



The First Mate, by Harry Collingwood.

________________________________________________________________________
The hero of this story is Walter Leigh, who takes a job as second mate
aboard a gasoline-powered yacht owned by a Mrs Vansittart, whose
husband is an American industrialist.  Julius Vansittart is a rather
nasty 12-year-old, who, despite his life being saved by Leigh, when he
had fallen overboard, hates the English, and never misses an opportunity
of being as unpleasant as possible, even to the point of stupidity.

There are numerous disasters in this story, with the First Mate's death
occurring soon after the start of the book, and Leigh's promotion to the
position.  After that there are an attack by pirates, a shipwreck, an
attack by hostile natives, all of which Leigh does his best to cope
with.  Eventually even the dreadful Julius becomes a bit more civilised,
and apologises for his bad behaviour hitherto.

They drop a large number of floating messages asking for help, into the
sea, and eventually they are rescued.  This is not a very long book,
taking only 8.5 hours to read as an audiobook.

________________________________________________________________________
THE FIRST MATE, BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE "STELLA MARIS" AND MRS VANSITTART.

"Well, young man, what do you think of her?"

The question was addressed to me in a very pleasantly modulated female
voice, carrying just the slightest suspicion of an American accent.  For
the fraction of a second I was a wee bit startled.  I had not had the
ghost of a suspicion that anyone was nearer me than the gang of
labourers who were busily engaged in unloading a big delivery wagon and
transferring the contents, in the shape of numerous packing cases, to
the deck of the vessel which I was scrutinising.  It was afternoon of a
grey day in the latter part of October three years ago; and the scene
was one of the wharves of the east basin of the London Docks, round
which I had been prowling in search of a ship.  I had been thus engaged
ever since nine o'clock that morning, interviewing skippers and mates,
so far unsuccessfully, when I was "brought up all standing" by finding
myself in close proximity to a white-hulled, ship-rigged craft of, I
estimated, some two thousand five hundred tons measurement.

She was steel-built, with steel lower masts, bowsprit, and lower and
topsail yards; and even if she had not been sporting the ensign of the
New York Yacht Club at her ensign staff and its burgee at her main
royal-mast-head, I should still have known her for a yacht from the
perfection of her lines, the dainty and exquisite beauty of her shape,
the whiteness of her decks (notwithstanding their somewhat littered
condition), the beautiful modelling of her boats, her polished teak
rails, and generally the high finish and perfect cleanliness of her deck
fittings.  She was as heavily rigged as a frigate; moreover, although no
guns were visible, I observed that her main-deck bulwarks were pierced
with six ports of a side, in the wake of which steel racers were bolted
to the deck; also she sported hammock rails, which I had never seen
before except in pictures of old-fashioned wooden men-o'-war.  A gilt
cable moulding ornamented her sheer strake; a beautifully carved and
gilded full-length figure of a woman wearing a star of cut-glass facets
on her forehead formed her figurehead; and her quarters were adorned
with a considerable amount of gilded scroll-work.  Her elliptical stern
bore, in large gilded block letters, the words: Stella Maris.  New York.

As the enquiry with which I have opened this story reached my ears, I
wheeled round and found myself face to face with a little lady.  She was
very richly dressed in silk and furs, quite colourless as to complexion,
but with a fine pair of deep violet eyes and a quantity of dark chestnut
hair loosely coiled under an immense hat rigged with black ostrich
plumes.  I put her down in my own mind as being something over
thirty-six years of age, and I subsequently learned that I was not very
far out.

Her eyes were dancing with amusement as I wheeled sharply round upon
her; and as my hand went up to my cap she laughed a low, musical laugh.

"Guess I startled you some, didn't I?" she remarked in that pleasant
voice of hers.  "You were so completely absorbed by the charms of
_Stella Maris_ that you had neither eyes nor ears for anybody else.
Well, what do you think of her?"

I was bareheaded by this time, but still a trifle confused at the
suddenness and unconventionality of my companion's address; yet I
quickly recovered my equanimity.

"She is the most lovely craft I ever set eyes on, bar none," I answered
with enthusiasm.

"Yes, she is a real daisy," agreed my companion.  "Do you know what she
is?"

"I know what she ought to be," I said; "and that is, flagship of the
Club.  But I see by her burgee that she is merely the property of one of
its members."

"That is so," returned the lady; "but I guess it's good enough.  Say,
would you like to go aboard and have a look at her from inside?"

"Indeed I should, if her owner would not--"

I hesitated.

"Well, come along, then," cut in my companion.  "I'm the owner, and I
promise you that I won't."

So saying, my strange acquaintance led the way to a narrow gang plank
stretching from the wharf to the ship's poop.  Laughingly declining my
proffered assistance, she tripped lightly along it, and as lightly
sprang down upon the deck of narrow planking paid with white-lead
instead of the more usual pitch.

Allowing me a few moments to look round, my companion presently led me
forward to the break of the poop, where, standing at the head of one of
the ladders leading down to the main-deck, I obtained a view of the
whole length of the ship.  The first thing to attract my attention was
the wheelhouse, a teak structure raised upon massive steel standards,
lofty enough to allow the helmsman a clear view ahead and astern.

Some ten feet ahead of it was the after hatchway, the coamings of which
stood about eighteen inches high, and, like those aboard a man-o'-war,
were protected by rails and stanchions.  The hatchway was open, and
there was a ladder leading down through it.  Just beyond this was the
mainmast; a little way forward of which was the main-hatch, also open,
and, like the other, protected by rails and stanchions.  Beyond this
hatchway there stood, in chocks, a fine powerful screw launch, about
forty feet long by ten feet beam; and just ahead of her rose the
foremast.  Before the foremast gaped the fore-hatchway, also open; then
came a handsome capstan; and ahead of it, leaving just comfortable room
to work, rose the bulkhead of the turtle-back topgallant forecastle.  In
addition to the launch, the vessel carried four other boats in davits,
namely, two cutters, some thirty-five feet long, and two whaler gigs,
each about twenty-five feet long.

My companion--or hostess, rather, I suppose I ought to call her--allowed
me to stand about five minutes at the break of the poop, as I ran my eye
over the deck and noted, with many approving comments, the various items
that especially appealed to me.  Then she invited me to accompany her
below.

I will spare the reader a detailed description of the apartments--I
cannot call them cabins--to which I was now conducted; suffice it to say
that, in their several ways, they were a combination of magnificence,
luxury, and comfort that seemed to me almost incredible, remembering
that I was aboard a ship.

Having duly expressed my admiration for these truly beautiful and
luxurious apartments, I was shown two other but much smaller rooms, one
on either side of the companion stairway.  These two rooms occupied the
extreme fore end of the poop, and could be entered from the main-deck as
well as from the vestibule.  The one on the starboard side was the
chart-room, and was fitted up with a bookshelf crammed with nautical
works of various descriptions, a table large enough to spread a good big
chart upon, a cabinet in which reposed a complete set of the most
recently published charts, a case containing no less than four
chronometers, and a cupboard wherein were securely packed a whole
battery of sextants and other instruments.  The corresponding room on
the port side was fitted up as a writing room, and here the log slate
was kept and the logbook written up from time to time.  Here also the
ship's clock and a very fine aneroid barometer were securely bolted to
the bulkhead, side by side, in such a position that they could be seen
from outside by merely glancing through the window.  And near them, hung
in gimbals from a long bracket, was a very fine Fitzroy mercurial
barometer.

My hostess seemed genuinely gratified at the admiration which I freely
expressed, especially for the noble array of charts and nautical
instruments; these, to be quite candid, appealing to me even more
strongly than the sumptuous elegance of the drawing and dining-rooms.
She smiled brightly as I expatiated with enthusiasm upon these matters,
and when at length I paused, she said:

"Now let us go below, and I will show you the officers' and men's
quarters."

We descended from the vestibule by way of a staircase at the back of the
main companion, and presently entered the wardroom, which adjoined the
dining-room, but was only about half its size.  This was the living-room
of the executive officers of the ship, and was a very fine, comfortable
room, although, of course, its fittings and furnishings were much less
sumptuous than those belonging exclusively to the owner.

On the side of the ship opposite the wardroom, and with a good wide
passage between the two, was the block of officers' cabins, the comfort
and convenience of which left nothing to be desired.  Next came the
petty officers' berthage, of which the same may be said, although, as
was to be expected, the space here was rather more restricted, and the
fittings somewhat plainer than in those of the other officers.

Next came the kitchen--it would be an outrage to dub such a place a
"galley"--and forward of it again came the men's quarters, a great, airy
place, well-lighted by scuttles in the ship's sides, with sleeping
accommodation for eighty men.  This consisted of two tiers of hammocks,
forty hammocks on either side of the room, their head-clews suspended
from hooks bolted to the sides of the ship; while the foot-clews were
secured to steel stanchions hinged to the deck above, and so arranged
that they could be triced up out of the way when required, leaving ample
room for the men's mess tables.

I very willingly and very fully expressed my admiration for everything
shown me, not only because all was well worthy of admiration, but also
because I saw that it gratified my hostess, who explained to me that she
had planned everything herself.

At length my inspection of the beautiful and wonderful ship came to an
end.  As we ascended to the deck by way of the fore-hatch ladder my
hostess remarked:

"There!  I guess that's all there is to show.  And,"--glancing at an
elegant little watch which she wore attached to a bracelet--"my stars,
if it ain't just five o'clock!  I want my tea.  Do you drink tea, young
man?"

"I should really enjoy a cup of tea, madam, if you would be so kind as
to offer me one," I said.

"Are you a teetotaller, then?" the lady asked.

"Well, no; hardly that," I replied.  "That is to say, I have never
formally forsworn intoxicants; but I very rarely take them--never,
indeed, I may say, except when I have been exposed for several hours to
extreme cold, or have been wet to the skin, or something of that kind.
Even then I am inclined to think a cup of scalding hot coffee really
does one more good."

"Well, I guess you're as nearly right as makes no matter," returned my
hostess.  "Now, just you come into my drawing-room, and I'll give you a
cup of real good tea.  Ah! there is Lizette, my chief stewardess.  I
guess she is looking for me to tell me that tea is served, so come
along."

The lady was right in her surmise, for the trig, decidedly pretty, and
exceedingly capable-looking young woman, in a black dress, with white
cap and apron, who at that moment stepped out on deck, came forward and
duly made the anticipated announcement.

It was a distinctly novel experience for me to find myself seated in
that elegant apartment, drinking the most delicious tea I had ever
tasted out of a hand-painted cup of china which I knew must be worth its
weight in gold, munching cakes and biscuits of wonderful flavour, and
being treated quite as an equal by this smartly dressed and vivacious
American lady.  Not the least of her charms was that she had the knack
of putting one absolutely at one's ease; and presently she began to
question me about myself.

"I guess I don't know now whether I've done you any kindness in inviting
you aboard to see over the _Stella Maris_," she said.  "I reckon your
own ship will seem a bit dowdy in comparison, won't she?"

"I am sure she will--when I find her," I replied.  "Unfortunately, I
haven't a ship just now; indeed, I had been prowling round the docks all
day looking for one when the sight of your yacht brought me up all
standing.  I love a pretty ship, and anxious though I am to get another
berth, I could not deny myself the pleasure of taking a good look at
her."

"Y-e-s," my companion agreed; "I can understand that feeling and
sympathise with it too.  There's nothing made by the hand of man that I
admire more than a handsome ship.  And so you're out of a berth, Mr--"

"Leigh," I supplied; "Walter Leigh, at your service, madam."

"Thank you!" she answered.  "Any relation to the Lees of Virginia?"

"No," I said, "I am afraid not.  I am a Leigh of Devon, you know--
L-e-i-g-h, not L double e."

"I see," she responded.  "Well, Mr Leigh, if it's not a rude question
to ask, how do you come to be out of employment?"

"Not through any misconduct of mine, I am happy to say," I answered.
"The way of it is this.  The City line of ships--the line in which I
served and have only recently completed my apprenticeship--is
amalgamating with, or, rather, is being absorbed by, the firm of Hepburn
Brothers, the one-time rivals of the City line.  Hepburns are, of
course, taking over many of the City officers, as well as the ships.
But Mr Clayton, Hepburns' present manager, was once master of a City
liner in which I was serving; and--well, something happened which caused
Clayton to lose his berth, and unfortunately for me it was through me
that the matter came to light.  Consequently, now that Clayton has the
chance to do me a bad turn, he is doing it by refusing to take me on
with the new firm."

"Is that so?  Well, I call that real mean," exclaimed my hostess, in
accents of indignation.  "And is that the reason why you have not been
able to get other employment?"

"Oh, no!"  I said, "excepting, of course, so far as Hepburn Brothers are
concerned.  My failure to-day arises simply from the fact that none of
the skippers I have spoken to happen to have any vacancies."

"Nothing wrong with your discharge, I suppose?"

"Nothing whatever," I answered, whipping the document out of my pocket
and handing it to her.

She read it carefully and handed it back.

"Thank you!" she said.  "I guess that looks all right.  How old are you,
Mr Leigh?"

"I shall be eighteen on the ninth of next December," I replied,
beginning now to wonder whether this questioning was likely to lead to
anything, or whether it was merely the result of kindly curiosity on the
part of my hostess.

"Eighteen!" she exclaimed.  "Well, I declare to goodness I'd have said
you were at least three years older, if I'd been asked to guess.  Only
eighteen!  And what kind of a berth have you been looking for, may I
ask?"

"Well," I said, "I had it in my mind to get into some big craft as third
mate, if I could find an opening.  It would afford me a chance to work
up for my ticket, which I am naturally anxious to obtain as soon as
possible."

"Sure," she agreed.  "And do you know anything about navigation?  But I
guess you do, by the way that you looked at those charts and instruments
just now."

"Oh, yes!"  I said; "I rather fancy myself as a navigator.  Navigation
is quite a hobby of mine."

"Tell me how much you know," she said.  "I'm something of a navigator
myself.  In fact, Mr Leigh, I am one of the few women who hold a
master's certificate and are qualified to take command of a ship sailing
to any part of the world.  I am captain of this yacht, in fact as well
as in name; I brought her across from New York to the Nore without the
ghost of a hitch, and I guess I can take her the rest of the trip round
the world, upon which we are bound.  Now, go ahead and tell me what you
know about navigation."

I named the several problems in navigation, one or more of which I had
been accustomed to practise daily and nightly under my late skipper; and
the lady was graciously pleased to express her cordial approval of my
knowledge.

"Yes," she said; "if you can do all those things I guess you are pretty
good--quite as good, in fact, as Neil Kennedy, my chief officer, and he
is no slouch as a navigator.  Now, Mr Leigh, I have not been putting
you through your facings just out of sheer feminine curiosity; I've been
doing it with a purpose.  I am Mrs Cornelia Vansittart, wife of Julius
Vansittart of New York, engineer, the inventor of the Vansittart
gasoline engine.  I am passionately fond of yachting, so my husband made
me a present of the _Stella Maris_, and consented to my making a voyage
in her round the world.  She is a good ship, and I have a good crew; but
I have only two mates, and Kennedy says that in a ship of this size, and
on such a cruise as we are contemplating, I ought to have a third.  At
first I didn't propose to do anything of the kind, for I don't like
being told by anybody what I ought to do, or to have; but somehow, when
I saw you lost in admiration of my ship, I sort of took a fancy to you.
I like the look of you, and thought that if I must have a third mate,
I'd like one something like you; so I invited you to come aboard, that I
might have a chance to talk to you and find out if you came up to
sample.  I mean to have a good time this trip, and I mean that my
officers and crew shall have a good time too, if it rests with me.  I've
taken a whole lot of trouble to pick the right sort of men to man this
ship, and I've come to the conclusion that you are the right sort.  So
if you care to accept the position I am ready to ship you as third mate
of the _Stella Maris_.  The pay is thirty per, with all found, uniforms
included.  Now, what do you say?"

I had a sufficient knowledge of American colloquialisms to be aware that
the expression "thirty per" meant thirty dollars--or six pounds--per
month, which was considerably better than I had hoped for, or was at all
likely to get elsewhere.  I liked the ship, and I was immensely taken
with my prospective new skipper; therefore I at once unhesitatingly and
gratefully accepted the offer.

I was then gracefully dismissed, with instructions to be prepared to
"sign on" at eleven o'clock on the morrow, and to have my dunnage aboard
not later than noon, since the yacht would haul out of dock and proceed
down the river early in the afternoon.

I had taken my leave of Mrs Vansittart, and was already out on deck on
my way to the gangway, when the lady rushed after me and called upon me
to stop, exclaiming:

"Sakes alive! what's come over me?  I declare to goodness I clean forgot
that you haven't yet been measured for your uniforms.  Colson,"--to one
of the seamen who were engaged in striking packing cases down
below--"pass the word for Mr Grimwood, please.  Mr Grimwood," she
explained, "is the purser.  I'll turn you over to him, and he will take
you to the tailor, who will soon rig you out."

A shout down the after hatchway resulted in Mr Grimwood's prompt
appearance on deck, and to him I was in due form introduced.

"Mr Grimwood," said Mrs Vansittart, "this is Mr Walter Leigh--
L-e-i-g-h, you know--who will sign on at eleven o'clock to-morrow
morning as third mate of this ship.  I want you to take him below to
Snip, who will measure him for his uniforms.  Please tell Snip to
arrange things so that Mr Leigh's working uniform shall be ready for
him by noon.  When you have done that, have the goodness to assign a
cabin to Mr Leigh; and at the same time I'd like you to introduce him
to the rest of the wardroom officers.  You'll see to that?  Thank you!
Once more, good afternoon, Mr Leigh!"

As the lady turned and left us, Grimwood chuckled.

"So the skipper's taken Kennedy's advice, after all, to ship a third
mate," he remarked.  "Guess he's put one over Briscoe this time, anyway.
Briscoe's our `second', you know, and he bet Kennedy that he couldn't
persuade Mrs Vansittart to ship a `third'.  Kennedy'll be a bit set up
when he hears the news, because, between you and me, he doesn't take
overmuch stock in Briscoe, and has held all along that we ought to have
a third mate to take his place if necessary.  Oh, yes, Briscoe's all
right, so far as he goes; but he doesn't go far enough.  He's not
exactly the right sort of man for a ship of this kind, and I think that,
for once in a way, Mrs Vansittart made a mistake when she picked him.
But I guess you'd better not take too much notice of what I say; I don't
want to prejudice you against him."

We found Snip--by the way, that was the tailor's actual name, and not a
nickname, as I had at first imagined--comfortably ensconced in a little,
well-lighted workroom under the topgallant forecastle.  He quickly took
my measure, promising, somewhat to my amazement, to have my working
uniform ready for me to try on as early on the following morning as I
chose to come aboard--the earlier the better, he assured me.  This
matter settled, the purser--to whom I took an immediate liking--led me
aft and down below to the wardroom, where we found Mr Neil Kennedy, the
chief officer, Mr Alexander Mackenzie, the chief engineer, and Doctor
Stephen Harper, the ship's medico, chatting and smoking together.  To
these I was introduced by Grimwood; and I was at once admitted as a
member of the fraternity with much cordiality.

I liked those three men immensely.  Neil Kennedy was a huge man,
standing six feet three in his socks, as I afterwards learned, and being
bulky in proportion, was the sort of man that a "hazing" skipper would
at once have singled out as eminently suited to keep a refractory crew
in order and get the last ounce of work out of the laziest skulker.  But
it happened that Kennedy was not that sort of man at all.  Although
admirably fitted by Nature for the part, he was not the typical
quarterdeck tyrant and bully, but a genial, merry, great-hearted
Irish-American of the very best stamp.  He could, however, if occasion
demanded it, display a sternness and severity of manner well calculated
to subdue the most recklessly insubordinate of mariners.  His voice was
like the bellow of a bull, and could be heard from the taffrail to the
flying jib-boom end in anything short of a full-grown hurricane.

The doctor was quite another type of man--tall, lean, clean-shaven,
slightly bald, with a pair of piercing black eyes that seemed to look a
man through and through.  Possessed of a quiet, well-modulated and
cultured voice, and a deliberate yet firm manner of speaking, he was
apparently a man of high attainments, and unmistakably a gentleman.

As for Mackenzie, the chief engineer, he was but a trifle less
formidable in appearance than Kennedy--red-haired, with a shaggy red
beard and moustache, the former of which he had a trick of pushing up
over his mouth and nose when he was meditating deeply, and immense hands
as hairy as a monkey's.  He was apparently between forty and fifty years
of age, and had been domiciled in America for the last twenty years,
which he had spent in Mr Vansittart's workshops, but his accent was as
broad as though he had just come straight from Glasgow.  He happened to
make some passing reference to a certain Mackintosh as being busy with
"the engines down below"; and when I enquired with some surprise what
engines he referred to, he exclaimed:

"Hoots, laddie!  D'ye no' ken that we're an auxiliary-screw, then?"

"Auxiliary-screw!"  I ejaculated.  "No, certainly not.  I had a good
look at the craft before I came aboard, but I saw no sign of a
propeller.  And besides, where is your funnel?"

"Funnel, man!" he retorted.  "We ha'e no need o' a funnel.  Our engines
are operated by gasoline, and we ha'e ane o' twa hunner and feefty
horse-power, giving the ship a speed o' seven knots, forbye anither ane
o' a hunner and feefty to drive the dynamos and work the capstan and
winches.  Man, I tell ye this bonnie boat is richt up-to-date, and dinna
forget it.  As to the propeller, naiturally ye wadna see't, the watter
bein' sae thick."

At Kennedy's pressing invitation I remained aboard to dine, and
incidentally to be introduced to the remaining members of the wardroom
mess--Mr Samuel Briscoe, the second officer, and Mr Robert Mackintosh,
the second engineer.  Before the meal was over I had come to agree with
the purser that in selecting Briscoe for her second officer Mrs
Vansittart had not been quite so happily inspired as in the case of the
other members of the mess.  He was a pasty-faced fellow of about forty
years of age, baggy under his watery-looking, almost colourless blue
eyes, slow in his movements, glum and churlish of manner, and unpolished
of speech; also I had a suspicion that he was more addicted to drink
than was at all desirable in a man occupying such a responsible position
in such a ship.  He would doubtless have done well enough as "dicky" in
an ordinary wind-jammer, but on the quarterdeck of such a craft as the
_Stella Maris_ I considered he was distinctly out of place.

During the progress of the meal I learned that, as I had already
suspected, the yacht was a brand-new ship, this being her first voyage.
Her exact measurement, it appeared, was two thousand six hundred and
seventeen tons.  She had originated in the office of Herreshoff, the
world-famous yacht designer, and embraced in her construction every last
refinement known to the most up-to-date naval constructor.  She had been
built to the order of Mr Julius Vansittart, the multi-millionaire
engineer and steel magnate, as a birthday present to his wife.  Mrs
Vansittart's passion was yachting, and she was wont to knock about New
York Bay, the Hudson River, and Long Island Sound, with occasional
adventurous stretches down the coast as far as Delaware Bay, or even to
Baltimore, in a sturdy little ten-ton sloop, the while she studied
seamanship and navigation and Mr Vansittart attended to his business.

I further learned that the lady's boast to me, that she was captain of
the yacht in fact as well as in name, was literally true, she having not
only picked and shipped the entire crew, officers as well as men, but
taken command of the ship when the pilot left her, and sailed and
navigated her across the Atlantic and up the English Channel with no
more assistance from her officers than a shipmaster usually receives.

"I tell you, sor, it's a treat to see her put this ship about, blow
high, blow low," Kennedy remarked admiringly; "though how the mischief
she learned the way to handle a square-rigger it puzzles the sowl of me
to know."

It transpired that Mrs Vansittart was accompanied on this trip by her
daughter Anthea, aged sixteen--"as bonnie a lassie as you e'er set eyes
upon," Mackintosh interjected--and her son Julius, a lad of twelve--"and
thoroughly spoiled at that, more's the pity," the doctor added.  There
was also a certain Reverend Henry James Monroe, M.A., a middle-aged,
refined, and very scholarly man, who served in the dual capacity of
chaplain of the ship and tutor to the aforesaid Julius.  He was one of
the saloon party, and was held in the highest honour and respect by Mrs
Vansittart, who deferred to his opinion in all things save in the matter
of discipline where her darling boy was concerned.  I also learned that
the yacht was manned by a crew of no less than eighty seamen, every one
of whom was rated as A.B.; so that, with the saloon party, officers,
petty officers, stewards, and stewardesses, we should make the
respectable muster of one hundred and eight all told when we went to sea
on the morrow.



CHAPTER TWO.

WE GO TO SEA.

It was past nine o'clock, and a cold, dreary night, with a drizzle of
rain, when at length I quitted the hospitable wardroom of the yacht and
wended my way back to my rather frowsy lodging in Nightingale Lane.
Arrived there, I forthwith proceeded to write a letter to my mother,
whose home was in the picturesque little village of Newton Ferrers, near
Plymouth, informing her of my good fortune in having secured so
satisfactory a berth, and explaining my inability to run down and see
her before my departure owing to the fact that we were to sail on the
following day.  Then, having posted my letter, I got my few traps
together, bundled them all into my sea chest, and turned in to take my
last sleep on English soil for many a long day to come.

I was up and astir again by seven o'clock the next morning, my first
move being to go along to the yacht and interview Snip, the tailor, in
accordance with my arrangement of the previous evening.  To my
amazement, I found that the man, with characteristic American "hustle",
had got my working suit of uniform far enough advanced for me to try it
on.  The cut and fit proved to be everything: that could be desired, and
I was faithfully promised that the suit should be ready for me to don
upon joining the ship after signing articles.

In keeping with our pretensions to be a "swagger" ship and crew, the
wardroom mess took lunch, instead of dinner, at one o'clock, dining at
seven o'clock in the evening.  This was the hour adopted by the saloon
party, who, I learned, were regularly reinforced by one or more members
of the wardroom contingent, by special invitation from Mrs Vansittart.

It was just two o'clock in the afternoon when the boatswain piped "All
hands unmoor ship"; and by half-past two we were through the dock gates
and heading down the river, impelled by our own engine.

Bearing out what Kennedy and the others had already told me as to Mrs
Vansittart being the actual as well as nominal captain of the yacht, at
the call of "All hands" the lady had appeared on deck.  She was arrayed
in an exceedingly neat and workmanlike costume of navy-blue serge, the
jacket of which was fastened with gilt buttons bearing the insignia of
the New York Yacht Club, the cuffs being adorned with four rows of gold
braid, the top row showing the "executive curl", while her smartly
dressed chestnut hair was surmounted by a navy cap of the most approved
pattern, the peak edged with the usual trimming of a wreath of oak
leaves embroidered in gold thread, while the front of the cap bore the
New York Yacht Club badge.

True, she did not give her orders respecting the unmooring of the ship
directly to the crew, as this would probably have resulted in unduly
straining her voice, singularly sweet and pure in quality, of which, as
I subsequently discovered, she was very justly proud.  She gave her
orders to Kennedy, who acted as her _aide_ and repeated them in
trumpet-like notes that could be distinctly heard all over the ship.

It was then, while we were hauling out of dock, that I got my first
glimpse of Miss Anthea, Master Julius, and the Reverend Henry James
Monroe, all of whom came on deck to witness the passage of the ship
through the dock gates and down the river.  I was stationed in the
waist, and therefore only obtained at that moment a comparatively
distant glimpse of the saloon party on the poop, but even that sufficed
to confirm the testimony of the second engineer as to Miss Anthea's
physical charms.  But I did not altogether like her expression, which
was a blank, save for a hint of hauteur mingled with dissatisfaction at
things in general.

Her brother was so exactly like her in features that the two might have
been twins, but he was a good three inches shorter than his sister, as
well as a trifle thinner in the face.  He talked incessantly in a sharp,
high-pitched, and most unmusical voice, the unattractiveness of which
was further heightened by a pronounced nasal American accent.  From such
scraps of his conversation as reached me from time to time I gathered
that his talk was almost wholly about himself, his doings, his opinions,
his likes and dislikes--chiefly the latter.  I liked his expression even
less than that of his sister.  It was a most objectionable mingling of
peevishness, insolence, and self-assurance; while his manner, even to
his mother, was domineering and dictatorial to a perfectly disgusting
degree.  There was no doubt in my mind that he had been thoroughly
spoiled from the moment of his birth onward, and the process was still
going on, if I was anything of a judge of such matters.

As regards the Reverend Mr Monroe, all I need say about him at this
juncture was that he appeared to answer in every respect to the verbal
portrait that had been drawn of him in the wardroom during the preceding
evening.

Shortly after we had cleared the dock gates I got a message from Snip
requesting me to present myself in his workshop as early as possible to
try on my mess jacket and waistcoat; which, like the new rig I had
donned little more than an hour earlier, I found fitted me excellently.
I was promised that the entire suit should be ready for me in time for
mess that night (it appeared that everything was done in tip-top style
aboard the _Stella Maris)_.

About five o'clock, Marsh, the chief steward, presented himself with a
message from Mrs Vansittart, requesting the pleasure of my company at
dinner at seven o'clock, which invitation I of course accepted, as in
duty bound.

We were just abreast the eastern extremity of Canvey Island when the
second bugle call sounded for dinner.  I was by that time dressed and
quite ready, and joined Kennedy, who had also been invited; and together
we repaired to the drawing-room, where Mrs Vansittart, gorgeously
attired and wearing many diamonds, very graciously received us and then
proceeded to introduce me in due form to the parson, her daughter, and
her son.

As regards the parson, I need only say that his manner was everything
that the most fastidious person could possibly desire.  He was a
gentleman, in the highest sense of that often misused term; and although
his conversation subsequently, during dinner, evidenced that he was a
most erudite and finished scholar, there was nothing of the pedant about
him.  Information exuded from him naturally and simply because he could
not help it; it seemed impossible to broach a topic upon which his
knowledge was not complete, and he was brilliant without the slightest
apparent effort.

As for Miss Anthea, she looked lovely in a perfectly simple white satin
dinner frock, her only jewellery being a thin gold necklet, from which
was suspended a very fine opal in a quaint and curious gold setting.
She acknowledged my introduction to her with the slightest possible
inclination of her head, and thereafter ignored my existence for the
rest of the evening.  And her brother's greeting of me was equally
frigid.

Mrs Vansittart's graceful and kindly geniality, however, made ample
amends for the disdainful attitude of her children.  She chatted in
animated fashion with Monroe, Kennedy, and me for some minutes, and then
Marsh, the chief steward, appeared with the announcement that dinner was
served.  Thereupon she turned to me and said:

"Mr Leigh, you are the stranger of the party to-night; do me the favour
to take me down to dinner."

That dinner--as indeed were all those at which I was subsequently a
guest--was a banquet.  The viands were the choicest of their several
kinds, and perfectly prepared; the wines were of rare vintages--at least
so Monroe asserted (I was no judge of wines, and contented myself with a
single glass of sherry taken with my soup); and the table appointments
were on a par with the food and the sumptuous character of the apartment
in which the meal was served.  There were choice flowers in profusion
upon the table; a fire burned cosily in the handsome fireplace; and the
table was brilliantly illuminated by handsome, softly shaded electric
candelabra of massive silver.

The finishing touch to the enjoyment of the meal was given by Mrs
Vansittart's charming manner and sparkling conversation.  For the moment
we were not her servants but her welcome guests, and she contrived to
make us feel this without the faintest suggestion of condescension.  She
was both brilliant and witty, and in some subtle manner peculiar to
herself she not only put us perfectly at our ease, but also put us upon
our mettle, so that I at least found myself saying clever things of
which I had not before believed myself in the least capable.

It was all so very different from what I had hitherto been accustomed to
that I could scarcely persuade myself I was not dreaming some splendid
and unusually vivid dream; and I heartily congratulated myself upon the
lucky chance which had thrown me into the midst of such delightful
surroundings.  The dinner, although smartly served, demanded
three-quarters of an hour for its consumption; and at its close our
hostess took wine with us all, nodded to her daughter, and, rising from
the table, retired to the drawing-room.

When the ladies disappeared, Monroe, Kennedy, and young Vansittart
resumed their seats, somewhat to my surprise; and a moment later Marsh
brought forward cigars, cigarettes, and a jar of choice tobacco.  I had
been picked for the first mate's watch, and it was our eight hours out
that night, consequently by rights I ought to have been on deck at that
moment; therefore, as soon as Mrs Vansittart and her daughter vanished,
I turned to Kennedy and said:

"If you gentlemen will excuse me, I'll run away and change, and go on
deck.  I am in your watch, you know, Mr Kennedy, and ought to be on
duty now--"

"Bring yourself to an anchor, me bhoy," interrupted Kennedy, pointing to
the chair alongside him.  "Do ye shmoke?  No?  Quite right; shmoking is
very bad for growing lads," with a glance at Master Julius, who was
coolly lighting a cigarette.  "If ye don't shmoke ye can at least sit
and listen to Mr Monroe's and my illuminatin' conversation until it's
time for us to join the ladies.  Mrs Vansittart--God bless her kind
heart!--allows us just half an hour for an afther-dinner shmoke; then
she expects us to join her in the drawing-room until ten o'clock, and to
contribute, each in our separate ways, toward the entertainment of the
rest.  Do ye sing by anny chance?"

I modestly replied that I did, a little, and that in a very amateurish
way I also played the fiddle.  I may as well frankly confess that in my
inmost heart I rather prided myself upon my musical accomplishments,
music being a perfect passion with me.  I had often been complimented
upon the quality of my baritone voice and my manner of using it, while
some who might be supposed to be competent judges had told me that I
ought to have devoted my energies to becoming a professional violinist.
But I was careful not to say anything of this.

"Good!  That's capital!" exclaimed Monroe.  "Mrs Vansittart will be
pleased to hear that, I know; for she is devoted to music, is herself a
brilliant musician, and will warmly welcome anyone who can contribute in
the slightest degree to the pleasure of our evenings.  You have the
trick of telling a story well, too, Leigh; our hostess thoroughly
enjoyed the humour of that yarn of yours.  You should cultivate the art
of story-telling; there are very few people who are able to tell a story
really well."

"Guess that's all nonsense, Mr Monroe," remarked Master Julius.  "It's
the easiest thing in the world to talk.  Anybody can do it."

"Well--yes, I suppose anybody can," returned Monroe.  "But," he
continued, meaningly, "it is not everybody who can talk sense, Julius.
Moreover, the art of conversation consists in knowing when to talk--and
when to be silent."

Master Julius, however, did not agree with this.  He argued the point
with Monroe so volubly and persistently that anything like general
conversation became impossible, and he kept it up until Kennedy, with a
glance at the clock on the mantelpiece, deposited his cigar stub in an
ash tray and announced that the half-hour was up, and that it was time
to adjourn to the drawing-room.

"Ah, here you are!" exclaimed Mrs Vansittart, who was seated at the
open piano as we filed into the drawing-room, Master Julius well in
advance.  The boy marched straight across the room, without taking the
slightest notice of his mother, and seated himself beside his sister,
who occupied a settee in the far corner, and was apparently so deeply
absorbed in a book that she was unaware of our entrance.

"Now, then," continued our hostess, "it has gone one bell, and we have
not very much time to spare.  Which of you gentlemen will favour us with
a song?"

"I suggest, madam, that you should call upon Mr Leigh," said Monroe.
"In response to a leading question put to him by our friend Kennedy, the
young man has pleaded guilty to a limited ability as a singer, and he
has also admitted that there are times when he scrapes upon a fiddle.
Knowing Britishers as I do, it is my experience that when one of them
goes so far as to say he can play or sing at all, he--or she--can
usually do it pretty well; I am therefore not without hope that in Leigh
we shall find we have a valuable addition to our stock of musical
talent."

"You don't say!" ejaculated Mrs Vansittart vivaciously.  "Well, I am
glad; for I believe I have heard every one of your songs at least half a
dozen times, Mr Monroe; and Mr Kennedy's too, to say nothing about the
doctor and the purser.  Do you sing and play by ear, or from music, Mr
Leigh?"

I explained that I did both, but preferred to have the music before me;
and in answer to a further question I admitted the existence of certain
books and sheets of music among my other belongings.  Thereupon I was
ordered off to my cabin, with instructions to fetch them and my fiddle
forthwith.  When I returned, Kennedy was trolling forth the song
"Kathleen Mavourneen" in a deep, rich bass voice that made the spacious
apartment ring again, while Mrs Vansittart accompanied him on the
piano.  But for all the attention that the youngsters gave to the song
they might as well have been deaf!

When the song was finished, Mrs Vansittart beckoned me to her, and,
taking my music from me, glanced through it.  Among it were two volumes
of _Standard English Songs_, a book of songs by Schubert, a book of
sacred melodies consisting chiefly of solos and duets from the
oratorios, another containing a selection of songs from various operas,
and, in sheet, a few ballads and a quantity of music specially composed
for the violin.  As she glanced through my budget, our hostess volubly
expressed her delight, and was pleased to compliment me very highly upon
the taste which had dictated my choice.  Then, opening one of the books
of English songs and placing it before her on the piano, she invited me
to sing "Twickenham Ferry".  The song happened to be rather a favourite
of mine, and when I noticed the exquisite perfection with which she
played the few bars of the introduction I just let myself go, and was
rewarded for my pains by receiving what sounded like very genuine and
hearty applause when the song came to an end.

Then Monroe, who was gifted with a really beautiful tenor voice, sang
with much taste and feeling an old plantation song; after which Mrs
Vansittart sang in Italian.  Then, by way of a change, we had Gounod's
"Ave Maria", Mrs Vansittart playing the accompaniment on the piano
while I played the air on my fiddle and Monroe joined in with an
obligato on the organ.  So, in a very delightful way, to me at least,
the evening was passed until four bells chimed out, when we closed the
concert by rendering "Hail, Columbia!" with all the vocal and
instrumental strength at our command.

As Kennedy and I took our leave, Mrs Vansittart very graciously thanked
us both for giving her the pleasure of our company, and expressed the
hope that we should spend together many equally enjoyable evenings; but
Miss Vansittart scarcely deigned to acknowledge, by the curtest nod of
her head, our farewell bows.  As for the boy, he was, or pretended to
be, fast asleep.

Taking my beloved fiddle with me, I hurried away to my cabin, placed the
instrument safely in my bunk, shifted hurriedly into my working clothes,
and went on deck, where I was presently joined by Kennedy.  The pilot
was in charge on the poop, and Mrs Vansittart, wrapped in a voluminous
cloak, was also up there, taking a look round and a brief promenade
before turning in; so the first mate and I fell into step and walked
fore and aft in the waist, between the break of the poop and the fore
rigging.

It was a lovely night, very clear and brilliantly starlit.  There was no
moon, the satellite, then well advanced in her fourth quarter, not
rising until toward morning; and it was very cold, a light breeze from
the north-east having sprung up about the end of the second dog-watch.
We were by that time well down toward the mouth of the Thames estuary,
the Tongue lightship being about a point and a half before our port
beam, while Margate lights were broad on our starboard bow, the ship
heading a trifle to the south of east as she edged in toward the land
preparatory to hauling round the North Foreland.

There was a small easterly swell running, just enough to impart motion
to the ship and let us know that we were afloat, and we were slipping
along at a fine rate upon the last of the ebb tide, and as smoothly and
as free from vibration as though we had been under sail.

We rounded the North Foreland just before midnight; and when at eight
bells Mr Briscoe came on deck to relieve Mr Kennedy I heard the latter
instruct him to get the ship under canvas, and, as soon as she was under
command, stop the engine and have the propeller feathered.  Then I went
below, very tired, to snatch four hours' sleep before turning out to
keep the morning watch.

I tumbled into my bunk and instantly fell asleep, only to be awakened
the next moment, as it seemed to me, by a quartermaster, who informed
me, as he switched on the light, that it wanted ten minutes to eight
bells.  Accordingly I hopped out of bed, washed and dressed, and was in
the act of ascending the poop ladder when eight bells struck.

I found the ship under all plain sail, heading south-west, with the
lights of Dover just abaft the starboard beam, some five miles distant;
and was informed by Mr Briscoe that the pilot had left us about half an
hour earlier, and that we were now "on our own".  There was a fine fresh
breeze blowing from the north-east, and we were sweeping along in fine
style, with squared yards and the mainsail brailed up.  After a good
look at the sky the first mate gave it as his opinion that the wind was
going to haul round more from the eastward, accordingly as soon as the
watches had been changed he gave the order to set fore, main, and mizen
royal, topgallant, and topmast studding sails on both sides, and lower
studding sails for'ard.  Now came the advantage of our strong crew; for
although we were working with the port watch only, we had the whole of
those studding sails set in less than half an hour; whereas, had we been
manned after the rate of an ordinary merchantman of our tonnage, the job
would have kept us busy during the entire watch.  As soon as we were
through with this work Mr Kennedy instructed me to ship and set the
patent log, which I did, taking the exact time when it started, and
noting what it registered fifteen minutes later.  The result was that we
found we were doing just twelve knots, with the wind dead aft and our
head sails practically becalmed by our after canvas.

The first mate's prophecy concerning the easting of the wind proved a
true one, for when we hauled up a couple of points after rounding
Dungeness it followed us, keeping dead astern.  At four bells (six
o'clock) we mustered holystones and scrubbing-brushes, attached the hose
to the fire hydrant, and industriously washed, scrubbed, and holystoned
the decks and cleaned paintwork for an hour, after which the planks were
thoroughly squeegeed and dried.  Then all hands went to work to polish
brasswork until eight bells, by which time the ship looked as spick and
span as if she had been kept under a glass case, just removed.

When eight bells struck, Beachy Head bore North-North-West by compass,
distant fourteen miles.  Prompt at the stroke of the bell, Mrs
Vansittart came up on deck, dressed in her blue serge seagoing rig, and
bade us a cheery good morning.  After receiving Kennedy's report and
verifying the bearing and distance of the headland, she gave orders for
the course to be altered to west-half-south for the run down channel.

It was at this time a clear and brilliant morning, the sky a hard blue,
streaked here and there with mare's tails, the sun, pallid and without
warmth, hanging low over the French coast well on our port quarter.  The
breeze was blowing fresh and very keen, although, running before it as
we were, we did not feel anything like the full strength of it.  Of this
we could only get a correct idea by observing the run of the short,
bottle-green channel surges breaking in foam all round us, and the way
in which a few brigs and schooners, the former under single-reefed
topsails, beating up channel, lay down to it and flung the spray over
their weather catheads.  There were a good many craft going our way too,
both steam and sail, the latter, like ourselves, making the utmost of
the good fair wind by showing to it every rag that they could spread.
But we overhauled and passed them, one after the other, with the utmost
ease; and when, a little later, the breeze freshened, we began to give
some of the steamers the go-by as well.

By noon we had brought Selsea Bill square abeam, some sixteen miles
distant; and at two o'clock in the afternoon, when I went on deck after
luncheon, Saint Catharine's was a point abaft the beam, distant eight
miles.  At nine o'clock that night we were abreast of the Start, when,
Mrs Vansittart having determined our distance from the Point by a
couple of bearings taken an hour apart, ordered the studding sails to be
taken in and the royals and mizen topgallant sail to be furled.  We then
"took our departure", and, hauling our wind on the port tack, shaped a
course for Ushant, which was sighted and passed at three bells in the
following morning watch, our next port of call being, as I now learned,
Lisbon.

During the day occupied by our run down channel all hands had an easy
time of it, there being nothing much for them to do except keep the ship
clean and take an occasional pull at a halyard or brace.  I therefore
had ample time to take stock of the crew and improve my acquaintance
with my shipmates generally.

As regards the crew, I had an idea that in a quiet way they were
watching me and seeking to "reckon me up".  I was a "Britisher", the
only one in the ship; and my experience of Americans, which up to that
time had been but slight, led me to the belief that the people, taken as
a whole, held the Britisher in but light esteem.  I therefore decided
that, so far at least as the crew of the _Stella Maris_ was concerned,
the reputation of my countrymen was to some extent in my hands, and I
determined to let slip no opportunity to vindicate it.  I was the more
strengthened in this resolution by hearing the boy Julius remark to his
sister, in tones which I felt were fully intended to reach my ear, that
"he had no use for Britishers, and took no stock in them, for they were
never of much account."

I do not know whether my brother officers shared the lad's view, or
whether they, as I half-suspected the men of doing, were quietly waiting
to see of what stuff I was made; but, in either case, they never, with
the solitary exception of Briscoe, the second mate, permitted such an
attitude to appear.  On the contrary, they were genial, cordial, and
friendly in a very marked degree, so that within the first twenty-four
hours of our being at sea I felt thoroughly at home with all of them.
If I had a preference for any above the others it was for Monroe, the
boy's tutor, and Harper, the medico of the ship, both of whom were
extremely broad-minded men, in addition to being exceptionally well
informed and polished in manner.  As for our skipper, the more I saw of
her the better I liked her.  I soon discovered that nothing escaped her
notice; she was as smart a seaman as Kennedy himself; she was an expert
navigator; the heavens and their portents were an open book to her; she
issued her orders with the utmost confidence and decision, and never
hesitated to find fault if things did not please her; and yet with it
all she was most gracious and friendly in her manner to us all, from the
highest to the lowest.

As for Miss Anthea, I am bound to admit that, with the exception of
Monroe and the doctor, she treated us all alike with the utmost
impartiality, merely acknowledging our salutes with a careless, scarcely
perceptible inclination of the head, and otherwise completely ignoring
our existence.  Her amusements, while on deck, consisted of reading,
playing bull, shuffle-board, or deck quoits with her brother,
promenading the poop with her mother, and occasionally condescending to
exchange a few remarks with the parson or the doctor.  But she was a
musician of rare ability, and possessed a soprano singing voice of
exquisite richness and purity, as I had frequent opportunity of judging
by hearing her playing and singing in the drawing-room below while I was
on duty on the poop.

That Mrs Vansittart was an ardent sportswoman was evident from the very
outset by the way in which she sailed the yacht.  She "carried on"
consistently, day and night, as though we were sailing in a race, and no
sooner were we past Ushant, and the breeze showed signs of freshening,
than she ordered preventer backstays rigged fore and aft, and hung on to
her canvas until our lee rail was awash and the lee main-deck flooded to
such an extent from the topgallant forecastle to the poop that its
passage became an impossibility except by swimming.

We swept across the Bay like smoke driven by a strong breeze,
overhauling and passing everything that was going our way, excepting a
big Cape liner; and we actually held our own with her for some hours,
until the breeze eased up sufficiently to allow the steamer to draw
gradually away from us.  We must have presented a most beautiful picture
to the people aboard that boat as we swept along for a time neck and
neck with her, our snow-white cotton canvas gleaming in the brilliant
sunlight or flecked with sweeping blue shadows as the yacht rushed
through and over the foaming surges with the water all aboil about her
and every perfectly cut sail, to her three royals, accurately set and
drawing like a team of cart horses.

The fresh easterly breeze which had swept us down channel in such
splendid style lasted long enough to carry us to the mouth of the Tagus
shortly after nine o'clock in the morning of our fifth day out from
London; and by noon of that day we were riding at anchor off the city of
Lisbon.  Here we remained two days, our next destination being the
island of Madeira.

From Madeira we went on to Teneriffe, and from Teneriffe to Gibraltar;
after which we gradually worked our way up the Mediterranean, calling in
at a number of interesting places on the way.  We were at Ajaccio on
Christmas Day; and it was characteristic of our skipper that she so
arranged matters as to spend the day aboard with us, giving the crew a
rare good time and inviting the whole of her officers to dine with her
in the evening.

We left Ajaccio on the evening of New Year's Day, and, passing through
the Straits of Bonifacio, headed for the Bay of Naples, where we arrived
at nine o'clock on the morning of the third of January.  From Naples we
proceeded to Messina; thence to Malta, Athens, Constantinople, and
Jaffa, where we were all afforded an opportunity to make the trip to
Jerusalem; and from Jaffa we proceeded to Port Said, where, after
remaining at anchor some four or five hours, we ran through the Canal
during the night, with an enormous searchlight suspended from our
bowsprit end to light us on our way.  We anchored at Suez the next day,
and Mrs Vansittart then announced that we should remain there at least
a week, during which the men would be granted daily leave, while the
officers were to make their own arrangements, subject to the approval of
Kennedy, who was left in charge.  I thus had an opportunity not only to
visit Cairo, but also to take a run out to the Pyramids and the Sphinx.
As a matter of fact we remained at Suez nearly a fortnight, awaiting our
skipper's return, when we hove up our anchor and proceeded down the Gulf
of Suez into the Red Sea, duly noting Mount Sinai on our port hand as we
passed it.



CHAPTER THREE.

AN INDIAN OCEAN HURRICANE.

I am not writing this story as a mere diary of travel, and will
therefore push on as rapidly as possible to the point where the real
living interest of the voyage began, contenting myself with a mere brief
reference to the various spots at which we touched.  We took eight days
to make the passage to Aden, where we arrived early on a certain
morning, leaving at five o'clock the same afternoon, after a visit to
the famous Tanks.  Our next port of call was Zanzibar, whence we
proceeded to Durban, in Natal.  From Durban we proceeded to Mauritius,
remaining in Port Louis harbour two days to permit of a visit to that
extraordinary natural curiosity, the Peter Botte Mountain.

From Mauritius we sailed for Colombo.  The weather was glorious when we
left Port Louis, and for two days afterward, with moderate breezes from
the south-east; toward sunset, on our third day out, however, we began
to notice signs of a change.  The barometer had started to decline
shortly after noon; and as the afternoon advanced the breeze weakened,
so that from a speed of fourteen knots we dropped down to a bare five,
although we were under royals, had all our staysails set, and were
showing our whole flight of starboard studding sails as well, the wind
being about a point and a half abaft the beam.  At the same time the
aspect of the sky underwent a subtle change.  The clear, rich blue of
the vault became gradually obscured by a veil, at first scarcely
perceptible, of dirty, whitish-grey haze, from which, by the time of
sunset, every trace of blue had completely vanished.

Gradually, too, the sun became shorn of his rays, although there was no
perceptible diminution of heat, until at length when the great luminary
was upon the point of sinking below the horizon, he had changed into the
semblance of a huge, shapeless mass of molten copper hanging suspended
in the midst of an almost equally shapeless conglomeration of flame and
smoke.  Then he slowly vanished from view; the flaming, smoky western
sky seemed to blaze up for a few moments into a still fiercer
conflagration, the hues deepened until they became a mingling of blood
and soot, when with startling suddenness they died out and an inky
blackness enveloped the ship.  At the same time the small remains of the
wind died away, leaving the yacht rolling and lurching heavily upon a
sea that seemed to have no run in it, but heaved itself up into great
hummocks, only to subside again in the same purposeless manner.

It was drawing on toward the end of the first dog-watch, and as a matter
of fact I was off duty.  But one never spends a dog-watch below in the
tropics if it can be avoided, and Kennedy and I had gone up on the poop
together to watch the sunset and discuss with Briscoe, the second mate,
the meaning of the portents.  Kennedy had never before been in that part
of the world, but I had, and while he did not quite know what to make of
the aspect of the sky, I had already made up my mind pretty well
regarding what was in store for us, and had expressed my opinion as to
what we might expect.  The first mate did not altogether agree with me,
and had proposed that we should refer the matter to Briscoe, who, like
myself, knew, or professed to know, the Indian Ocean pretty well.  So up
we went; and presently, when the last gleam of light was vanishing from
the sky, Kennedy beckoned Briscoe to him and said:

"Well, Mr Briscoe, what d'ye think all that grand show away to the
west'ard means?  Mr Leigh here, who has been in these parts before,
says he belaives we're in for a hurricane."

"Hurricane be hanged!" retorted Briscoe, who always seemed to find a
peculiar pleasure in belittling any opinion that I might express.  "What
we are in for is a thunderstorm that will make some of ye sit up and
take notice.  I guess it will bring with it some pretty considerable
squalls, so it will be a good plan to stow a few of them flyin' kites of
ours.  They're doin' no good anyway, and will only thrash themselves
threadbare if we leave 'em abroad."

"That's so, and I guess you'd better see about it at once, Mr Briscoe,"
remarked Mrs Vansittart, emerging from the companion at that moment.
She had apparently heard Briscoe's last words as she came up the
companion way.  "I've just been looking up the weather remarks in the
_Indian Ocean Directory_," she continued; "and from what it says I guess
there's a hurricane brewing, Mr Kennedy, so--"

"Why," interrupted Kennedy, "that's what Mr Leigh here says.  But Mr
Briscoe, who ought to know something about the Indian Ocean, says no,
it's only going to be a thunderstorm, probably accompanied by heavy
squalls."

"And do you know the Indian Ocean, Mr Leigh?  Have you ever been here
before?" demanded the skipper.

"Several times, madam," I answered.  "And once I was caught in a
hurricane which dismasted us.  The appearance of the sky then was very
much what it was this evening, while the barometer behaved pretty
similarly to what ours has been doing."

"Then that settles it," exclaimed Mrs Vansittart.  "There are two to
one--the _Indian Ocean Directory_ and Mr Leigh against you, Mr
Briscoe; and I guess we'll prepare for the hurricane.  Stow all the
light canvas; stow everything, in fact, except the fore and main
topsails and the fore-topmast staysail; then we shall be ready for
anything that comes--eh, Mr Leigh?"

"Assuredly much better prepared than we are at the present moment," I
said.  "But if I may be permitted to offer a suggestion--"

"You may, Mr Leigh," replied the skipper.  "Yes; go ahead.  What do you
advise?"

"Well, madam," I said, "since you are good enough to give me leave, I
would advise that the staysail be stowed also, the topsail yards lowered
to the caps,"--we carried patent reefing topsails--"the royal and
topgallant yards and topgallant masts sent down on deck, as well as the
studding sails out of the tops; and that extra lashings be put upon the
boats and booms.  Then I have no doubt we shall ride out whatever may
come with reasonable comfort and safety.  And when it comes, I would
heave the ship to with her close-reefed fore topsail aback; also I would
have a small tarpaulin ready to lash in the weather mizen rigging in
case the topsails should blow away.  Finally, I would direct Mackenzie
to see that his engine is all ready for starting at a moment's notice,
if need be."

"Sakes alive!" exclaimed Mrs Vansittart, "do you really believe it's
going to be so bad as all that?"

"I certainly think it not at all improbable, madam," I said.

"Then I guess we'll do as you say," exclaimed the lady.  "It's the right
thing to err on the safe side, and I won't take any chances.  But it
will be bad for the men to have to work in this darkness.  When does the
moon rise?"

"She is due to rise at about eight forty-five to-night," I said.  "But I
am afraid it will be useless for us to look for any help from her; we
shall get no light from her to-night."

"You think not?" she said.  "Then--ah! there is four bells," as Briscoe,
having descended to the main-deck, came up on the poop and struck the
bell.  "Let the men get to work at once, Mr Kennedy, both watches, and
see that Mr Leigh's suggestions are carried out.  And, say, I guess I
won't risk having the topsails blown away; we'll furl everything while
we're about it; and if the hurricane comes we'll heave to under bare
poles.  How will that do, Mr Leigh?"

"Admirably, madam," I replied.  "You will then have done everything
possible to provide for the safety of the ship; and when the blow comes,
as I feel sure it will, there will be no need to risk the lives of any
of the crew."

The necessary orders were at once given, and we all repaired to our
several stations.  My duty was to supervise operations on the mizenmast,
Kennedy having charge of the men working upon the mainmast, and Briscoe
supervising those upon the foremast, and when I went aft I found Miss
Anthea and her brother seated in a couple of basket chairs by the
taffrail.  It was necessary for me to stand quite close to them for a
few minutes; and I had no sooner taken up my position than I heard the
boy say to his sister, in tones loud enough to reach my ears:

"Say, 'Thea, why does Momma pay so much attention to what the Britisher
says?  I guess I don't like it--and I don't like him, either.  I am
going to speak to her about it.  Who is he, that he is to be consulted
before Kennedy and Briscoe?  They're Amuricans, while he is only a
Britisher, and they've been to sea longer than he has; and anyway, an
Amurican is a darn sight better than a Britisher any day."

"Yes, I guess you are right, Ju," replied the young lady; "only you need
not allow your dislike to betray you into vulgarity.  I hate Englishmen,
but I do not find it necessary to use the word `darn', and I wish you
wouldn't; it is only common, vulgar people who use it.  And I wouldn't
speak to Momma either, if I were you; it is not worth while.  Momma
thinks the man is clever, but, of course, he isn't, and she will find it
out sooner or later."

So that was it!  I had often wondered at the attitude of latent
hostility of these two youngsters toward me; and now I understood.  They
hated Englishmen!  Well, their hatred did not trouble me in the least;
it was passive, or at all events was only so far active as to prompt
them now and then to make offensive remarks in my hearing, and taking
into consideration who and what they were, I could put up with a good
deal of that.  But it had the effect of putting me upon my mettle.  I
was determined to prove to them that they were mistaken in their
estimate of Englishmen, not because I attached any value personally to
their good or bad opinion, but because eventually they would be man and
woman, if they lived, and, from the position which their wealth would
give them, would have the power of influencing the opinion of their
fellow countrymen to a certain limited extent.  I felt that it was my
duty to do what I could to lessen the unreasoning dislike of my fellow
countrymen which I had noticed in so many Americans.

It was at this time a dead calm, with a very heavy, confused swell
running, so that the only sounds heard, apart from our own voices, were
the wash and gurgle of the water alongside, as the ship wallowed
uneasily, the loud rustle and flap of the canvas aloft, and the creaking
of the spars.  Moreover, it was intensely dark--to such an extent indeed
that I found it impossible to superintend operations from the deck.
Presently, therefore, I sprang into the mizen rigging and made my way
aloft to the mizen topmast crosstrees, from which I directed the
operation of sending down the royal and topgallant yards, and afterwards
took a hand in sending down the topgallant mast, having the satisfaction
of finding, when I returned to the deck, that we on the mizenmast had
beaten both Briscoe and Kennedy.  I reckoned that, on board a
well-disciplined, old-fashioned British man-o'-war, the task of sending
down royal and topgallant yards and masts and stowing all canvas would
have been accomplished, under similar circumstances, in about twelve
minutes, at the utmost; but it took us thirty-five minutes by the ship's
clock.  This I thought not at all bad, however; for in the first place
we were nothing like so heavily manned as a man-o'-war of our size would
have been, nor had our hands the constant practice in such evolutions
that a frigate's crew would have had.  But the main thing was that our
lady skipper was satisfied, and was good enough to say so.

It remained intensely dark until close upon ten o'clock that night, when
the thinnest imaginable suggestion of moonlight came filtering weakly
through the dense curtain of cloud that now overspread the heavens, just
enough of it to enable us to see objects close at hand and avoid hurting
ourselves by running foul of them, as we had been doing while moving
about the decks.  The weather still remained stark calm, and the ship
was rolling so furiously that I should not have been at all surprised to
see the masts go over the side at any moment.  The gear was all good and
new, however, and held bravely; but the motion was so intensely
disagreeable, and we shipped so much water over both rails, flooding the
main-deck and necessitating the battening down of the hatches, that at
length Mrs Vansittart gave orders to start the engine, and the ship was
then put stem-on to the swell, which had now become more regular,
setting out from about North-North-East.  This action brought us
immediate relief, as it enabled the helmsman to keep the ship out of the
trough, though the violent rolling was exchanged for almost as violent a
pitching.  But the thunderstorm which Briscoe still persistently
maintained was coming, failed to eventuate; and hour after hour dragged
away with no indication of any immediate change, save that the feeble
glimmer of moonlight, instead of increasing, gradually died away again,
leaving us in almost as bad a plight as before.

At midnight, when I went on deck to keep the middle watch, Mrs
Vansittart was still up; and I thought that her temper seemed to be
rather on edge, perhaps owing to the strain of the long-spun-out
suspense.  At least she responded rather sharply to Kennedy's and my
greeting when we joined her on the poop.

I thought that perhaps Briscoe had been talking to her during his watch,
and doing his best to discredit my judgment, for no sooner had we joined
her than she turned upon me, and, in very incisive tones, informed me
that she had come to the conclusion that I had been mistaken, and that
there was going to be no hurricane after all, otherwise it would have
come before then.  But I knew that the Indian Ocean hurricane sometimes
takes a long time brewing; indeed, in the case of my previous experience
it had threatened for more than ten hours before it actually burst upon
us.  I explained this to her; and also said that there was nothing in
the aspect of the weather to make me alter my original opinion.  We were
still engaged in debating the matter when a peculiar low, moaning sound
became audible in the air, rapidly increasing to a weird, unearthly
howl, and a wild, scuffling gust of hot wind swept over us from the
north and went whining away astern of us until we lost sound of it
altogether.

"It is coming at last, madam," I said; "we shall probably have three or
four more such gusts as that, each lasting longer than the one preceding
it, and--"

"And, begorra, here comes number two, now!" exclaimed Kennedy, as a
similar sound once more became audible; and with a vicious swoop another
gust smote us so fiercely that the yacht stopped dead, unable to make
headway against it.  For a full minute or more it seemed as though half
a dozen separate and distinct winds were battling together for the
mastery, the yacht being the centre and focus round which the battle
raged.  We on the poop were buffeted helplessly this way and that, so
that it was only with the utmost difficulty we could keep our feet;
indeed, Mrs Vansittart was literally lifted off her feet for a moment
and blown across the deck with such violence that, had she not luckily
been forced straight into my arms, so that I was able to catch and hold
her, she would probably have been seriously injured by being dashed
furiously against the poop rail.

She thanked me breathlessly as I dragged her by main force to the
mizenmast and passed a couple of turns of the topgallant halyard round
her waist, securing her to a belaying pin; and by the time that this was
done the gust, like the first, had passed.  I begged her to go below,
before worse happened, assuring her that Kennedy, who was in charge,
would know exactly what to do; but the little lady was grit to the
backbone, and positively refused to leave the deck.  On the contrary,
she ordered Kennedy to counter-brace the yards with the head yards
aback, and then heave the ship to on the port tack, after which
everybody but ourselves and the look-outs was to go below, and while she
was giving these orders she deftly passed a few more turns of the
halyard about herself, so that she could not possibly be blown away
unless the mizenmast was blown out of the ship.  Also she begged the
loan of my black silk neck scarf, which she tied over her head and under
her chin, so that her yachting cap might not be blown overboard, as mine
had been.

By this time the air all about us was in a state of continuous
agitation, the wind sometimes swooping down upon us in savage gusts, and
anon easing up for a moment until it was scarcely more than a zephyr;
but these lulls momentarily became of briefer duration, until in the
space of about ten minutes it was blowing hard but very unsteadily, the
heavy gusts following each other with ever-increasing rapidity.  And now
we felt the full benefit of our earlier preparations; for with the
counter-bracing of the yards--a task accomplished in less than a
minute--everything that was possible had been done; and all that
remained was to ride out the gale as best we could.

We were now afforded an opportunity--the first that had ever occurred,
as Kennedy yelled for my information--to see what a really magnificent
sea boat we had under our feet, for under the scourging of that terrible
wind the sea rose with appalling rapidity, notwithstanding that the top
of every sea, as it rose, was torn off and swept to leeward in blinding
and drenching clouds of spindrift.  And although our engine had been
stopped, the ship lay to in the most perfect manner, heading well up
into the wind and taking the seas, as they came at her, as buoyantly as
a gull, shipping very little water except what came aboard in the form
of spindrift or scud water, with an occasional spattering over the
weather cathead.

But this was only the beginning of the hurricane--merely its awakening,
so to speak.  With the passage of the minutes the wind steadily
increased in strength until the wailing and shrieking of it through the
spars and rigging aloft resembled the tones of a mighty organ, drowning
every other sound; while the yacht lay down to it until her lee rail was
completely buried and the water was right up to her main-hatch coamings.
As the wind increased, however, we rode somewhat easier, for after a
time it became impossible for the sea to rise; indeed, the strength of
the wind was such that it actually flattened the sea down, every wave,
as it reared its head, being swept away as a deluge of spray.  The air
was full of it--as full as it is of water during a tropical shower; and
the only manner in which we could distinguish it from rain was by the
salt taste of it upon our lips.

I think the worst feature of it all, however, was the hideous darkness
in which we were enwrapped; for outside the small circle of light
emanating from the skylights it was impossible to see anything save a
faint, ghostly white radiance representing the phosphorescent surface of
the foaming sea, in the midst of which the hull of the yacht stood out
black, vague, and shapeless, it being impossible to see the whole length
of her because of the dense clouds of spindrift which enveloped us.

At length it occurred to me to wonder how our lady skipper was faring in
the midst of this awful turmoil of wind and sea; and, watching my
opportunity, I made a dash for the spot where, dimly outlined in the
sheen of light from the foremost skylight, I could just distinguish her
form huddled up against the foot of the mizen mast.  As I reached her I
noticed that she seemed to be hanging limply in her lashings, and,
stooping closer, I presently discovered that the plucky little lady had
fainted.  The buffeting of the wind and the pitiless incessant pelting
of the spray had been too much for her; and unable to call for
assistance, or to escape unaided, she had succumbed.  This fact
established, I lost no time in summoning Kennedy to my assistance, when,
having cast her adrift, we managed between us to convey her safely to
the companion and carry her below to her cabin.  We then roused the
doctor and Lizette, the chief stewardess, and turned her over to their
care, after which we left her there and returned to the deck to complete
our watch.

I think that middle watch was the longest four hours hat I had ever
spent, chiefly because of its extreme discomfort and the fact that there
was nothing to do.  First of all, I was drenched to the skin, the
conversation in which I was engaged with Mrs Vansittart when the
hurricane started having rendered it impossible for me to go below and
get into my oilskins.  Then there was the unceasing buffeting of the
wind, which seemed at times as though it would drag me limb from limb.
There was also the continuous scourging of the spray, which stung like
the lash of a million whips; and finally, there was the oppression of a
very real anxiety, for, as I think I have mentioned, the yacht was as
heavily rigged as a frigate, and notwithstanding the relief afforded by
sending down her tophamper, she lay down so alarmingly that at length I
began seriously to question whether it would not eventually end in her
turning turtle.  Eight bells came at length, however; and when shortly
afterward I got below, shed my streaming garments, towelled myself dry,
and tumbled into my bunk, my discomfort and anxiety promptly left me as
I sank into a sound and dreamless sleep.



CHAPTER FOUR.

I SAVE JULIUS'S LIFE.

When, shortly before eight bells, I was called by the wardroom steward,
I at once became aware that a change of some sort had occurred in the
weather.  For, on the one hand, the list of the ship to starboard seemed
to be no longer so heavy as it had been when I turned in; while, on the
other, the motion was far and away greater--so violent indeed was it
that, seasoned as I was to the movements of a heaving deck, I
experienced the greatest difficulty in maintaining my balance.  When
presently I went on deck, my previous impressions were fully confirmed;
for although it was still blowing a whole gale, the maniacal fury of the
hurricane was past, while the sea, no longer flattened down and kept
practically level by the irresistible strength of the tempest, had risen
rapidly and was now an almost terrifying sight to behold.  Especially
was this the case when the ship settled into the trough, with one great
foaming liquid mountain rushing away to leeward of her, while another
enormous grey-back, towering above us as high as our lower mast-heads,
came swooping down upon us from to windward with hissing angry crest,
threatening to hurl itself bodily down upon our decks and sink us out of
hand.

Yet that threat was never fulfilled, for the yacht was behaving
magnificently.  She came to in most perfect style as she climbed the
breast of each oncoming comber, heeling steeply to it the while and
turning up a bold weather bow to meet its onslaught.  Then, as the crest
curled in over her turtle-back topgallant forecastle, smothering it in
whirling and blowing foam and spray, she would swing upright and, with a
lift of her stern and an easy weather roll, go sliding down into the
trough beyond, her head paying off as she did so.  And although she was
still under bare poles, with her head yards aback, I could see, upon
looking over the side, that she was forging ahead at a speed of about a
knot and a half.

But although the wind was no longer blowing with hurricane force it
still had the strength of a heavy gale, and while a reference to the
barometer showed that the mercury had begun to rise, there was no other
sign of improvement in the weather.  The sky was almost as black and
threatening in its aspect as ever, with innumerable shreds and tatters
of dirty whitish-grey cloud sweeping athwart at a speed that made one
giddy to look at; while there could be no question that the sea was
gathering height, weight, and volume with the passage of every minute.
The air was still heavily charged with flying spume and spindrift,
necessitating the use of oilskins and sou'westers, and keeping our
spars, rigging, and decks streaming; but we could see with tolerable
clearness for at least a mile in every direction.

Yet although the general feeling out on deck was one of dampness and
discomfort, we had not the added misery of cold to deal with.  On the
contrary, it was so warm that shortly after I went on deck, having
breakfasted, I felt my long oilskin coat and sea boots so uncomfortably
warm that I presently slipped below again for a moment, and, removing
them and my socks, donned a short oilskin jacket and returned to the
deck barefooted, for the sake of the greater comfort.  I took it for
granted that Miss Anthea would never dream of turning out in such
weather, while I felt sure that Mrs Vansittart would excuse me, under
the circumstances, the more so as she had often before come on deck
while we were paddling about, barelegged, washing decks.  And indeed
when, shortly afterward, she emerged through the companion way, encased
in a thin mackintosh reaching to the hem of her dress, and with a light
sou'-wester on her head which in nowise detracted from her good looks,
she at once set me at my ease by laughingly complimenting me upon the
sensible character of my attire.  Then, in a very different tone of
voice, she thanked me for having come to her rescue on the previous
night when, overcome by the terrific buffeting of the hurricane, she had
swooned while lashed to the mast.

We--that is to say, Mrs Vansittart, Kennedy, and I--were still standing
together under the lee of the wheelhouse, discussing the weather
generally, and the probable duration of the gale in particular, when the
boy Julius came up from below, emerging from the companion way at the
precise moment when the ship, with a terrific lee roll, was climbing to
the summit of an exceptionally heavy sea.  Precisely how it happened I
could not possibly say, it occurred so suddenly, and moreover I only saw
the last part of it; but I imagine that the lad must have lost, or
inadvertently released, his hold upon the side of the companion at the
critical moment when the velocity of the ship's roll was at its highest.
Be that as it may, Julius no sooner stepped out on deck than he went
with a run straight to the lee rail of the poop, fetched up against it
with a force that must have knocked the breath out of him, and then--
although the rail was breast-high to him--in some inconceivable fashion
seemed to lurch forward upon it, turn a complete somersault over it, and
plunge headlong into the sea.  It was Mrs Vansittart's shriek of
"Julius!" and her look of petrified horror, that caused me to wheel
round, and I was just in time to see the lad go whirling over the rail.

One's thoughts move with lightning-like rapidity in moments of
emergency, and as I saw the boy going I thought, "Kennedy is no good;
those heavy sea boots of his would drag him down and sink him in a few
seconds; I must go myself!"  And as the thought flashed through my brain
I tore off my oilskin jacket and, shouting to Kennedy, "Lifebuoy--bend
to signal halyards!" made a dash for the rail, while Mrs Vansittart's
shrieks lent wings to my feet.

As I reached the rail the ship topped the surge, which went rushing and
roaring away beneath her and to leeward in a tremendous boil of foam, in
the rear of which there was a space of almost glass-smooth
indigo-coloured water, down through which I thought I saw something that
might be the boy's body.  Without hesitating an instant I vaulted the
rail, landing upon the curved turtle-back outboard, flung my hands above
my head, and plunged straight for the spot where, a moment before, I
thought I had seen the lad's body.

I went deep, kicking and striking out vigorously as I felt the water
close about me, for the thought occurred to me that if the boy had
really hurt himself badly when colliding with the rail, he would
probably not rise to the surface at all, but would slowly sink.  As I
forced my way downward I looked about me, and presently saw a glimmering
white something far below which might be the object of my quest, for the
boy was dressed entirely in white.  Desperately I urged myself downward,
the gloom increasing with every stroke; and at length, when I felt as
though my lungs would burst and I could not retain my breath another
second, I grabbed something, I scarcely knew what, and turning, struck
upward toward the blue glimmer of light far overhead.

How I managed to hold my breath during that seemingly endless climb to
the surface I cannot say, but I did it somehow, my head emerging from
the water at the very instant when the air escaped from my lungs in one
long gasp.  I quickly filled them again, looked to see what I had
brought to the surface with me, and found that, as I expected, it was
the apparently lifeless form of Master Julius.  I had grabbed the lad by
his ankle, so that he hung head downward in my grasp.  That would never
do; so, treading water vigorously, I shifted the position of the body
until I had the head resting upon my shoulder; and at that moment I felt
myself being hove up, up, up, and the next instant a very mountain of
water went hissing and roaring over my head, plunging me helplessly
hither and thither and momentarily threatening to tear my prize from my
hold.

As soon as I had again got my breath, I looked round for the yacht.  She
was nowhere in sight; but presently, as I began to wonder what had
become of her, I saw her topmast-heads swing into view beyond the head
of the comber that had just swept past me, and then up she swept until
the whole of her hull was visible.  I saw a crowd of people gathered aft
by the taffrail, and others in the rigging, all peering out under the
sharp of their hands in various directions.  Then, as the craft
surmounted the grey-back and came sliding down its weather slope,
rolling to windward until I could see nearly half her main-deck, one of
the figures suddenly pointed toward me, and in an instant every face
turned my way, while one man, whom I presently recognised as Kennedy,
put one hand to the side of his mouth, as though shouting, while he
pointed with the other.

Not a word could I hear, however, for my ears were still full of water,
while such sound as entered them was merely the hiss and roar of the
sea.  But I guessed what the mate was pointing at, the more readily as I
saw one man paying out a thin line over the rail; so I looked eagerly
about me, and presently saw, some thirty fathoms away, a white lifebuoy
floating in the midst of a wide surface of foam, the ship at this time
being perhaps twice as far from me as the lifebuoy.  But just as I
started to strike out for the buoy, another heavy sea swept over me,
treating me pretty much as the first had done, and all but suffocating
me into the bargain.

I thought that, hampered as I was with the boy's inert body, I should
never reach the buoy, for I seemed utterly unable to make so much as an
inch of progress in that frightful sea; and once, after I had been
overwhelmed about a dozen times, the thought came to me that if I wanted
to save myself I must give up the idea of saving the body, which after
all would be a useless task, since I felt certain that the lad was dead.
But no; I could not return to the ship and face the lad's mother
empty-handed.  I could picture her despair under such circumstances, for
Julius was Mrs Vansittart's only son, and, spoiled as he was, I
believed that she loved him more than her husband, more than her
daughter, more than her own life.  No, it was not to be thought of; I
had undertaken the task and I must execute it.  I had raised her hopes,
and I would not disappoint them if God would only give me strength to
reach that buoy.

At length, after what seemed like a century of effort, I did reach it,
and, laying my hand upon its nearest rim, tilted it over my head and
under my armpits, at the very moment--as I afterward learned--when those
aboard had paid out four sets of signal halyards to the bare end of the
fourth set!

And now came the delicate and difficult task of hauling me alongside in
the shortest possible space of time, without parting the halyards on the
one hand or drowning me on the other.  But Kennedy was the man for the
job.  Even as I vaulted the rail and plunged into the water his active
mind, aided by past experience, had enabled him not only to grasp the
full import of my hasty words concerning the lifebuoy and the signal
halyards, but also to foresee exactly what must inevitably happen.  And
while he was in the very act of unreeving the peak ensign halyards,
preparatory to bending them on to the lifebuoy which his ready knife had
slashed off the taffrail, he was shouting for somebody to pass the word
for Mackenzie, the engineer.

When Mac, already issuing from his cabin to learn what all the sudden
outcry was about, received the message and came rushing aft in response
to the call, he in turn was fully prepared for the order which Kennedy
gave him, to go below and set his engine going dead easy astern.  Thus
by the time that I reached and got into the buoy, the ship's way through
the water was stopped, and, highly dangerous though such a proceeding
undoubtedly was, under the circumstances, they were able to haul me
gradually alongside and up under the counter without mishap, the engine
of course being stopped again at the right moment.  And when once they
had got me under the lee quarter of the ship all the rest was of course
comparatively easy.  Two of the hands standing by hove me a couple of
standing bowlines on ropes' ends, one of which I slipped over the
inanimate Julius's head and under his armpits; and when I saw that they
had got the body safely in over the rail I slipped into the other
myself, and was hauled aboard amid the triumphant yells of the crew--to
swoon as my feet touched the deck.

But there was nothing much the matter with me.  I had swooned simply
through over-exertion, coupled perhaps with the reaction at finding
myself once more safely aboard the yacht; and Harper, the surgeon,
having had the foresight to order someone to stand by with brandy as a
restorative, in case of need, they soon brought me round again.  By
Kennedy's orders I was helped below to my cabin, to turn in and rest for
a bit, learning, as I went, that Harper and the boy's mother had taken
charge of the lad the moment that he was hauled aboard, and had carried
him below to his cabin.  I afterward heard, however, that before she
quitted the deck, Mrs Vansittart had given orders that she was to be
informed, at the earliest possible opportunity, how things were going
with me; and I further learned that, upon being told I was doing well,
she fell upon her knees by the side of her boy's bed and, bursting into
tears, sobbed forth audible thanks to God for my preservation.

As for me, after vomiting a considerable quantity of salt water, I was
helped to undress, given a vigorous towelling, and put into my bunk,
where, having swallowed a tumblerful of hot brandy and water, I quickly
dropped off to sleep, and remained asleep until after four bells of the
afternoon watch had struck.  Then, feeling pretty much my former self,
although a bit shaky on my pins, and very sore about the chest, I turned
out, donned a dry suit of clothes, and sallied forth to the wardroom,
with the twofold object of ascertaining if there was any news as to
Master Julius's fate and getting something to eat.

Upon entering the wardroom I found Kennedy, Mackenzie, Grimwood the
purser, and, somewhat to my astonishment, the doctor, present and
chatting animatedly.  Moreover, I gathered that they were talking about
me, for as I passed through the open doorway Kennedy looked up and
exclaimed:

"And begorra here's himself, no less!  Talk of the--Here, bring yourself
to an anchor on the sofa, lad, and let's have a look at ye!  Faith! but
your morning's experience has taken it out of ye, by the looks of ut.
But never ye mind that, me bhoy, ye'll weather it all right, and ye'll
always have the memory of havin' done a gallant thing, whatever happens.
By the Piper, lad, we're all proud of ye, from the skipper downward."

They all came crowding round me as I sank upon the sofa, and insisted
upon shaking hands with me, saying so many nice and complimentary things
to me that I presently began to feel quite abashed.  Then Harper
interfered authoritatively.

"There!" he exclaimed, waving the crowd away, "that will do, you chaps.
Let up upon the youngster a bit and give him a chance.  What you want,"
he continued, turning to me and laying his fingers upon my pulse, "is a
meal first--not a heavy meal, but something good and nourishing, and
then another spell of sleep.  Mac, have the goodness to press the button
for the steward, and I'll give him an order.  How is your appetite, my
British hero?"

"Why," said I, "to confess the truth I turned out because I felt hungry,
and came in here with the hope of getting something to eat.  But,
Doctor, I want to know about the boy.  I did the best I could for him,
and was determined to bring him back with me if I was fortunate enough
to fetch the ship again; but I felt certain there was no life left in
him, even before I got hold of the buoy."

"And that is just where you were mistaken, young man.  Oh! here you are,
steward," as that individual entered in response to the summons of the
bell.  "I want you to go to the cook and tell him--from me, you
understand--to give you a good big basin of that chicken broth I
instructed him to prepare, and bring it here for Mr Leigh, with a slice
of bread from a loaf baked yesterday, if anything of the sort remains.
Then, when you have brought the broth, go to Mr Marsh and ask him to
give you a small bottle of Mumm, and bring it along here.  Now get a
move on, and let me have those things quick."

"Well, Doctor, what about Master Julius?"  I prompted, as the steward
retired.

"Why, as it happened, he was not dead when we hauled him aboard,"
replied Harper, "though he was so near to it that it cost me two solid
hours or more of strenuous work to restore animation.  But I believe I
shall pull him through now, with luck.  He dropped off to sleep about
half an hour ago, and I left him in charge of his mother and the chief
stewardess, with instructions to send for me upon the instant of his
waking.  How do you like your broth?"

"It is delicious," I replied, "and I am enjoying it; although I feel a
bit mean in taking it, for I suppose it was prepared for Julius, wasn't
it?"

"Don't you trouble about that, young un," returned the doctor.  "The
cook has my orders; and if he has attended to them--as I have no doubt
he has--there will be plenty for the pair of you.  Will you have some
more?"

But I declined; I had had quite sufficient, I said.  Thereupon Harper
opened the half-bottle of wine which the steward had brought, poured the
contents into a tumbler, and ordered me to toss it off and then go back
to my bunk and get another sleep.

"Sleep just as long as you care to," he said, "and don't worry about
watches until I give you leave.  A night in ought to fix you up again, I
think; but we will see what you look like when you turn out for
breakfast to-morrow."

I was soon asleep again, but the first bugle call for dinner awakened
me, and, feeling a good deal better, I turned out and dressed, noticing,
as I did so, that the ship's movements were very much easier and more
rhythmical than when I had lain down.  Indeed, I had the feeling that
she was sailing again; and, glancing through my porthole, I found that
this was so, and that the weather had cleared.  The sea, now a deep
sapphire blue, had gone down very considerably, the sky was clear of
clouds, and upon looking more closely at the water I was able to detect
the shadow of the ship upon it, and thereby determine that she was under
her three topsails, courses, fore-topmast staysail, and spanker.  And by
the swirl of yeast past my port I estimated that she must be reeling off
about eight knots.

While I was still engaged in dressing there came a gentle tap at my
door, to which I answered "Come!" whereupon the door opened and Harper
entered.

"So you are turning out again," he said, after standing and looking at
me a moment.  "How do you find yourself?"

"Oh! ever so much better," I replied; "indeed, I think I may say that I
am practically all right again.  The soreness of my chest is all but
gone, and--"

"Let me feel your pulse," he commanded; and I stretched out my arm to
him.

He laid his finger on my pulse and kept it there for about half a
minute.

"Yes," he said, "you'll do; nothing very much the matter with you.  Now,
look here, boy, Mrs Vansittart has instructed me to come and see how
you are getting on, and to say that if you feel equal to it, she would
like you to join the saloon party at dinner to-night--just themselves,
you and I, you know, alone.  The fact is that they are all eager to tell
you what they feel about your exploit of this morning, and they will not
be happy until they have done so.  Do you feel equal to the ordeal; or
shall I go back and say that they must excuse you for a little while
longer?  I think you can stand it, you know.  What say you?"

"Oh, yes!"  I replied, "I dare say I can stand it.  I suppose it will
have to come sometime, so I might as well get it over and done with.
But, I say, Doctor, just give them a hint to go easy with their thanks,
will you, there's a good fellow.  If there is one thing I hate more than
anything else, it is being made a fuss of.  You understand me?"

"Why, of course I _do_, my dear chap," was the reply.  "It is
frightfully trying, I know; but you mustn't grudge them the satisfaction
of expressing their gratitude to you--see?  I'll take care that they
shall not carry the thing too far.  I'll tell 'em that you're not in
condition to stand very much excitement just yet.  Well, then, so long.
See you again later."

As soon as I had finished dressing I seated myself in the very
comfortable revolving chair in front of my writing desk, to await the
second bugle call to dinner; but I had scarcely done so when a steward
came along to my cabin, bearing a medicine glass containing a draught
which he said the doctor had sent me, with instructions that I was to
take it at once.  I accordingly tossed it off; and a few minutes later
the second dinner call sounded, and I made my way aft and up the
companion way to the drawing-room, where I found Mrs Vansittart, her
daughter, Monroe, and the doctor already assembled.

As one of the stewards flung open the door and announced me, Mrs
Vansittart came forward, seized my hands in both of hers, and looked up
into my face with eyes that were swimming with tears.  For a moment her
lips quivered, speechless; then, recovering command of herself, she
said:

"Welcome--a thousand welcomes, Mr Leigh!  Doctor Harper has explained
to us that it is only by making a great effort you find yourself able to
meet us to-night and give us a chance to express our lifelong gratitude
to you for your noble, gallant deed."  Again her emotion overcame her;
and presently, after a brave but ineffectual struggle to be formal and
restrained, she suddenly let herself go, and, bursting into tears,
exclaimed:

"Oh! you dear, dear boy, Walter, how can I ever thank you enough?  I am
a happy, grateful woman to-night, for the doctor has just assured me
that Julius will certainly recover; whereas, but for you, he would--
would--have been--" She could get no further; so in lieu of words the
dear lady lifted my hands to her lips and kissed them repeatedly.  Then,
to my intense relief, Harper stepped forward, and, gently taking her by
the arm, led her to a seat, saying:

"Now, my dear lady, this will never do, you know.  You must pull
yourself together, or I shall have another case upon my sick list.  If I
had suspected that this was going to happen I would not have allowed
Leigh to come to you so soon.  This has been a very trying day for you,
I know, but--"

"Yes, it has, Doctor," she sobbed, "and of course it has upset me a bit;
but just leave me alone for a minute or two, and I shall be all right
again."

While she was saying this, Miss Anthea came forward, and, frankly
extending her hand, expressed her own thanks to me for having saved her
brother's life.  "And, Mr Leigh," she continued in a low voice, "I take
back every one of those horrid things that I've said about Englishmen in
your hearing.  I am downright ashamed of myself.  Will you forgive me?"

"Why, of course I will, very freely and willingly," I said.  "Please
forget all about them, as I shall."

"Thank you!" she said.  "My brother--"

But at this moment Marsh flung open the door, and, in his most
impressive manner, announced that dinner was served, thus putting an end
to what I felt to be a most embarrassing situation.

"You are to take me down to dinner, if you please, Mr Leigh," said Miss
Anthea, linking her arm in mine.  "I insisted upon it," she explained,
"because I want to make you understand how sorry and ashamed I am at the
way I have behaved to you all through the voyage--"

"But," I said, "I thought it was agreed that that should be all
forgotten."

"So it shall be," she said, "since you are so generous as to wish it.
But before we entirely relegate the matter to oblivion, I want to
explain that my stupid prejudice against Englishmen is not at all
founded upon experience, for the few Englishmen whom I have met--true,
they have been very few--have all been unexceptionable.  I don't know
why it is, but it seems to be the fashion for us Americans to speak and
think of Englishmen as being of a different clay from ourselves,
something infinitely inferior to us in every respect--effete, and all
that sort of thing; and so much is this the case that a good many of us
really come to believe it at last.  There!  I have made my confession,
cried _peccavi_, and have been forgiven; and I feel ever so much
happier.  Now, please tell me about yourself.  I want to know whether
you have quite recovered from the effect of your dreadful exertions this
morning.  My!  I don't believe I shall ever forget how I felt when I
rushed up on deck to find out what all the confusion was about, and saw
you swimming in the water, ever so far away, with Julius hanging over
your shoulder."



CHAPTER FIVE.

WE FALL IN WITH A DERELICT; AND MEET WITH AN ACCIDENT.

That evening, short though it was--for Harper insisted that we should
all retire early--was the most delightful that I had ever spent,
although everybody would persist in talking of what they termed my
"exploit", the ladies telling me over and over again how profound was
their gratitude to me for saving the life of the being who was
evidently, to them, the most important person in the world, while the
men said all sorts of complimentary and flattering things about my
courage in plunging overboard in such a tremendous sea, and so on, so
that my cheeks were aflame with blushes all the time.  But the absolute
sincerity of their gratitude and admiration and the friendly warmth of
their feeling toward me were so transparently evident in everything they
said, that despite the feeling of embarrassment that oppressed me, I was
very happy, the more so that nothing was said or even hinted at
concerning a reward for what I had done.  For--perhaps because of my
youth--my pride was intensely sensitive; and while I greatly valued
their gratitude and friendship--and I may as well be frank enough to
add, their admiration--any hint of reward would have wounded my
self-respect to the quick.

In consequence of the doctor's injunction as to our early retirement
that night, we did not adjourn to the drawing-room, as usual, but when
the cloth was removed Mrs Vansittart announced her intention of
remaining with us while we sipped our coffee and Harper and Monroe
smoked their cigars; and Miss Anthea also remained.  And it was then
that I learned how very narrow had been the escape of the lad Julius
from drowning.

It appeared that when, owing to the sudden and violent lurch of the
ship, he had been hurled athwart the deck and against the lee rail of
the poop, the impact of his body upon the hard wood was so severe that
the breath was completely knocked out of him, while the pain must have
been so great as practically to paralyse him for the moment and render
him quite unable to do anything to help himself.  Hence the probability
was that, once in the water, he would have sunk for good and all, and
that but for my promptitude in diving after him he would never again
have been seen.  And when at length he was got aboard, he was so nearly
gone that Harper's skill and resources were taxed to their uttermost for
more than two hours before any sign of returning animation manifested
itself; while it was not until the afternoon was well advanced that the
medico was able to assert with assurance that the lad would recover.
Even so, there was the probability that, with all the care and skilful
treatment he could possibly receive, it would be at least three or four
days before Julius could be up and about again.

According to routine, it was my eight hours out that night; but Harper's
fiat had already gone forth that I was to spend the whole night in my
bunk.  Therefore upon leaving the dining-room I at once retired to my
cabin, turned in, and slept soundly until I was called at eight o'clock
on the following morning, when I arose, thoroughly recuperated, and
feeling as well as ever.

The first thing I noticed, while dressing, was that it was a brilliantly
fine morning, for the sunshine was streaming powerfully in through my
port, flooding the cabin with its radiance; and the next thing was that
the ship's motion was easy and buoyant, from which I inferred that the
gale was over and that we had passed beyond the area over which it had
swept.  But in this last supposition I was mistaken, as was to appear
later.  Still, when I went on deck everything went to justify the
belief, for the sky was cloudless, the wind had sunk to a royal breeze
from the eastward, the sea had gone down, leaving nothing but a long low
northerly swell, and we were reeling off our twelve knots easily and
comfortably, as I learned had been the case ever since midnight.

When I climbed to the poop, Mrs Vansittart was already there, attired
in a fine-weather rig of white, with a white cover on her yachting cap.
She immediately came up to me and, shaking hands, expressed the hope
that I had entirely recovered from the effects of yesterday's ducking
and exertions.  Then, as I replied in the affirmative and in return
enquired how her son was progressing, she deftly drew me aft to the
taffrail, out of earshot of Briscoe, the second mate, who was sourly
regarding us both, and said:

"Now, Walter, there is just a word or two that I want to say to you, and
this is as good an opportunity as any to say it.  I will not repeat what
I said to you last night in reference to my gratitude to you for saving
dear Julius's life, for I hope I then made it quite clear to you that I
shall always regard myself as under an obligation to you which it will
be quite impossible for me ever adequately to repay.  But this is what I
wish you to understand.  I have decided that in the interests of good
discipline, and to guard against the possibility of arousing unworthy
jealousy,"--here, whether by accident or design, she allowed her gaze to
rest for a moment upon the second mate's somewhat ungainly figure--"I
shall treat you, while on duty, precisely as I do my other officers,
making no distinction whatever in my behaviour between you and them.  I
feel sure that you would prefer it so; would you not?  Of course.  Very
well, then, that is clearly understood between us; but I thought it best
to mention the matter, so that there shall be no misapprehension.

"And now, as to Julius.  The dear boy is very much better, I am thankful
to say; but Dr Harper thinks it is best that he should remain in bed
for to-day at least.  I find that he has not the faintest recollection
of what happened to him after he fell into the water until he came to
himself in his bed, so I have told him everything, and made it perfectly
clear to him that he owes his life to you.  Of course he is grateful,
and wishes you to go down and see him a little later on in order that he
may personally thank you; but--well--if he should seem not quite so
grateful to you as he ought to be I beg that you will not think badly of
him, Walter.  Having been unconscious all the time that he was in the
water, I can quite understand--cannot you?--that he is unable to
appreciate very clearly the awful risk you ran in effecting his rescue,
and the magnitude of his indebtedness to you.  And--yes--there is
another thing.  He is an only son--and--well, I am beginning to think
that perhaps we have all united together to spoil him a bit, so that,
you see--"

The poor lady was becoming more and more embarrassed with every word she
uttered, I therefore thought it high time to come to her relief; so I
said:

"Dear madam, I beg that you will not distress yourself by attempting any
further explanation.  I see exactly how the matter stands; and believe
me, I shall not be in the smallest degree disappointed if I find that
Julius's gratitude is less eloquent in its expression than your own.
After all, he is still very young; he has no knowledge of what actually
happened, except what you have told him; and I doubt very much whether
any boy of his age possesses the capacity to conjure up a very lively
feeling of gratitude for an obligation of which he knows nothing except
from hearsay.  Therefore I hope that you will not allow yourself to
worry over any seeming lukewarmness on his part."

"Thank you, Walter; a thousand thanks!" she said, laying her hand upon
my arm.  "It is generous of you to feel about it as you do, and it
increases the load of my obligation to you.  But I see that you
perfectly understand, so I will say no more about it.  As soon as Dr
Harper says you can see Julius, I will send for you."

The interview with Julius took place shortly after six bells in the
forenoon watch, the boy's mother and the doctor being present; and after
what the former had said to me by way of preparation, I was not at all
surprised to find that Master Julius's thanks were expressed in a very
perfunctory, offhand manner, with not much of the ring of sincerity
about them.  But I made allowances for him, for I saw that the lad was
still only in the early stage of convalescence; also, it was perfectly
clear that he did not in the least realise the fact that he had all but
lost his life.

The cabin in which he lay was very large, light, airy, and most
beautifully furnished, with every convenience and luxury that the most
fastidious person could possibly desire; and it was quite painful to see
its occupant, on his handsome and capacious brass bedstead, under a most
beautiful embroidered silk coverlet, and surrounded by everything that
heart could wish for, lying there wan, peevish, irritable, dissatisfied
with everybody and everything, seemingly because his doting parents had
gratified his every whim and humoured his every caprice.  It was quite
evident that he regarded me with almost if not quite as great distaste
as ever; he even seemed to consider it a grievance that he owed his life
to a despised Britisher; and seeing how acutely his mother was
distressed at his ungracious manner toward me, I contented myself by
saying a few words of sympathy with him on his illness, and brought my
visit to a speedy close.

Five bells in the afternoon watch had just been struck, and I was once
more on duty, when a man who had been sent aloft to attend to some small
matter hailed the deck from the main topsail yard to report that, some
ten miles distant, and broad on our weather beam, there was something
that had the appearance of a dismasted wreck.  In reply to this the
skipper, who was on deck, requested Kennedy to take the ship's telescope
up into the main topmast crosstrees and ascertain what the object really
was.  This was done; and in due time the mate came down and reported
that the object, as seen through the glass, proved to be a biggish lump
of a craft, either a ship or a barque, totally dismasted, with the
wreckage of her spars still floating alongside, and to all appearance
derelict.  We at once hauled our wind, and shortly afterward tacked; and
by eight bells we were up with the wreck and hove to within biscuit-toss
to leeward of the craft.  Then Briscoe, the second mate, in charge of
one of the whalers, was sent away to give the derelict--for such she
seemed to be--an overhaul.

The craft was a wooden vessel, of about our own tonnage, painted black
with a broad white ribbon chequered with false ports; she had a Dutch
look about her; and, from her model, was evidently somewhat elderly.
She had been ship-rigged, and from the appearance of the wreckage
alongside had been caught unawares, very probably by the recent
hurricane, and dismasted.  She had a short, full poop, and as she rolled
heavily toward us we caught sight of what looked like the shattered
framework of a deckhouse close abaft the stump of her foremast; also,
there were the remains of two boats dangling from davits on her
quarters; from all of which appearances we concluded that she had passed
through a pretty desperate experience.

But what had become of her crew?  There had been no sign of them when we
closed with and hailed her, nor had any of them appeared since; yet the
wreckage of the boats hanging from her davits made it difficult for us
to believe that they had abandoned the ship.  True, there was no sign of
a longboat such as is usually stowed on the main-hatch of a merchantman,
but we could hardly believe that the crew had taken to her in preference
to the two quarter boats; for after the fall of the spars it would have
been difficult to launch so heavy a boat, unless indeed they had run her
overboard, fisherman fashion, through the wide gap in her bulwarks
amidships on both sides, where not only the planking but also the
stanchions had been swept away.

Shortly after the departure of Briscoe we drifted into a position which
enabled us to get a view of the stranger's stern.  This confirmed our
first surmise respecting her origin, for beneath a row of smashed cabin
windows we read the words: "Anna Waarden.  Amsterdam."

Briscoe remained aboard the wreck about three-quarters of an hour; and,
upon his return, reported that the craft was derelict, and that there
was nothing to show how the crew had left her, except that it appeared
to have been with the utmost suddenness, for there was no sign of their
having taken anything with them.  Even the ship's papers--which he found
in the captain's stateroom and brought away with him--had been left
behind; and that the disaster could only have occurred very recently was
proved by the logbook, which had been entered up to within a few hours
of the moment when the hurricane struck us, while Briscoe had found the
chronometer still going.

He added that he had sounded the well and found barely a foot of water
in it; and that, after careful examination, he had come to the
conclusion that the hull was sound.  If Mrs Vansittart would supply him
with a crew, he believed he could fit the craft with a jury rig and take
her into port.  The logbook showed that she had sailed from Batavia,
homeward bound for Amsterdam, sixteen days before the date upon which we
fell in with her; while her papers made it clear that she was laden with
a cargo quite rich enough to justify the attempt at salvage.  The result
of this report was that Mrs Vansittart summoned the crew aft, explained
to them, through Kennedy, the nature of the second mate's report and his
request to be allowed to salve the hull and cargo, and then called for
volunteers for the job.

The prospect of salvage money proved tempting enough to induce some
twenty men to come forward, of whom Kennedy chose fifteen, including the
boatswain's and carpenter's mates; whereupon the purser was instructed
to make up the men's accounts to date and pay them off.  While the first
part of this business--namely, the making up of the accounts--was being
attended to, those who had volunteered went below and packed their kits,
then brought them on deck and threw them into the first cutter, which
Mrs Vansittart gave them, after which they went aboard the Hollander
and got to work.

The arrangement was that if Briscoe found the ship sound, he was, if
possible, to follow us to Colombo.  If the yacht should be there upon
his arrival, he was to turn over his salvaged vessel to the proper
authorities, and, with his crew, rejoin the _Stella Maris_.  But if for
any reason this plan should be found impracticable, he was to act
according to his own discretion, preferably navigating the ship to the
nearest port at which she could be refitted, and thence taking her home.

Half an hour afterward Grimwood, the purser, reported that he had made
up his accounts and withdrawn from the safe the amount of money required
to pay off the volunteers, whereupon I was ordered to take the whaler,
which was still in the water, veered astern, convey the purser aboard
the other craft, and, while he was engaged upon his business, take a
look round and consult with Briscoe, to determine whether the latter had
all that he was likely to require.

Investigation showed, as was of course to be expected, that the craft
was amply supplied with provisions and water for a long voyage, and also
that both were undamaged, while she was also well found in every other
respect.  As soon, therefore, as the purser had finished his task--not
without having some of his accounts disputed--we bade the adventurers
farewell, wished them a safe and prosperous voyage, climbed down into
our boat, and returned to the yacht, which, after I had made my report
to the skipper, filled away and proceeded for Colombo, just as the sun
was dipping below the horizon.

I may mention here that we saw no more of Briscoe and his crew.  They
did not turn up at Colombo during our sojourn there; and it was not
until long afterward that I learned that, after a very protracted and
adventurous voyage, the _Anna Waarden_ safely reached Durban, where she
refitted, ultimately arriving safely in Amsterdam.

At ten o'clock in the morning of the fifth day after parting company
with Briscoe, we entered Colombo harbour and came to an anchor in six
fathoms.  The boy Julius was by this time sufficiently recovered to show
once more on deck, but his health was still such as to cause his mother
some anxiety; therefore, after anxious consultation with Harper, it was
arranged that he should be taken up to Kandy and given a fortnight's
thorough change of air and scene.  The whole party--that is to say, Mrs
Vansittart, her son and daughter, and Monroe--therefore packed up their
traps and went ashore immediately after luncheon; and we saw no more of
them for a full fortnight.  At least we saw no more of them down aboard
the yacht; but after they had been gone some three or four days Kennedy
received an invitation to go up to Kandy, to dine and spend the next day
there; and when he returned he brought with him a similar invitation for
me, it being now impossible for us both to be out of the ship together,
since, immediately upon Briscoe's departure, I had been temporarily
promoted to the position of second mate, with the promise of permanent
confirmation in the event of Briscoe not rejoining us.  So in my turn,
up I went to Kandy, and enjoyed the trip immensely, being most warmly
received by everybody except Julius, who seemed wholly unable to conquer
his antipathy toward me.

When the party returned to the yacht they were all, Julius included,
looking vastly better for their sojourn among the hills; indeed the boy
appeared better in health than I had ever seen him before, and I thought
there was a shade of improvement in his temper also.  They came aboard
about half-past five o'clock in the evening, and, we having been
previously warned by letter, the moment that they stepped in on deck we
hove up our anchor, started our engine, and proceeded to sea, in order
that we might avoid spending the night in the insufferable heat of the
harbour.  We kept the engine going until we had rounded Dondra Head and
were heading north, with Adam's Peak square off our port beam, when we
made sail, bound for Calcutta, where we arrived exactly a week later.

We lay at Calcutta a whole month, during which Mrs Vansittart and her
party toured India from end to end, seeing, according to her own
account, everything worth seeing.  And while she was thus engaged, we of
the wardroom did our modest best to enjoy ourselves, first of all seeing
everything that was worth seeing in and about the city; and afterward
engaging a native pilot to take us in the motor launch to the
Sunderbunds, where, braving malaria, snakes, and all other perils, we
spent a week shooting, the four of us who constituted the party bagging
seven tigers between us, to say nothing of other and less formidable
game.

From Calcutta we sailed for Moulmein, where we remained four days,
getting a hurried glimpse of Burma and the Burmese; then we sailed for
Singapore, at the southern extremity of the Malay Peninsula.  But on the
night of our third day out from Moulmein, while we were bowling merrily
along with a spanking wind abeam, reeling off a good twelve knots by the
log, we struck something which we conjectured to be a piece of
practically submerged wreckage; for when we afterwards came to
investigate the matter, the look-out on the forecastle head vowed by all
his gods that, although he was keenly alert, he had seen nothing.  The
incident occurred during the middle watch, while Kennedy was in charge,
consequently I was below and asleep at the time.  But I was awakened by
the shock, although it was not very severe.  Kennedy rushed aft to the
taffrail to see if he could catch a glimpse of the object, whatever it
might be; but although the night was starlit it was too dark to see very
distinctly, and although he imagined that, as he stood there at gaze, he
saw something break water some eight or ten fathoms astern, he could not
be sure.

He wheeled about, and, running forward to the break of the poop, gave
orders to let fly the royal and topgallant halyards and sheets and to
back the mainyard, also instructing the carpenter to sound the pump
well.  For a few moments, while these things were doing, there was some
confusion, what with the watch bustling about the decks, and those below
rushing up on deck to see what had happened--among them being Mrs
Vansittart, who appeared on the poop wrapped in a dressing-gown.  But
presently the ship was brought to the wind and hove to, and the
confusion began to subside, especially when the carpenter reported that
the ship was making no water.

Mrs Vansittart, apprehensive that we might have run down some small
native craft, ordered our remaining cutter to be lowered and sent me
away in charge to investigate; but after pulling about for more than an
hour I was unable to find anything, and at length returned to the ship
in response to a rocket recall.  Meanwhile, the carpenter had been
below, and, after a most careful investigation, had returned with the
report that he could find no indication that the ship had sustained the
slightest damage; consequently, upon my return, the cutter was hoisted
up and sail was again made.  But on the morrow, with the arrival of
daylight, the discovery was made that all three blades of our propeller
had been completely shorn off, a mishap which, a little later on,
resulted in landing us in what might have been a very awkward mess.

Possibly this accident may have had the effect of reminding our lady
skipper of something that had all but slipped her memory.  Be that as it
may, the loss of our propeller blades had no sooner been discovered than
she issued certain orders, in response to which several heavy cases were
swayed up on deck and opened, with the result that when the sun went
down that night the _Stella Maris_ was an armed ship, sporting two
main-deck batteries of beautiful four-inch quick-firing guns of the most
up-to-date pattern, six of a side, with two one-pound Hotchkisses on her
forecastle, and four Maxims on her poop.



CHAPTER SIX.

KENNEDY'S BANSHEE.

It was shortly after noon, on our fifth day out from Moulmein, and we
were just within the Malacca Strait, when the wind began to fail us; and
by two bells in the first dog-watch it had fallen stark calm, and the
yacht's head was slowly boxing the compass.  We were close enough in
with the land to see from the deck the ridge of the mountain range that
forms the backbone, as it were, of the Malay Peninsula, though not the
coast line itself; but there were quite a number of islands in sight,
some of which were of respectable size, while there were others that
could not have had an area of more than a few acres--some of them indeed
being scarcely more than rocks.  Most of them, however, seemed
inhabited, for even on some of the smallest we were able, with the help
of our telescopes, to distinguish one or more ramshackle huts, some
perched on the top of long, stilt-like poles; also there were at least a
hundred small fishing craft in sight, as well as a few proas, probably
coasting craft, becalmed like ourselves.

"Now," said Mrs Vansittart, addressing herself to Kennedy and me as we
sat upon the poop rail, longing for the sun to go down and leave us the
comparative coolness of the night, "here is just where we miss our
propeller.  If it had not been for that accident I guess we could have
started the engine; and we should at least have had the draught caused
by the ship's passage through the water to cool us; whereas we shall
have to wait where we are and just simmer until a breeze springs up
again.  And I guess I see no sign of one as yet, while the glass stands
very high.  Mr Leigh, do you happen to know whether there is such a
thing as a dry dock at Singapore?"

"I have never been to Singapore," I replied, "so I cannot say for
certain; but I seem to recollect having heard such a thing mentioned.
Does not the Directory say anything about it?"

"There now!  I declare to goodness that I never thought to look,"
exclaimed the lady.  "But," she continued, "I'll go and do so now; and
if there happens to be a dock there big enough to take in this vessel, I
guess I will have the _Stella Maris_ docked and cleaned and another
propeller fixed.  We've got a spare one down below; and I guess
Mackenzie is man enough to fit it, once we get into harbour, even if
there is no dock--though I hope there will be one.  I'll turn up the
Directory now, and see what it says;" and therewith she descended to the
chart-room, fanning herself with a palm-leaf fan as she went.

As soon as Mrs Vansittart was fairly out of earshot, Kennedy turned to
me and said:

"Ever been through here before?"

"No," I replied.  "The nearest I have ever been to it was two passages
through Sunda on a voyage to and from Canton."

"M-m!" returned Kennedy.  "Did annything out of the common happen to ye
that voyage?"

"N-o, I think not," said I, trying to remember precisely what, if
anything, had happened.  "Why do you ask?"

"Well," replied my companion, "chiefly, I think, because yonder's the
Malay coast, and here we are, a valuable ship, becalmed, and helpless
because we've lost the blades of our propeller."

"Oh! but that is sheer nonsense," I said.  "You are thinking about
pirates, I suppose.  But, my dear chap, with the incoming of steam,
piracy went out, because it no longer paid to be a pirate.  You never
hear of such a thing in these days."

"Not very often, I admit," agreed Kennedy.  "Yet it was only about a
week before we sailed from New York that I read in the _Herald_ a story
of a ship being picked up derelict, in this same Strait; and when she
was boarded, her crew, consisting of twenty-seven men, were found lying
about her decks, murdered; while her main-hatchway was open, and the
signs that she had been plundered were as plain as large print."

"Indeed!"  I said.  "I do not remember hearing anything of that case.
Anyhow, it only happens once in a blue moon.  And I don't think that,
with our pretty double row of teeth and our Maxims and Hotchkisses for
close-quarter fighting, we need be very greatly afraid."

"No," agreed Kennedy, with a laugh.  "I guess ye're right there, me lad.
Wid those guns, and hands enough to fight them, I calculate we are well
fixed, and could beat off a whole fleet of proas.  But I'm rale sorry
that the skipper didn't think of havin' them mounted before, so that the
men might have had a chance to practise the workin' of them a bit.  An'
there's another thing--But here comes the skipper; I guess I'll spake to
her about it."

At that moment Mrs Vansittart returned to the poop with the information
that, according to the Directory, Singapore possessed a dry dock capable
of taking in the _Stella Maris_; and, that being the case, she would
have the ship docked and the spare propeller fitted as soon as possible
after our arrival.

"And a very wise thing, too, ma'am," agreed Kennedy.  "I am only sorry
that we haven't got it shipped this very minute."

"Are you?" returned Mrs Vansittart, looking up sharply as she detected
the serious tone of the first mate's voice.  "Why?  Any reason in
particular?"

"Sure!" answered Kennedy.  "As I was sayin' to Leigh a minute ago,
yonder is the Malay coast, and here are we, becalmed and unable to move.
Now, I don't want to raise a scare, there's no need for it, but I hold
that it's better to be ready for a thing, even if it doesn't happen,
than to be caught unprepared.  No doubt ye're well aware, ma'am, that
the Malays have the name of bein' always ready to undertake a piratical
job if they think there's half a chance of ut bein' successful; and I
wouldn't be a bit surprised if anybody was to tell me that hundreds of
eyes have been watchin' us all this afternoon and their owners
speculatin' as to the sort of reception they'd meet with if a few
hundred were to come off to us some time durin' the small hours of the
mornin'.  Av coorse we may not be here then; a breeze may spring up and
carry us far enough away.  But then again, it mayn't, and in my opinion
the bettin' is against it; therefore, if I may be allowed to offer a
suggestion, it would be somethin' like this.

"I'd recommend ye to send for Bledsoe, the gunner, and ordher him to
tell off crews to every one of these guns.  Then let him explain to the
captain of each gun how the thing works; and afther he has done that,
send him down to the magazine and let him sort out a few rounds of
ammunition for each gun and have them handy to send up on deck.  Also
let each gun be loaded, ready in case of need.  If not needed, the
charges can easily be withdrawn and sent below again to-morrow, while,
if they are, they'll be ready.  Also, it might be quite worth while to
have the small arms ready for servin' out at a moment's notice."

"My!" exclaimed Mrs Vansittart, "are you quite serious, Mr Kennedy?
Because, if you are, it sounds as though we might be in for a real big
fight.  What do you think, Mr Leigh?"

"I fully agree with Mr Kennedy, madam," said I; "not so much because I
anticipate an attack upon the ship, as that I clearly see the force of
his argument as to the advantage of preparedness."

"Yes," agreed Mrs Vansittart; "I guess you are both right, and I will
act upon your advice, Mr Kennedy.  Please send for the gunner and tell
him what to do.  I had something of this sort in my mind when I gave the
order for those guns to be put on board."

By the promptitude with which Kennedy sent for the gunner, and, when he
arrived, mustered the crew, I could clearly see that the good man was
distinctly anxious, although I did not believe he had much cause to be
so.  Still, I quite agreed with him that the wise and proper thing was
to be prepared for every possible contingency, and I cheerfully did my
share of the work.  Fortunately, Bledsoe was an ex-man-o'-war's-man, and
had held a gunner's warrant in the United States navy; he therefore knew
his business from A to Z, and gave us all the help that we needed.

First, all hands were mustered and paraded; then a crew was told off to
each gun, including the Hotchkisses and Maxims--Kennedy undertaking the
supervision of the Hotchkisses, and I that of the Maxims.  Bledsoe next
took each gun's crew separately in hand, showed one how to work their
weapon, and left them to practise the movements of loading, sighting,
firing, and sponging, while he passed on to the next, until both
batteries were assiduously engaged in repeating the several motions time
after time.  Finally he worked his way round to me, explained the
mechanism of the Maxim, and showed how the belts of cartridges were
fixed and the gun was handled.  It was very simple, and I picked the
whole thing up in a few minutes, the weapon being to so large an extent
automatic.  Finally every piece was loaded, ten rounds for each were
brought on deck, the covers were put on, and the hands were piped down.

It was my eight hours in that night; and by this time it had come to be
a regular custom and a recognised thing for me to dine in the saloon on
such occasions, that is to say, every other night, the arrangement with
regard to Kennedy being similar, so that he and I dined in the saloon on
alternate nights, the doctor, the purser, and the two engineers forming
the other guests.  Thus as soon as our exercise with the guns was over I
rushed off below, took a tepid bath, and then dressed for dinner,
completing my preparations just in time to respond to the second bugle
call.  There was some disposition to make merry over Kennedy's "scare",
as the boy Julius would persist in designating it; but as the lad was
the only one who seemed to regard the matter purely from the jocular
point of view, the conversation was soon steered in another and more
agreeable direction, and we spent a very pleasant evening, breaking up
shortly after ten o'clock.

Before retiring to my cabin I went up on deck to take a look round.  It
was a most glorious night, still a breathless calm, the heavens
perfectly clear, save for a low cloud bank hanging over the land, the
stars shining brilliantly, and a half-moon shedding a soft, mysterious
radiance upon the scene powerful enough to enable us to distinguish with
tolerable clearness the nearer islands and some half a dozen craft lying
becalmed within two miles of us, inshore.  The moon would set about
midnight; yet even then we should still have the stars, if the night
remained clear.

Kennedy was seated in a deck chair, with a powerful night glass reposing
upon his knees, when I went up on the poop; and he informed me that
although he had been keeping a careful watch upon matters inshore, he
had seen nothing whatever of a suspicious character.

"But then," he explained, "I didn't expect to.  If those Malays are as
'cute as I take them to be, and are cherishing designs against us, you
may bet your bottom dollar that they'll be careful not to do anything
that would appear to us in the least suspicious.  I may be a fool, but
things look almost too quiet, ashore there, to be wholly satisfactory to
me.  I would rather see a little more movement, a fishing boat or two
coming out, or something like that.  Why, I've known cases where, a ship
bein' becalmed as we are, widin a few miles of the shore, the natives
have come off in scores wid fruit and fish and curios to sell; but those
chaps ashore there have kept most religiously away from us.  Ah, well!
that cloud yonder is risin'--slowly, I admit, still it's risin', and I
hope it'll bring a breeze wid it, if it's only enough to give us
steerage way.  I don't like things as they are, not the least little
bit."

"Why, man," I exclaimed, "what is the matter with you to-night?  If I
didn't know better I should be almost inclined to think you were
afraid!"

"Afraid, is ut?" he laughed.  "Begorra! what would I be afraid of, in
such a ship as this, wid all those beautiful guns and what not to
purtect us?  No, Leigh, it's not afraid I am, as you know well; and yet
I have a curious feelin'--I can't describe ut, but it's a sort of
feelin' of--Howly Sailor!--what in the nation is that?  Did ye hear it,
boy?"

Hear it?  I should think so; and so had every other individual on deck,
if one might judge by the sudden silence that fell upon the men grouped
about the fore deck, followed by an equally sudden fusillade of low,
quick ejaculations and the swift rush of bare feet to the rails.  It
began as a low, weird moan, which rose rapidly to a sort of sobbing wail
and culminated in a sharp, unearthly scream that sent cold shivers
running down my spine and caused the hairs of my head to bristle upon my
scalp.  It seemed to come from the water almost immediately under our
bows.  I saw a little crowd of men spring up the ladder leading to the
topgallant forecastle, rush to the rail, and peer eagerly down into the
black water.  Then one of them straightened up suddenly and hailed:

"Poop, there! did ye hear that strange cry, sir?"

"Ay, ay," answered Kennedy, "I heard it right enough.  D'ye suppose I'm
deaf?  What is ut, anyway, that's makin' it?"

There was a brief but animated confab on the forecastle, and then the
voice that had hailed came back:

"Can't see anything anywhere, sir; but the sound seemed to come from
away yonder, on the starboard bow."

Instantly there arose a hubbub of protesting voices, one of which,
louder than the rest, could be heard exclaiming:

"You chump! what d'ye mean by sayin' that?  Don't ye know the difference
between starboard and port?  It was away off here to port that the sound
came from."

But this assertion in turn was contradicted by the first speaker and his
adherents, so that in less than a minute a strenuous argument was
proceeding on the forecastle, both parties to which, it seemed to me,
were in the wrong.

"Ay, ay, there ye are," commented Kennedy.  "Nobody knows where the
sound came from.  'Twas the _banshee_, me bhoy, that's what ut was; and
some Oirishman aboard this good ship is goin' to lose the number of his
mess shortly."

"Oh, nonsense!"  I exclaimed.  "You surely do not believe that--"

I had got so far with my protest when again the blood-curdling cry rang
out over the dark water, this time sounding more distant than before.
Once more a clamorous dispute arose on the forecastle as to the
direction from which the sound proceeded, for, curiously enough, no two
individuals seemed quite agreed upon the point, while even I felt it
impossible to make an authoritative statement as to whether the cry
arose from ahead or astern.  And, in the midst of the discussion, up
came the saloon party, _en masse_, to enquire what was the matter.

I was, for some not very definite reason, glad that Kennedy did not
again assert his _banshee_ theory; he merely stated the facts of the
case, leaving the others to draw their own conclusions.  The boy,
Julius, no sooner heard the chief mate's statement than he was ready
with an explanation.  In a high-pitched tone of voice, which could be
distinctly heard from one end of the ship to the other, he positively
asserted that the cries were those of a sea bird, although I had never
in my life heard a sea bird utter such terrible sounds, nor had the men
forward, if one might judge by the low, contemptuous laughter from the
forecastle with which the assertion was greeted.  But although Kennedy
demurred, the boy insisted that he was right; he knew all about it, and
finally rushed off to his cabin for some book, a certain passage in
which, he declared, would support his contention.  And I seized the
opportunity thus afforded to retire in good order to my own cabin.

When I went on deck again, at eight bells, the moon was just on the
point of ruddily setting, while the cloud bank which I had noticed
earlier in the evening hanging low over the land had risen until its
upper edge was almost over our mast-heads, blotting out about half the
stars.  It was now so dark away to the eastward that nothing whatever
could be seen, not even the faintest loom of the nearest islands; while,
if it had not been for a faintly glimmering light here and there, we
could not have told that there were any craft of any kind in our
neighbourhood.  There had been no repetition of those strange, weird
sounds that had startled us all earlier in the night, so Kennedy
informed me; but he was still firmly convinced that they had emanated
from the banshee, and when I laughingly tried to argue him out of his
conviction he took me up rather sharply with the assertion that, had I
been of Irish birth or extraction, I would know better than to make
light of the matter.  To my amazement, he seemed quite depressed and
low-spirited at the mere mention of it, so I quickly dropped the subject
and asked him if during his watch he had observed anything to confirm
his earlier suspicion that we might possibly be attacked.  He admitted
that he had not, but added:

"I niver expected to see annything so long as the light lasted.  It's
now that they'll be beginnin' to make a musther if those ginks mane
comin' off to us at all, so for the love o' Mike keep your eyes skinned
and your ears wide open all through your watch.  We can keep them off
aisily, if we only get warnin' enough; but if by anny chance they can
conthrive to creep up close enough to take us unawares and lay us
aboard, they may take the ship through sheer force av numbers."

"Why," said I, "you talk as though you felt absolutely certain that an
attack will be made upon the ship!  I can't understand you a bit
to-night, and that's a fact."

"Faith, boy, I cannot undherstand mesilf," replied Kennedy, seriously.
"I've never before felt as I do this blessed night; but somehow I _know_
that something's goin' to happen.  And then, there's the banshee--"

"Oh," I interrupted, "banshee be hanged!  I thought you were much too
sensible a fellow to be moved by superstitions of any kind.  Now, take
my advice--you've got a touch of the sun.  Go down to the doc, get him
to give you a good stiff dose of quinine, and turn in.  You'll feel a
different man when you are roused at eight bells and find that the ship
is all right.  And as to anything creeping up and taking us unawares,
you may trust me to see that nothing of that sort happens.  I will keep
a bright look-out, never fear."

"Well, I hope ye will, that's all," returned Kennedy, as he stepped
toward the head of the poop ladder on his way below.  "And, by the by,
there's one precaution ye may as well take.  Unship the side lights and
stow them somewhere handy but where their gleam will not show.  They're
quite useless, since we're becalmed, unless a steamer should happen
along, and if she does ye'll see her lights and hear her propeller in
plenty of time to show her where ye are.  And mask the skylights, too.
Then, maybe, if annybody comes lookin' for us wid evil intentions,
they'll not find us.  Good night--and keep a bright look-out."

With this final caution the first mate took himself off, much to my
relief; for, truth to tell, his undisguised anxiety and uneasiness were
beginning to get a bit upon my nerves.  As soon as he was out of the way
I went forward and, in obedience to what I took to be his order, caused
the red and green side lights to be unshipped and placed inboard, just
inside the topgallant forecastle door, at the same time cautioning the
look-outs to keep their eyes skinned, as we were in somewhat dangerous
waters.  Then I went aft, masked the skylights, and slipped into the
saloon for a moment to extinguish all the lights save one, and draw the
blinds across the open ports.

This task took me less than a couple of minutes, and then I returned to
the poop and took a good look round.  But I could see nothing except
four dim glimmers of light spaced at irregular intervals, which I took
to be the lights of the becalmed craft which we had seen inshore of us
earlier in the evening.  And as for sound, there was nothing to be heard
save an occasional faint gurgle of water under the counter when the ship
lifted to the almost invisible swell, accompanied by a low flap of
canvas aloft, a gentle patter of reef points, or the slight creak of a
parral or block sheave; but so breathlessly still was the night that
these sounds, faint as they really were, sounded almost appallingly
loud.  There was not the smallest murmur of subdued talk for'ard, for
the watch had curled themselves up in the most comfortable places they
could find in order to steal a "caulk", and I did not attempt to disturb
them, knowing that at my first call they would be upon their feet in a
moment.

To keep myself awake I proceeded to pace the poop to and fro in my
rubber-soled shoes, taking care to avoid passing over that portion of
the deck which formed the roof of our lady skipper's stateroom; and
while I was thus engaged I nearly collided with a ghostly figure which
proved, upon investigation, to be that of Monroe, the tutor parson, in
pyjamas and slippers.  He explained that he found it too hot to sleep
below, so had come up on deck in the hope of being able to cool off a
bit prior to having another try.  He fell into step alongside me, and
began to talk in a low voice, presently turning the conversation to
Kennedy and the queerness of his seemingly rooted conviction that we
should be attacked.  I let him talk on until he appeared to have said
all that he had to say upon the subject and was about to go below again,
when I said to him:

"I am glad that you came up on deck, because it affords me an
opportunity to say something that Kennedy's queer talk has rather forced
upon my mind.  It is this.  If by any chance we should be attacked, will
you undertake to see that Mrs Vansittart, her daughter, and the boy
are, any or all of them, prevented from coming on deck?  Their presence
here under such circumstances could be of no possible assistance to us;
on the contrary, it would be a distinct hindrance."

"Yes," acknowledged Monroe; "I see what you mean.  But suppose that any
of them should take it into their heads to come on deck, how am I to
prevent them?  I have no authority over them, not even over the boy."

"You must bring your moral suasion to bear upon her, if need be," I
said.  "Point out to her that the beating off of a piratical attack--Oh!
hang it, what bosh I am talking, to be sure; as though there was the
least likelihood of such a thing!  The talk of that ass Kennedy seems to
have hypnotised me as well as himself!  But to return to what I was
saying--_if_ such an utterly improbable thing should happen, point out
to her that fighting is men's work, and that the presence of women and
children would be worse than useless at such a time.  Let her remain
below herself, and exercise her authority over that boy of hers to make
him stay below also.  I don't suppose that Miss Anthea would need any
persuading."

"No," agreed Monroe; "she is all right, and on the whole a very sensible
girl, despite her foolish pride.  But let me give you a hint, Leigh.  In
the event of, as you say, such an exceedingly unlikely thing as an
attack occurring, don't trust too much to my powers of persuasion, but
act upon your own responsibility.  Lock the door of the drawing-room,
and Mrs Vansittart will be unable to get out on deck, however anxious
she may be; and then slip down below and lock Master Julius into his
cabin; that is all you will need to do.  There will probably be a row
afterward, but I will back you up by saying that what you did was done
by my advice.  And now, good night!  I feel a trifle cooler than I did,
and hope I shall be able to--Hallo!  Listen!  Did you hear anything?"



CHAPTER SEVEN.

ATTACKED BY PIRATES.

We both halted and listened intently, Monroe with one foot on the top
step of the companion, on his way below.

"What did you think you heard?"  I questioned in a half-whisper.

"Well, I can scarcely say," was the low-spoken reply.  "As a matter of
fact, I am not sure that I heard anything.  I am beginning to think that
Kennedy's stupid talk must have affected us all aft here, more or less,
but it certainly seemed to me that while I was bidding you good night
just now I caught the faintest suggestion of--Ah! by Jove! there it is
again.  Did you catch it?"

"Yes," I said, "unless--But no; I don't believe it was imagination.  I
thought I heard a sound like the groaning of an oar against a thole pin,
some distance off in that direction," with a flourish of my hand toward
the east.

"Yes," agreed Monroe; "that describes the sound exactly.  Surely
Kennedy's apprehensions cannot have been well-founded, after all, can
they?"

"Don't know in the least," I returned; "but I guess we shall, very soon
now.  Meanwhile, since it must be obvious to you that I cannot possibly
leave the deck at this juncture, perhaps you will have the goodness to
slip down below and do that key-turning trick you suggested to me just
now."

"Sure!  I will," answered the parson.  "It was my advice, and I will
take the responsibility of carrying it out," and he vanished down the
companion way.

As he disappeared I went down the poop ladder at a run, hurried forward,
and made my way to the forecastle head, where I found the look-out
leaning against the guard rail with his arms folded and his chin sunk
upon his chest.  He was not asleep, for as he heard the light patter of
my shoes upon the ladder he straightened himself and turned to see who
was coming; but I had a very shrewd suspicion that the stillness of the
night had induced in him a condition very much the reverse of alertness.

"Is that Johnson?"  I demanded sharply.

"No, sir," he replied.  "I'm Maguire."

"Then, Maguire," I said, "I am afraid you have not been keeping quite so
wideawake as you ought, considering that it's your look-out.  For
instance, have you heard any unusual sounds, such as you ought to have
reported, since you came on watch?"

"No, sir," replied the man.  "And as to--"

"That will do," I interrupted.  "Now, pull yourself together and
listen."

We both set ourselves intently to listen, but before half a dozen
seconds had passed I heard loud voices--those of Monroe and the boy,
and, almost immediately afterward, that of Mrs Vansittart--the parson's
in remonstrance, the boy's in loud and angry protest, and that of the
lady in anxious enquiry.  It seemed as though Monroe had somehow
mismanaged his rather delicate task, for as I started to go aft again I
heard the lad shout, "I _will_ go on deck if I feel like it, and you,
Monroe, aren't going to stop me.  And as for the Britisher, do you think
I care what he says?"  But here Mrs Vansittart cut in with an
injunction to Julius to hold his tongue, following it up with an enquiry
as to what all the fuss was about.  I felt that it was time I took a
hand; so, cautioning Maguire to keep a bright look-out and listen for
all he was worth, I sprang down the forecastle ladder on my way aft.
And as I did so I ran into a couple of men who had just crept out from
beneath the launch, evidently curious to learn what the disturbance was
about.

Halting for a moment, I ordered the two men to rouse the watch quietly,
and stand by for an "All hands" call, and then continued on my way aft,
meeting the trio just by the foot of the poop ladder.  Mrs Vansittart
was evidently in something of a temper, for, as I joined the party, she
turned sharply and demanded:

"Is that Mr Leigh?"

"It is, madam," I replied.  "Hush, Julius!"  I continued, for the boy
also had turned angrily upon me.  "Pray stop your outcry, for Heaven's
sake!  Silence is of vital importance to us all at this moment, for we
may be on the very verge of a crisis.  Mr Monroe and I are both of
opinion that we very recently heard certain sounds that--"

"I know all about that," interrupted Mrs Vansittart; "Mr Monroe has
already explained that to me.  What I want to know now is by what right
you presumed to instruct him to lock the door of the drawing-room, and
so prevent me from coming out on deck?"

"Yes," added the boy, in that high-pitched, clamorous voice of his,
which would carry so far over the water on such a night, "and what right
have you to order me to be locked in my cabin?  Who are you, I should
like to know--"

"Craft on the port quarter--two of 'em--three--four--a whole fleet of
small craft headin' dead for us!" yelled the look-out at this moment.

"Good heavens!"  I ejaculated, "then Kennedy's extraordinary premonition
was right after all;" and, unceremoniously quitting the little group
under the break of the poop, I rushed forward, shouting:

"All hands to general quarters!  Throw open the ports.  Off with the gun
covers; slew the guns, and point them out through the ports.  Pass the
word for the gunner, and send him aft to me."  Then I turned and went
aft again, once more encountering the saloon party, now made complete by
the appearance of Miss Anthea, clad, like her mother, in a very becoming
dressing-gown.

"Madam," said I, addressing Mrs Vansittart, "there is no time for
explanation at this moment, for, unless I am very greatly mistaken, we
are about to be attacked by a fleet of pirate craft.  But I most
earnestly beseech you to retire below, taking your son and daughter with
you out of harm's way.  If my suspicions are well-founded, none of you
can be of the slightest assistance on deck, while at any moment we may
have shot flying about our ears, and--"

"Yes," the skipper agreed, "you are quite right.  Mr Leigh is perfectly
right, Julius, therefore I order you to go to your cabin at once.  And
you too, Anthea.  Mr Monroe, if Julius will not go quietly, I authorise
you to use such force as may be necessary to compel him to go.  And when
you have seen him safe in his cabin, lock him in, and bring me the key.
Now, sir,"--very haughtily to me--"be good enough to accompany me to the
poop, and let us see what justification there is for all this sudden
alarm and confusion."

It was very evident that the lady was tremendously indignant with me.
And at this, when I came to think of it, I was not greatly surprised,
for it certainly was a tremendous liberty for a second officer to
consent to, much less order, the locking of a skipper and owner in her
own cabin.  I therefore followed her, very much crestfallen, up the poop
ladder, and at once looked away out over the port quarter in search of
the supposed pirate fleet.

It was at this time so very dark that for several seconds I could see
nothing.  The moon had set, and the bank of cloud already referred to
had overspread more than half the sky; moreover, a mist had come
creeping up from the eastward, not dense enough to merit the name of
fog, yet sufficiently thick to dim the light of the stars still shining
in the western half of the heavens, while it added still more to the
darkness which gloomed away to the eastward of us.  But presently, down
in the midst of the dusky blackness broad on our port quarter, I caught
a glimpse of a small, indeterminate shape of still deeper blackness,
then another, and another, and another, until I had counted ten of them;
and concentrating my gaze intently upon them, I felt sure I could
occasionally distinguish a small, evanescent, silvery gleam like that of
sea fire stirred into brilliance by the slow passage of a moving object
through the water.

"Yes," I exclaimed, pointing, "there they come, ten of them, if not
more.  Have you any particular orders to give, madam, or will you leave
the defence of the ship to Mr Kennedy and me?"

"Why, of course I leave it to Kennedy--and you--to do the best you can,"
replied Mrs Vansittart.  "I know nothing at all about fighting tactics;
and I shall not attempt to interfere.  Further than that, I shall go
below--although I do not like the idea of quitting the deck at the
approach of an enemy--for I am sensible enough to recognise that I can
do no good up here, and should only be in the way.  But, Walter, never,
under any circumstances whatever, again dream of turning a key upon me.
It was a most unwarrantable liberty, which not even such a crisis as
this can justify; and for a few minutes I was really furiously angry
with you.  But I believe what you did was done with the very best of
intentions, so I will say no more about it.  Now, here comes Kennedy, so
I will just say a word or two to him, and then go.  Take care of
yourself, my dear boy, and see that you do not get hurt."

There was no time for me to express my gratitude to the lady for her
exceeding kindness in thus overlooking what at best could only be
described as a serious error of judgment--although, even so, I could not
refrain from reminding myself that the fault originated with Monroe--for
at that moment the first mate came bounding up the poop ladder,
struggling into his jacket as he came.

"Whoopee!" he shouted, as he reached the level of the poop.  "What did I
tell ye, bhoy?  Where are the shpalpeens?  Show 'em to me--Oh! beg your
pardon, ma'am; I didn't expect to find you here--"

"Where did you expect I should be, then, pray, Mr Kennedy?" demanded
the skipper.  "Hiding in the shaft tunnel, I suppose--"

"By the piper! ye might be in a worse place than that same, ma'am.  Up
here, for instance," interrupted Kennedy.  But Mrs Vansittart was in no
mood to discuss that unfortunate subject any further, just then at all
events; she therefore cut in upon the first mate's remarks by saying:

"Now, that will do, Mr Kennedy.  Please listen to me, for time is
pressing.  I have just been explaining to Mr Leigh that I know nothing
about fighting, therefore I shall leave you and him to do the best you
can for our defence, and go below out of the way, since I can be of no
use up here.  Good night, and take care of yourselves!  And let me know
when it is all over."  With which the lady took herself off, to our
intense relief.

"Now, then," exclaimed Kennedy, turning to me, "where are the cut-throat
pirates that I'm afther hearin' about?"

"There they are, less than half a mile off," I replied, pointing.  "They
are coming along very slowly, hoping to catch us unawares, perhaps.
But, goodness knows, that young rip, Julius, was making noise enough
just now to be heard at double that distance, and to show that some of
us at least are broad awake."  Then I briefly explained what orders I
had so far given, and waited to hear what he had to say.

"Have the small arms been served out yet?" he demanded.

"Not yet," I answered.  "But they are ready at a moment's notice."

"Right!" he approved.  "Let them be served out at once; a cutlass and a
brace of fully loaded automatics to each man, not forgettin' our noble
selves.  With these Maxims we shall not need any rifles, I guess."

I turned away to issue this order, when I was met at the head of the
poop ladder by Bledsoe, the gunner.

"You sent for me, sir?" he asked.

"I did, Bledsoe," said I.  "Come up.  Mr Kennedy is here, and he may
have some orders for you."  Then I turned to Kennedy and said:

"Here is the gunner.  I sent for him a few minutes ago, thinking you
might wish to see him.  Also, I had it in my mind to order him to send a
few portfires up on deck.  It occurred to me that if those fellows
insist on closing with us, it would be a good plan to have a hand up in
the maintop with some portfires; it would enable us to see what we are
doing."

"It would that," agreed Kennedy; "and we'll do ut.  See to it, Mr
Bledsoe, if ye plaise.  And ye may also send up some ammunition for the
four-inches and Maxims.  I guess we'll not need the Hotchkisses.
That'll do, gunner; let's have that ammunition quick.  Mr Leigh, be
good enough to attend to that matther of the shmall arms, and then come
back here and take charge of the Maxims.  It's about time we let those
ginks know that we're awake, so I'll step down to the main-deck and see
about throwin' a shot over 'em."

We descended to the main-deck together, all hands being by that time on
deck and at stations; and while I went below to attend to the sending up
and distribution of the cutlasses and automatics, Kennedy planted
himself in rear of Number 2 gun of the port battery.  A minute later the
deep, ringing report and jar of the discharge were heard and felt, but
with what effect I knew not, being on the deck beneath.  A minute later
a second gun roared overhead, and while my ears were still ringing with
the report I heard the boom of a distant gun, and listened breathlessly
for the impact of the shot.  I heard nothing, however, so concluded that
the missile had flown wide.  By the time that our third gun spoke my
task below was completed; I therefore snatched at a cutlass, buckled the
belt round my waist, took a brace of automatic pistols from the man who
was loading them, thrust them into my belt, and rushed up on deck.  I
encountered Kennedy near the foot of the poop ladder, reported to him
what I had done, and received from him the order to go up on the poop
and open fire with the Maxims forthwith.

"We've hit one of thim, and she seems to be sinkin'," he said; "but the
rest of the divvies are comin' for us like mad, wid their sweeps
churnin' up the wather like the paddles of one av your London tugs.
Shtop 'em from layin' us aboard, if ye can, bhoy.  We want no
hand-to-hand fightin' wid thim, for they'll outnumber us ten to one, I
calculate."  He added this last item in a confidential whisper.

I dashed up on the poop, and, to my great satisfaction, found both the
Maxims manned and well supplied with ammunition.  But although it was
now easy enough to hear the grind and splash of the sweeps with which
the attackers were urging their craft through the water, ay, and even to
hear their shouts of encouragement to each other, the darkness and the
mist together still combined to render them too indistinctly visible to
permit of effective firing from our Maxims.  I therefore shouted to
Kennedy a suggestion that he should order the man in the maintop to
light his portfires, so that we might have light to see what we were
about.  And Kennedy was in the very act of giving the order when three
of the approaching craft fired upon us almost at the same instant; and a
_moment_ later I heard a sharp, splintering crash, followed by a dull,
crunching sound below me on the main-deck.  One of the enemy's round
shot had got home through our port bulwark, so far as I could judge.

I was in a perfect fever of impatience to get additional light, though
it were ever so little, and had about made up my mind to open fire with
the Maxims without further delay, for the approaching craft were by this
time perilously close--not more than two cables' lengths distant, I
believe--when I caught a faint flicker of light from aloft, and the next
instant the baleful, blue-white glare of a portfire illuminated the
scene and revealed ten small sailing craft foaming down upon us under
the impulse of from twelve to sixteen powerfully-manned sweeps apiece.
Each craft carried a gun, which looked to be about the calibre of a
twelve-pound smooth-bore, mounted in the eyes of her; their decks were
crowded with Malays of most ferocious, malignant, and determined aspect,
and I caught the gleam and flash of the light from innumerable krisses
and rifle barrels as their owners waved them above their heads in savage
anticipation of presently getting to close-quarters with us.

It was evident that we were confronted with a most formidable and
dangerous situation, demanding the utmost promptitude of action, and I
at once turned to the crew of the port Maxim, with the command upon my
lips to them to open fire, when a cry of horror arose from the gun's
crew on the main-deck immediately below where I was standing, and a man,
looking up to me and pointing with his hand, shouted that the mate was
killed.  Glancing down over the poop rail, I saw the body of poor
Kennedy stretched out on the deck in the midst of a pool of blood, with
the top of his head shot away, doubtless by the round shot that, a few
seconds earlier, I had heard crash through the bulwarks.

"Let them have the contents of every gun that will bear!"  I shouted.
Then turning to the Maxim crews, I added: "Open fire upon them--the
nearest craft first; and clear their decks of men, if you can, before
they get alongside."

The light was the only thing that our lads--and the pirates too,
apparently--had been waiting for, for the next moment the guns of our
port battery crashed forth, one after the other, while our port Maxim--
the only one of the two that could be brought to bear--started its
savage thud-thudding tattoo, and in less than half a minute the ship was
enveloped in a cloud of acrid smoke which, hanging motionless in the
stagnant air, effectually cloaked the approach of the attacking force,
and as effectually prevented anything like accurate shooting.

Nor were the enemy one whit behindhand in availing themselves of the
assistance afforded by the light of the portfires; indeed, they had
rather the best of it, for although the hull of the yacht was speedily
enveloped in smoke, the portfire brilliantly illuminated our canvas, and
thus afforded them an excellent guide in aiming.  And now the round shot
began to fly thick and fast, while bullets and slugs hummed and sang
about our ears like a swarm of angry hornets.  Luckily for us, the aim
of the pirates was atrociously bad--probably the fire of our Maxim
disconcerted them--and although we afterward found that five round shot
had passed through our sails, only one struck our hull, while, by what
seemed like a miracle, the bullets all missed our bodies, though in many
cases by only the merest hair's-breadth.  For perhaps half a minute the
fire of the pirates was maintained with the utmost fury, and then all in
a moment it died away to a few desultory shots, which presently ceased.

Putting my whistle to my lips, I blew a shrill blast upon it, which I
followed up with the order:

"Main-deck guns, cease firing!"  And as I uttered the words I thought I
felt a faint draught of air upon my face.  I was not mistaken, for at
the same moment the heavy pall of smoke which enveloped us began lazily
to shape itself into fantastic wreaths that slowly swept away to the
westward, while our lighter canvas rustled gently, and then filled to a
small air from the eastward.  As it happened, our sails were correctly
trimmed, so that all that was needed was just to allow the ship to come
up to her proper course when she gathered way.

Meanwhile, with the dispersion of the smoke, we were able once more to
get a glimpse of the enemy, and that glimpse revealed them to be in full
flight.  They must have suffered frightfully from our fire before their
courage gave way, for of the ten craft which constituted the original
attacking force only six were now visible, while every one of these
appeared to be more or less in difficulties--three of them, indeed, very
much more than less.  I perceived that only one of the half-dozen
appeared to be working her full complement of sweeps, while another was
hobbling off under the impulse of but a single pair.  Shells, though
they be of but four-inches diameter, are capable of inflicting serious
damage when they hit and explode.

The breeze, which at first came away as a mere breathing, gained
steadily in strength, until the yacht was sliding along at a six-knot
pace, and it would have been easy for us to have overtaken our audacious
attackers and sunk them out of hand.  But I had my doubts as to whether
any of them would remain afloat long enough to get back to the small
hidden harbour from which they had emerged; while in any case it seemed
to me that the rascals had received so severe a punishment that it would
be long before they again attempted to attack a seemingly helpless ship.
I therefore allowed them to go their way without further molestation,
and, boarding the fore and main tacks, brought the ship to her course.
This done, I gave orders for the guns to be secured, the charges to be
drawn, the unused ammunition to be returned to the magazine, and the
small arms to the armourer, and the decks to be cleared up generally.

Meanwhile poor Kennedy's body had been carried forward and laid upon the
fore-hatch, covered over with a tarpaulin.  Poor chap!  I was sincerely
grieved at his loss, for he was both a first-rate seaman and a
thoroughly stanch messmate.  And as, passing round the deck to satisfy
myself that all my orders had been satisfactorily executed, I paused for
a moment to gaze regretfully at the shrouded form under the tarpaulin, I
could not help wondering a little at the memory that he, the only
victim, should have been the one to have experienced a premonition,
practically amounting to certainty, not only of the encounter, but also,
as I now felt convinced, that it would prove fatal to him.

Having completed my inspection of the decks, and satisfied myself that
everything was all right, I called the boatswain aft to take temporary
charge, and then entered the drawing-room, intending to pass through it
to the door of Mrs Vansittart's cabin, to make my report.  But on
entering the apartment I was surprised to find the lady seated there,
fully dressed, and evidently waiting with some impatience for news.  As
I advanced she rose to her feet and held out her hand to me.

"Well, Walter," she exclaimed, "it is all over--the dreadful fighting, I
mean--and you are unhurt.  Is it not so?"  Then, as I briefly replied in
the affirmative, she continued: "But why are you looking so serious?
And why have you come to me instead of Mr Kennedy?  I most sincerely
hope that nothing dreadful has happened."

"We have got off much more easily than at one moment I dared to hope," I
said.  "But I grieve to inform you that the fight has cost us the life
of one man, and he the man whom we can least of all afford to lose.  You
will guess at once that I mean poor Kennedy, who was killed by a round
shot--the only shot that did any damage worth mentioning."

For a moment Mrs Vansittart seemed scarcely able to credit my news.  I
believe that up to then she had never quite realised the fact of our
peril; but now that one of our men had actually lost his life it was
suddenly brought home to her with startling vividness, and she was
correspondingly upset.  She stared at me unbelievingly, gasped: "What?
Neil Kennedy killed?  Oh, Walter, you cannot possibly mean it!" and
then, as I nodded my head, she sank back into her chair and burst into
tears.  I thought it best to let her have her cry out in peace, for
tears seem to be the natural safety valve of a woman's emotions; and
while she sat there with her face buried in her hands and the tears
streaming through her fingers, Miss Anthea, Monroe, and Julius came up
from below.  Of course they all wanted to know what was the matter, and
I was obliged to explain.  In the course of the explanation, which took
something of the form of a brief narrative of the entire adventure, I
happened to remark:

"What puzzles me more than anything is how it happened that those
fellows were able to find us so accurately on so dark a night.  I took
the greatest care to mask all our lights effectually; yet when we first
sighted them they were heading as straight for us as if we were in plain
sight."

"And so we were," remarked Monroe; "for which we have to thank our young
friend Julius, here.  When, in obedience to his mother's command, I took
him below to his cabin before the fight began, I not only found the open
port of his cabin uncovered, but all three of the electric-lights
ablaze, so that the port must have shown up in the dark like a
lighthouse.  The young gentleman explained to me that he couldn't sleep
because of the heat, and had therefore been reading in bed!"



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A WEIRD AND STARTLING EXPERIENCE.

The untimely death of poor Kennedy resulted in my being promoted to the
position of first mate of the _Stella Maris_, young as I was; while the
boatswain, who knew nothing of navigation, but was an excellent seaman,
was temporarily given the post of second mate, until someone more suited
to the position could be found.

At ten o'clock in the morning following our brush with the Malays the
hands were mustered for church parade, as on Sundays, and Kennedy's body
was committed to the deep with all solemnity.  Monroe read the burial
service so impressively that even the lad Julius was visibly affected,
while Mrs Vansittart and her daughter--both of them attired in black
for the occasion--wept freely.  Three days later we arrived in
Singapore, and on the following day the yacht was docked for examination
and the fitting of the spare propeller.

Upon examination the hull was found to be quite undamaged, yet we must
have hit the wreckage, or whatever it was that we ran foul of, a pretty
severe blow, for not only was the weed completely scoured off the ship's
bottom where contact had occurred, but the anti-fouling composition had
also been removed as effectually as though a scraper had been employed.

We stayed at Singapore exactly a week, and then, with bottom scraped
clean, two fresh coats of anti-fouling composition applied, the outside
of the hull, up to the level of the rail, repainted, and our spare
propeller fitted, we sailed for Hong-Kong.  It was Mrs Vansittart's
intention to ship a second and a third mate at Singapore; but she
forbore to do so, no suitable men happening to be available during our
stay.  The temporary arrangement was therefore allowed to stand a little
longer, our lady skipper hoping to find what she required at Hong-Kong.

We went to sea in fine weather, and made excellent but uneventful
progress during the first four days of the trip.  Then, on our fourth
night out, when we were in the neighbourhood of the Vanguard Bank, the
wind fell light, and finally died away, leaving us becalmed, very much
as had happened with us in the Strait of Malacca.  This time, however,
there was neither land nor craft in sight, and we were therefore under
no apprehension of a repetition of our experiences on that occasion.  I
ought, by the way, to have stated that upon our arrival at Singapore we
duly reported our adventure to the authorities, with the result that the
British gunboat _Cormorant_ was dispatched to the scene of the outrage.
But we were given to understand that it would probably prove exceedingly
difficult, if not impossible, to lay hands upon the guilty parties; and
as a matter of fact we afterwards learned that the only result of the
_Cormorant's_ visit to the spot was the discovery of a considerable
quantity of wreckage and several dead bodies floating about.

As I have said, the wind began to drop late in the afternoon of our
fourth day out from Singapore, and by eight bells of the second
dog-watch we had lost steerage way.  As soon as this happened the matter
was reported to Mrs Vansittart, and I enquired whether she wished the
engine to be started; but she replied that she was in no especial hurry
to reach Hong-Kong, and therefore, as there was no particular reason for
pushing on, she would not waste gasoline.  The engine was therefore
permitted to remain inactive, but we furled all our light canvas, to
save wear and tear, and hauled up our courses, leaving the ship under
topsails, topgallant sails, and jib.

The fact is that none of us quite knew what to make of the weather.  The
glass stood fairly high, with a rising rather than a falling tendency,
yet the sky was hazy without being exactly overcast.  Nor, considering
where we were, was the weather particularly hot; the atmosphere,
however, seemed surcharged with damp, although no rain fell.  With the
going down of the sun it fell exceedingly dark, for the moon was far
advanced in her last quarter, and did not rise until very late--or
rather in the early morning--while the haze was thick enough to shut out
the light of the stars effectually.  The water was smooth, excepting for
a low, easterly swell to remind us of the breeze that had died away.

It chanced to be my eight hours in that night, and, as had become a
firmly-established custom on such occasions, I was dining with the
saloon party, with all of whom, excepting Julius, I was now upon
excellent terms.  Mrs Vansittart had graciously listened to my
explanation of, and accepted my apologies for, the colossal liberty I
had taken in suggesting that she should be locked in her cabin on the
memorable night of the piratical attack upon us; and not only had she
freely forgiven me, but I believe that, after I had fully explained the
motives which actuated me, she felt almost inclined to admit that I was
to a certain extent justified.  Possibly she would have admitted this
but for the fact that such an admission might have been subversive of
discipline.  Monroe and I had always got on splendidly together; and
even the once haughty Miss Anthea had at length thawed completely, even
to the extent of singing duets with me and playing my accompaniments
while I sang or fiddled.  It was only the boy whom I seemed utterly
unable to placate; he had taken a violent dislike to me from the very
first, and not even the fact that I had undoubtedly saved his life
seemed to make any apparent difference in his attitude toward me.

Since leaving Singapore we had resumed our musical evenings after
dinner, temporarily interrupted by Kennedy's death, and we were enjoying
ourselves as usual on the evening of which I am now speaking when, while
I was playing a violin solo to Miss Anthea's accompaniment, we were all
startled by a sudden but very slight jarring sensation, as though the
ship had lightly touched the ground for a moment.  I knew that we were
in the neighbourhood of the Vanguard, Prince Consort, and Prince of
Wales Banks, and although I also knew that, according to our position as
determined that afternoon, and the course and distance since run, we
ought to be far enough away from them to be perfectly safe, the thought
for a moment seized me that in some extraordinary and wholly
unaccountable manner we might have been mistaken.  Flinging down my
violin, I rushed out on deck, closely followed by Mrs Vansittart and
Monroe.

On reaching the deck I found that the jar had already created quite a
small commotion, the boatswain's watch being all on the alert, while the
hands below, awakened by the unaccustomed sensation, were swarming up to
learn what had happened.  Parker, the boatswain, was shouting for one
hand to bring along the hand lead, and to another to bring a lighted
lantern.

My first glance was over the side; but it was so dark that I could see
nothing save a faint gleam under the lighted ports.  Then the men with
the lead line and lantern came along, and we took several casts of the
lead.  "No bottom", was the report; but even while the line was being
coiled up after the last cast, the same sensation was again experienced,
this time a little stronger.  And then, while we were debating what it
could possibly mean, one of the hands from forward came along and
reassured us.

"I know what it is, sir," he explained.  "I've felt the very same thing
before, and not very far from here, too--while we was lyin' in Manila
harbour.  We couldn't make out what the mischief it was at first; but
when the skipper went ashore shortly afterwards they told him that
there'd been a slight shock of earthquake."

The explanation seemed quite reasonable and satisfactory, so after some
little further talk we returned to the drawing-room and resumed our
music.  But shortly afterward we were again disturbed twice by
recurrences of the same phenomenon; we accordingly gave it up, and I
went off to my cabin, debating within myself whether I should change
into my working rig or turn in.

Finally I decided upon the former alternative, since I did not feel much
inclined for sleep, and when I had effected the change I went up on
deck, thinking that possibly a spell of fresh air would bring on the
desired drowsiness.

As I reached the main-deck four bells (ten o'clock) were struck, and the
look-out had just responded with the stereotyped cry of "All's well!"
when there occurred another shock, so violent and protracted that some
of the hands cried out in terror.  It is difficult to gauge the passage
of time accurately at such a moment, but I think this shock must have
lasted nearly, if not quite, two minutes; and the sensation to which I
can most nearly compare it is that of a ship being swept and jolted over
the rough surface of a coral reef by a red-hot tide.

So strong and so alarming was the shock that it created something almost
amounting to panic among the crew, a few of whom, in their alarm, raised
a cry to launch the boats; and it was not without some difficulty that
they were eventually persuaded that the yacht was quite uninjured, and
that they were therefore far safer on her deck than they could possibly
be in any boat.  I was not greatly surprised at their alarm, for the
phenomenon was of so unusual and startling a character that, to confess
the truth, I felt my own self-possession a little inclined to "wilt", as
my companions would probably have put it.

Meanwhile the saloon party, like everybody else, had rushed on deck in
alarm, and were eagerly discussing the occurrence.  Monroe assured the
two ladies that they need not be in the least degree uneasy, since,
strange as the phenomenon might be to us, it was really not so very
extraordinary or unusual, especially in the region where we now found
ourselves; and he was making good headway in his effort to reassure his
audience when suddenly there occurred another and still more violent
shock.  This was so pronounced that it set the sea all a-quiver with
ripples, which seemed to run in the direction of all the points of the
compass, crossing and recrossing each other at every conceivable angle
with such rapidity that the "shaling" of the water was like that of a
strong rapid, while the interlacing--so to speak--of the ripples created
a sort of network of miniature breakers, easily visible because of the
phosphorescence set up.

The jar and jolting of this last shock were so severe that I really
began to entertain serious fears as to whether the ship could withstand
them.  It seemed to me that if the thing continued very long every rivet
in her would be shaken or torn out of place, and the entire fabric must
fall to pieces; for the deck was now quivering and jolting so violently
that, to maintain our footing, we all instinctively clung to the nearest
thing we could lay hands upon.

I must confess that I was more than a little astonished at the courage
manifested by Mrs Vansittart and her daughter.  There could be no doubt
that they were greatly alarmed, yet they were more self-possessed than
any of the rest of us--so much so, indeed, that Mrs Vansittart's voice
was almost steady as she directed me to find Mackenzie and instruct him
to start the engine.  "I think I should feel more comfortable if we had
the ship under command," she explained.

I had just executed this commission and returned to the poop, and the
ship was already beginning to gather way, when above the hiss of the
agitated water a low rumble became audible, increasing with,
inconceivable rapidity to a frightful, deafening roar.  The vibrations
grew still more violent, and suddenly, with an awful, ear-splitting
explosion, we saw a great column of flame shoot high into the air, some
two miles away and almost directly ahead of us.  It looked for all the
world as though a gigantic cannon, planted vertically in the sea, muzzle
upward, had been discharged, except that the flash of fire, instead of
being only momentary, as in the case of a gun, was continuous.  It
remained visible for quite ten minutes, and probably endured for a much
longer period.  The emission of flame was accompanied by a frightful
roaring sound, like that of a thousand blast furnaces, intermingled with
frequent terrific explosions; and we continued to hear these long after
we had lost sight of the fire.

At the first outburst of flame I instinctively sprang to the wheelhouse
and ordered the dazed and terrified quartermaster to put his helm hard
a-port, and let the ship sweep round in a complete half-circle, so that
we might get away from the dangerous spot as speedily as possible.  But
we had hardly begun to turn, in response to our hard-over helm, before
dense clouds of steam commenced to rise from the water round about the
flame; and these soon obscured it to such an extent that the glare,
which at first was almost as strong as daylight, rapidly dwindled until
it became merely a great shapeless luminous blotch, growing less and
less brilliant until we lost sight of it altogether as we went at full
speed ahead away from it.  But it was quite a quarter of an hour before
we were fairly clear of the extraordinary danger that had so suddenly
leaped up in our path; and within the first minute following the
explosion great masses of incandescent rock mingled with flaming cinders
began to fall about us on all sides, so that I regard it as nothing
short of a miracle that none of the larger masses fell upon our decks.
Had they done so, we must inevitably have been destroyed.  As it was, we
were kept busy with the hose for fully half an hour extinguishing the
cinders that fell upon our deck.

Not the least remarkable circumstance connected with the phenomenon was
that soon after we started the pumps the water rapidly became so hot
that the men could not bear the contact of it upon their bare feet, and
were obliged to don their sea boots hurriedly.  At first we were fearful
that the dense clouds of steam generated by the flame would spread and
overtake us; but we were spared this, for almost immediately a small
breeze sprang up, blowing toward the fire, and as we advanced it
strengthened until it became quite a stiff breeze.  To this circumstance
I attribute the fact that none of our sails were set on fire by the
falling cinders, for it necessitated the hurried clewing up and furling
of all our canvas.

For a full hour we travelled south at full speed; and then, having
apparently run beyond the limit of the danger zone, we shifted our helm
and headed east until daylight, when, perceiving no sign of the
eruption, and the wind having drawn round from the eastward, we set our
canvas and stopped the engine.  A week later we arrived at Hong-Kong
without further adventure, and were amazed to learn that nothing was
known there of the submarine volcanic outburst--for such, of course, it
was--from which we had so narrowly escaped destruction.  Nor, although
we remained a week in the roadstead, during which several craft arrived
from the south, and two from the Philippines, could we learn that any
others than ourselves had beheld the phenomenon.

Before our arrival at Singapore it had been Mrs Vansittart's intention
to proceed from that port to Manila, she being somewhat curious to see
something of the United States' farthest East possession on our way
north.  But the United States' consul at Singapore had very strongly
dissuaded her from making such a visit; we therefore skipped the
Philippines, and, after spending a week at Hong-Kong, during which the
saloon party made a trip to Canton and back, weighed and stood out of
the harbour _en route_ for Yokohama.

We had a good run up through the China Sea, doing the trip in ten days
from port to port without being obliged to use the engine at all.
Arrived in the magical land of the chrysanthemum, our lady skipper
"spread herself", as she graphically expressed it, devoting a full month
to the exploration of the country, and returning to the ship loaded down
with priceless treasures of porcelain, pictures, carving and lacquer
work, mostly designed as presents for her more stay-at-home friends in
"little old N'York", when she should get back.  Of course her children
went with her, and Monroe, equally of course, "went along" as escort.

While Mrs Vansittart and her party were enjoying themselves the crew
also had an opportunity to see something of what many regard as the most
wonderful country and people in the world, the same generous rule with
regard to shore leave prevailing here as elsewhere.  For myself, I did
not see nearly as much of the country as I should have liked, for it
unfortunately happened that at the time of our visit the relations
between Japan and the United States were somewhat strained in connection
with the settlement of Japanese subjects on United States soil, and the
Stars and Stripes was not altogether welcome in Japanese ports.  Indeed,
within the first week of our arrival in Yokohama harbour we had reason
to suspect that a malicious attempt had been made either to damage or to
destroy the yacht; and as she was in my charge during the owner's
absence I did not care to leave her for more than a day at a time--and
only once as long as that.  But of course it must be understood that
such ill feeling as undoubtedly existed was only openly manifested by
private persons, and those almost entirely of the lower classes.
Official Japan was the very essence of politeness and urbanity whenever
we came into contact with it.

There was just one element of regret for Mrs Vansittart in her visit to
Japan, and that was the unfortunate fact that Monroe developed typhoid
on the very day of the party's return to Yokohama, and had to be left
behind in hospital.  She would most willingly have prolonged her stay
until the patient's recovery; but Harper, our doctor, intervened,
pointing out that, since our next cruise was to be among the Pacific
Islands, it would be most inadvisable for a person newly recovered from
typhoid to accompany us, as a relapse would almost certainly follow; and
that the better plan would be to arrange for Monroe's return home direct
by mail boat via 'Frisco.  This was accordingly done, Mrs Vansittart
making every arrangement for the care and comfort of the patient during
his sojourn in Yokohama, and his journey to New York in all ease and
comfort afterward, before giving the word for our departure.

We hove our anchor out of the mud of Yokohama harbour at ten o'clock on
a certain lovely September morning, which, as Mrs Vansittart informed
me incidentally, happened to be the anniversary of the yacht's departure
from New York.  Starting our engine, we proceeded down Yedo Bay, through
Uraga Strait, and so to sea, passing Cape Mela about eight bells in the
afternoon watch.  Then, to a fine spanking westerly breeze, we set all
plain sail and headed south for the Ladrones.

I arrive now at a point where, for a space of over two months, I find no
entry in my diary of any incident worthy of special mention; this period
may therefore be dismissed with the simple remark that it was spent in
visiting several of the most interesting islands in the Pacific
archipelago.

We sailed from Taputeuea, in the Gilbert Group, in the middle of
November, and for more than a week we headed west, making good headway
on the whole, although there were times when we were detained by
vexatious calms, to counterbalance which we "carried on" when the wind
favoured us and we had a clear sea ahead.

Such happened to be the case on a certain day in the first week of
December.  We had a slashing easterly breeze behind us, and fine clear
weather; and the chart told us that there were no lurking dangers in our
path; we therefore gave the yacht the whole flight of studding sails on
both sides, and laid ourselves out to make up a little of our lost time.
And we were doing so in handsome style, too, for the ship reeled off
her fourteen knots hour after hour until the end of the afternoon watch,
when the wind suddenly hauled four points to the southward and
freshened; and although this shift of wind necessitated our handing our
star board studding sails, it gave our fore-and-aft canvas a chance to
put in some good work, which it did, the ship's speed going up to
sixteen knots within the next hour.  And for a sailing ship, sixteen
knots is a very respectable speed, let me tell you, although I can
recall more than one occasion when we logged nineteen, and that not only
for a brief spell, but for three or four hours at a stretch.  Still,
sixteen knots is a pretty good pace; and it was an exhilarating sight to
watch the rush of the white yacht over that glorious sapphire sea, with
every sail accurately set and trimmed and tugging at the beautiful hull
like a team of cart horses, the long, weighty swell chasing us,
wind-whipped and capped with seething crests of snow-white foam, while
the great, glass-smooth bow wave went roaring away on either hand with
its hissing and leaping crown of froth sparkling like gems in the rays
of the declining sun.

I think Mrs Vansittart was never more proud of her beautiful ship than
she was on that particular evening, as she stood with me on the poop and
critically marked our rush through the water and every perfection of
hull, spar, and sail.  The yacht was a lovely picture, even as beheld by
us from her poop; but I would have given a trifle for the privilege of
seeing her as she must have appeared at such a moment from a passing
ship, had there been such a craft.  But, as it happened, there was not;
we had the sea to ourselves, for we chanced just then to be traversing a
stretch of water very rarely frequented by craft of any description.

It happened to be my eight hours out on that particular night, and when,
at eight bells of the first watch, I turned the ship over to Parker, the
boatswain, we were still reeling off our sixteen knots, with a fresh,
steady breeze from the south-east.  It was a dark night, for the moon
was only two days old, and had set long ago, while a thin veil of cloud
hid most of the stars.  Had we been in much-frequented waters I should
perhaps have considered it a bit reckless to drive the ship so hard
through the darkness; but we were not, and I retired to my cabin with an
easy mind, and, undressing at once, tumbled into my bunk and fell sound
asleep almost as my head touched the pillow.



CHAPTER NINE.

WRECKED!

How long I slept I have no means of knowing.  All I can remember is that
from a sound, dreamless sleep, I was startled into sudden wakefulness by
experiencing a shock of such tremendous violence that my first real
consciousness of anything being amiss was caused by me finding myself
hurled headlong out of my bunk to the deck of my cabin.  I fell so
awkwardly that I seemed to land fair upon my right temple, and, after an
instant of sharp pain, I forthwith lost all consciousness for a length
of time that must have been considerable, although I never had the means
to guess it even approximately.  But I remember one thing distinctly.
Even as I was in the very act of falling, a terrific rending crash
sounded in my ears, and the thought flashed through my brain: "There go
the masts by the board!"

The return of consciousness manifested itself in a hazy and quite
detached perception that I was being violently shaken by the shoulder;
while a voice, pitched in aggrieved and petulant tones--which I
presently recognised as those of the lad, Julius--exhorted me to "Wake
up!"  At first these exhortations produced no particular effect upon me.
I was aware of them, but that was all; they had no definite meaning so
far as I was concerned.  I did not even trouble to ask myself why I
should wake up.  Then after a period of silence, during which I perhaps
slipped back into unconsciousness, I became aware that water was being
vigorously dashed in my face, while Julius's voice resumed its petulant
appeal.

"Oh, I say, dash it all! do wake up, Leigh," I heard the boy exclaim.
"Wake up, I tell you!  Momma's blocked into her cabin, and Sis and I
can't get her out.  And you're the only one of the crew left!"

I suppose my wits must have been reasserting themselves by that time,
for these words conveyed some sort of definite meaning to me, especially
that last statement: "You're the only one of the crew left."  The only
one of the crew!  What crew?  Why, of course, the crew of the _Stella
Maris_, in which I had some recollection of having spent a very pleasant
time.  Then, as memory began to work, I recalled the tremendous shock
which had hurled me, scarcely awake, out of my bunk, and the jarring,
rending crash that had reached my ears in the very act of falling.  What
did these things mean?  I asked myself, and the answer came without much
groping for.  What could they mean, except that some disaster had
overtaken the yacht?

I opened my eyes, and by the light of a rapidly growing dawn perceived,
first, that I was still in my own cabin, and secondly, that Julius was
bending over me with a water jug in one hand and a tumbler in the other,
from the latter of which he had just dashed a quantity of water in my
face.  Also I was conscious of a splitting headache, and a burning,
smarting sensation in the right temple.  I put up my hand, passed it
over the seat of the pain, and was immediately conscious of an increased
smart.  As I lowered my hand I looked at it stupidly: it was smeared
with blood.

"Oh, that's nothing!" commented the boy, as I looked questioningly at
the ruddy stain; "you've cut your forehead a bit, that's all.  Thank
goodness, you've woke up at last!  I thought at first you'd handed in
your checks.  Now, I say, just get up and come with me to the
drawing-room.  Momma's somehow pinned in her cabin, and I want you to
get her out."

"All right!"  I said; "I'll come.  But what has happened to the ship?
She seems to be--"

"I dunno," replied the boy.  "She's wrecked, that's all that I can tell
you.  Her three masts are broken; and, exceptin' Momma, 'Thea, and I,
you're the only person left."

"The only person left!"  I ejaculated, as I staggered to my feet.  "Good
Heavens, boy, what do you mean?"

"Just exactly what I say," returned Master Julius.  "And see here, you,"
he continued aggressively, "don't you dare to call me `boy' again.  I
don't like it, and I won't have it.  See?"

"Certainly," I replied, with a smile at the lad's astonishing touchiness
at such a moment; "I both see and hear.  All right!  I apologise.  And
now, what is this you say about your mother?  She is jammed in her cabin
and can't get out?  I will go and attend to her first; and when she has
been released I must look into that other matter of the missing crew."

"I guess the first thing you'll do after you've got Momma out of her
cabin will be to get my breakfast ready, and don't you forget it!"
retorted the boy.

While we talked I had been hastily dressing, and until I had finished I
said nothing.  I suppose it was the blow on the head that I had
received, coupled with the growing consciousness that some disaster, far
more frightful than I had thus far dreamed of, had befallen us, that
made me suddenly irritable and short-tempered then.  Anyhow, the lad's
manner jarred upon me at the moment to such an extent that, as I was
about to lead the way through the doorway of my cabin, I halted and
turned upon the youngster.

"Look here, my lad," I said.  "If what you say is true, that only your
mother, your sister, you and I are left aboard this ship, somebody will
have to take charge of things, and that somebody will be myself.  There
will be a multitude of things to be done, and you will have to lend a
hand.  And I will see that you do so.  Henceforth it will be I who will
give orders; and--understand me, my young friend--if I give you an
order, you will execute it, or I'll know the reason why.  Hitherto, it
seems to me, you have been spoiled by too much indulgence; but if this
ship proves to be a wreck, as I more than suspect is the case, there
will be no more spoiling for you, and I'll see if I cannot make
something like a man of you.  Now, just turn that saying over in your
mind, and don't let me have any more of your nonsense.  Now we will go
and see what can be done for your mother.  Come along!"

For a moment I really thought that the boy meant to strike me, but I
kept my eyes steadily staring into his, and presently I saw that I had
mastered him, for the moment at all events.  The gleam of mingled anger
and defiance faded out of his eyes, and he muttered: "All right! let's
go."

As we wended our way from my cabin to the drawing-room, abaft which Mrs
Vansittart's cabin was situate, I had time to note several matters.  The
first of these was that the ship was evidently hard and fast aground;
for although she rolled slightly from time to time the motion was not
continuous like that of a floating ship, but intermittent, with
intervals when she did not move at all, but lay motionless with a list
to starboard.  Also, when she moved, there was a gritty, grinding sound,
which at once suggested to me that she was lying upon a bed of coral.
There was also another sound, a bumping sound, accompanied by a
perceptible jar of the hull, recurring at frequent and pretty regular
intervals, which I set down to the bumping of wreckage alongside.  The
next thing I observed was that the lee side of the deck was about a foot
or more deep in water, showing that a very considerable quantity must
have come below, the greater part of it probably through the hatchways,
although some had no doubt come in through the open ports.

Then I went up the hatchway ladder to the main-deck.  Heavens! what a
picture of wreck and ruin I there beheld!  The three hollow steel masts
were snapped off close to the deck, and now, with all attached, were
over the starboard side, still fast to the hull by the standing and
running gear, which lay, a confused raffle of wire and hemp, across the
deck.  The mizenmast, heel upward, leaned against the side of the poop
in a slanting position, showing that it had fallen forward as well as
sideways; and immediately to leeward, in the water that heaved and
seethed round us, rose and fell a tangle of wrecked spars, sails, and
rigging.  Every inch of the bulwarks, from poop to topgallant forecastle
on both sides, had disappeared, leaving only the bent and broken steel
stanchions standing here and there.  The deckhouses were gone, as were
every one of the boats except the motor launch, and even she was
represented only by a shattered, fragmentary skeleton.  Four of the six
main-deck guns in the starboard battery were either smashed or missing
altogether; and, in short, the whole appearance of the main-deck was
such as to suggest that the ship had been repeatedly swept from end to
end by a succession of tremendously heavy seas.

All these things I observed during my brief passage from the after
hatchway to the face of the poop.  I also observed that no land was in
sight from the main-deck; therefore, if we had hit an unknown atoll
during the night, it must be so small as to be entirely hidden by the
poop.

Followed submissively enough by the boy, who now seemed tongue-tied, I
passed through the cabin into the drawing-room; and it gave me quite a
sharp pain to see the dreadful havoc that had been wrought in that
splendid apartment since I had left it only a few hours before.  For not
only had all the ports been left open during the night, for the sake of
coolness, but the skylight and companion had both been swept away, and,
from the appearance of things, tons of water must have flooded the
place.  Even now, when it had had time to drain away to a small extent,
the lee side of the room was flooded to the depth of fully four feet,
and chairs, ottomans, table, grand piano, organ--the latter capsized--in
fact, everything movable had settled away to leeward, and now lay in a
confused heap in the water.  The rich carpet was everywhere sodden,
several of the electric-light shades were smashed, two or three of the
pictures had fallen; in short, the destruction was practically complete.
And there, in the midst of all the ruin, stood poor little Anthea, a
most forlorn and pathetic-looking object.

I hastened toward her with the idea of saying something comforting,
though what I could have said I am sure I don't know.  Happily, she
forestalled me by coming to meet me with outstretched hands.

"Oh!  Mr Leigh," she exclaimed, "isn't this just awful!  I am so glad
you are here, for Momma is in her cabin and can't get out; and Jule and
I haven't been strong enough to help her.  She says that the wardrobe
has fallen across her door, and she cannot move it."

"All right!"  I said; "I will see what I can do to help her;" and I
moved toward the door in question.

"But don't you think you had better get some of the men to help you?"
demanded the girl.  "I guess that wardrobe is a pretty heavy piece of
furniture and--But what are you looking at me like that for?  And what
have you done to your head?"

"Hasn't Julius told you?"  I asked, ignoring the last question.

"Told me what?" returned Anthea.  Then, without waiting for a reply, she
continued.  "No, he hasn't told me a thing.  In fact, I haven't seen him
since he left me nearly an hour ago to get help.  Of course I know that
we're wrecked, and goodness knows that's bad enough.  There's nothing
worse than that to tell, is there?"

"I don't know for certain," I said, "but I fear so.  Julius says that we
three and your mother are all that remain of the entire ship's company;
but I pray Heaven that he may be mistaken.  However, we will free your
mother; and then I will take a good look round.  I have scarcely had a
chance to see anything yet."

I walked up to the closed door of Mrs Vansittart's cabin, Anthea and
Julius accompanying me, and knocked.

"It is Walter Leigh," I cried.  "Julius tells me that you are blockaded
in your room, madam, and cannot force your way out.  May I see what I
can do?"

"Pray do, if you please," was the response.  "I have been shut up here
for hours, terrified and half-drowned, and I want to get out.  Have you
anybody there to help you?"

"Only Julius," I replied.  "But I daresay we can manage, between us."

"I don't believe you can," retorted Mrs Vansittart.  "There is a
wardrobe right across the door, and it is so heavy that I cannot move
it.  Still, you may try."

"Right!"  I replied.  "Stand clear, if you please.  Now, Julius, put
your shoulder to the door, close to the frame, and throw your whole
weight upon it.  I will help you."

But the door would not move, strive as we might, and soon I realised
that the lad was a hindrance rather than a help.  So I told him to stand
aside, and was then able to bring my whole weight and strength to bear.
Presently I felt the door move, ever so little; I had started it, and
after some minutes of strenuous heaving I managed to force it so far
open that, with a little tight squeezing, I might push myself through
the aperture.  This I did, having first asked permission; and, once
inside the room, I managed to shift the blockading wardrobe without very
much difficulty, and so to release the imprisoned lady.

When I had hooked back the door, so that the way was open, Mrs
Vansittart turned to me and said:

"Thank you, ever so much, Walter!  And now, tell me, what dreadful thing
has happened?  We are stranded, are we not, and--What is the matter with
your head?  You are bleeding!  Tell me the worst, Walter!  Whatever it
is, I believe I can bear it."

"To confess the truth, madam," I said, "I scarcely know yet what is the
full extent of our misfortune.  That the ship is ashore--on a coral
reef, as I believe--and totally dismasted, is certain; and I fear that
that is not the worst of it.  Julius tells me that we four are the only
survivors of the entire ship's company, but I can hardly believe that.
There must be some of the crew left somewhere in the ship, although I
saw no sign of them when I came here from my cabin.  Probably I should
not have been here now but for the fact that when the ship struck I was
hurled out of my bunk with such violence that I was stunned; and it was
Julius who found and revived me.  With your permission, I will now take
a thorough look round, and then return to you with my report."

"Please do so," assented Mrs Vansittart.  "Search the ship thoroughly
from end to end, and then let me know exactly how matters stand.  I am
sure it cannot be anything like so bad as you say.  Some of the poor
fellows may have been, indeed probably were, swept away by those awful
seas that broke over the ship when she first struck; but all of them!
Oh, no, it cannot be so bad as that; it would be too terrible!"

"I will go at once," I said.  "But I beg that you will prepare yourself
for bad news; for, from what I saw on deck just now, on my way here, I
am afraid my report will be a very distressing one."

Therewith I hurried away, for I saw that the poor lady was quite
overwhelmed, and would probably be relieved to find herself alone for a
time.  I searched the ship thoroughly, penetrating to every part of her
in which it was possible for a man to hide himself, but found nobody,
until at length I made my way to the stewardesses' quarters.  There,
huddled up in the cabin which they shared between them, I discovered the
chief and assistant stewardess, quite unhurt but half-crazy with
terror--so frightened, indeed, that it was only with the greatest
difficulty I at length succeeded in persuading them that all danger was
over for the present, and induced them to join their mistress in the
drawing-room.

Then I proceeded to investigate the condition of the wreck.  The yacht
had been constructed like a liner, with a double bottom; and the
conclusion at which I arrived was that the actual bottom of the ship was
so seriously damaged that she would never float again, but that the
inner skin was intact; and that the water in her interior, of which
there was a very considerable quantity, had all come in through the
hatchways and ports.

With regard to the loss of the crew, I believed I could understand
exactly how it had come about; for, wherever I went, whether to the
men's berthage in the 'tween decks or to the officers' cabins, the
indications were the same, and pointed to the conviction that when the
ship struck, every man below leaped out of his bunk or hammock and
dashed up on deck in something of a panic, where they were washed
overboard, with the watch already on deck, by the terrific seas that
must at once have swept the ship from stem to stern, their awful power
being sufficiently evidenced by the scene of destruction presented by
the decks.

Having completed my investigation below, I ascended to the poop,
shinning up by one of the port mizen shrouds, which trailed across the
deck and hung down over the face of the poop, both ladders being
missing; and when I got up there and was able to see all round the ship,
I thought I began to understand a little more clearly what had happened
during the darkness of the preceding night.

I found that the ship had piled herself up on a small atoll, some two
miles in diameter, only a very small portion of which--less than a
hundred yards in length--showed above water.  This portion, consisting
of a low bank of sand, the highest point of which could not, I
estimated, be more than three feet above the level of the ocean's
surface, lay directly astern of the ship, distant about half a mile.
From the position which the wreck then occupied I surmised that in the
darkness of the preceding night we must have rushed headlong upon the
weathermost portion of the reef, and beaten through the terrific surf
that everlastingly broke upon it.  Our decks had been swept of
everything animate and inanimate in the process, until the vessel had
settled down on the top of the reef in the comparatively smooth water
that then surrounded us, which, though it boiled and seethed all round
the wreck, had power only to cause her to stir gently and at intervals
upon her coral bed when an extra heavy swell swept across the reef.

Of course the wreck ought not to have occurred; but Parker, the
boatswain, who was in charge of the ship when she piled herself up,
unfortunately happened to overhear Mrs Vansittart remark, only the day
before the disaster, that we were then in a part of the ocean which was
not only very sparsely used, but, according to the charts, was supposed
to be absolutely void of dangers.  Hence I imagine he must not only have
grown careless himself, but must also have permitted the look-outs to
become so also; with the result that, on such a pitch-dark night as the
preceding one had been, the ship would be absolutely on top of the
danger, and escape from it impossible, before its existence was
discovered.

Well, our plight, although bad enough in all conscience, might easily
have been a good deal worse.  For if the ship had remained afloat a few
minutes longer than she actually did, she would have driven completely
across the reef and sunk in the lagoon, when probably the whole of us
who happened to be below would have gone down with her, and the disaster
would have been complete.  As it was, there were half a dozen of us who
had escaped drowning, although our prospects for the future were
anything but brilliant.  To start with, the diminutive sandbank astern
of the wreck was impossible as a place of prolonged residence, though we
might, perhaps, if driven to it, contrive to exist for a few days upon
the shellfish which no doubt might be collected along the margin of the
inner beach, assisted, perhaps, by a few sea-birds' eggs.  But there was
no fresh water, so far as I could discover with the aid of the ship's
telescope, nor was there so much as a blade of grass in the way of
shelter.

Therefore it was perfectly evident that we must stick to the wreck until
something came along to take us off, or until I could put together
something in the nature of a craft or raft capable of being handled
under sail and of making a voyage to the nearest civilised land.  That,
as anyone who has used the sea will know, was a pretty tall order for a
young fellow like myself, with such assistance only as four women and a
boy could afford me.  Of course there was the possibility that the wreck
might break up during the next gale.  But I hardly thought she would,
because she must have driven to her present berth while last night's
breeze was at its height, and from the look of things generally I
doubted whether a sea heavy enough to destroy her would ever reach us
where we then lay.  The reef would break it up and render it practically
harmless before it could get so far as the spot which we occupied.

Still, I realised that it would not be wise to trust too much to that
belief; and I determined to get to work upon some sort of craft at the
earliest moment possible.  Meanwhile, however, since under the most
favourable circumstances the wreck must obviously be our home for some
time to come, unless indeed we should be lucky enough to be seen and
taken off, the first thing to be done was to clear the ship of water and
get the cabins dry again as speedily as possible; and I determined that
I would make that my first job.

Having now decided upon something in the nature of a plan of campaign, I
returned to the drawing-room, descending to it by way of the companion--
the stairway of which was still intact--with the object of making my
report to Mrs Vansittart and submitting my plans for her approval.  But
when I reached the apartment I found the occupants in the very act of
descending to the dining-room, in order to partake of breakfast.  This
had been prepared by the two stewardesses, the senior of whom--the young
Frenchwoman, Lizette Charpentier, who also acted as Mrs Vansittart's
maid--had just made her appearance with the information that the meal
was ready.  I therefore decided to postpone what I had to say until
after breakfast, believing that everybody would be the better able to
listen to bad news if they were first fortified with a good meal.



CHAPTER TEN.

ADAPTING OURSELVES TO CIRCUMSTANCES.

To ward off the enquiries that sprang to Mrs Vansittart's lips the
moment I appeared was a little difficult, but I managed it by simply
declining to say a word until after breakfast.  When, however, we
presently all sat down at the table together, I soon perceived that the
task of breaking to her the full extent of the night's disaster, to
which I had been looking forward with dread, was likely to be less
painful than I had anticipated.  For Mrs Vansittart was far too
experienced in nautical matters to be easily deceived.  Moreover, during
my absence there had been time for her to think, and to draw her own
conclusions, not only from what she saw and heard, but also from what
she failed to see and hear--particularly the sound of men's voices and
footsteps.  So that, as the meal progressed, I began to understand that
it would require very little effort on my part to bring complete
realisation home to her.

Poor lady!  I felt very sorry for her--not so much on account of the
possible hardships, privations, and dangers that only too probably
awaited her, for she was "grit" all through, and I knew that she would
face them all without a murmur; but it was easy to see that she was
grieving over the terrible loss of life that had attended the disaster.
Also, I rather imagined she blamed herself for it.  For when I ventured
to beg her not to take the matter too much to heart, she looked at me
through her tears and retorted:

"How can I help taking it to heart, Walter?  If I had been content to
enjoy life in the same way that other women of my class do, this would
never have happened.  But I must needs go gadding about the world in a
yacht; and this is what has come of it!"

I replied that yachting was not in itself more dangerous than many other
forms of amusement which could easily be named; that thousands indulged
in it year after year with impunity; and that what had befallen us was
neither more nor less than a pure accident, for which she certainly
could in nowise hold herself responsible, since she had navigated the
ship with skill and the observance of every necessary precaution.  I
went on to say that the accident had arisen simply from the existence of
a coral reef which nobody had thus far suspected.  But my arguments,
sound as I felt them to be, seemed to influence the lady very little, if
at all.  I could only hope that time, reflection, and the difficulties
that lay before us would gradually divert her thoughts from the sorrow
that just then seemed to possess her.

At the conclusion of the meal I took her up on the poop and allowed her
to view our surroundings, expounded my theory of the various happenings
that had brought us to our present pass, and explained the steps which I
suggested should be immediately taken.  To which she responded by
saying:

"Very well, Walter.  Whatever you think necessary do, and we will all
help you to the utmost of our ability.  I can sail and navigate a ship,
as you have seen, but there my seamanship ends.  I have not the
knowledge, the skill, the experience, the intuitiveness and
imaginativeness to deal adequately with, such a matter as a shipwreck.
And when people are in such a plight as ourselves it is the man who must
take hold of the situation and handle it.  I trust entirely to you to do
what you think best; and, as I said before, we women will help you all
we can."

I thanked her very heartily for her trust in me, and proposed that we
should forthwith set to work, our first task being to free the habitable
portions of the ship from water, so that they might become dry and
comfortable again with the least possible delay.  And I suggested that
we should begin with her own sleeping cabin, to which she made no
objection.

"There is one other matter," I added, "which demands our immediate
attention.  We must at once determine the exact position of the wreck,
and, having done so, must prepare a statement briefly setting forth our
plight and requesting assistance.  This statement must be copied out
several times--as many times as you please, indeed--and the copies,
enclosed in sealed bottles, sent adrift at, say, daily intervals.  It
will be strange indeed if, out of four or five dozen bottles, not one is
picked up."

The suggestion appealed to Mrs Vansittart.  She pronounced the idea a
good one, and as the time and conditions were alike favourable we
forthwith proceeded to carry it out, she first taking a set of five
sights for the determination of the longitude while I noted the
chronometer times, and then, vice versa, I taking the sextant and she
the chronometer.  Then we adjourned to the chart-room and worked out our
calculations independently, the results agreeing within ten seconds of
longitude, or a difference of only a few hundred feet.  This, of course,
was quite near enough for all practical purposes, but it did not
completely satisfy either of us, Mrs Vansittart being, like myself,
something of a stickler for absolute accuracy.  We therefore tried
again, this time working the problem of "equal altitudes", and before
the day was out we had arrived at identical results, both as to latitude
and longitude.

Then, while I tackled the task of clearing our living quarters of water,
Mrs Vansittart set to work to draft out a statement setting forth the
circumstances of the wreck and appealing for help.  I have still a copy
of the document in my possession, which runs as follows:--

      "Yacht _Stella Maris_; New York Yacht Club, U.S.A.;
          Mrs Cornelia Vansittart, Owner.
              Latitude -- North; Longitude -- East.

"To all whom it may concern.

"The full-rigged, auxiliary-screw yacht _Stella Maris_, stranded on an
uncharted coral reef, situate in the above-mentioned position, during
the night of Wednesday the -- day of December, 19--, with the lamentable
loss of all hands excepting the owner, her son and daughter, chief
officer Walter Leigh, of Newton Ferrers, Devonshire, England; Lizette
Charpentier, chief stewardess, and Susie Blaine, second stewardess, both
of New York, U.S.A.

"As the only land in sight is a very small, bare sandbank, quite
uninhabitable, the above-named survivors are remaining upon the wreck,
which, although totally dismasted and badly bilged, will afford them a
refuge so long as the weather remains fine, but may break up during the
next gale that chances to occur.

"Mrs Vansittart offers a reward of ten thousand dollars (American), and
the reimbursement of all expenses incurred, to the person or persons who
will effect the rescue of herself and her companions in misfortune; and
the finder of this document is earnestly besought to make public its
contents as soon as found.

Signed: "Cornelia Vansittart."

The first copy of this appeal was dispatched that very day, by the
simple process of wrapping it carefully in oiled silk, inserting it in
an empty bottle, which was tightly corked and sealed, and heaving it
overboard to take its chance.  As I stood watching the bottle's progress
I was gratified to see that there was a one-knot current setting across
the reef, which I hoped would carry it clear into the open sea; though
whether it would ever be found by anyone capable of making intelligent
use of it was quite another matter.  The chances of it being seen were
small, and of its recovery still less.  But I determined to increase
both before dispatching the next message; and this I did by routing out
some paint and setting the boy Julius to the task of painting a number
of bottles all over in alternate bands of red and white.  An ordinary
floating bottle might be seen and passed without the smallest effort to
pick it up, even though all the conditions for recovery should be
favourable.  But I argued that if a bottle were seen bearing
distinguishing marks that were obviously put upon it with the object of
attracting attention, the person sighting it might reasonably conclude
that it would be worth while to salve it and ascertain its contents.

If the sight of our first call for help drifting placidly seaward across
the lagoon was an agreeable sight, there was another which appeared
later on that was by no means so agreeable--the dorsal fins of several
sharks cruising lazily here and there about the lagoon.  I thought I
could make a pretty shrewd guess at the meaning of their presence there,
I therefore devised a number of pretexts for keeping everybody off the
poop, so that there might be as little chance as possible of anyone
beholding the gruesome sight.

There were so many matters demanding immediate attention that it was
difficult to determine which of them should first be taken in hand.  But
as the weather was fine, and the barometer stood high, exhibiting a
tendency to rise still higher and thus promising a continuance of fine
weather, it was agreed that, for health's sake, the living quarters
should be cleared of water and thoroughly aired and made wholesome first
of all.  This was accordingly done, the task keeping us all busily
employed for the best part of three days.  Then provision had to be made
against the further flooding of Mrs Vansittart's cabin and the
drawing-room by rain, for, as has already been mentioned, the skylights
and companion had been swept away, and the corresponding apertures in
the deck were quite open and unprotected.

Very fortunately, a large quantity of timber scantling and planking of
various kinds and dimensions had been shipped by our far-seeing owner,
for the purpose of effecting repairs at sea, if required.  As soon as
the cabins had been cleared of water, therefore, some of this timber was
brought on deck; and with the aid of the carpenter's tools, Julius and I
proceeded to plank over the openings, and make them weather-proof by
covering the planking with tarpaulins tightly nailed over them.

When I first invited the boy to help me he refused point-blank, upon two
distinct pleas: the first of which was that he saw no reason why he
should work at all, seeing that I was there to do what needed to be
done; while, in the second place, if he chose to work at all he would do
only such work as he pleased, and in any case was not going to be
ordered about by any darned Britisher.  So I just let him severely
alone, and for the first day he loafed about, smoking cigarettes and
pretending to fish in the troubled water over the side.

When, however, on the second day, seeing that I needed help, his mother
and sister came to my assistance, the sight of them working while he
idled was too much for even his spoiled and selfish temper; and with
many grumblings and mutterings below his breath he ordered his mother
away and took her place.  But so intractable was he, so unwilling to
receive the slightest suggestion or hint from a "darned Britisher", and
so determined to do things his own way or not at all, that eventually I
had to tell him plainly he must consent to do as he was told, or drop
work altogether.  Finally he gave in, mainly in consequence of his
sister's outspoken comments upon his behaviour, but it was with a very
bad grace.

Having made the living quarters of the ship once more habitable and safe
against bad weather, the next task undertaken was the salving of the
sails and as many of the spars and as much of the rigging as possible.
This was a lengthy and heavy job, in the performance of which it became
necessary for me to be frequently over the side, in the water, cutting
the sails from the yards and stays, clearing and unreeving rigging, and
so on.  It would have been exceedingly dangerous had the sharks which I
had seen during the first few days remained in the lagoon; but they
seemed to have gone again, for I saw nothing of them.

Although their absence enabled me to work with the utmost freedom, I
could not make very rapid headway, single-handed, in the water; while
the hoisting inboard of the heavier spars and sails, assisted though we
were with such appliances as a derrick, tackles, snatch-blocks, and the
winch, taxed our energies to the very utmost.  It was done at last,
however, and most thankful was I when the last spar it was possible for
us to secure came up over the side; for not only had we saved a
considerable quantity of material that might possibly prove of the
utmost value to us, but we had also rid ourselves of the menace of
having the ship holed by the wreckage bumping alongside.

This big task was completed exactly six weeks from the day upon which
the wreck had occurred, all of us working strenuously from dawn to dark
day after day, excepting Sundays, which Mrs Vansittart insisted should
be observed as days of rest, during which she conducted a service,
morning and evening, in the drawing-room.  Christmas Day, which occurred
three weeks after the wreck, was also observed as a holiday; and despite
our forlorn and rather precarious situation, we contrived to make a
fairly jolly day of it, the only discordant element being the boy
Julius, who early became sulky for some unaccountable reason, and spent
the entire day upon the topgallant forecastle with a rifle, shooting at
sea-birds and wasting some two hundred rounds of ball cartridge.  I felt
strongly inclined several times to take the rifle forcibly from him, but
the mere hint of such a thing seemed to distress his mother so keenly
that I did not refer to it a second time.  Yet I must confess that I
bitterly begrudged the utterly useless expenditure of so many good and,
in our case, valuable cartridges.

Now, it must not be supposed that, in our anxiety to recover as much
wreckage as possible, we forgot to keep a diligent look-out for passing
ships, for we did not.  Nor did we neglect to dispatch a copy of our
appeal for help, securely sealed up in a bottle, regularly every day.
But thus far the horizon had remained blank while daylight lasted;
therefore if perchance any ships had passed us, they must have done so
during the night.  Up to this we had all been working so hard that we
had deemed it hardly worth while to sacrifice our hours of rest for the
very doubtful advantage of maintaining a night watch; but with the
conclusion of what we considered our heaviest task, so far as actual
labour was concerned, we decided that it might be of advantage to keep a
look-out at night time, at least during the moonlit nights.  We should
then be able to see a passing ship at such a distance as would enable us
to attract her attention by means of a flare.  Accordingly it was
arranged that four of us, namely, Julius, the two stewardesses, and I,
should each take one watch in succession.

In that latitude, which was only a few degrees north of the Line, day
and night were approximately of equal length, and for all practical
purposes the night might be reckoned as beginning at six p.m., and
ending at six a.m.  Therefore if each of us kept a watch of three hours,
we should cover the twelve hours between us.  But by this arrangement
the same person would keep one particular watch every night, and, of
course, the least arduous of the watches would be that from six o'clock
to nine o'clock p.m.; I therefore decided to split this watch into two
dog-watches of one and a half hours each, by which arrangement the
regularity would be broken, and each of us would get the benefit of the
first dog-watch in succession, which seemed to be not only a fair but a
desirable thing.

To keep a night watch, however, without possessing the means to attract
the notice of a passing ship, would be useless.  I therefore constructed
a sort of framework consisting of four twelve-foot planks, which I set
up on edge in the form of a square enclosure on the after extremity of
the poop, securing them firmly to the deck planking by means of battens.
The planks were nine inches wide, consequently when my work was
complete I had a kind of open box twelve feet square and nine inches
deep in which to light my flare.  But something was needed to protect
the deck from the action of the fire; my next act, therefore, was to
nail together a sort of light raft, consisting of six fifteen-foot
planks laid side by side and secured to each other by cross battens, the
forward ends being bevelled to reduce the resistance to the raft's
passage through the water.  Then I fixed up an arrangement on each side
of the raft whereby, with the aid of rowlocks, I could work a pair of
sculls and so propel the raft through the water.  This job took me two
days to complete, but when it was done I had a raft that would sustain
not only my own weight but something to spare.  I placed upon it a
couple of wash-deck tubs, put a shovel in one of them, and paddled
myself ashore to the small sandbank about half a mile away.

As I rowed away from the wreck, standing up to my work and facing
forward, fisherman fashion, I took a rather wide sweep, whereby I was
enabled to obtain a good view of her.  A pitiful sight she presented,
bereft of her three masts, with her jib-boom snapped short off, odds and
ends of rigging trailing overboard, a great gap in her starboard
bulwarks, and the fair whiteness of her hull disfigured here and there
with rust streaks.  She sat with a list to starboard, and was a trifle
down by the head, from which latter circumstance I concluded that her
forefoot and bottom forward were the most seriously damaged parts of
her, as, indeed, it was only reasonable to suppose, seeing that she must
have hit the reef stem-on.  But, oh! it was distressing to look at that
still beautiful though dishevelled hull and reflect that she had been
brought to her present lamentable condition by pure negligence.

The raft travelled more easily through the water than I had dared to
hope, and in about a quarter of an hour I reached the sandbank and
sprang ashore, taking the precaution to secure the raft by a painter
made fast to one of the oars, the loom of which I drove well into the
sand.  Then I walked to the highest point of the bank and looked about
me.

With the exception of a few bunches of dry and rotting seaweed, the bank
was as bare as the back of my hand, but a colony of gulls had settled
upon it, and by their cries indicated the resentment which they felt at
my intrusion.  I looked round to see if I could discover any eggs, for
fresh gulls' eggs are not at all bad eating, and would perhaps afford a
welcome change of diet to the women folk; but I found none, so concluded
that it was not just then the season for them.  The bank measured, by
pacing, a little over eighty yards long by some forty broad; and I
diligently examined the seaward side of it to see whether perchance
there might be a spring of fresh water gushing out of it.  I hardly
expected that there would be, and was therefore not greatly disappointed
at failing to find any such thing.  But I found the margin liberally
strewed with small shellfish, as well as with numerous empty shells,
some of which were so exquisite, both in form and in colouring, that I
could not resist the temptation to waste a few minutes in securing
specimens of the most beautiful for the delectation of Mrs Vansittart
and her daughter.  This done, I returned to the raft, hauled it
broadside on to the beach, and proceeded to fill my two wash-deck tubs
with sand, with which I designed to fill my square box-like arrangement
on the poop as a protection for the deck from the flames of my projected
flare.  Needless to say, two tubs of sand did not go very far toward
filling the box, and it was not until the following evening that I had
everything ready.  Then, with a goodly pile of combustibles, consisting
of dry seaweed, chips, kindling wood, and coal, heaped up in the middle
of my sandbox, I had everything ready for lighting a flare at a moment's
notice.

Our most pressing necessities having been attended to, I found time to
attend to the matter which seemed to come next in importance.  Hitherto
we had been favoured with the finest of fine weather--nothing but the
bluest of skies, often without the smallest shred of cloud, no rain, and
only the most gentle of zephyrs.  But I knew that such a condition of
things could not last for ever.  A change must inevitably come sooner or
later; and if that change should chance to take the form of a gale from
the southward, I had scarcely a shadow of doubt that, unless it should
happen to be of the very briefest character, the wreck would go to
pieces under our feet.  Therefore it seemed to me that the task which
now clamoured most loudly for our immediate attention was the
construction of a craft of some sort which would enable us to escape in
the last resort.

Now, there are very few tasks in connection with his craft which
mercantile Jack cannot perform in a more or less efficient manner.  He
can unrig his ship, and rig her afresh.  If any of her spars should be
sprung, he can fix them up in such a fashion that they will serve their
purpose very well until a new spar can be procured.  He can knot and
splice rigging; he can patch or rope a sail; and there are a thousand
other things that he can do very deftly.  But there is one thing which
he cannot do, unless he has served an apprenticeship, or at least part
of an apprenticeship to it, and that is--build a boat.  He can repair a
damaged boat, I grant you, put in a new plank, or replace a damaged
timber.  But to build a boat, as we understand the term, is altogether
beyond him.  The best that he can do is to construct some sort of a
makeshift; and the problem that now confronted me was, what form was my
makeshift to take?

First, what were my requirements?  If it came to our being obliged to
abandon the wreck, either through stress of weather or because of a
conviction that our appeals for help had gone astray and that we must
give up all hope of rescue and effect our own deliverance, it would mean
a boat voyage.  This in its turn would mean that the craft must be a
good sea boat, capable of facing any weather, weatherly, a reasonably
good sailer, and big enough to accommodate six people--four of whom were
women, whose comfort and welfare must receive special consideration--
together with a stock of provisions and water sufficient to last us all
for, say, five weeks at least.  I had already discussed this matter with
Mrs Vansittart, and she had expressed a determination to try for
Manila, in such a case, that being an American possession.  Secondly,
had we the materials, and had I the skill and strength to build such a
boat, with such assistance as my companions could afford me?  That was
the question which now demanded an answer, and, in consultation with
Mrs Vansittart, I now diligently proceeded to seek the reply.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A SUSPICIOUS SAIL HEAVES IN SIGHT.

As I have already hinted, I was no boat builder.  I knew a good boat
when I saw her, and I had a very fair notion of the correct proportions
of such a craft; but when it came to the point of draughting a vessel's
lines, I very soon discovered, upon making the attempt, that I was all
at sea.  Nor could Mrs Vansittart help me.  As a matter of fact, we
quickly came to the conclusion that we knew just enough of the subject
to be painfully conscious of our own ignorance.  Of course I might have
laid a keel, attached to it a stem and stern post, and then, with the
help of a few moulds, roughed out something resembling a boat; but when
in imagination I had got thus far, I found myself face to face with the
mystery of properly shaping the planks, and, when this was done, of
bending them to the correct curves.  Then I realised that the job was
too much for me.

It was clear that a boat of the usual form was out of the question, so
something very much simpler must be thought out--something that should
be all straight lines, or if there were any curves they must be of such
a character as to be producible without such special apparatus as, for
instance, a steaming trunk.

Then Mrs Vansittart and I began to overhaul our memories in search of
the most simple form of floating craft that we had ever seen, and it was
not long before we decided that the Thames punt "filled the bill".  That
craft, so familiar to frequenters of the reaches of the Thames, and
examples of which may be seen in Boulter's Lock any Sunday in summer,
is, as everybody knows, a thing of straight lines, flat-bottomed,
flat-sided--in fact, an open box, with its two ends sloping instead of
perpendicular; and we quickly decided that anyone with enough of the
carpenter's skill to knock a box together ought to be able to build a
punt.  Later on we discovered that we were not quite right in this
assumption, but it was sufficiently encouraging to form a basis upon
which to make a start.

Now, a sea voyage in an open boat is something to be attempted only as a
last resource.  A trip of a few hours' duration in suitable weather is
all very well; it is, indeed, a very enjoyable experience.  But in a
gale, when one is exposed hour after hour to the fury of the elements,
is in momentary danger of being capsized, and has to bale for dear life!

Well, those who have been through it know what that means.  I had been
through it, therefore I knew that for those delicately nurtured women it
was not to be thought of for a moment; our boat must be decked, that was
a certainty.

This decision led naturally to the question of one of the principal
dimensions--namely, the depth--of the proposed craft.  She must be deep
enough under her deck at least to allow her occupants to lie down and
sleep in comfort.  After careful consideration we fixed the depth at
five feet in the clear.  With that as a ruling dimension it was not
difficult to decide that a suitable beam or breadth would be ten feet.
After much consideration we fixed the length at thirty feet on the
water-line, which, we decided, would afford sufficient room for
ourselves, our immediate and indispensable belongings, and a sufficient
supply of food and water to carry us to our journey's end.  Taking
pencil and paper, we proceeded to draught out the boat, that we might
see how she looked, and estimate the quantity of material needed for her
construction.

Our first sketch showed the contours of a Thames punt, pure and simple;
but when we pictured her in a heavy seaway, and endeavoured to imagine
what her behaviour would be under such circumstances, we quickly came to
the conclusion that certain modifications were imperative.  These we
proceeded to make forthwith; the final result being a craft of the
dimensions already determined upon, flat-bottomed in cross section, but
curved fore and aft, and with enough sheer to lift the fore end of her
well above water.  Being flat-bottomed, she would naturally be of light
draught, and would consequently make a good deal of leeway when
close-hauled, unless some special provision could be made to meet the
case.  We therefore decided to extend her two flat sides nine inches
below her bottom, so as to form two keels; and, thus provided, we
believed she would prove to be fairly weatherly.  She was to be decked
all over, with only a small cockpit aft; and light was to be furnished
to her interior by four of the glass ports or windows to be removed from
the wreck.  She was to be sloop-rigged.  The completed and finally
approved design cost us an afternoon to produce, but when it was done we
were very well satisfied with it.  We believed that the craft ought to
behave fairly well, even in heavy weather; while the design was so
simple as to demand no special skill in carrying it out, and such loose
timber as we had, supplemented by a certain quantity of deck planking,
would be sufficient for our purpose.

The next thing to be done was to proceed with the actual work, and this
we did forthwith.

I am not going to inflict upon the patient reader any wearisome details
of our work, step by step; I believe they may safely be left to his
imagination; moreover, I have other and more interesting things to tell.
I will therefore dismiss this part of my story by mentioning that,
although the work of building our craft proved to be considerably less
easy than we had anticipated, chiefly because of my lack of knowledge of
the details of carpentry, we made very fair progress after the first two
or three days, and especially after I had acquired the knack of handling
a plane properly.  But I had to do every stroke of the actual work
myself.  The women merely helped me by holding the various parts in
place while I bored the holes or drove the nails; and Julius positively
refused to lend the slightest assistance, because, forsooth, he had not
been consulted during the preparation of the plans!  He would sit
smoking cigarettes and fishing, and watch, unmoved, his mother and
sister, to say nothing of the two stewardesses, straining themselves to
help me to lift heavy weights and bend the stout bottom planks to the
required curve.  Also--chiefly, I think, because he knew that I
objected--he would persist in shooting at the gulls with a rifle; until
at length, in a fit of exasperation, I risked his mother's displeasure
and put an end to the wastage by locking up the ammunition and taking
possession of the key.

I have already mentioned the arrangement which we had made in the matter
of night watches.  This, of course, only applied to those nights when
the moon afforded light enough to permit a passing ship to be seen.  My
instructions were that, in the event of a sail being sighted, I was to
be called at once, when I would decide as to the advisability or
otherwise of making a flare to attract the attention of her crew.  I was
quite prepared to receive Master Julius's refusal to participate in
these night watches, but, strangely enough, he did not; and thereby
hangs a tale.

The watches had been established a month or more, and no sail had been
seen.  Then, on a certain morning, when Julius called me at three
o'clock--my watch followed his--I went on deck and, to my amazement,
discovered the flare which I had prepared to serve as a signal blazing
brilliantly, having evidently been lighted for quite a quarter of an
hour.  The full moon was hanging high in a cloudless sky, and the stars
were shining with their usual tropical brilliance, but so bright was the
light of the flames that I could see nothing outside the rail of the
wreck.  I therefore descended to the boy's cabin, and, entering without
ceremony, demanded to be informed of his reason for lighting the fire.

"Because I saw a ship," he replied.

"Saw a ship!"  I repeated.  "Then why did you not at once come down and
call me?  You surely cannot have forgotten that I made it clearly
understood I was to be called if a ship should heave in sight, and that
nobody was to light the fire without first consulting me?"

To this there was no reply, the lad merely lying in his bed and scowling
sulkily at me.  I repeated the question in a slightly different form.

"Naw," he answered at length, "I didn't forget.  But I guess it's about
time that you understood I ain't going to take any orders from you."

"But," I remonstrated, "your mother has given me full power to act as I
think best, under all circumstances.  I presume that, young as you are,
you have sense enough to understand that in any community, however
small, there must be a leader whom all the rest must obey.  Under no
circumstances is this more imperative than in such a case as ours.  You
surely do not consider that you should be our head and leader, do you?"

"You bet I do," was his amazing reply.  "Anyhow," he continued, "I'm not
going to obey you, Mister Britisher, so you may clear out and leave me
to have my sleep.  And see here, since you don't like the way I keep
watch, I won't do it any more.  Now, git!"

I "got" with some precipitation, lest I should lose my grip upon myself
and give the youth the trouncing that he so richly deserved.  I desired
above all things to avoid that, for I knew that nothing would distress
his mother so much as that her darling should be chastised, though ever
so lightly.

Returning to the deck, I found the fire still blazing high, for, not
content with merely kindling the flare, Master Julius had taken the
trouble to fling the whole of our reserve stock of fuel upon it.  There
was the merest breathing of wind out from the eastward, and this fanned
the smoke right along our deck.  It made my eyes smart to such an extent
that I was compelled to get down off the poop and shelter myself under
the break of it, but even here, out of direct range of the glare, I
found it impossible to see anything outboard, the mere reflection of the
flames being bright enough to dazzle me.

I awaited the coming of daylight, and the appearance of the alleged
ship, with the utmost eagerness, not altogether unmingled with anxiety.
On the beach of one of the islands which we had visited shortly before
the wreck of the yacht, I had observed the ribs of what had once been a
fine ship; and the Scotsman who had taken up his abode on the island as
a trader in copra and shell had told me a grisly story concerning that
ship, which had haunted my memory from the moment when I had awakened to
find the _Stella Maris_ piled up on the coral reef.  That story was to
the effect that the ship had one morning been sighted ashore on the
beach, apparently undamaged, but with no sign of a crew aboard her; and
when the Scotsman at length succeeded in boarding her, he had found
twenty-three corpses lying about her decks in a state of putrefaction
that rendered the craft a veritable pest-house and precluded all
possibility of close examination.  But the deck and bulwarks were so
abundantly smeared and bespattered with dry blood as to point
unmistakably to the fact of a general slaughter of the crew; while the
open hatches and the state of the cargo showed that the ship had been
pretty effectually plundered.

My informant added that, while such cases were rare, there was reason
for believing that the adjacent seas were haunted by certain individuals
who made it their business to hunt for wrecks for the sake of what could
be salved from them, and were not above perpetrating a little piracy
when the conditions were favourable.

It was the memory of this story that had caused me to give such explicit
instructions, that I was to be informed of the presence of a stranger in
our neighbourhood before making our plight known by the ignition of the
flare.  The unruly youngster had wilfully disobeyed me, with the result
that, for all he or I knew to the contrary, the attentions of a band of
ruthless outlaws or bloodthirsty pirates had possibly been invited.  I
could only hope that this might not be the case, and that the stranger,
if stranger there really was, would prove to be honest; but I was by no
means easy in my mind about it.

When one's imagination becomes obsessed by an unpleasant idea there is a
natural tendency for anxiety to grow while one is held in suspense; at
all events it was so with me on that particular occasion, for it seemed
to me that daylight would never come.  Meanwhile, however, our flare,
after blazing fiercely for a full half-hour, gradually died down and
finally burned itself out; and I made no attempt to replenish it, for I
knew that, whatever the result might be, its work was effectually done.
All that remained was to await the result as patiently as might be.

As soon as the flames had died down sufficiently to allow of my seeing
anything, I got the ship's night glass and diligently searched the
entire horizon with it, and presently picked up something that gradually
resolved itself into a craft which, from its stunted rig, I set down in
my own mind as a junk.  With the solitary exception, perhaps, of a Malay
proa, a Chinese junk was the very last kind of craft that, under the
circumstances, I desired to see.  While of course it is by no means the
case that every Chinese junk carries a pirate crew, the Chinese
generally, and especially Chinese seamen, are regarded by Europeans with
a certain measure of dubiety as possessing a code of morals peculiarly
their own, and of such a character that I, for one, would hesitate long
before placing myself and, still more, my companions in their hands and
at their mercy.  Still, there was nothing for it now but to wait and see
how matters would turn out.

When I first saw her, the doubtful craft was in the south-western board,
some seven miles distant, heading to the southward, apparently
close-hauled, and moving very slowly.  As I have said, the wind was a
mere breathing; and although the moon was now well down in the western
sky and the stranger's sails were in shadow, there was a certain
indefinable something in their appearance which told me that they were
wrinkling and collapsing with every heave of the swell.  I kept the
telescope bearing steadily upon her, for she was drawing down toward
that part of the sea which was shimmering in liquid silver under the
moon's rays, and I knew that when she reached that radiant path I should
get a clean, sharply-cut silhouette of her and be able to determine her
exact character with some certainty.  As luck would have it, however,
she tacked before reaching the moon's track, and I was still left in a
state of some doubt, although doubt was fast giving way to apprehension.
In any case, unless the breeze should freshen, which it might with the
coming of the dawn, several hours must elapse before the stranger could
arrive at the reef, if she was making for it, as seemed certain.

At length, after what appeared to me an interminable period of suspense,
the blackness of the eastern sky melted into a pallor that spread along
the horizon even as I watched it, revealing the long, low hummocks of
swell slowly heaving in ebony.  The lower stars dimmed and vanished as
the pallor strengthened and warmed into a delicate primrose tint,
spreading to right and left and upward as it did so.  Then star after
star went out before the advance of the light that turned the indigo of
the zenith into purest ultramarine; the primrose hue in the east flushed
into orange; a great shaft of white light shot suddenly upward from its
midst, and a spark of molten, flaming gold sprang into view, darting a
long line of liquid fire across the gently heaving bosom of the sea.
The spark grew into a throbbing, palpitating, dazzling blaze; and in an
instant it was day: the stars had disappeared, the sky glowed in purest
sapphire, the placid ocean laughed under the beams of the triumphant
sun.  The air, which a few minutes before had carried a sudden touch of
chill in it, came warm to the skin, the breeze freshened a trifle; and
at length I was able to secure a clear and convincing view of the
stranger.  She was indeed a junk, as I had surmised; and she was now
undoubtedly beating up toward the reef.  But for that headstrong boy's
wilful disobedience of my instructions, she might have held on upon her
original course and by this time been hull-down, with the wreck out of
sight from her deck.

There was now no possibility of our evading a visit from her crew; but,
thank goodness! there would be ample time to prepare for that visit.  I
reckoned that unless the breeze continued to freshen, she could not
possibly reach us in less than six or seven hours.  The question with me
was, what sort of reception were we to give her when at length she
should arrive?  There was, of course, the possibility that her crew
might be just plain, honest traders.  In that case we might regard
ourselves as rescued from our imprisonment on the reef; and, having
regard to the precariousness of our situation on a wreck that would
perhaps go to pieces in the next gale--which might spring up at any
moment--it was important, especially for the women folk, that no chance
of rescue should be let slip.

The junk might be heading for us in response to one of the many urgent
calls for succour which we had sent out sealed up in empty bottles.  My
spirits rose a little at the thought, only to sink again at the
reflection which succeeded it.  It was in the highest degree improbable,
if perchance one of our messages should fall into the hands of a Chinese
seaman, that he would be able to comprehend and act upon it.

It was a rather perplexing problem for a young fellow like myself to be
confronted with; but the decision at which I ultimately arrived was
that, while recognising the possibility of the junk's crew being
friends, it would be wise to be prepared to meet them as enemies.
Having come to this decision, I went below and called the stewardesses,
who, since the wreck, had assumed charge of the domestic arrangements--
Susie, the second stewardess, proving herself to be a past mistress of
the culinary art.

I allowed the others to sleep on, for there was no reason why I should
prematurely awaken Mrs Vansittart, only perhaps to worry her needlessly
by pouring into her ears the tale of my doubts and fears; but at eight
o'clock she and her daughter came on deck, and caught me watching the
slowly moving junk, with the telescope glued to my eye.  They looked,
and an exclamation of delight burst from their lips, to be instantly
followed by a demand from Mrs Vansittart why I had not at once called
her to impart the good news.  Of course I had to explain at length to
them the uncertain state of mind under which I was labouring, as already
indicated.

"But you fired the flare, Mr Leigh," exclaimed Anthea, pointing to the
frame on the poop, from which a thin haze of smoke still arose.  "Why
did you do that if you felt uncertain as to the character of that junk?"

"No," I said, "your brother did that, on his own responsibility; and he,
if anybody, must bear the blame.  I am sorry that he did it, because if
that junk is indeed coming in response to our call for help, we may be
sure that there is somebody aboard her who is navigator enough to find
his way to the reef without the need of a special signal from us.
Whereas if it be, as I am somewhat disposed to fear--"

"There may be a fight before us--I suppose that is what you mean,"
interposed Mrs Vansittart.  "Oh, well," she continued, "we have plenty
of weapons and ammunition, and are not afraid of a few Chinamen.  I am
sure the dear boy did what he considered the proper thing--"

"Oh, Momma," cut in Anthea, "for goodness gracious sake don't talk such
foolishness.  It was a stupid, a wrong thing to do, after Mr Leigh had
given explicit orders that--"

"It was, was it?  Then you take that, and just mind your own business!"
exclaimed a well-known quarrelsome voice behind us, and the next instant
Master Julius, who had crept up noiselessly behind us in his
rubber-soled deck shoes, smote his sister a resounding box on the ear.

As a rule I am a most placid-tempered person, but somehow that blow
instantly aroused in me a fury that made me "see red" for a moment.
Wheeling sharply, I seized the boy by the scruff of the neck and shook
him until his teeth fairly rattled in his head.

"You young ruffian!"  I exclaimed, "how dare you strike your sister?
You deserve a downright good thrashing for such a deed, and--mark you
this, boy!--if ever you so much as attempt to do such a thing again and
I get to hear of it, I will rope's-end you until you can neither stand,
sit, nor lie down.  You ought to be ashamed of yourself!"  And I flung
him from me with such violence that he went staggering along the deck
for three or four yards before he recovered himself.

Of course there was at once a pretty to-do.  Anthea was crying--more, I
think, at the mortification of being struck than for any other reason;
while Mrs Vansittart instantly went into violent hysterics, shrieking
that her darling boy was being murdered.  The young gentleman himself
meanwhile slunk away down the companion stairs, eyeing me as he went, as
though by no means certain that I would not yet fall upon him and
inflict the punishment that he must have known he richly deserved.  Then
up rushed the two stewardesses, in response to Mrs Vansittart's
shrieks, and between them and Anthea she was piloted below, and, it is
to be presumed, ministered to and restored, for the shrieks and outcries
presently died away.

About half an hour afterward Lizette, the head stewardess, summoned me
to breakfast, at the same time explaining that Mrs Vansittart was
taking the meal in her own room, with Julius.

"She is dr-r-readfully angree with you, Monsieur Leigh," the girl
informed me; "but do not you care.  It is time that somebody should take
that boy in hand.  He is everey day growing more execr-r-rable!"



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE CONVERSION OF JULIUS.

When I went down to breakfast, Anthea and Lizette were already in the
dining-room.  The former had quite recovered her composure, although her
eyelids were still a trifle red and swollen, while her small,
beautifully-shaped ear was crimson from the force of the blow which it
had received.  I have already mentioned that this young lady's attitude
toward me had completely changed from the moment when I saved her
brother's life; her frosty and almost insolent aloofness had entirely
disappeared, giving place to a frank and cordial friendliness of
disposition rivalling that of her mother, which I admit was mightily
agreeable to me.  In short, I believed her to be intensely grateful for
what I had done on that occasion, and perfectly willing that I should
know it.  So now I was not at all surprised when, upon my entrance, she
came forward and, laying her hand upon my arm, said:

"Oh!  Mr Leigh, I cannot tell you how dreadfully sorry I am for what
has happened.  Momma is frightfully angry with you for what she is
pleased to term your violent and cowardly behaviour to Julius--they are
her words, please remember, not mine: but I think, indeed I am almost
certain, that upon reflection she will recognise that no man could stand
by and permit to pass, unreproved, such an outrage as that wretched boy
inflicted upon me.  The fact is--I can see it for myself now--we have
all combined together to spoil Julius, with the result that he has
become a thoroughly selfish, conceited, unfeeling, unmanageable boy; and
it is high time that somebody should intervene.  But that somebody must
not be you, Mr Leigh; you have no right to interfere, you know, and I
am sure that Momma would never tolerate anything of the kind from you.

"At the same time I feel impelled to say,"--and here her eyes sparkled
and an amused smile lighted up her face--"that I believe your
interference has done Julius good.  You frightened him, and I think he
will feel that henceforth he will have to behave a little more
circumspectly while you are around.  But I want you, please, to promise
me that you will not interfere with him again.  I will take up the
matter.  I will talk very seriously to Momma and see if I cannot open
her eyes to the very serious wrong and injury that we are all doing to
the boy by petting and pampering him, and humouring his every whim,
however outrageous it may be.  So you will give me your promise to be
very patient with him, won't you?  I know that he has been atrociously
rude and provocative to you, but--"

"Please say no more," I interrupted.  "I think I may safely promise you
that no rudeness or provocation on his part, levelled at me personally,
shall be allowed to move me in the slightest degree.  But if ever the
young monkey again dares to lift his hand against you in my presence,
I'll--I'll--"

"Yes, yes, I know; you needn't say it," she interrupted in turn, and
once more her eyes sparkled with merriment; "it will be something too
awful for words.  Well, I'll tell Julius what you say, and perhaps the
information may have a good effect upon him.  And now let us to
breakfast, for I see Lizette is in a perfect terror lest the coffee
should be allowed to go cold."

We sat down to breakfast opposite each other and chatted more merrily
and intimately together than we had ever done before.  But when the meal
was over we put merriment aside, for there was the approaching junk to
be thought of and provided for.  When we rose from the table I requested
Anthea to procure from her mother the keys of the magazine and bring
them to me, as I proposed to make every possible provision for the
defence of the wreck, should such unhappily prove to be necessary.  And
while she went to her mother for the required keys, I made my way up on
to the poop and took another look at the junk.

There she was, close-hauled on the port tack, and evidently working up
for the reef.  But she was a slow tub, and the breeze was still so light
that her sails barely remained "asleep" as she heaved and rolled
ponderously upon the long, low, Pacific swell.  I plainly saw that I
should have ample time for such preparations as it would be possible to
make for her reception.

I flung a look round the horizon and searched the sky for weather signs.
The sky was clear as a bell, of a deep, rich, ultramarine tint in the
zenith; shading off by imperceptible gradations to a soft, warm
colourlessness at the horizon.  There was not the slightest hint of haze
or cloud in the whole of the visible vault, and the breeze was a mere
warm breathing, with nothing to indicate that it might possibly freshen.
Would that it would fall calm before the junk could enter the lagoon!
In that case we should be able to judge of her friendliness or otherwise
by the number of boats which she would dispatch to us.  I went to the
flag locker, drew forth our Club ensign, and ran it up, reversed, to the
head of the ensign staff--which, for a wonder, had escaped the general
destruction--in the hope that this would evoke some sort of response
from the crew of the junk, to serve in some measure as a guide to me.  I
had just belayed the halyards when Anthea came to me with the keys.

She glanced from me to the flag and back again, questioningly, and I
explained.

"I see," she said.  "Very well; here are the keys, but I do hope it will
not be necessary to fight.  I remember the Malacca Straits affair, when
we had the entire crew to help us in defending the ship.  Do you think
that, situated as we now are, we should have any chance?"

"I don't see why not," I replied.  "Although we are a wreck we can still
show a rather formidable set of teeth,"--waving my hand toward the
main-deck guns--"to say nothing of the two Maxims, upon which I shall
principally pin my faith.  The only thing that we must guard against is
letting the rascals get too close before plainly declaring their
intentions.  But that should not be difficult."

"Supposing they are enemies, and should beat us, what do you think our
fate would be?" demanded the girl, coming close to me and laying her
hand upon my arm in the earnestness of her questioning.

I drew in my breath sharply at the mere suggestion.  "They must not be
allowed to beat us," I exclaimed harshly.  "Such a possibility will not
bear thinking of."

"Ah!  I understand.  So you think it might be as bad as that," returned
my companion; and I saw the colour ebb from her cheeks and lips, leaving
them white as marble, while her fingers closed like a vice upon my arm.
"But if you should be hurt," she continued, "what would happen then?"

"It _mustn't_ happen," I exclaimed; "it mustn't!  I must take
precautions of some sort to provide against such a possibility."

"Of course," she eagerly agreed.  "But, supposing that in spite of your
precautions you should be hurt--or killed,"--she shivered
violently--"what then?"

"I will tell you," I said, seizing both her hands in mine and crushing
them, I fear, in the passion of horror which her persistence conjured
up.  "I will give you, your mother, and the stewardesses a revolver
each, and if by evil chance that junk should prove to be an enemy, and
should get the upper hand of us, you must shoot yourselves, rather than
fall alive into the hands of the Chinamen!  Of course you need not take
such a desperate step until the very last moment, when it has become
evident that escape is impossible; but when that moment arrives--do you
think you will have the courage to do as I say?"

"Yes," she whispered hoarsely.  "I shall--and I will.  But--oh!  Walter,
I hope, I pray, that we may none of us be driven to that frightful
alternative.  Now I must leave you, for I want to have a good
heart-to-heart talk with Momma.  But I shall see you again before--
before--"

"Yes, yes," I said hurriedly, for I saw that the poor girl was becoming
a trifle overwrought, and I had an uncomfortable feeling that her
emotion carried something of a contagious character with it.  It was
necessary to get away from emotionalism and down to the commonplaces of
life once more, so I nodded smilingly at Anthea and ran briskly below,
jingling the keys in my hand as I went.

I had said that I should pin my faith principally to the Maxims, if it
came to a fight, and so I fully meant to do; at the same time, I by no
means overlooked the fact that a four-inch shell or two might prove very
convincing arguments, under certain conditions.  I therefore began my
preparations by conveying eight shells and a corresponding number of
cartridges up on deck and loading them into the eight main-deck guns
that still remained to us, after carefully sponging out the latter.
Next, I gave my attention to the Maxims, preparing them for action with
meticulous care, overhauling, cleaning, and oiling the mechanism of
them, satisfying myself that they were in perfect working order, placing
a belt of cartridges in position in each, and taking care to have an
abundant supply of relays in hand.  While doing all these things I kept
one eye pretty constantly upon the junk, in the hope that she would
respond to the display of our ensign by hoisting some sort of signal
which I might interpret as that of a friend coming to our rescue in
answer to our appeals for help.  But she showed no bunting beyond a
small whiff at her mainmast head, which meant nothing.

Having prepared our artillery, I next turned my attention to the subject
of magazine rifles, a dozen of which I brought up on deck.  These I
loaded and laid handy on the poop, near the Maxims, with a box of
cartridges, although I doubted whether, after all our other weapons had
played their part, there would be much opportunity to use them.  Finally
I produced and loaded six revolvers, two of which I thrust into the belt
of a cutlass girded round my waist, while the other four I designed for
the use of the women in the last dreadful resort.  The boy I did not
greatly trouble about, feeling pretty certain that he would look after
himself.

I had finished all my preparations, and was sitting on the poop rail,
intently scanning the slowly approaching junk through the ship's
telescope, and taking due note of such details and particulars as were
thus brought within my ken, when the slight rustle of feminine garments
at my side caused me to lower the glass.  Mrs Vansittart was standing
at my elbow.  She was still very pale, and her eyelids were swollen and
red with recent weeping, but she smiled wanly as she offered me her
hand.

"Walter," she said, and there was a tremor in her voice as she spoke,
while the blood surged up into her cheeks for a moment--"I want to
apologise.  I am afraid--"

"No, certainly not, dear lady!"  I cried, seizing her hand; "you must
not dream of such a thing.  On the contrary, it is for me to apologise
to you for my sudden and violent ebullition of temper; and I do, most
heartily.  I cannot imagine what it was that possessed me just then,
but--"

Her smile broadened and brightened a little as she raised her left hand
to silence me.

"You must let me speak, Walter--let me say what I want to say," she
resumed.  "Anthea has been talking to me, and she said things that have
opened my eyes to what I fear I must call my own folly.  She has made me
see that I have been altogether wrong in my attitude toward Julius.  She
has shown me that in the blindness and intensity of my affection for
him--he is my only son, you know, Walter--I have indulged him and
allowed him to have his own way in everything to such an extent that,
unless we are all very careful, he will be utterly spoiled, ruined, and
rendered totally unfit to go out into the world and take a worthy place
there when the time comes for him to do so.  There have been occasions
before to-day when I have been troubled by suspicions that something was
going wrong with the dear boy, that I was not doing my duty toward him
as a wise mother should, but it was not until within the last half-hour
that my eyes have been completely opened; and now I intend to adopt an
entirely different attitude toward him.  But the trouble is that I don't
know how to set about it.  How were you brought up, Walter?"

I could not avoid smiling at the naivete of this question, yet I could
also sympathise with the questioner.

"Well," said I, "naturally I loved my parents, and they as naturally
loved me, but they never allowed their affection to blind them to the
little childish faults and failings which, like all other children, I
suppose, I soon developed; and they diligently devoted themselves to the
task of checking these, so that in addition to loving my parents I was
soon taught to honour and obey them.  Then, when I was five years old, I
was sent to school, where, mixing with other boys, any especial conceit
of myself that I might have had was quickly nipped in the bud.  At
school, in addition to a fair, useful education, I was taught to
reverence and respect my seniors and superiors, to be obedient, to
submit to discipline, to be honest and truthful, to despise selfishness
and viciousness, to fear God and honour the king.  That, in brief, was
the way of my bringing up, Mrs Vansittart.  And although many of the
things that I learned had to be hammered into me with a cane wielded by
a willing and vigorous arm, I can truthfully assert that I am not a whit
the worse, but rather the better for it to-day."

My companion regarded me smilingly for some moments.  Then she said:

"So that is the story of how you came to be what you are!  Well, Walter,
I am compelled to admit that your parents were wiser than Mr Vansittart
and I have been.  But I am going to alter my methods now, and I can only
pray that it may not be too late.  You and I must talk further upon this
matter later on.  I think that perhaps you may be able to help me.  Now,
what about that junk?  You were looking at her through the glass when I
came up: have you been able to discover anything that would afford us a
clue to her character?"

"Not very much," I replied; "but I am bound to confess that what I have
seen is not altogether reassuring.  For instance, she has not responded
to the display of our ensign; and I believe that she would have done so
in one form or another if she were coming to our rescue, in answer to
our appeals for assistance.  Then, although I cannot see her decks very
well because of her high bulwarks, she appears to be carrying a good
many men--too many, I think, for an honest craft of her size.  I notice
also that she has a gun--an eighteen-pound smooth-bore, I judge, from
its appearance--mounted on her forecastle, while if you will look at her
through the glass, you will see three ports in her port bulwarks through
which protrude the muzzles of other cannon.  These look like
twelve-pounders; and I have not the slightest doubt that there are three
more of the same kind grinning through her starboard bulwark."

"Yes," replied Mrs Vansittart, peering through the telescope which I
had handed to her.  "I see the guns you mention, and I can catch through
the portholes glimpses of a number of men moving about the deck.  As you
say, there appears to be a good many of them; but do you really regard
that as a sinister sign?  Would not any vessel trading in these waters
carry a good strong crew, and guns for self-defence?"

"No doubt she would," I agreed; "and we can only hope that yonder junk
is such a craft.  We shall know for certain in about two hours from now;
in any case I am quite ready for her."

Mrs Vansittart looked round at my preparations and smiled.

"Yes," she assented, "your preparations certainly appear to be
reasonably complete.  You have done what you could, Walter, haven't you?
Well, I am going below, for the sun is terribly hot, and I must not get
a headache just now, if I can possibly avoid it.  Of course we shall all
come and help you, if there is any fighting to be done."

"Indeed," I exclaimed, "I beg that none of you will dream of doing
anything of the kind!  You would only be a source of anxiety and
embarrassment to me.  I would rather not have even Julius; for I could
not trust him.  He is not amenable to discipline, and it is quite on the
cards that at a critical moment he might take it into his head to do the
wrong thing, with disastrous consequences to us all."

"Very well, we shall see," was the smiling reply as my lady skipper
disappeared down the companion way.

Again I took up the telescope to resume my study of the junk, which I
continued to do for the next half-hour or more.  Then Master Julius made
his appearance on deck.  He came straight up to me, and as I looked at
him, expecting some fresh unpleasantness, I detected a new expression in
his eyes and on his features.  The look of sullenness and discontent had
disappeared, and he actually smiled as, looking me square in the eye, he
held out his hand and exclaimed:

"Say, Mr Leigh, let's be friends, shall we?"

"Sure, old chap!"  I replied, adopting an Americanism with which I had
become quite familiar, as I grasped his outstretched hand; "the very
best of friends, if you like.  Why shouldn't we be?  I am perfectly
willing, if you are."

"Then it's a deal," he answered, seating himself at my side on the poop
rail.  "Say!" he continued, "do you think we're going to have to fight
that junk?"

"It is impossible to say, as yet," I replied.  "I hope not; but if it
should be necessary, do you want to take a hand?"

"Bet your life I do!" exclaimed the boy.  "That's what I've come up to
talk about.  Momma says that you won't let me help because I'm not
amenable to discipline, and you're afraid that I won't do as I'm told.
If I promise you, on my word of honour as a gentleman, that I'll do
exactly as you tell me, will you let me come in?"

"Certainly I will, and be delighted to have your help," I replied.

"Then it's a deal," repeated the lad, again offering his hand.

I must confess that I was both puzzled and astounded at the sudden and
amazing change that had come over the boy; but the secret soon came out.
It appeared that both his mother and his sister had been talking to him
as it seemed he had never before been talked to in his life.  They had
told him a number of home truths in language that it seemed there was no
possibility of misunderstanding; and they had done all this so
convincingly that the dormant spirit of good that was in him had been
effectually awakened.  The withering scorn with which his sister had
commented upon his behaviour in general and the offensive and
contemptible traits of character that he had flaunted so flagrantly in
all our faces had scorched and shrivelled his boyish soul; the picture
of himself as others saw him was so repulsive that he had been
overwhelmed with shame and--better still--repentance, and, if he was to
be believed, had caused him to determine upon an altogether new line of
action for the future.

Scorn, contempt, contumely, dislike, are disagreeable things to swallow,
and now that his mother and sister had drawn aside the veil and allowed
him to get a glimpse of their real opinion of him, it was rather more
than he could bear.  His pride and self-respect had been grievously
hurt; he did not like to be despised and detested, so he was going now
to make everybody respect and admire him.  I had no very great faith in
this conversion, I must confess--it seemed altogether too sudden to be
genuine; but I was not going to say or do anything that might neutralise
any good that might have been done.  I listened with interest to all
that the boy had to say, and replied encouragingly and sympathetically;
and so the time passed until Lizette appeared to summon us to luncheon,
when the junk was still some two miles in the offing, and working in
very slowly.  There was no sign of any intention to hoist out boats, or
attempt to communicate with us in any way, so I knew that I should have
sufficient time to snatch a mouthful of food before the moment for
action should arrive, and I descended to the dining-room with an easy
mind.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

WE ARE ATTACKED BY CHINESE PIRATE WRECKERS.

We had finished luncheon, and were all on deck watching the junk, when,
about half-past two o'clock--she having by that time arrived within
about a mile of the lagoon entrance--we saw her heave to; and a minute
or two later it became evident that she was preparing to launch a boat,
or boats.  She was now close enough in for us to see, with the aid of
the telescope, pretty nearly everything that was happening aboard her,
and I was far from reassured when I noticed that the man upon the poop--
probably the junk's captain--who was directing operations, wore a
formidable-looking broad-bladed Chinese yatagan girded to his side,
while, when he faced in our direction once or twice, pointing, I felt
almost certain that I could detect one, if not a brace of pistols in his
belt.

Presently we saw a boat of very respectable dimensions rise above the
junk's bulwarks and slowly disappear over her lee rail; and this was
followed by a second, and a third of at least equal size.

"Three boats!"  I exclaimed.  "That settles it.  If she were here upon a
friendly mission she would not send in three boats to take off half a
dozen people.  She is a wrecker, and only too probably a pirate as well.
Her people know that there are survivors on this wreck--our flare
during the night and our ensign to-day will have told them that much--
but they do not know how many of us there are; so her skipper is sending
in enough men to make quite sure of us, as he believes.  And guns, too,
by George!"  I continued, as I saw an old-fashioned smooth-bore cannon
in slings top the rail.  "The rascals mean business, that is quite
evident; but so do I.  I am going below to bring up half a dozen more
shells; it is just possible that we may need them.  Meanwhile, madam,
will you kindly keep an eye on the junk while I am gone, and report to
me what you have _seen_ when I return?"

Thrusting the glass into Mrs Vansittart's hands, I hurried away to the
magazine and brought out six additional shells, with the necessary
cartridges, and, conveying them up on deck, placed them conveniently
near the guns of the port battery, which I now saw were the only
main-deck pieces that were at all likely to be of use to us.

Having at length completed my task, I rejoined the little group upon the
poop.  I saw that the boats had already pushed off from the junk, and
were pulling at a good pace toward the opening in the reef, while the
junk herself had filled away again, and was beating up in the same
direction.

"There are three boats, Walter, as you see," said Mrs Vansittart,
handing over the telescope to me; "and if you look at them carefully
through the glass you will also see that they are crowded with men--at
least twenty in each boat, I should say.  I dare say you will also
notice, as I did, the glint of the sun upon many weapons; and, unless I
am very greatly mistaken, each boat has a gun mounted in her bows.  I am
afraid there can be no possible doubt as to the intentions of those
men."

"No," I agreed, as I raised the telescope to my eye; "no doubt whatever.
They mean to wipe us out if they can, and then plunder the wreck.  But
they will not do that while I am alive and able to resist them.  Now," I
continued, "you two ladies have each a revolver, and so have the
stewardesses.  They are fully loaded; and I have already explained to
Miss Anthea why I have given them to you.  I most fervently hope that
there will be no need for you to use them in that way; but should there
be--and one never knows; I may be bowled over and killed, or rendered
helpless by a shot or a pike-thrust--I implore you not to hesitate too
long.  It would be infinitely better that you should die instantly and
painlessly by a well-directed pistol shot than that you should fall
alive into the hands of a crew of Chinese pirates."

The colour ebbed away from the cheeks of Mrs Vansittart and her
daughter as I uttered the concluding words, but I saw a look of firmness
and determination tightening about their lips while the elder lady said:

"Have no fear for us, Walter.  I hope, with you, that we may not be
driven to any such desperate step; but should we be, we both have
courage enough to take it, and so, I think, have the two maids."

"Thank you!"  I replied.  "It is a relief to me to hear you speak so
bravely.  But do not act, I pray you, until the very last moment--until
it has become clear beyond all question that everything is lost.  Now,
since those boats are within easy range, I will just give them a hint
that we want to have nothing to do with them, and that they had better
keep their distance."

I swung myself down off the poop on to the main-deck, and, running to
the forward gun of the port battery, which was the gun that could best
be brought to bear on the advancing boats at that moment, I levelled the
piece, aiming to strike the water at a point a few fathoms ahead of the
middle boat of the three--they were advancing in line abreast.  I
calculated that the shot would rebound and fly over the heads of her
crew close enough to frighten them a bit and make them think twice
before advancing any farther.  It was a rather difficult and risky
shot--risky for those in the boat, I mean--but I pulled it off
successfully.  The shell dashed up a great column of snow-white spray,
which completely hid the boat for a moment; and when this cleared away I
saw that all the boats' crews were holding water, evidently taken a good
deal by surprise, and apparently undecided what to do.

"Bravo, Walter; a beautiful shot!" exclaimed Mrs Vansittart, and I saw
her snatch up the telescope and peer through it.  She held it to her eye
for a full minute; then, without lowering the instrument, she cried:

"There is a man standing up in the stern-sheets of the middle boat
apparently haranguing the crews, for he is flourishing his arms about a
great deal.  Ah! he has stepped down again; and now--yes--the oarsmen
are giving way again.  The two outside boats look as though they were
turning back--no, they are only opening out into wider order, and are
coming on again.  Try them with another shot, Walter.  Perhaps if you
can hit one of those boats the others may be induced to go back."

"Ay, ay!"  I replied, with a flourish of my arm; and I carefully sponged
out and reloaded the piece.  But I did not now want the boats to return;
I wanted them to come on and be destroyed.  I was by this time convinced
that the matter must be fought out to the bitter end, and that we must
destroy that junk and the whole of her crew if we would not be ourselves
destroyed.  If the boats were driven back the vessel would hang about,
watching her opportunity, or possibly return some night during the dark
and take us unawares.  It was their lives or ours that hung in the
balance; therefore when I had reloaded the piece I ran my eye along the
sights, and was in the act of training them upon the middle boat, when
my attention was distracted for a moment by the distant boom of a gun.
Looking up, I saw that the junk had fired.  I knew by the ring of the
report that the gun was shotted, and presently I saw the shot come
skipping toward us just inside the reef; but it fell a good way short,
and I turned to my own gun again.

But now, when I wanted actually to hit the mark, I found that it was not
quite so easy as I had imagined.  To aim straight was easy enough, but
even where they were the boats presented but a small mark, and they were
constantly disappearing in the trough of the swell.  It was therefore
necessary for me to wait until my particular target reappeared before
firing, and although the next two shots went very near indeed they did
not actually hit.  Meanwhile the junk was firing rapidly, making short
tacks to keep as nearly abreast of us as might be, and her shot were
gradually dropping nearer to us.  Seeing this, I insisted that the
ladies at least should go below, as now a shot might at any moment come
aboard us.  Julius begged hard to be allowed to remain, and, his mother
raising no objection, I willingly consented, as there was no knowing
when I might be glad of his assistance.

The three boats were now so close to the passage through the reef that
they were obliged to alter their formation to "line ahead" in order to
pass through it; and it was at this moment that, with my fourth shot, I
caught the leading boat fair and square, and literally blew her to
pieces.  I thought that perhaps this might check the advance of the
remaining two boats; but not a bit of it.  They did not even pause to
pick up any of the survivors of the leading boat's crew--probably there
were no survivors--but came on with a blood-curdling yell that evoked a
faint shriek from, I thought, somewhere in the neighbourhood of the
companion.  Almost immediately afterward a round shot from the junk
struck the water at a little distance away, and then went humming
directly over my head, so close that I felt the wind of it.

At this juncture I became aware of the fact that the wind, what little
there was of it, was falling lighter; our ensign was drooping from its
staff all but dead, while the junk's sails were flapping with her every
roll, and the little curl of water about her bows had all but
disappeared.  This afforded me a grain of comfort, for she could not
draw very much nearer, though, to be sure, she was near enough already
if her gunners' eyes were but straight enough to hit us; my great hope
was that her heavy rolling would distract their aim, and so cause their
shot either to fall short of or to fly over us.  But I had no time to
meditate at length upon these chances; the two boats were drawing
dangerously near, and I must stop them by hook or by crook before they
actually got alongside.  I therefore quickly recharged my piece and
carefully pointed it at the inner end of the passage through the reef.
I had barely got this done to my satisfaction, when the leading boat
thrust her nose through.  Bang!  The four-inch barked out its greeting,
and a moment later that boat disappeared in flame and smoke, to my
intense relief.

Mentally I patted myself on the back.  "Now, surely," I thought, "that
remaining boat will turn tail, and I shall have a chance to wipe her out
on her way back to the junk!"  But no; on she came, her crew yelling
like demons, and churning the placid waters of the lagoon into foam with
their oars.  They sprang to their feet at each stroke, that they might
throw the whole weight of their bodies into it, while a man standing in
the stern-sheets frantically waved a most murderous-looking blade above
his head.  I jumped to the next gun--there was no time to reload now--
and hastily levelled it.  As I did so I saw a flash burst from her bows,
followed by a gust of smoke; the ball struck the waterway close by my
feet and hurtled past, sending a shower of splinters flying, and this
distracted my aim.  I missed, and the shot harmlessly struck the water
some distance astern of the boat, to be greeted by its occupants with a
yell of mingled triumph and derision.

Matters were becoming frightfully critical now.  Should I have time for
another shot, I wondered?  As the thought flashed through my brain a
rifle shot rang out from the poop, and, glancing that way, I saw the boy
Julius with a Remington repeater at his shoulder aiming at the rapidly
advancing boat.  And--what I had absolutely forgotten--I saw also the
Maxims standing there, ready for action!  To dash up on to the poop and
level the port Maxim at the enemy was the work of but a moment, and the
next instant the deadly little weapon was thudding away, pouring its
leaden stream fair into the boat.  At that range--a bare three hundred
yards--it was impossible to miss, and in a few seconds every occupant of
the boat was either dead or wounded; the oars trailed motionless in the
water, the boat lost her way, and in less than a minute it became
evident that the craft was sinking, literally riddled with that leaden
hail.

"Hurrah!"  I yelled.  "There goes the last of them, and, thank God, that
danger's over!  Now for the junk herself.  She must be settled, or there
will be no safety for us."

I made my way down to the main-deck again, very nearly tumbling head
over heels over Mrs Vansittart and her daughter, whom I found seated
upon the stairs of the companion way.  I paused just long enough to
explain the situation to them, and then rushed out on deck in time to
see the last boat, submerged to her gunwale, slowly roll over and go
down bows first, leaving a few forms feebly struggling on the surface.

The junk was by this time completely becalmed and had lost her way;
nevertheless she maintained a fairly steady fire upon us, and some of
her shot came so unpleasantly close that I thought it well to order
Julius down off the poop, where he could be of no further use.  I got to
work with the main-deck guns again, and, possibly because I could take
all the time I pleased over the aiming, did some very neat shooting.  I
fired six shells in all at the junk, every one of which but the first
went home--three of them close to her water-line.

They were destructive missiles, those shells, bursting as they hit and
blowing great holes in the junk's sides; and it soon became apparent
that the vessel was sinking rapidly.  I therefore ceased firing and went
up on to the poop to see the last of her.  But she died game, for her
crew maintained a steady fire upon us until she foundered, her last shot
being fired at the very moment when she was plunging stern first beneath
the waves.  And by an unlucky chance that last shot came slap aboard the
wreck, struck the teak poop rail within a foot of where I stood, and
scattered a number of splinters, one of which, a heavy one, caught me in
the side of the head, very nearly scalped me, and sent me reeling to the
deck senseless.

I recovered consciousness slowly, my first sensation being that the top
of my head seemed to be on fire.  Then I became aware that I was being
partially supported by somebody's knee behind my shoulders, and that my
head was being bathed.  Finally I opened my eyes, to find Mrs
Vansittart bending over me with a sponge in her hand, which she was just
withdrawing from a basin of bloodstained water, while the boy Julius
supported me in a semi-recumbent position as I lay on the deck.

"Ah, that is better!" exclaimed Mrs Vansittart, as she bent over me.
"He is coming to himself.  Lizette," raising her voice; "hurry with that
brandy.  Is your head very painful, Walter?"

"It feels as though it were being held much too close to a fierce fire,"
I replied, "and, in addition, it is aching most atrociously.  It is most
unfortunate that--"

"Yes, it is indeed, you poor boy!" replied Mrs Vansittart as I paused,
a feeling of deadly nausea sweeping over me.  "Ah," she continued, as
the chief stewardess appeared with a tumbler in her hand, "here is the
brandy!  Sip this, Walter; it will revive you.  And as soon as you are
able to move, we must get you below, and I must attend to your head and
dress it properly.  Then you must go to bed and endeavour to get some
sleep.  You have taken splendid care of us this morning, and now it will
be our turn to take care of you."

"Oh, thank you very much!"  I murmured; "but I hope this unlucky blow on
the head is not going to make me a nuisance to you.  As to turning in, I
simply cannot do it.  A careful watch must be maintained for several
hours yet, lest some of the men from that junk should swim to the wreck
and get aboard us.  Even so few as half a dozen able-bodied Chinamen
could make a lot of trouble for us just now."

"Yes," agreed Julius, "they could.  But I guess I'm not going to give
them the chance.  You'll just have to turn in, as Momma says, and leave
me to look after things.  And, see here, Mr Leigh, don't you worry
about anything.  I'll keep a look-out, and if any swimming Chinks come
meandering around here, I'll just give 'em socks, you bet!"

This was reassuring; for if the boy was willing to undertake the duty he
could quite easily keep a considerable number of swimmers at a distance
with the assistance of a Remington.  A few sips of brandy served to
restore my strength greatly; and presently, with the help of Mrs
Vansittart and Lizette, I was able to make my way below to the
drawing-room.  There I passed a particularly unpleasant three-quarters
of an hour while the lady skipper snipped most of my hair off and
afterwards coaxed the lacerated scalp back into place, securing it in
position with straps of sticking plaster and finishing off by a dressing
of healing ointment and bandages.

When all was done, the two stewardesses helped me to my own cabin; and
after they had left me I somehow managed to undress and get into my
bunk, which I was glad enough to do, for I was beginning to feel
distinctly ill.  I have a hazy recollection that after I had been in my
bunk a little while, Mrs Vansittart came to me and administered a dose
of medicine, which she told me was intended to make me sleep.  Then I
seemed to pass into a condition wherein I was the victim of a long
succession of hideous nightmares, during which I was either perpetually
battling with a thousand awful perils, or was lying helpless in the
hands of cruel and relentless savages, who were inflicting the most
dreadful torments upon me.

It was a close, muggy, and suffocatingly hot day when I at length
emerged from this condition of extreme mental and physical suffering.
My cabin port stood wide open close to my head, but not even the
faintest breath of air came through it.  Presently I became aware of a
sound which I quickly identified as that of a torrential downpour of
tropical rain lashing the surface of the sea outside and the deck above.
I stirred uneasily in my bunk, wondering vaguely how long I had lain
there, and strove to rise upon my elbow, that I might look through the
port.  But I might as well have striven to lift the deck over my head; I
seemed not to have an ounce of strength left in me, and I sank my head
back upon the pillow with a weary sigh.  As I did so I became aware of a
slight movement beside my bunk, and, turning my eyes in that direction,
I saw Miss Anthea in the act of rising to her feet from a chair
immediately beneath the port.  She had a book in her hand, which she
placed face down upon the top of the desk beside her as she rose to her
feet.  Then, coming to the side of the bunk, she bent over me and gazed
into my eyes.  Gradually a little smile of gratification illuminated her
somewhat pale and worn features and her eyes, which, I noticed, had a
very weary look, as though from prolonged sleeplessness.

Presently, as I smiled in answer, she spoke.

"You are feeling better, Wal--Mr Leigh?" she asked.  "Do you know me?"

"Assuredly, Miss Anthea," I answered.  "Why should I not know you?"  I
spoke with most disconcerting difficulty; my words halted, and my lips
seemed scarcely capable of forming them.

"Oh! but that is splendid," she exclaimed, straightening her body and
clasping her hands together after the manner of a girl who hears good
news.  "You are feeling better?" she persisted.

"Have I been ill, then?"  I stupidly asked.  Indeed my mind was at that
moment tenanted merely by a mass of most confused and incoherent
memories, of which I could make little or nothing.

"You have indeed," she replied; "dreadfully ill, raving in delirium, and
so violent that it is a miracle you did not do yourself or some of us a
serious injury.  But," she continued, stopping me as I attempted to
speak, "thank God, that is over now, I hope; and all that remains is for
you to take as much nourishment as you can, do as you are told, and get
well and strong again as quickly as possible.  I must run away and leave
you for a few minutes to tell Momma the good news, and arrange to have
some food prepared for you."

With a nod and a smile of encouragement she left the cabin, and a minute
or two later Mrs Vansittart entered it.  She stepped quickly up to the
side of my bunk, looked at me, and presently laid her slim, cool fingers
upon my pulse, holding them there for several seconds.

"Ah!" she commented, as she removed them at length, "I guess you are
oceans better than you were at this time yesterday.  The fever is gone,
and your skin is delightfully cool and moist; moreover, you are in your
right mind once more, and that is something gained.  I expect the wound
in your head is healing, although we haven't been able to look at it
properly for nearly a week.  But we will attend to it now, as soon as
you have taken a little food.  My stars, Walter, we have had a time with
you!  Lucky for us all that you have taken it into your head to become
sensible again, or I guess we'd all have been sick people in another day
or two.  Do you know how long you've been ill?"

"No," I answered; "but I am afraid that it has been much too long.  I
don't know where to find words in which to express my regret for--"

"Regret!" she repeated.  "Regret nothing!  You couldn't help it, my dear
boy.  You got hurt in defending us, and it was just our duty to look
after and nurse you as best we could; and that is all there is to it.
You have been ill ten whole days.  This is the eleventh morning since
the junk appeared.  During the best part of those ten days you have been
raving in delirium, with occasional outbreaks of violence, when it taxed
the energies of all five of us to the utmost to restrain you.  Oh, I
guess we have had some very lively times with you, Walter, off and on!
But, thank God! that is all over now and--Ah! here comes Lizette with
some broth for you.  We have been hoping for this change for the last
five or six hours, and have got all ready for it.

"Now, Lizette, I guess you've got to climb right up on to this chair,
seat yourself on the edge of the bunk, and support Mr Leigh in a
sitting posture while I feed him.  Take care that you don't hurt his
head.  So--that's right; lean back against the head of the bunk, and
rest his head against your shoulder.  Gently, girl, gently!  I reckon
the poor boy is aching all over with weakness.  There, that's all right!
Are you pretty comfortable, Walter?  Good!  Now then, all that you've
got to do is, just drink this broth right away, rest yourself for a
spell, and then I'll come along again and dress that wound on your
head."



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

THE GALE.

Another week elapsed before I could convince Mrs Vansittart that I was
strong enough to be permitted to rise from my bunk and sit in a chair
for a short time; but after that my recovery was rapid.  My wound healed
nicely, my strength returned, and five days later I was able to dress
and, with assistance, make my way up on to the main-deck, where Julius,
helped by the others--with a forethought for which I should certainly
never have given him credit--had rigged up a sort of makeshift awning
for my especial benefit.  I learned, with the utmost satisfaction, that
since the memorable morning of the junk's appearance the boy had behaved
with almost unbelievable goodness.  The talking-to which he had received
from his sister seemed to have awakened his better nature, and now they
assured me that--as indeed it seemed--he was everything that could be
desired.  Of one thing at least there could be no possible mistake: his
strange antipathy to me had entirely vanished, and he now seemed anxious
to be as friendly and agreeable as before he had been objectionable.

It was nearly six weeks after the appearance of the junk when at length
I felt strong enough to resume my boat-building operations, and even
then I was only able at first to do such comparatively light work as
shaping and planing planks.  Gradually, however, I got back again to the
heavier work which came from time to time when it was necessary to shift
the framework of the hull while working upon it.  Every day witnessed a
certain amount of progress, until at length the open shell was finished
and caulked.  Then by our combined efforts we placed the boat in
position ready for launching, bows first, off our sloping deck, since
she was now so heavy that no further lifting would be possible.  This
brought the time on to five months and a few days from the date of the
wreck, during the whole of which period we had been favoured with
glorious weather, except for a few days of calms, accompanied by heavy
rain, about the time when I was emerging from my state of delirium.

But a few days after we had completed the shell of the boat, and while I
was preparing the planking with which to lay her deck, there occurred
signs of a change.  The wind, which usually blew a moderate breeze from
the eastward, died away to a calm, and the sky became veiled by a thin
film of haze that gradually thickened until the sun was completely
blotted out.  The atmosphere grew almost unbearably sultry, so that we
seemed to breathe only with the utmost difficulty, while work, even the
lightest, became almost impossible.  The barometer fell so rapidly that
even the veriest tyro in weather lore could not have mistaken the signs;
and that night, or rather in the small hours of morning, a thunderstorm
broke over us, the like of which for violence and duration I had never
seen.

It started dry, and for four hours the heavens were incessantly ablaze
with lightnings, the vividness and alarming character of which it is
quite impossible to describe, while the continuous crash of thunder,
immediately overhead as it seemed, was terrific, causing the very wreck
herself to tremble with its vibrations.  As I left my cabin and went up
on deck to watch it, I felt that sooner or later the wreck must
inevitably be struck; and indeed I frequently thought she actually had
been, for the lightning seemed to be playing all about her.  But I
suppose she escaped somehow; or at least, if she was struck, no apparent
damage was done.

Then, about the time when daylight was beginning to make itself
apparent, it suddenly began to rain, the warm fresh water from the
clouds pelting down in a perfect deluge and totally obscuring everything
beyond a hundred yards' radius.  The water poured off the decks in
cataracts, while from the poop it gushed through a scupper which
discharged on to the main-deck as though flowing from the spout of a
pump.  In ten minutes the decks were as effectually cleansed as though
they had been scrubbed with soap and water.  Thinking it a pity that so
much delicious fresh water should be permitted to run to waste, I went
below and brought up several small breakers and proceeded to fill them,
one after the other, until I had the lot, numbering about twenty,
brimming full.  And all this time the thunderstorm continued to rage
with unabated fury.

The filling of the breakers during the continuance of that terrific
deluge naturally resulted in my getting wet through to the skin.  Upon
the completion of my task, therefore, I retired to my cabin and effected
a complete change of garments; and I had barely finished my toilet when
I heard the sound of the gong summoning the party to breakfast.

While I was discarding my drenched garments and donning dry ones, I
became aware of the fact that the thunderstorm was at last easing up a
little.  The lightning flashes were no longer a continuous blaze; the
thunder no longer was one continuous, uninterrupted crash and crackle
and boom, like the firing of two enormous fleets engaged in fighting a
fiercely-contested action, but each peal was separate and distinct, with
momentarily increasing intervals between the peals.  Thus when we
presently met and sat down to breakfast, conversation of a sort was
possible, although by no means easy.  The topic of the moment was of
course the storm, and I was not at all surprised to learn that the
entire party had been thoroughly terrified, and were by no means
reassured even now, when if was indisputable that the storm was passing.

We were all rather inclined to be silent at that meal.  Mrs Vansittart
and her daughter both confessed to the possession of distracting
headaches, the result, no doubt, of their terror, and even Julius was in
a distinctly subdued mood; nobody but myself ate at all heartily, and I
think they were all glad when I laid down my knife and fork and made it
possible for them to rise from the table.  The ladies and Julius
announced their intention to retire to their respective cabins in the
hope of obtaining relief in slumber; and as work on deck was quite out
of the question so long as the rain continued, I decided to follow their
example, having myself lost some hours of sleep.  I accordingly carried
out my resolution, and soon sank into a condition of semi-oblivion,
during which I was only partially conscious of the fact that, although
the rain was still sluicing in torrents, the thunder and lightning had
dwindled away to a few distant rumblings and occasional flashes.
Finally this consciousness also passed and I fell sound asleep.

When I awoke rather more than an hour later, I at once became aware that
both the rain and the thunder had entirely ceased.  It was still so dark
that until I referred to my watch I had the impression that I must have
overslept myself, and that the night was coming on.  Then I flung open
the port of my cabin, which had been closed to exclude the rain, and,
poking my head out, saw that the sky was still overcast with enormous
masses of blackish, lurid-looking cloud which, as I watched, I saw were
working slowly in a strange writhing fashion, as though agitated by
several conflicting internal forces.

I went up on deck, and observed that the overcast condition of the sky,
of which I had obtained a partial view from my cabin port, extended in
every direction, right down to the horizon.  A visit to the chart-house
revealed the fact that the barometer still stood alarmingly low; and it
was this fact, perhaps, in conjunction with the disquieting aspect of
the sky, that subconsciously awakened in me a sudden anxiety to hasten
my work upon the craft which, for want of a better name, I have spoken
of as a boat.

Be that as it may, I remember that I flung off the light jacket which,
for appearance' sake, I wore at meal times and when otherwise in the
company of the ladies, and set to work as though my very life depended
upon it.  As I have already mentioned, the shell of the boat was
finished, caulked, and placed in position ready for launching; and in
addition to this the beams upon which the deck was to be laid were
fitted and fixed, and the planking planed up and roughly cut to shape.
My next task, therefore, was to complete the fitting of the planks and
the nailing of them in position, which I at once proceeded to do, with
the fixed determination to finish the job before dark.  This
determination I carried out, although it necessitated my working for an
hour by lantern light; and when at length I knocked off, I had the
satisfaction of leaving the boat completely decked with the exception of
the cockpit, the coaming of which I also insisted on fixing before I
could persuade myself to lay down my tools.

The day had been one of lowering, breathless calm, with an insufferably
close atmosphere that rendered hard work exceedingly trying, and the
black, working canopy of cloud that overhung us continued to writhe and
twist itself into the most extraordinary shapes, while it showed no sign
of dispersing.  This state of affairs continued until about four o'clock
in the afternoon, when a light, puffy, southerly breeze sprang up which
gradually freshened until, when at length I ceased work for the day, it
was blowing quite gustily, while a sea came rolling in over the reef
that soon caused the wreck occasionally to rock lightly upon her coral
bed.

I was very tired after my strenuous labours that day; moreover, I had
not yet fully recovered the strength that I had lost during my illness;
therefore, under ordinary circumstances, I should have gone to my cabin
and turned in soon after dinner.  But as it was, I felt uneasy.  I did
not at all like the look of the weather; I felt convinced that we were
booked for a blow, possibly a heavy one; and a further reference to the
barometer fully confirmed me in that conviction.  If my foreboding
should prove to be correct, what would be the probable result?  Should
the wreck but remain where she was, we would no doubt be all right, and
nothing worse would befall us than possibly an unpleasant and anxious
night.  But if she did not, what then?  She would gradually bump her way
over the few yards of the inner edge of the reef and then reach the
lagoon, in which she would probably founder, unless, indeed, she
remained afloat long enough to drive across it and fetch up again on the
opposite reef.

That was a possibility that I had long since recognised; but now, as I
looked out into the night and dimly saw the breakers thundering in upon
the outer end of the reef, shattering themselves into a wall of
madly-leaping water thirty feet high, and then continuing their course
across the reef in the form of foam-flecked waves, the power of which
was rapidly dissipated as they swept inward toward the wreck, I began to
doubt whether the _Stella Maris_ would ever again shift her berth.  It
is true that those waves, as they swirled and foamed about her, had
power enough to cause the hull to rock a little now and again; but as to
lifting her bodily and throwing her into the lagoon--well, I thought it
unlikely.  I reflected that when, in the first instance, she piled
herself up, there was a strong breeze blowing and a heavy sea running,
and that she had hit the reef stem-on under a heavy press of sail; yet
she had not then been flung right across the reef.  The seas had brought
her so far, and then their power had failed to move her an inch farther.
Why should not that be the case now?

There was something comforting, almost reassuring, about this line of
argument; yet at the back of my mind there was another something that
seemed to tell me I must not take my data too much for granted--that
there was another possibility of which I must not permit myself quite to
lose sight.  I therefore set myself to answer the question, in the event
of that other possibility happening, How were we to meet it?  There was
but one answer--with the boat; and unfinished and destitute of equipment
as she was, we should undoubtedly be obliged to trust ourselves to her
if the worst came to the worst.

This point settled, the next question I asked myself was: What should we
require to take with us, supposing that it should come to our being
obliged to take to the boat in a hurry--that night, in fact?  Provisions
and water, of course, in such abundance as the boat's capacity would
permit; a pair of oars, a coil of line, a baler, a bucket, a few tools;
say, half a dozen rifles, and a good supply of ammunition for same.  But
why tools?  I may be asked.  Because if once we were compelled to trust
ourselves to a boat without mast or sails, we should be compelled to go
practically wherever the wind chose to drive us, and that might be to an
uninhabited island, where tools would be worth their weight in gold.

The carpenter's chest stood on the deck close by the boat--I had been
using the tools only a few hours earlier--and the thought came to me
that they might as well be in as out of her.  I therefore emptied the
chest, since it was too heavy for me to lift full, and, having decided
upon the most suitable spot for it, I stowed it inside the boat, and
then proceeded carefully to replace its contents.  This done, I hunted
up a pair of twelve-foot oars and put them aboard; found a pair of
rowlocks, and then, remembering that I had as yet made no provision for
shipping them, proceeded to cut out a good stout pair of cleats, which I
firmly secured to the gunwale of the boat.  There was plenty of rope
lying about the deck, neatly done up in coils--the salvage of the
running gear; and from this I selected the mizen topgallant halyard as
of suitable size, putting it into the boat, unstopping it, and bending
one end to a hole in the stem head which I bored for the purpose.

Having gone so far, I decided that I would complete my preparations, so
that in the event of our being driven to the last extremity, we might be
ready.  I considered a little as to what I would next put into the boat,
and fixed upon a case of ammunition, which I would stow alongside the
carpenter's chest, it being desirable, in order to secure stability,
that the heaviest articles should be at the bottom.  Accordingly I dived
below to the magazine.  Now, our Remington-rifle cartridges were done up
in small tin boxes of one hundred each, sealed up in air-tight tin
cases, which were in turn stowed in stout wooden chests each containing
one hundred tins; consequently each chest contained ten thousand rounds.
This was a large quantity, yet not too large, I decided, considering
the uncertainties of our position; I therefore emptied a case--which,
apart from its contents, was fairly heavy to drag up on deck--carried it
up to the boat, stowed it in position, and then returned for the small
tin cases.

The transport and stowage of these occupied some time, involving several
journeys up and down between the deck and the magazine, and when I had
finished this job I was distinctly tired.  Nevertheless I brought up six
Remingtons, a cutlass, a brace of automatic pistols, and a box of
cartridges for the latter, and stowed them all in the boat before
knocking off for a rest.  The work had given me an appetite, and since
it was now close upon midnight, I went below and routed out a good
substantial cold meal, which I consumed while I rested.  Then--why
attempt to conceal the truth?--overcome, I suppose, by my unusual and
protracted exertions, I fell asleep as I sat.

I remember that as I slept I dreamed that we were away back there at the
entrance to the Straits of Malacca, where we lost the blades of our
propeller.  I felt again the shock of our collision with the supposed
wreckage to which we attributed the loss, and the start I gave awoke me.
I instantly became aware that it was blowing heavily, for the howl and
whoop of the gale came distinctly to my ears; also the wreck was rolling
heavily from side to side, and for a moment I thought she was afloat,
until her harsh grinding upon the coral reached me above the tumultuous
crying of the wind.  I staggered to my feet, for I realised that matters
were becoming serious.  At that instant I felt the hull lift as the
wreck heeled over, and come down again with a jar that all but jolted me
off my feet; also, unless I was greatly mistaken, I caught, among the
other sounds, the thud of water falling heavily on deck.

I made a spring for the ladder, and in a couple of seconds was out on
deck, to find myself in the midst of a living gale.  Coming up out of a
lighted room, I found the night intensely dark; yet as I stood there by
the open hatchway, clinging to the main fife-rail, I presently became
dimly aware of my more immediate surroundings.  As it chanced, it was
about the time of full moon, and although the planet herself was
completely hidden by the dense masses of cloud that drove wildly athwart
the firmament, her light filtered through.  Presently I was able to see
as far as the outer edge of the reef, where the surf, brilliantly
phosphorescent, plunged madly down upon it and burst into leaping
fountains of spray that came driving over the wreck like heavy rain,
though I knew it was not rain by the bitter, salt taste of it on my
lips.  The surface of the water all round the wreck and on either hand--
in fact, over the whole of the weather portion of the reef--was a mass
of swirling, phosphorescent foam, which rose and fell as the rollers
came sweeping across the reef.  It was these rollers that were causing
the ship to roll on her bed of coral, while occasionally one heavier
than the others would lift her bodily, break furiously over her, and
shift her a foot or more toward the inner edge of the reef, as I judged
by the feel of her, before it dashed her down again.

Instinctively my glances flew to where the boat should lie.  Yes, thank
God! she was still where I had left her, held down mainly, I believed,
by the weight of the things that I had put in her, for when a sea broke
over the deck the water surged past her to leeward with quite weight
enough to wash her off had she been empty.  I rushed at her, snatched
the rope which I had bent to her stem head, led it across the deck to
the stump of a stanchion, and made it fast with a clove hitch, thus
ensuring that the boat should not be washed off the deck so long as the
rope held.  Then I stood for a minute or two, looking about me and
taking careful note of all the details of the situation.

It was in all essentials the complete realisation of the fear which had
haunted me ever since the wreck, and which, but a short time before, I
had been inclined to deride as highly improbable--the gale, the heavy
sea sweeping in across the reef, and the only question whether the wreck
would be battered to pieces where she lay or be washed off to founder in
the deeper water of the lagoon.  A heavier sea than any that had
preceded it, surging in at that moment and making a clean breach over
the wreck, washed me off my feet, and would have swept me overboard had
I not chanced to have in my hand the rope by which I had secured the
boat.  It lifted the wreck, slued her nearly half round, and swept her a
good fathom nearer that danger point, the inner edge of the reef; and I
began to realise that the peril was imminent, and momentarily growing
more so, and that immediate action was necessary.

Without pausing to consider further, I rushed below and hammered at the
cabin doors of Anthea and Julius, which were contiguous; and upon
receiving a reply, shouted to them to dress at once and join me with all
speed in the drawing-room.  Then I sped to the stewardesses' quarters,
roused them, and finally made my way to Mrs Vansittart's cabin, where I
met the lady, fully dressed, just emerging.

She must have read in my countenance that there was trouble ahead, for
she came forward at once with outstretched hands, exclaiming:

"What is it, Walter?  Does this dreadful gale mean danger to us?"

"It does indeed, madam, I greatly fear," I replied; and I proceeded to
explain the situation rapidly to her.  While I was doing so, Anthea and
her brother made their appearance.

Naturally, they were all greatly discomposed at my statement of the
imminence of our danger, but never for a moment did they flinch.  On the
contrary, the women appeared to be a good deal more calm and composed
than I was.  They asked what they were to do, and when I told them, set
to work quietly but expeditiously collecting a quantity of food of
various kinds in tins, being assisted in this by the two stewardesses,
who now came upon the scene.

Meanwhile, the wreck had been bumping more and more heavily as we stood
and hurriedly conversed; sea after sea had broken over her, with
ever-increasing violence, and I was now in a very fever of anxiety
touching the safety of the boat.  As soon, therefore, as I had started
my little crew to work, I rushed out on deck again, to see how matters
were going there.

I was no sooner in the open than I perceived that, even during my short
absence from the deck, the conditions had changed very materially for
the worse.  The wind was now blowing with hurricane force, and evidently
piling up the water on the reef, for the seas that now swept across it
were momentarily gaining in power and weight, almost every one that
reached the wreck lifting her bodily and shifting her a fathom or so,
ever in the fatal direction of the edge of the reef.  But the worst
feature of the case, after all, was that, while shifting the wreck, the
seas had canted her, so that she now lay fair and square broadside on to
them, and every one that struck her made a clean breach over her, and
threatened either to destroy or to sweep away our boat.  This, even as I
stood, was lifted, and would have been washed away but for the restraint
of the rope by which I had secured her.  I could see plainly, however,
that the rope would not bear the strain much longer than a few minutes,
or perhaps even seconds, and that if we should lose the boat our doom
would be sealed.  I therefore rushed back to the drawing-room, called
the little party together, bade them take as much as they could carry,
and, watching their chance, make a dash for the boat.  I set the example
by gathering in my arms as many tins and bottles as my hands and arms
would hold, rushed out on deck, just missed being washed overboard, and
hurriedly tumbled my load into the cockpit anyhow.  Then I suddenly
remembered that as yet there was no water in the boat, and I dashed aft
to where I had left the water breakers which I had filled with rain
water, passing the other members of the party on my way.

"Do not attempt to return for another load," I shouted to them as I
passed; "get into the boat and stow yourselves under her deck; your
weight will be more useful there than anywhere else.  I will attend to
the rest."  Seizing one of the breakers, I proceeded to roll it quickly
along the deck until, after a hazardous and adventurous journey, I
arrived at the boat, into which, with Julius's assistance, I lifted it.
We both got into the cockpit to stow the breaker securely--the women
having already entered and stowed themselves away--when, just as matters
were satisfactorily arranged and I was in the very act of leaving the
boat to secure another armful of provisions, a tremendous sea struck the
wreck, heeling her over until her starboard waterway was buried.  The
breaking sea swept the deck like a cataract, lifting the boat clean off
it, just as I sprang back into the cockpit; there was a little jerk and
a twang as the rope parted, and in an instant we were afloat and driving
rapidly away to leeward across the lagoon.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

WE ARE COMPELLED TO LEAVE THE REEF.

For perhaps half a dozen seconds I stood there motionless in the cockpit
of the dancing boat, paralysed with dismay.  There we were, six people,
adrift in a contraption of a craft that I could not even be sure was
water-tight, and about the behaviour of which I was absolutely ignorant.
We were without mast or sail, and had only a small quantity of
provisions and about fourteen gallons of water, to furnish us with food
and drink for Heaven alone knew how long!

Recognising the vital necessity for instant action, however, I groped
for an oar, found it, and threw it out over the lee quarter of the boat,
at the same time staring into the darkness in an endeavour to locate the
sandbank.  That, now, was our only hope, for to drive out to sea in such
a craft as ours on such a night as that simply meant our speedy
destruction.  The boat, low as she sat on the water, without even so
much as a naked mast for the wind to act upon, was skimming along at a
surprising speed, and would soon be in the open ocean unless I could
find the sandbank and secure her to it.

I thought for a moment of the bearings of the bank in relation to the
position of the ship and the direction of the wind, and then, having
decided this point, I brought the boat to the wind on the starboard
tack, so to speak, found that she answered her helm better than I had
dared to hope, forging ahead with the pressure of the wind on her
weather side, and some ten minutes later had the satisfaction of feeling
her ground and bring up dead upon something that could be none other
than the bank which I was so anxious to reach.  But the moment that she
grounded, the waves, although they were not very much more than mere
ripples here, began to slop in over her weather side.  That, I knew,
would never do, for if it did nothing worse it would at least interfere
with the comfort of my passengers.  Therefore, since I was already wet
through to the skin, I nipped over the side into knee-deep water, put my
shoulder under the boat's slanting bow, shoved her afloat again and,
with the broken painter in my hand, waded along the margin of the bank,
towing the boat after me, until presently I had worked her round to the
lee side of the bank.  For a few yards' breadth the water here was
perfectly smooth, and I grounded her afresh, dragging her up as high as
I could on the bank and anchoring her by her painter to an oar thrust as
deep into the sand as I could force it.  I clambered back into the boat,
thrust my head in under the deck, and shouted:

"Are you all here?"

"Yes; we are all here, and quite safe--so far," answered Mrs
Vansittart.  "But what has happened, Walter?  We have been washed off
the wreck, have we not?"

"Yes," I replied, "and are now grounded on the lee margin of the
sandbank, where I believe we are reasonably safe, provided that we don't
strike adrift--and I think there is not much fear of that.  We must
remain here for the rest of the night, and indeed until the gale
subsides; then, if the wreck is still above water, we will return to her
and complete the equipment of this boat and our preparations for a
voyage."

"You say, `if the wreck is still above water'.  Is there any possibility
that she may not be?" demanded Mrs Vansittart.

"I very greatly fear so," I said.  "When we involuntarily left her she
was being steadily driven ever nearer to the edge of the reef; and if
she passes that point I believe she will sink like a stone.  Still,
there is no use in anticipating the worst.  I would recommend you to
compose yourselves to sleep, if you can, until daylight; then we shall
know for certain exactly how we stand.  By the way, is the boat leaking
at all?"

For a few seconds there was no reply; Mrs Vansittart was evidently
feeling round for indications of a leak.  Presently she spoke.

"There has been a little water here, Walter," she replied, "but I
believe it all came in through the cockpit, in the form of spray, and
now no doubt it has all run aft with the tilt of the boat.  There is
nothing worse now than a little damp."

"I am sorry," I said; "but I am afraid you will have to make the best of
things as they are.  Luckily it is anything but cold, and if you can but
get to sleep you will soon forget your discomforts.  I will keep a
look-out."

So saying I backed out from under the deck, and in the first place
proceeded to search for the water complained of.  I found it right aft,
as Mrs Vansittart had suggested, and in order to test the tightness of
the boat I baled it all out, or at least as much of it as could be got
rid of with the baler, leaving no more than perhaps half a tumblerful.
Then, wading ashore, I sat down on the sand, with my back against the
upright oar to which the boat was moored, and began to review the
situation.  Five minutes later, despite my soaked clothing and my
general state of discomfort, I was fast asleep.

When I awoke, the sun was just showing on the eastern horizon.  The sky
was clear, save for a few tattered fragments of ragged-looking scud that
speedily disappeared, the wind had died down to a piping, topsail
breeze, and the sea-birds, which had evidently been driven out to sea by
the gale, were wearily winging their way back to the sandbank, filling
the brisk, clean morning air with their mournful cries.  I looked for
the wreck, but the reef was bare.  She had vanished, leaving not a trace
behind her, save a few planks remaining of the stock from which I had
built the boat; these, upon looking more carefully about me, I saw
floating in a little bunch near the middle of the lagoon.  My clothes
had dried upon me during my sleep, and I was feeling just a trifle
chilled, but the air was already warming up, and a brisk walk along the
edge of the water and back again soon restored my circulation.

I climbed aboard the boat and, barefooted, padded softly along the deck
until I reached the cockpit, into which I dropped softly; then, peering
in under the deck, I looked to see whether any of the occupants were
stirring.  They all appeared to be asleep except the boy, who, as soon
as my eyes became accustomed to the obscurity, I saw was sitting up,
rubbing his eyes and yawning.  He presently saw me and was evidently
about to speak, but I silenced him with a gesture, and beckoned him to
come to me in the cockpit.  He obeyed, and when he was standing beside
me, staring round him in wonderment, I pointed out the floating planks
to him and said:

"It has just occurred to me, Julius, that one of those planks, or
rather, a small portion of one of them, will be exceedingly useful to
us.  I am therefore going to swim off and fetch one; and I want you to
stand here and keep watch while I am gone.  If anyone wakes and wants to
come out from below, just tell them that I am having a swim, and that I
shall be much obliged if they will stay below until I return and am
dressed.  My clothes are dry now, and I don't want to wet them again, so
I shall strip.  You understand?"

"Sure!  I get you all right," answered the lad.  "I won't let any of
them out until you are ready to be seen again.  Better `git' as quickly
as you can, hadn't you?"

I nodded, and, springing up on the deck, quickly threw off my clothes,
spread them in the sun so that any lingering moisture might be dried out
of them during my absence, and, dropping lightly to the sand, dashed
into the water and struck out.  I was gone about half an hour, and it
was not until I was returning with my captured plank that the thought of
possible sharks occurred to me.  However, I saw none, and got safely
back to the bank, where, having hauled up my plank, I at once proceeded
to dress in my now thoroughly dry clothes.  The swim had greatly
refreshed me and I felt in excellent form for a good hearty breakfast.
But alas!  I remembered our slender stock of provisions, and stifled my
longings as best I could.

Presently the women folk emerged, one after the other, and, standing in
the cockpit, looked about them in something approaching amazement at the
change which the passage of a few hours had effected.  When they entered
the boat about midnight, a black hurricane was raging; and now it was a
brilliantly beautiful morning.  But Mrs Vansittart was greatly
concerned on account of the disappearance of the wreck.  She realised as
clearly as I did all that it involved; and leaping down upon the sand
with my assistance, she walked with me to the highest point of the bank,
and intently surveyed the aspect of the sea.  The question which we had
to decide was whether or not it was yet safe for us to put to sea.  Had
we been provided with a mast and sails, I would not have hesitated a
moment; indeed the breeze, if a trifle fresh, would have swept us along
at a merry pace and soon brought land of some sort into our ken.  But in
our present condition the risk of being overrun and swamped was as yet
too great.  It was, however, of vital importance that we should make a
start at the earliest possible moment, for our stock of food and water
was exceedingly meagre, though it would have to suffice until we were
either picked up or could reach a more kindly shore than the sandbank.

But in any case we could not make a start for at least half an hour, for
my experience of the previous night, during our brief passage from the
wreck to the sandbank, had shown me that, in the absence of a rudder--
which I had not yet made--provision for a steering oar was an absolute
necessity.  Hence my anxiety, a little earlier, to secure one of the
floating planks.

We were by this time all eager for breakfast, therefore before doing
anything else we took careful account of our stock of food and water,
and estimated that, with care, it might be made to last us all a week.
This was better than I had dared to hope; for it would be strange indeed
if in the course of a week we did not fall in with a craft of some sort,
or reach solid earth which would afford us at least the means of
sustaining life.  We measured out an allowance of food sufficient to
serve for one meal in accordance with the scale agreed upon, and quickly
disposed of it.  Upon opening the water breaker, however, I was vexed to
find that it was not full to the bung-hole, as I had confidently
expected to find it.  On the contrary, there was quite a gallon short,
which I supposed must have been lost while rolling it along the wreck's
deck the previous night.  That missing gallon or so we should have to
make up by slightly curtailing each person's allowance, unless indeed we
were blessed with a shower or two of rain during our voyage.

Having quickly disposed of my rather meagre breakfast, I got out the
tool chest, and, using the plank which I had retrieved, made a cleat for
the reception of a rowlock.  This I firmly fixed to the boat's transom,
so that, when necessary, we could use one of the oars to steer with; or
for sculling purposes.  The job occupied me for the best part of an
hour; and when it was finished I suggested that, since we were doing no
good where we were, it might be worth our while to take a cruise about
the lagoon and see whether we could find any flotsam from the wreck that
would be of any value to us.  This we did, but we found nothing except a
few planks, half a dozen of which we hauled in and laid on the boat's
deck to dry, upon the off-chance of their eventually proving useful to
us.

Then we made our way to the spot where we thought the wreck had sunk,
and eventually found her submerged within about forty fathoms of the
inner edge of the reef, showing that she must have gone down almost
immediately after being washed clear.  There was about a fathom and a
half of water over her poop, and as we gazed down upon the craft,
clearly visible through the crystal waters of the lagoon, poor Mrs
Vansittart shed a few pardonable tears over the grave of the ship of
which she had been so proud, and which she had loved so well.

We were agreeably surprised to find that our so-called boat, bulky and
clumsy as she looked to the eye, proved quite easy to propel with a pair
of oars handled by Julius and myself--except, indeed, when we tried to
force her to windward.  Then she became decidedly heavy and sluggish in
her movements, which showed us that it would be hopeless to dream of
shaping a course other than to leeward, or at best with the wind abeam.
The wind was, at the moment, blowing briskly from the southward, which
was a fair wind for the Caroline group, in one of which--if we could
only manage to hit the right one--we might hope to meet with hospitality
at least, if not the actual means to return to civilisation.  After some
discussion, therefore, we determined, as the wind seemed inclined to
moderate a little, to risk a start without further delay, since, if our
boat was to be of any real service to us, she ought to be able to live
in such a sea as was now running outside.

It was about eleven o'clock in the morning when we reached the open sea;
and the first discovery which we made with regard to our boat was that,
thanks to her double keel, she would forge ahead with the wind anywhere
at all abaft the beam--not at any great speed, certainly, with the wind
only about one point free, but still fast enough to enable us to control
her with a steering oar.  When we bore up before the wind, she moved
under the impetus of the breeze almost as fast as we had been able to
row her in the lagoon.  Our second discovery with regard to her was no
less pleasing.  Owing to the peculiar shape of her floor, which, it will
be remembered, sloped up fore and aft somewhat after the fashion of that
of a fishing punt, she rode the seas with extraordinary buoyancy, and as
dry as a bone.

Being without either chart or compass, we could not, of course, steer
any definite course, and therefore kept our craft dead before the wind
and sea.  Julius and I each wielded an oar until the boy was tired, when
Susie, the second stewardess, who was a fine, strong, strapping girl,
took a spell, and soon picked up the trick of rowing.  When she was
tired, Lizette, the chief stewardess, must needs try her hand; but she
proved much less adaptable than her assistant, and did little more than
blister her hands.  Julius then took another spell, and by the time he
was tired I was tired too.  We therefore gave up rowing for a bit, and
Mrs Vansittart undertook to steer the boat by means of an oar over the
stern.  By this time we had dropped the reef out of sight astern, and
were beginning to realise fully that we were veritable castaways--a fact
which I think had never hitherto quite come home to any of us.

The thing that worried me most was the absence of sail on the boat.  Now
that we had definitely and irretrievably embarked ourselves and our
fortunes in her, I wanted to get over the ground at a good pace instead
of drifting snail-like before wind and sea; and I set myself to consider
whether, with the materials at my command, I could not rig up something
that would serve the purpose of a mast and sail.  I had the best part of
a coil of good useful line in the boat, half a dozen three-by-nine-inch
planks, each of which was twelve feet in length--and that was all,
excepting of course that priceless treasure, the carpenter's chest.

As I stood looking contemplatively at the planks it occurred to me that
three of them, say, placed edge to edge, and reared upright on the
boat's deck, would catch quite an appreciable amount of wind, and no
sooner had the idea suggested itself to me than I got to work.  My first
act was to take one of the planks and saw off an end two feet six inches
in length.  This piece I next sawed into six equal strips, or battens, a
task which occupied me much longer than I had anticipated, chiefly on
account of the limited space in which I was obliged to work, and because
I had nothing but the boat's gunwale to steady the plank against.  But I
got my six battens at last, and four of them I nailed at equal intervals
of about two feet three inches across three planks laid close together
side by side, while I nailed a fifth athwartships on the deck at the
point where I intended to rear my planks.  The length of the battens
being three inches more than the combined width of the three planks, the
projecting ends of the top batten afforded me a very convenient shoulder
for the support of my shrouds and stay, which I cut from my coil of
line.

Having got these all fixed and seized, I reared my structure on end
against the deck batten, with the assistance of Julius and the two
stewardesses, set up the shrouds and stay, nailed another batten in
front of the contraption, to keep it in place, and behold!  I had a mast
and sail in one, twelve feet long and two feet three inches wide,
capable of catching and holding quite an appreciable amount of wind.
That this was actually the case at once became apparent, the boat's
speed quickly rising to about three knots, while she did not now lose
way when she sank into the trough of the sea.

I was so pleased with the success of my experiment that I immediately
began to elaborate the original idea.  My new scheme was to saw one of
the planks into very thin veneer-like sheets, nail them together at the
edges, and make veritable sails out of them; but an hour's work sufficed
to convince me that to saw a three-inch plank into even quarter-inch
boards with an ordinary handsaw demanded far more skill in carpentry
than I possessed.

The afternoon and night passed quietly; and shortly after sunrise the
feminine members of the party made their appearance.  Upon enquiry I was
informed that they had all passed a comfortable night and slept well.
They were quite cheerful and courageous; indeed, I was amazed to see how
quickly and thoroughly they all adapted themselves to circumstances,
although, in the case of Mrs Vansittart and her daughter at least, this
was their first experience of anything in the nature of real hardship.

We breakfasted early that morning, all of us declaring ourselves to be
more than ready for the meal.  Then we experienced a most unpleasant
shock, for upon serving out the first allowance of water for the day, we
discovered that our stock had suffered a further mysterious depletion
during the night, which, upon investigation, proved to be due to a leaky
breaker.  The leak was not a very serious one, certainly, and the staves
seemed to be taking up a bit and the leak growing less; still, we had
lost about three pints, which was half a pint apiece, and it was not
difficult to picture conditions under which this might make all the
difference to us between life and death.

The day passed like the night, uneventfully.  The breeze held steady,
and we continued to blow along northward, Mrs Vansittart and her
daughter taking spell and spell at the steering oar while I endeavoured
to make up my arrears of sleep.  Of course a sharp look-out was
maintained, in the hope that either a sail or land might be sighted; but
although the air was crystal-clear the horizon remained bare throughout
its entire circle.  Toward nightfall the wind manifested a tendency to
drop, and shortly after midnight it fell dead, so that when Julius
aroused me at two o'clock in the morning I found the boat heaving gently
upon an oil-smooth swell.

This calm, if it should last for any length of time, would be nothing
short of a disaster.  It was of vital importance that we should find
either a ship or a shore capable of providing us with sustenance within
the next four or five days, or we should all be subjected to the horrors
of starvation.  I positively dreaded to think of what might be the
effect of this upon the women; therefore, that we might not lie there
absolutely helpless, I started to scull the boat with the steering oar.
But she was heavy for this style of propulsion, and I estimated that our
progress did not amount to more than three-quarters of a mile per hour.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

PERISHING OF HUNGER AND THIRST.

It was a night of great discomfort, a storm of wind and rain arising,
and the day which followed was little if any better, the same weather
conditions prevailing throughout.  I continued to scull the boat at
intervals all through the day, but it was horribly distressing work, the
distress being aggravated by the knowledge that it was all for so small
a result, since I estimated that by the end of the day we had
accomplished little more than six miles of progress.

It was about four o'clock that afternoon when my fast-failing energies
received a fresh stimulus.  I had been wearily toiling at the oar for
about an hour, facing west so that I might be guided in my course by the
pale blotch of light which represented the position of the sun, when a
cry from Julius, who was the only alert member of the party, caused me
to turn my head.  I saw him pointing eagerly toward the north-eastern
quarter.

"Aren't those the masts of a ship over yonder, Mr Leigh?" the boy
asked, and looking in the direction of his pointing finger I caught
sight, as the boat lifted over a swell, of two microscopic objects which
I at once recognised as a vessel's mast-heads.  They stood out fairly
clear against the gloomy background of lowering sky, and after a
prolonged scrutiny of them I came to the conclusion that they belonged
to a small schooner, some fifteen miles distant--probably one of the
craft that make a business of trading among the islands of the western
and southern Pacific.

"You are right, Julius, they are," I cried eagerly.  "Do you feel equal
to handling an oar for an hour or two?"

"You bet I do," answered the lad with equal eagerness.  "I am equal to
doing anything that will help us to get out of this beastly boat and on
to a ship once more."

"Right!"  I exclaimed.  "Come along, then, and let us see what we can
do.  That craft is only about fifteen miles off, and if this calm will
last long enough we are bound to fetch her," and I hastened to adjust
the rowlocks into position for using both oars.

Meanwhile, our remarks had stirred the rest of the party from
listlessness into action--they all sat up and looked eagerly at the two
tiny pin-points on the horizon; and Mrs Vansittart, climbing down into
the cockpit, exclaimed:

"Yes, I guess that is a ship, all right, and we've got to reach her.
I'll help you, Jule; your strength and mine together ought to be equal
to Walter's, so between us we shall keep the boat going straight."

But the stewardesses, good plucky girls, would not agree to this.  With
one voice they declared that they were not going to sit still and let
their mistress work; so the end of it was that they arranged to take one
oar, both working at it at once, while Julius volunteered to help me.
Presently we had the two mast-heads bearing straight ahead, and the boat
moving through the water at the rate of about three miles an hour, the
two girls, being perfectly fresh, doing quite as much work as Julius and
myself.

Strenuously we toiled, and when at length the light failed us we had
risen the craft sufficiently to determine that she was a fore-and-aft
schooner.  Then our difficulties began, for there were no stars, and
within ten minutes of the time of sunset it fell pitch-dark, from which
moment our course was largely a matter of guesswork.  The two girls and
Julius declared that they were so tired and their hands were so raw that
they could do no more; whereupon Mrs Vansittart and Anthea took one
oar, while I laboured on at the other.  But by this time I, too, was
weak and trembling with exhaustion to such an extent that I could
scarcely lift the blade of my oar out of the water, while my thirst was
so intolerable that at length I was fairly driven to the proposal that
we should all risk the indulgence in an extra ration of water.

Even this revived me but for a few minutes, and finally I had to confess
to a feeling of such dizziness and confusion that I could no longer be
responsible for the course of the boat, and had to beg Mrs Vansittart
to assume that duty.  The next hour was one of absolute torment to me.
My arms felt as though they were about to drop out of their sockets, my
back ached intolerably, every breath I drew was like a knife piercing my
lungs, my head throbbed as though it would burst, and my eyes were
sightless.  Then there came a small four-knot breeze out from about
North-North-West, which was too shy a wind for us with our unadjustable
substitute for a sail; and with the knowledge that unless the schooner
happened to be bound in our direction we should miss her, and all our
efforts would be thrown away, I dropped insensible in the cockpit and so
remained for a full hour or more, despite the efforts of the others to
revive me.

When at length I came to myself, a brisk westerly breeze was blowing,
and the boat was scudding before it, with Mrs Vansittart at the
steering oar.  The moon was just rising, but so little of her light as
yet came filtering through the veil of cloud which overspread the sky
that it was impossible to see anything more than the faint sheen of her
light upon the briskly rippling surface of the sea; and although we
scanned the whole visible horizon in search of a light that should
indicate the position of the schooner, our search was unrewarded.

To be brief, we saw no more of that schooner.  As the night progressed
the wind increased until by morning it was blowing so strongly that we
could do nothing but run before it.  Luckily, our craft proved to be an
unexpectedly good sea boat, and scudded dry, although her behaviour was
at times so unlike that of the boat of normal model that we were
somewhat puzzled as to what was going to happen next.  We scudded all
that day, and the whole of the succeeding night, by which time the wind
had raised what was, to us, such a formidable sea that we deemed it wise
to heave to, lest some heavier sea than usual should break aboard and
swamp us.  With great difficulty and considerable danger to ourselves,
we therefore lowered the arrangement of planks that served us as mast
and sail combined, and, bending our painter to them, rode to them as to
a sea anchor.

By this time I was feeling really ill.  Hard work and exhaustion were
telling upon me with increasing severity almost hourly, and now upon the
top of these came bitter anxiety.

My heart ached for my companions, especially the women folk.  They did
their utmost to seem cheerful, but it was pitiable to see the dreadful
languor of their movements, their hollow cheeks, the dark markings under
their eyes and, above all, the terrible look of suffering and despair
that was beginning to reveal itself in the eyes themselves.  Yet not a
word of discouragement or complaint passed their black and cracking
lips; they simply lay about, moving as little as possible, and endured
silently.  As for me, I could think of nothing, do nothing to help them.
It was horrible!

That gale lasted four interminable days before it blew itself out, which
it did later in the afternoon; and about sunset of the same day we
consumed the last scrap of food that remained to us.  Then, with moans
of utter despair, those poor dear women crawled into their lair beneath
the deck--to die, as they and I verily believed.  As for Julius, he was
nearly as bad as they were, but those last days in the wreck and the
nine days in the boat had wrought a miracle in him.  All the perversity
and selfishness of character that had before distinguished him had gone,
and he had come out of the fires of adversity and suffering purged, a
new and a right gallant, manly boy--how manly I did not know until some
time afterward, when it came out that, watching me and observing that I
took a trifle less food and water than I served out to others, he had
surreptitiously returned a portion of his own meagre allowance.  Poor
boy! so far as usefulness was concerned, he was already as good as dead,
for he could do nothing but just lie where he had flung himself down,
utterly exhausted, and moan piteously.

Being naturally robust, I still retained a small modicum of strength.
This I utilised by hauling in the sea anchor, and, with superhuman
exertion, setting it up in place again, not so much with any hope that
it would blow us to land, as that it might attract attention aboard some
passing ship and lead them to bear down upon and rescue us.  This last
bit of exertion finished me off, too, and I had not enough strength left
even to stagger aft to the cockpit; I simply collapsed on the deck and
knew no more.

I must have lain thus all through the night, for when at length
consciousness returned it was broad day, with the sun about an hour high
in a sky of exquisite stainless blue.  The long hours of unconsciousness
or sleep--perhaps it partook of both--had somewhat restored me, and I
sat up, staring about me.

Merciful heaven! were my eyes deceiving me?  Had I gone crazy, or was
what I beheld real?  I stared and stared with eyes that seemed to be
starting out of my head, but the vision--if vision it was--remained
stable.  There lay a fair island, with trees that seemed to wave gently
in the brisk morning breeze, and a hill that might almost be termed a
mountain nearly in its centre.  That island was dead to leeward of us,
and all that we had to do was to run down to it and land upon it, if God
would only be merciful enough to allow the fair breeze to last.

With a queer kind of croaking shriek, the memory of which disturbs my
sleep even now occasionally, but which I intended to be a yell of
rejoicing, I staggered to my feet, stumbled aft to the cockpit, and half
leaped, half tumbled into it.  I shipped the rowlock in the after cleat,
got out the steering oar, and, with labour that made me groan and pant,
contrived to head the boat toward that glorious vision of an island, for
we had been drifting toward it broadside on.  Then I bent down to where
the lad Julius lay unconscious at my feet, and, shaking him roughly by
the shoulder, called on him to awake, for there was land in sight not
more than four miles away.  For some time the poor boy made no response
to my efforts to arouse him, and I began to think that he was dead, when
suddenly he opened his eyes and whispered:

"Land?  Land?  Who talks of land?"

"I do, my hearty!"  I replied.  "I--Walter Leigh.  Wake up, old chap,
and see for yourself!"

"I--I--don't--think--I can," the poor boy gasped.  "I--don't seem--to--
to--.  Can you--help--me--Mr--?"

"Oh, hang the Mister!"  I exclaimed.  "That's done with, long ago.
Here, give me your hand, old man.  That's it!  Now--heave with a will.
That's right--steady, boy!--grip the coaming.  There you are!  Now then,
look straight ahead and tell me what you see."

The boy stared out over the boat's bows for a long minute or more, and
never shall I forget the look of exquisite rapture that gradually grew
in his glassy eyes as he stared.  Then suddenly down he dropped again
into the bottom of the boat and covered his poor emaciated face with his
hands, as he gave vent to a storm of dry, choking sobs.

I stooped and patted him on the shoulder encouragingly.

"There!"  I exclaimed soothingly, "that's all right, old man.  Cry if
you want to; but when you've done, slip in and see if you can make your
mother and sister understand that there's land in sight, and that we
shall reach it in about two hours."

"Yes, yes, I will," whispered the boy.  "It was of them I was thinking."

He got upon his hands and knees and crawled in under the deck, where he
remained about five minutes or thereabout.  Then he reappeared, his eyes
wide with horror.

"Walter," he gasped, "Walter, I can't rouse them.  I--I--guess they're
dead!"

"Dead!"  I croaked.  "Oh, no, surely not!  It would be too cruel that
they should have endured so much, only to perish when all that we need
is within sight.  Take the dipper--there is still a little water left--
and see if you can get them to swallow a drop or two; then, if they will
take any at all, give them a good drink--half a dipper each, but no
more, mind you.  Tell them that in two hours we shall be ashore on the
fairest island God's sun ever shone upon.  Go at once, old boy; a few
minutes may make all the difference between life and death.  I would go
myself, but I am afraid you are too weak to stand and steer."

"No, no, I'm not," he protested.  "I can steer all right.  And I'd ever
so much rather that you went in there than I.  You will manage better
than I could.  And--and, Walter, I'm afraid--afraid that I--that they
wouldn't wake for me."

I thought I saw what was the matter with the lad; he feared that his
mother and sister were dead, and shrank from converting that fear into
certainty.  I therefore surrendered the steering oar to him, and,
drawing a small quantity of water from the almost empty cask, crept in
under the deck, where I found the four women lying, each by herself, as
far apart from the others as possible, all of them apparently dead.  Yet
although the place smelt close and stuffy enough, I could detect no
trace of the taint which, in a hot climate, so quickly betrays the
presence of death, and with renewed hope I proceeded to my task.

I happened to turn to Miss Anthea first, and although the light in there
was too subdued to enable me to distinguish very clearly the ravages
wrought by slow starvation, the ease with which I, feeble as I was,
raised her poor emaciated form into a semi-sitting posture was eloquent
enough.  She lay, with closed eyes, quite inanimate in my arms; but upon
bending over her I thought I could detect that she still breathed,
although I was by no means certain.  I dipped my finger in the pannikin
of water which I had brought with me, and moistened her dry, cracked
lips, repeating the operation two or three times.  Presently I
distinctly heard her sigh, and saw that she was making a feeble effort
to lick her lips, whereupon I held the pannikin to them and allowed a
little water to trickle into her mouth.  This she endeavoured to
swallow, but the effort was so painful as to extort a low groan from
her.  Then she opened her eyes and looked about her vacantly, as though
she did not recognise her surroundings; but when she found me bending
over her she smiled faintly--a smile which strangely gladdened my heart.

"You are feeling better?"  I whispered.  "Try to swallow a little more
of this water; but hold it in your mouth for a moment or two first, then
I will give you more.  Listen: there is land in sight, a most lovely
island embowered in richest verdure, where I am sure we shall be able to
get all the food we need.  It is quite near, so near that we shall be
there in about two hours from now.  Surely you can hold out two hours
longer if I give you enough water to quench your thirst?"

She smiled again.  "Land, do you say?" she whispered.  "Land--and food?
Oh, yes, I am sure I can; the mere thought of it will sustain me.  But
are you sure, Walter--quite sure?"

"Absolutely certain," I answered.  "Julius has seen it, too, and is
steering the boat straight for it.  Now, drink a little more water, and
then let me help you to get into the fresh air.  You will feel ever so
much better out there on deck."

She drank again, this time avidly, almost savagely, her small teeth
clenching on the rim of the pannikin and her poor thin fingers grasping
it tightly when I attempted to remove it from her lips.  When, knowing
that, in her condition, to drink freely would be hurtful to her, I
forcibly removed the pannikin, the poor girl cried pitifully, and
whispered that I was cruel; but I presently pacified her with the
promise of a little more as soon as she was outside.  At last, with less
difficulty than I had anticipated, I got her out on deck, where, after
the administration of about a quarter of a pint of water, with just a
suspicion of brandy in it, she revived in the most marvellous manner.

Then I went below again, and, pursuing the same tactics with the others,
eventually had the happiness to restore them all to animation and get
them out on deck, where they sat feasting their eyes upon the glorious
prospect that was gradually unfolding itself before them.  To achieve
this result I had to expend the very last drop of water that could be
coaxed from the breaker; and as I did so I realised to the full what the
torments of Tantalus must have been.  Not a drop had passed my own lips
during the previous twelve hours, and to witness the ecstasy with which
the others absorbed the precious liquid was almost more than I could
endure in my then weak state.

As we crept slowly in toward the island we naturally obtained a more
distinct view of its characteristics.  Let me try to describe them.
From north to south I judged the island to measure a little over eight
miles long.  At about a third of its length from the north end there
occurred a sort of peak, to which the land sloped in every direction
from its extremities, which seemed to consist of rocky cliffs ranging
from about forty to perhaps two hundred feet in height, except towards
the north, where the soil sloped gently down to a white sandy beach
about half a mile in length.  Within about a mile and a half of the
southern extremity there was another elevation, a sort of knoll, and
about a mile further south another knoll, about half the height of its
neighbour.  The cliffs were almost black in colour; but above them there
were glimpses of most inviting grassy slopes peeping coyly out from
between great masses of umbrageous trees, among which I felt it would be
strange if we did not find fruit trees of some sort.  Indeed, I detected
certain palms that I was morally certain were coconut palms, while,
unless my eyes deceived me, I believed I could also descry foliage that
strongly suggested the idea of plantain or banana trees.  About a
hundred yards from the southern extremity of the island, and quite
detached from it, there towered out of the sea a great vertical column
of black rock, like a rugged pillar with a rounded top, which looked
quite inaccessible.

Naturally I headed the boat, in the first instance, for the only bit of
beach in sight.  But when we had arrived within about a mile of the
shore I detected a break in the cliffs which seemed to hint at the
existence of a small harbour near the southern part of the island,
between the two knolls recently mentioned, and I at once headed the boat
for this spot, finding the wind just free enough to permit us to reach
it.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE ISLAND.

Some twenty minutes later the boat slid in between two cliffs, about
seventy feet high, and we found ourselves in a channel a quarter of a
mile wide, trending south-east for nearly half a mile.  Then, on our
left hand, the cliff towered up boldly in the form of a headland to
about a hundred feet in height, while the shore on the right fell away,
forming a sort of cove a mile wide, at the widest point of which the
grass-covered soil sloped steeply down to the water's edge, rising again
in the form of a cliff as the cove took a bend away toward the
north-east.  The rocky cliffs seemed to be composed of basalt, with a
thick covering of rich deep-red soil, upon which vegetation flourished
luxuriantly.  The breeze, following the trend of the channel--the water
in which seemed deep enough to float a battleship--wafted us gently
forward, and I headed the boat for the point where the grass sloped down
to the water's edge, this being the only visible spot where landing was
possible.  When we had nearly reached it the inner end of the cove
became revealed, and I saw, about a mile and a quarter farther on, a
small strip of sandy beach that offered an ideal landing-place, and,
sweeping the boat's head round, I steered for it.  At that point, which
was now on our left hand, the miniature estuary narrowed to a stream
scarcely wider than the length of the boat.  That it was fresh water was
beyond a doubt, for at the far end of the gorge we saw the water foaming
steeply down in a series of tiny cascades, which stretched away upward
until they reached more than halfway to the peak that formed the highest
point of the island.

As we crept slowly toward our chosen landing-place, under the impulse of
the sculling oar--the wind having by this time failed us--we began to
get ever nearer glimpses of the beauties of the island.  The rocky face
of the cliff on either hand was splashed with colour from numerous small
flowering shrubs that seemed to spring from invisible clefts in the
basalt, while close down by the water's edge great clumps of maidenhair
and other ferns grew in extravagant luxuriance.  But these things were
observed as it were subconsciously, every eye in the boat being fixed
intently upon the little strip of beach toward which we were heading,
while the longing to feel our feet once more on terra firma grew more
intense as the minutes slipped by.  We had not the remotest idea whether
or not the island was inhabited, though we scarcely thought it possible
that such a paradise could be devoid of inhabitants; but if the beach
toward which we were heading had suddenly become black with hostile
natives, I am quite sure that, feeble as we were, we would have fought
desperately for the right to land, and either won that right or perished
in the attempt.

No natives appeared, however.  There was no sign of life that we could
discern, save a few gaudily plumaged birds that flitted hither and
thither, sometimes sweeping right over the boat, as though curious to
ascertain what new thing this was that invaded their solitude; and
presently the craft that had been our home for ten days--which seemed
more like months to us--slid with a thin grating sound on to the sand,
and stopped.

Scarcely waiting to lay in my oar, I scrambled out of the cockpit,
reeled along the deck, dropped over the overhanging bow on to the hot
sand, and held up my arms to help the others ashore.  The first to come
was Mrs Vansittart, who was followed by her daughter and the two
stewardesses, Julius bringing up the rear; and when at length we were
all ashore, Mrs Vansittart said, or rather whispered, for she had all
but lost her voice:

"Before we do anything else, or move another step, let us all go down on
our knees and return thanks to Almighty God for His great mercy in
bringing us to this delectable land."  And we did so, then and there,
with tears of deep and sincere gratitude.

It was by this time about ten o'clock in the morning, yet so deep and
narrow was the gorge in which we found ourselves that the beach where we
stood was still in shadow and the air comparatively cool.  Therefore,
after I had taken care to secure the boat to a great boulder of basalt
that lay conveniently at hand, I suggested that all should remain where
they were while I went prospecting for fruit; and to this they agreed.
Then, a thought suddenly striking me, I waded into the water, scooped up
a palmful, and tasted it.  It was deliciously sweet and cool; and I
turned to the rest and said:

"This water is perfectly fresh.  You may therefore drink of it; but
drink in moderation, I beg you, taking just a mouthful at a time every
few minutes until your thirst is quenched; for if you drink too freely
after your long abstinence, the effect may be harmful instead of
restorative."

I set them an example by taking a small quantity only and just washing
out my mouth with it before starting upon my quest.  But how delicious
that taste of clean, sweet water was to me, only those who have gone
nigh to perishing of thirst can ever know.

Resolutely resisting the almost overpowering temptation to drink freely
and quench the thirst that scorched me like a fire, I left the water and
allowed my gaze to wander over the face of the cliff that towered some
eighty feet aloft from the inner margin of the beach.  I soon saw that,
steep as at first sight it appeared to be, there were so many flat
fragments protruding from its face that the scaling of it would be a
comparatively easy matter; and, assuring my companions that I would not
be gone longer than I could possibly help, I began the ascent.

I soon discovered that in undertaking to climb that cliff I had been
reckoning without my host--that is to say, I had failed to take account
of my weakness; and before I was halfway up I felt that I should never
reach the top.  But after an arduous climb of some twenty minutes,
during which I experienced at least a dozen narrow escapes from pitching
headlong to the bottom, I flung myself over the top edge and lay gasping
for breath on the long sweet grass that waved about me.

What a glorious prospect it was that now revealed itself to my
enraptured eyes!  On my left front, distant about a mile, rose the
higher of the two knolls to which I have before referred, while square
away to my right, and distant perhaps two miles, towered the bald peak
that was the highest point in the island.  The ground in front of me, as
I lay, rose somewhat steeply to a kind of ridge that seemed to run from
one to the other of the two elevations I have just mentioned, and the
whole of the ground not clothed with grass was studded with great clumps
of splendid trees.  Some of these were thickly starred with flowers,
while here and there were coconut palms with their smooth, curving
trunks, smaller trees which might possibly be fruit-bearing, and a
profusion of plantains or bananas, among the long pendulous green leaves
of which I could distinguish, even where I lay, great clusters of ripe
yellow fruit.

The sight of that fruit was enough for me; it was even more entrancing
than the glorious landscape that unrolled itself to right and left.
Postponing the contemplation of the latter to a more convenient season,
I rose to my feet, staggered forward, and, a few minutes later, found
myself gathering a quantity of the golden fruit, even then allowing
myself time to choose the best and ripest.  Then, with a dozen or more
bananas in the hollow of my arm, I returned to the edge of the cliff at
a point a hundred yards or so to the north of where I had made my
ascent.  I at once saw that here the cliff was of a much more
practicable character than where I had ascended; and negotiating the
descent with very little difficulty, I soon had the intense satisfaction
not only of seeing each of the other members of the party devouring a
banana with indescribable avidity, but also of eating one myself; and I
can safely say that never in my life have I so thoroughly enjoyed food
as I did that banana.

But what was one banana to people who were on the very brink of
perishing from starvation?  It only served to whet their appetite for
more.  I would not, however, allow them to have any more just then; I
was cruel to be kind, and resolutely turned a deaf ear alike to their
entreaties and their reproaches, as I did to the cravings of my own
ravenous hunger.  I insisted that at least half an hour should elapse
before they ate again, and I kept to my word.  But no sooner had the
half-hour expired than we again fell to and consumed another banana
each, after which I insisted on everybody taking an hour's rest.  This
we did? and at the end of the hour we all felt so much better that it
was resolved to attempt an ascent to the plateau without further delay.

We took the longer but easier route; and, after a toilsome climb that
occupied nearly half an hour, reached our goal.  The women folk were too
utterly exhausted to do other than stretch themselves out on the grass
and feast their eyes upon the glories of the scene; but, feeling that we
might all now with safety venture upon another light meal, Julius and I
set off in search of what we might find, and soon returned with three
fine coconuts.  These I stripped of their outer husk with my knife; and
a few minutes later we were all feasting upon the sweet, delicate fruit,
after having shared the milk among us.  Finally, through a careful and
judicious system of feeding, by about four o'clock in the afternoon we
had contrived to allay our hunger and thirst and to recover enough
strength to enable us to move about and accomplish short distances
without undue fatigue.

My next concern was to find some sort of refuge in which to pass the
coming night.  Of course, in the last resort it would be quite possible
for us to return to the boat and sleep on board her as usual; but that
idea had no charms for me.  The under-deck quarters were very confined
and altogether inadequate for the accommodation of the four women;
moreover, I imagined that they would be willing to put up with a certain
amount of discomfort if by doing so they could secure a greater measure
of privacy than the boat afforded.  I therefore set off upon an
exploring expedition to see what I could find.

I was not going to be too particular at the outset.  The weather was
fine and the temperature high enough to allow us all to sleep with
comfort in the open air; but there was the heavy dew of the tropical
night to be considered, which I feared might be productive of fever and
ague to people in our debilitated condition.  My immediate ambition
therefore extended no further than to find in a suitable spot some tree,
of thick enough foliage and with widespreading branches near enough the
ground to afford good protection from the dew, beneath which beds of dry
fern, or something of that sort, might be arranged for the night.  On
the morrow I would see if I could not contrive something more effective
in the shape of a hut; while ultimately, if circumstances seemed to
demand it, I might seriously consider the possibility of erecting some
simple form of house.  As to the situation of our sleeping quarters,
which I recognised would be, for the time being, our abode, I decided
that it ought to be as near as possible to water.  I therefore began my
exploration by following the course of the cliff edge upward toward
where the stream came tumbling down the ravine.

A walk of about a mile brought me to a point where the ledge which I had
been traversing terminated abruptly.  In the face of the cliff on my
left, at the point where it cut across and blocked the narrow ledge
where I was standing, there was an irregularly-shaped hole or fissure
about two feet wide by perhaps five feet high which looked very much
like the mouth of a cave, and I determined to explore it; but upon
attempting to reach it I found it impossible of access, the rocky face
of the cliff was so absolutely smooth, so completely devoid of the
smallest projection, that not even a monkey could have reached it.

I looked around me again, this time taking especial notice of my more
immediate surroundings.  If that opening happened to be really the mouth
of a cave, and could be made easily accessible, it ought to form an
ideal dwelling.  There was pure sweet water in abundance far exceeding
our utmost requirements; the spot was unapproachable except by way of
the narrow ledge along which I had come, and could therefore be easily
defended in case of need; and the cave, if cave it really was, ought to
be at least as dry and roomy as any house that I could possibly build.

But how was I to gain entrance?  There was but one way that I could
think of--by means of a ladder.  I determined to construct one
forthwith, and set off upon my return journey with the intention of
going to the boat and procuring the axe from the carpenter's tool chest.
However, by the time I rejoined the others--who, it seemed, were
beginning to feel some anxiety as to what had become of me--the sun was
so low in the heavens that I at once perceived the impossibility of
carrying out my plan that night.  I therefore searched for and soon
found two suitable trees, within easy hail of each other, under one of
which the women might sleep comfortably on soft beds of dry grass, while
Julius and I took possession of the other.  When we had all partaken of
a moderate meal of bananas, the sun had set and the night was fast
closing down upon us; we therefore wended our way to our respective
trees, flung ourselves down upon our grassy couches, and were soon
wrapped in the sweet oblivion of dreamless sleep.

The following morning found me awake with the rising of the sun.  I felt
amazingly refreshed by my night's sleep, and quite strong, comparatively
speaking.  I saw that Julius had awakened, and I invited him to go with
me and have a swimming lesson, for the boy could not swim a stroke, and
I had decided it was high time he should learn.  So we started off,
noting as we went that the women folk seemed to be still asleep under
their own particular tree.

We walked to the cliff edge and looked down upon the beach; the boat was
still there, exactly as we had left her.

Stripping to the buff, we deposited our clothes on the boat's deck and
entered the water, which was of just the right temperature to be
refreshing; and while I swam delightedly hither and thither, Master
Julius, who was extremely fastidious in the matter of personal
cleanliness, carefully removed all traces of the grime that had
unavoidably accumulated during the voyage from the reef.  Then, my swim
ended, I did the same, after which I gave my companion his first
swimming lesson, the boy showing such aptitude, and acquitting himself
so well, that when we finally left the water he was actually able to
swim a stroke or two unaided.  Before dressing we explored the upper end
of the harbour, where the stream discharged into it, and were fortunate
enough to find a spot at which, in about three to four feet of water,
the women could bathe with enjoyment and absolute safety.

Having dressed, I entered the boat and procured the carpenter's axe,
after which we ascended to the top of the cliff.  Near there we met Mrs
Vansittart and her daughter, both of whom declared themselves greatly
the better for a sound and refreshing night's rest.  They were about to
prospect for a spot where they might enjoy the luxury that Julius and I
had just been indulging in; so, leaving the boy to direct them to the
place which we had discovered, and afterwards to gather bananas for our
breakfast, I shouldered the axe and set off northward, intent upon an
exploration of the aperture in the cliff, which I believed might prove
to be the mouth of a cave.

As I went I looked keenly about me for a sapling or small tree that
might serve as a ladder, and before long I came upon exactly the kind of
thing I wanted.  It was a young tree, somewhat resembling a yew, about
twenty feet high, with a number of branches springing from its trunk
close together and radiating in all directions, the lowest branch being
about seven feet from the ground.  This tree I at once attacked, and,
the wood being soft, while the axe was keen, it fell some ten minutes
later.  Lopping off as much of the upper part of the trunk as I
considered too slim and weak for my purpose, I found that by cutting off
the lower part, just below the bottom branch, I should have a nice
straight pole about twelve feet long.  This I did, afterward lopping off
all the branches to within about six inches of the trunk--the stumps to
serve as rungs or steps.  There was my ladder complete, and light enough
to be easily handled.  I hoisted it on my shoulder, and, carrying the
axe in my hand in case I should need it, proceeded along the ledge to
its extremity.

Here I reared my "ladder" against the cliff face, and found, as I had
expected, that it was just of a nice convenient length, enabling me to
reach the opening with the utmost ease.

As I had fully expected, the cleft proved to be the mouth of a cavern,
for as I stood at the top of the ladder and peered in, I saw that it
extended some way back into the cliff, widening as it went.  How far it
extended I could not tell, but when my eyes became somewhat accustomed
to the gloom I was able to trace the passage--for such it seemed to be--
inward for a distance of at least ten feet, beyond which was black
darkness.

Having seen thus much, I should not have been human had I not desired to
see more.  I therefore climbed into the opening, and, with all due
precaution, proceeded to investigate a little farther.  The floor of the
entrance, if I may so term it, was very awkwardly shaped, resembling a
V, so that in reality there was no floor at all, properly speaking, but
merely the rough sides of the cleft meeting together at the bottom.  A
little way in, however--about six or eight feet from the face of the
cliff--the sides began to fall away from each other, leaving a surface
that might be walked on without much difficulty; and I told myself that
if in other respects the cavern proved suitable as a dwelling, the
awkward character of the entrance might easily be rectified.

Still making my way carefully, with a watchful eye for possible snakes--
I had seen none thus far, and had not the least idea whether or not
there were any on the island; still, it was as well to be careful--I
gradually worked inward until I estimated that I was at least twenty
feet from the mouth, and here I was obliged to bring my explorations to
a temporary end for lack of light.  But by careful pacing from side to
side, I found that the passage was at this point some eighteen feet
wide, with a tolerably flat floor, while its height was such that I
could not reach it with my upstretched arm.  Its length I could not
tell, but it seemed to extend considerably farther inward; to determine
just how far, however, I should need a torch.  I therefore decided to
return to the rest of the party, report upon my find, and bring them
back with me after breakfast, that they might pass an opinion upon its
possibilities.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE WAR CANOES.

Our breakfast that morning consisted of bananas, mangoes, and coconuts,
all of which the island seemed to produce in profusion, as well, no
doubt, as many other fruits, when we should have time to seek for them.
At present our main concern was to establish ourselves in a shelter of
some sort, where we should find complete protection in every kind of
weather; and all expressed themselves as eager to inspect the cavern of
which I had been telling them.  To do this effectually torches were
needed, and the means to kindle them.  The latter was fortunately at
hand in the shape of a large and powerful magnifying lens, with which
Julius was fond of amusing himself and which he habitually carried in
his pocket.  With regard to torches--well, doubtless dry branches could
be found lying about under the trees; or, failing these, flambeaux could
be made of dry grass bound up into bundles.  We decided that dry
branches would best serve our purpose, and accordingly Julius and I
plunged into the nearest clump of timber in search of what we required,
quickly returning with a bundle each, as big as we could conveniently
carry, bound together with long strips of "monkey rope", of which there
seemed to be an inexhaustible quantity in the woods.  It was necessary
to carry our fire with us, since the path we should have to traverse to
reach the cave, as well as the cave itself, lay in a deep ravine, into
which the sun's rays struck only for about three hours during the course
of a day.  We therefore collected a little heap of dry grass and leaves,
set fire to it by concentrating the sun's rays upon it through Julius's
burning-glass, and from it ignited a branch, which I carried along with
us.

The distance from our temporary camp to the cave was about a mile and a
quarter, but we took nearly an hour to cover it, for directly we entered
the gorge there were frequent pauses to admire the splendid vistas which
every bend of the path opened out.  But in due time we reached the
cavern and entered it, when other torches were kindled, so that each
member of the party might be provided with a light.

It soon became apparent that the cavern was spacious enough to
accommodate a very much larger party than ours.  It was so extensive,
indeed, that we were obliged to defer its complete exploration for lack
of a sufficient number of torches; but we saw enough of it to determine
us to enter upon its occupation forthwith.  Accordingly I made my way to
the beach where we had left the boat, and proceeded to transfer our few
belongings from her to the cavern.  Those belongings were not very many,
consisting, in fact, merely of the empty water breaker, the arms and
ammunition, the carpenter's chest, and the few planks that I had found
afloat in the lagoon after the sinking of the wreck; and I succeeded in
effecting the transfer of the whole before sunset.

Thus far I had been much too busy to attempt anything in the nature of
an exploration of the entire island; but now that a safe shelter had
been found for the party--and one capable of being very effectively
defended, too, if the necessity should arise--I felt it was high time to
make myself fully acquainted with our new home and its capabilities as
at least a temporary abode.  I was especially anxious to ascertain
beyond all question whether it harboured any other inhabitants than
ourselves; therefore, on the morning after we had installed ourselves in
the cavern, I took a rifle, filled my pockets with cartridges, and set
out with the intention of making the complete circuit of the island.  I
left Julius in charge, and warned my companions not to be anxious on my
account, should I not return by nightfall, as I meant to take my time
and explore the island thoroughly before returning.

Starting from the cavern immediately after breakfast, I proceeded
southward, and, descending to the beach, indulged in a swim as a
preliminary.  Then, returning to the top of the cliff, I continued my
way southward until I reached a point overlooking the harbour entrance,
from which I struck inland toward one of the two inferior elevations
previously mentioned.

The base of this mound was completely surrounded by trees, intermingled
with an undergrowth so dense that it was only with difficulty I was
enabled to force a way through it.  I wished to reach the top of the
mound, if possible, because it appeared to be a very suitable spot upon
which to build a big flare for the purpose of attracting the attention
of ships, should any such chance to heave in sight; I therefore
persevered, and eventually came out at the base of the elevation, which
was clear of trees.  Then I started to climb, and after an hour's
arduous toil reached its summit, the sides being exceedingly steep and
consisting for the most part of fine ashes, from which I suspected that
I was climbing the cone of an extinct volcano.  This suspicion was fully
verified when I arrived at the top; for I found myself upon a narrow
platform, roughly elliptical in shape and some half a dozen yards wide,
from which I gazed down into the interior of a crater some two hundred
feet deep, the sides of which were nearly vertical, while the bottom was
apparently a shallow pool of stagnant water.

The rim would serve admirably as a site upon which to build a bonfire;
but the sides were so steep and the soil so loose that I foresaw it
would be difficult, almost to the point of impossibility, to climb them
with a load.  I therefore decided to see whether the peak near the
centre of the island offered better facilities.  But before descending I
took a good long look round the horizon, and was not very greatly
surprised to discover that there were no less than seven separate and
distinct indications of land to the northward, the nearest of which I
judged could not be very far away.

I walked round the rim of the crater to its northern side and made my
descent there, _en route_ for the peak near the centre of the island,
having first fully satisfied myself that the sea all round was entirely
bare of craft of any description.  My way now lay again through timber
and more or less dense scrub, beyond which I found a small patch of open
grass land, and then more timber.  But now, for some inscrutable reason,
there was little or no scrub.  The trees were more lofty and wider
apart, and intermingled with what I may term the timber trees were a
fair number bearing fruit, among which I found several specimens of the
breadfruit, and an abundance of mangoes, guavas, custard and star
apples, plantains, bananas, and a few other varieties; thus there was
the assurance of an ample supply of food so long as we might be
compelled to remain upon the island.

It was past noon when I reached the base of the peak; and I had no
sooner come to it than I perceived, from the ashes and scoriae that
thickly strewed its sides, that it also was a volcano.  Yet I was
determined to climb to its summit, if possible, if only for the perfect
panorama of the entire island that I knew I should obtain from there; so
I rested for a little while, utilising the time by making a good meal of
fruit, and then addressed myself to my task.

The sides of this volcano were not nearly so steep as those of the
other; the dust and ashes, however, were just as fine, rendering the
task of climbing the slope extremely difficult.  But I had learned
wisdom by this time, and instead of attempting the ascent in a straight
line from base to summit, I described a spiral round the peak, and in
this way accomplished the ascent in almost as short a time as, and with
far less fatigue than, if I had attempted to go up by the shortest way.

My conviction that this peak also was the vent of a volcano was verified
the moment that I reached the summit, the general aspect and character
of this and the other being almost identical.  The rim on which I now
stood was, however, quite three hundred feet higher than the first; the
view from it was consequently much more extensive, and in addition to
the seven indications of land seen from the top of the mound, I was now
able to trace three more quite distinctly, while in the farthest
distance I thought I could descry the faint loom of still more land.
This, however, was not all, for far away to the northward--so far as to
be no more than just visible--I caught a hint of a faint, pearly gleam
on the horizon, which I felt certain could only be that of the sun on a
ship's white sails; and my heart swelled with thankfulness, for here was
an unmistakable assurance that craft of some sort occasionally visited
these waters.

Having at length thoroughly searched the entire circle of the horizon, I
turned my gaze nearer home and proceeded to view the island, the whole
of which lay spread out beneath me like a large-scale relief map.

I scarcely know how to describe it.  The nearest thing to which I can
compare the shape of its plan, is a Ghoorka's _khookri_, or heavy knife,
the point directed northward, the edge facing west, with a widening of
the blade near its junction with the handle, this widening being broken
into by the little harbour at the upper end of which our boat lay.  The
surface of the island was very irregular, and was almost completely
covered with trees of various kinds, interspersed with small patches of
open grass land.  The island rose sheer from the sea everywhere except
in one spot inside the harbour, where the grass sloped down to the
water's edge, and at another spot on the north-western shore, where, for
a length of about a mile, the land sloped seaward to a strip of white
beach.

The source of the rivulet which discharged into the sea appeared to be
situated about three-quarters of a mile south of the spot whereon I
stood; and from that point it was easy for the eye to follow its course
past our cavern and down its steep, rocky course to the harbour.  The
whole of the ravine which it traversed lay open to my gaze, and I was
now able to assure myself with full conviction that our cavern could
only be approached from one direction, namely, the narrow ledge which we
had traversed to reach it.

The island was to all appearance uninhabited, save by ourselves.  There
were no canoes on the beach to the north-west, nor any sign of smoke
indicating the existence of a village; yet, if not near the harbour,
that is where a village would certainly be, since it was the only place
where men could possibly beach their canoes--and the idea of inhabitants
of an island without canoes was unthinkable.  Nevertheless, although I
felt convinced that our party were the only people on the island, I
determined to make my exploration complete.  Accordingly, after a long,
last, lingering look round me, I plunged down the northern slope of the
cone, and pushed northward through the forest; arriving at the most
northern extremity of the island, dead tired, about sunset.

I camped in the open that night, finding abundance of food wherewith to
satisfy my hunger, but no water.  This latter, however, was of trivial
importance, since the fruit staved off any excessive feeling of thirst;
yet it tended to confirm my conviction that there were no natives to be
found in this part of the island.  On the following morning I followed
the western line of the cliffs until I reached the beach aforementioned,
when I descended to it and most carefully examined its whole surface in
search of human footprints.  I found not the slightest trace of one on
the entire stretch of beach; therefore, perfectly satisfied at last that
we had the whole island to ourselves, I shaped a course for "home", as I
already began mentally to name the cavern, reaching it about
mid-afternoon.

I found that during my absence the others had been busying themselves in
a variety of ways to make our cavern comfortably habitable.  Julius, for
instance, had collected a quantity of stones, which he had so arranged
at the mouth of the cavern that the V-shaped floor had been nicely
levelled up and made smooth, so that it was now possible to pass in and
out without the risk of badly spraining one's ankles; while the women
had collected enough dry fern to make comfortable beds for us all.
Also, the interior of the cavern had been more carefully and
systematically examined, with the result that three separate and
distinct but adjoining chambers had been found, two of which would serve
admirably for sleeping apartments, while a third and very lofty one had
a large hole in its roof, situated apparently in the midst of a clump of
trees, admitting sufficient light to make it quite pleasantly habitable
as a general living and working room.

This, of course, was all very well and quite as we would have it; it was
a wise and reasonable policy to make ourselves as comfortable as we
could during our sojourn upon the island.  But how long was that sojourn
to last?  That was the matter now uppermost in my thoughts.  Were we to
sit down and wait patiently until something should come along and take
us off, or were we to take the initiative and, while availing ourselves
of the hospitality of the island, contrive some means whereby, failing
other help, we might effect our own rescue by making our way to some
civilised spot from which it would be possible to return to our
respective homes?  I had been thinking a good deal of late about my poor
mother in her little house at Newton Ferrers.  It was now over five
months since the _Stella Maris_ had been cast away, and more than six
since I had last written home; and I knew that by this time the dear
soul would be fretting her heart out with anxiety on my account.  I was
therefore growing every day more eager and determined to find a way of
deliverance, if only that the maternal anxiety might be allayed.

But what could I do?  There was the boat, certainly; but after our
recent dreadful experiences in her I knew that nothing would induce Mrs
Vansittart to undertake another boat voyage.  She had already said so
with much emphasis, and the others had echoed her resolution; and,
indeed, I could not blame them.  A single experience of that kind was
quite enough for a lifetime.  Had we possessed a sail, matters might
have been different, for despite the queer model of our craft she had
proved to be an excellent sea boat, quite as good, indeed, as a boat of
the usual shape; but to be at sea in her without a sail was to be simply
at the mercy of wind and wave.  I racked my brains to distraction in the
effort to evolve some practicable plan for obtaining a sail, even going
to the length of endeavouring to weave one of grass; but it was no good,
for as soon as the grass dried it became so tender and brittle that it
would never have borne the pressure of even a very moderate breeze, much
less a gale.

About a month later, when after numerous experiments I had found myself
obliged to abandon all hope in that direction, chance--or rather,
investigation in another direction--revived my hopes, and I began to
believe that I could see my way.

It was about two months from the time when we were driven out of the
wreck and compelled to commit ourselves and our fortunes to the mercy of
the open sea, and by this time our clothing had become so dilapidated
that the necessity for something to replace it was growing urgent.
Therefore, while I busied myself daily upon the task of conveying
combustible material to the summit of the Peak--as we had named the
highest point on the island--that we might be able to kindle a fire and
raise a big smoke in the event of a sail heaving in sight, and while
Julius undertook to find a daily supply of food for the party, the women
explored the island in search of some material that might be converted
into clothing.

By the merest accident they at length found what they believed might
serve.  It was the inner bark of a certain tree, and consisted of long
white threads or filaments which, after being steeped in water for some
time, could be separated from each other, and which proved to be so
exceedingly tough that we were able to make excellent fishing lines of
them, and so secure a most welcome addition to our daily diet.  The
threads were rather coarse, but we believed that they might be worked up
into a kind of sheeting which, while perhaps rather stiff and
uncomfortable when fashioned into garments, would make a very good sail;
and I devoted every moment of my spare time to the gathering and
preparation of the stuff, my idea being that after I had made a suit of
sails for the boat, if the others still refused to undertake a second
boat voyage, they might agree to my going away alone in search of help.

But about a month later, when the four women were busily and laboriously
engaged upon the tedious task of weaving by hand our stock of thread
into a coarse, tough cloth, a dramatic interruption of our labours
occurred which, but for the mercy of God, might have had a most tragic
ending.

I had by this time accumulated upon the top of the Peak a sufficient
quantity of material to make a blaze and smoke that might be seen in
clear weather at least thirty miles away, and I had therefore ceased to
devote my whole time to adding to the pile, employing myself instead in
industriously collecting the thread-like bark out of which we were
making our cloth.  Nevertheless it was a habit of mine to wend my way to
the summit every morning immediately after breakfast, in order to take a
good look round on the chance of a sail being in sight; and I repeated
the excursion daily after our midday meal, collecting a load of
combustibles on my way and carrying them up with me, in order that in
any case my journey might not be quite useless.

It was during my afternoon journey on the day in question that, having
reached the summit of the Peak and sent a long, searching, but fruitless
look round the horizon, I turned to descend by a short cut which my
frequent passages down had beaten in the loose, friable soil, when I was
arrested in the very act of plunging down the slope, and my blood turned
to ice, by the sight of a great war canoe crowded with natives, just
emerging from under the cover of the western cliffs and heading
southward, as though bound for our little harbour.  As I still stood
gaping at her, scarcely able to credit the evidence of my eyes, another,
and another, and another followed, making four in all, each manned by
some forty or fifty natives.  They had been creeping along so close
inshore that at first they had been invisible to me, hidden by the high
cliffs; but a curve of the shore line had caused them to head out a
little farther to the westward, and so brought them within my range of
vision.

Suddenly I became aware of signs of commotion in the leading canoe.
There was a cessation of paddling, arms were uplifted and flourished,
and the next moment I realised with horror that my figure, standing out
clear and clean-cut against the pure azure of the sky, had been
detected.  The natives were pointing and directing each other's
attention to me; indeed, I almost believed that I could catch, above the
soft sough of the wind, the faint sound of their voices shouting to each
other as they pointed.  Then the gesticulating suddenly ceased, the
paddles were resumed, churning the water into foam with the energy
thrown into each stroke, and the canoes raced forward at fully double
their original speed.

Waiting to see no more, I plunged recklessly down the slope, running,
sliding, stumbling, and once rolling headlong in my frantic haste to get
back to the cavern.  I felt assured that, whatever their original
purpose might have been, those savages would now most assuredly land, if
only to hunt for me and secure my head as a trophy.  It would be a race
between them and me as to who could reach the cavern first; moreover,
there was the horrid possibility that some of the women, or Julius,
might be abroad and fall into their hands; in which case, God help them!



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE RESCUE.

Never in my life, I think, had I run so fast as I did that afternoon,
while covering the mile and a half of ground that lay between the base
of the Peak and the nearest point at which I could overlook the harbour.
It was imperative that I should reach this point before returning to
the cavern, since it might very easily happen that Julius had launched
the boat and was in mid-harbour, fishing, as he had been wont to do of
late; and if so, he must be saved at all costs.

I had a rifle with me, and a pocketful of cartridges, it having become a
habit with me to carry them whenever I went abroad; and I believed that
at a pinch I might be able, by good shooting, to hold the savages off
long enough to enable the boy to land and make good his escape.
Luckily, when I arrived at the point for which I was aiming, the first
object to catch my eye was our boat, empty and moored in her usual
place; and the beach was entirely bare from end to end.  Scarcely had I
satisfied myself of this when the sharp nose of the leading canoe shot
into view past the point where the narrow entrance widened out and the
harbour proper began; and before I had time to withdraw from the edge of
the cliff a yell of delight conveyed to me the unpleasant news that I
had again been seen.

I had, however, by this time got my wind again after my long run, so,
keeping far enough back from the edge of the cliff to ensure my
invisibility from below, I started at a long, swinging trot for the
cavern, and was fortunate enough to run into Julius, loaded with a big
bunch of bananas, just at the point where the narrow ledge leading to
the cavern began.  He was on his way back from a stroll, and, happening
to sight a particularly attractive bunch of the fruit, had determined to
take it home with him.  We were practically safe now, since anywhere
along this narrow ledge, all the way to the cavern, a single person
armed with a rifle could defend and hold the road so long as his supply
of ammunition lasted.  I therefore slowed my pace to a walk, and, taking
the bananas from the boy and handing the rifle and cartridges to him in
return, I rapidly explained the situation to him, and bade him play the
part of rearguard while I carried the fruit, the weight of which was
almost too great for him.  I felt tolerably certain that we could reach
the cavern before being overtaken, as we did.

"Is everybody at home?"  I shouted, as, having climbed into the cave
after Julius, and drawn up the ladder behind me to prevent its
unauthorised use, I made my way toward the inner apartment which we used
as a living-room.

"Yes," came the reply in Mrs Vansittart's voice; "everybody, that is to
say, but Julius--"

"He is here with me," I cut in, as I entered the room and saw all four
of the women diligently engaged upon the tedious task of weaving their
cloth.  "I met him at the beginning of the path, and brought him home
with me, also this fine bunch of bananas which some good fairy prompted
him to cut.  We must use them carefully, for they, with what else we may
have in the cavern, may have to last us for several days."

"Why?  What do you mean, Walter?" demanded Mrs Vansittart in a tone of
alarm, while the others paused in their work to listen.

"He means that four big war canoes loaded with savages have just entered
the harbour; and the chances are that we may have to stand a siege," cut
in Julius, who had followed me in.

"Hillo!"  I exclaimed in surprise.  "You here?  That will never do.
Just trot back to the mouth of the cavern, keeping enough in the
darkness to avoid being seen from outside, and keep a look-out while I
explain things to your mother.  Then I will come and relieve you.  If
you see anything of the savages give a low whistle, and I will join you.
Cut, now; and keep your eyes skinned.  How are we off for water, Mrs
Vansittart?"

"Oh, I don't know!  I think we have the breaker about half-full,"
replied the lady.

"That will do; it will be ample for us all until to-night," I said.
"Then I must slip out in the darkness and endeavour to fill it."

I then proceeded to relate at length all that I had seen, but kept my
fears to myself, merely impressing upon my little audience the necessity
for staying well within the cavern, out of sight.  I did not attempt to
conceal that I quite expected the savages would subject the entire
island to a thorough search, which might possibly extend over three or
four days; but I expressed the opinion that if we could but remain
completely hidden during that time they would depart, rather than waste
further time in hunting for one man--for of course they had seen only
me, and could not possibly know that I had any companions.

"Oh, but this is awful!" exclaimed Mrs Vansittart, when I had finished.
"Just think of what might have happened if you had not come when you
did!  Anthea and I were beginning to feel tired and a bit headachy with
sitting so long over this horrid weaving, and so were Lizette and Susie;
and we were all talking about going out for a good long walk just as you
came in.  Why, we might all have been captured and carried off--"

The mere contemplation of such a fate, with all that it implied, was too
much for the poor lady, and reduced her to speechlessness.

"You are right," I assented.  "Lucky that I turned up in time to prevent
you.  As it is, I am afraid that we must regard our boat as lost to us.
The beggars will be sure to see her--indeed, they cannot avoid doing
so--and if they don't take her with them when they go, they will almost
certainly destroy her out of pure spite.  But `sufficient unto the day
is the evil thereof'.  We must keep our spirits up and our powder dry.
And speaking of powder reminds me that it will only be a reasonable
precaution to open a few boxes of cartridges, and load all our rifles.
By Jove! it was a happy inspiration that prompted me to put them into
the boat.  Even then I had a suspicion that they might be useful some
day."

I got out all our weapons and loaded them, filled my pockets with
cartridges, carried the loaded rifles to the outer cavern, where they
would be handy, and then joined Julius, whom I found lying prone, rifle
in hand, maintaining a careful watch on the ledge, which, so far as we
knew, was the only possible approach to our cavern.  The boy informed me
that thus far he had seen nothing of the savages, at which piece of
information I scarcely knew whether to be glad or sorry.  It was, of
course, just barely possible that the enemy, having first seen me on the
summit of the Peak, might come to the conclusion that my lair was
somewhere in that direction, and hunt round about there for me.  On the
other hand, I had been told that the Pacific islanders, taking them as a
whole, were by no means unintelligent, and they would naturally think,
upon finding the boat, that I would make my habitat as near her as
possible, and accordingly proceed to hunt for signs of me in her
immediate neighbourhood.  Besides, they had last seen me on the cliff
top, and if they were at all expert at tracking they should be able to
pick up my spoor without much difficulty.  The thing I most greatly
feared was that, suspecting me to be lurking in the neighbourhood, a few
of them had gone into ambush at no great distance, hoping that I should
ultimately show myself, while the rest were scouring the island.

Julius and I maintained our watch until nightfall; then, as soon as it
was as dark as it was likely to be that night, I made arrangements for
replenishing our stock of fresh water.  Julius was to mount guard in the
mouth of the cavern with his rifle, keeping a sharp look-out along the
ledge, which was just visible enough in the starlight to permit of the
boy being able to detect the approach of an enemy; and if he saw anyone
coming he was to give me warning, and shoot if necessary to cover my
retreat.  For my part, I was to take our only bucket, fill it with
water, and pass it up to Susie, who was to receive it in the mouth of
the cavern, carry it to the breaker, and empty it into the latter until
it was full.

It was not a long job, for the breaker was only of small capacity.  We
accomplished it in less than ten minutes, without interruption of any
kind, winding up by taking the full bucket into the cavern, as a
supplementary supply, and then drawing up the ladder after us.

The cavern was now provisioned and watered for at least four days.  We
could endure for that length of time without much difficulty or
hardship, after which, I ventured to hope, our anxiety respecting the
savages would be at an end.  I relieved Julius as guard, and sent him to
the inner cavern to get some food and a few hours' sleep prior to
relieving me in turn.

I fondly believed that the existence of our cavern was unknown, and that
we had been fortunate enough to replenish our stock of water unobserved;
but I afterward had reason to suspect the contrary.  I maintained a keen
watch at the mouth of the cavern until about midnight, my estimate of
the time being based upon the position and posture of the Southern Cross
in the sky--that constellation being visible from the mouth of the
cavern--when Mrs Vansittart came stealing out to me with the whispered
enquiry as to whether I was not tired enough to require a relief.  As a
matter of fact I was, and did not hesitate to say so, since the night
was quiet, I had seen nothing of a suspicious character, and Julius had
had a good long rest.  The lady retired, and presently Julius came
along, gaping and yawning, and stretched himself out beside me.  I
remained with him, conversing in low whispers, for about ten minutes,
until I was satisfied that he was broad awake, and then, with a final
word of caution, I left him and retreated to my own couch, where I soon
fell asleep.

I had been asleep about an hour when I was startled into instant
wakefulness by the sound of five rifle shots fired in quick succession;
and, rushing to the mouth of the cavern, I found Julius in a high state
of excitement.  Seizing my arm as I came beside him, he exclaimed:

"See that, Walter?"

Looking in the direction toward which the lad pointed, I was able to
descry just dimly a motionless something lying in the pathway, about ten
yards from the mouth of the cavern, while something else, still more
dimly visible, but recognisable as a little crowd of men, appeared about
twice as far away, evidently in somewhat hasty retreat.

"I believe I hit him," continued Julius, his teeth chattering with
excitement as he fidgeted with his rifle.

"Hit him!"  I interrupted; "I should think there is very little doubt
about that.  The man appears to be dead."

As the words left my lips we were joined by the women folk, who,
awakened by the rifle shots, came in a body to where we stood,
clamouring to know what was the matter.

"Let me tell you just what happened," interposed the boy.  "I was lying
down here, watching the path, with my rifle beside me, as I had been
doing ever since Walter left me.  Everything was quite quiet; I had not
seen a thing, or heard a sound, and I was beginning to feel a bit
sleepy.  So I stood up and moved about a bit to keep myself awake, since
Walter had told me it was of the utmost importance that a good look-out
should be kept.  I just walked across and across the mouth of the
cavern, three steps this way and three that, watching the path all the
time; and about ten minutes ago, or thereabout, I thought I saw a sort
of shadow or darkness that I had not noticed before out there at the far
end of the path.

"I stood still and watched; and presently I was sure that there was
something moving, and coming nearer; so I grabbed my rifle and lay down,
waiting, with my Remington pointing straight at 'em.  Nearer and nearer
they came, until at last I was certain that what I saw was two savages
carrying something on their shoulders, with other savages behind 'em.  I
waited until they were so close that I felt I couldn't miss, and then I
let drive--five shots, one after the other, right into the thick of 'em.
That savage lyin' there flung up his arms and keeled over, while the
other chap seemed to stagger a bit, I thought, and I heard something
fall that sounded as if they'd dropped a pole; then the whole crowd
turned and scooted.  But I'm pretty sure that I hit another chap as well
as the one lyin' out there."

"Excellent!"  I exclaimed.  "You have done splendidly, Julius, and saved
us all from a very ugly surprise.  Now, ladies, the danger is over for
the present, therefore you may retire and finish your sleep in peace.
As for you and I, Julius, we will get out our ladder, and, while you
watch with your rifle, I will slip out and roll that fellow over the
edge into the torrent; we don't want him lying there."

So said, so done.  We lowered the ladder and I climbed down it to the
pathway, with a loaded revolver in my hand as a precautionary measure,
for during our cruise among the islands I had heard one or two rather
gruesome stories of the craftiness and ferocity of certain savages while
out on the warpath.  But in the present instance my precaution was
needless.  The prostrate savage was quite dead, and I pushed him over
the edge of the pathway into the torrent that roared over its
precipitous rocky bed some thirty feet below, whence the body would
doubtless be swept along until it reached the harbour.  Then I found the
thing that he and another had been carrying, and put it safely inside
the cavern.  It was the trunk of a young tree, trimmed in similar
fashion to our own ladder; from which circumstance I inferred that,
lurking somewhere unseen, possibly among the bushes on the other side of
the ravine, some of the savages must not only have seen us replenishing
our water supply, but also have noted the character of the contrivance
which we used for gaining access to the interior of the cavern, and
copied it.

Toward the afternoon of next day I proposed that I should set out upon a
reconnoitring expedition, leaving Julius on guard, my intention being to
go along the ledge to a point from which I could obtain a view of the
beach, and so ascertain whether the canoes were still there.  But the
others would not hear of this; they denounced the project as both
unnecessary and dangerous; and when they found that this argument
scarcely sufficed to dissuade me, Mrs Vansittart flatly refused her
consent, asserting that if any mishap should befall me, Julius alone
would be utterly unable to protect the rest of them, and they must
inevitably fall into the hands of the savages.  To this I could find no
effective reply, for there was just enough truth in it to be almost
convincing; so I agreed to defer my expedition until at least the
following day.  There was some discussion among us, I remember, as to
where the savages had come from, and why they had called at the island:
as to the former, it was impossible to say; while my own opinion was
that their visit to our island was for the purpose of replenishing their
supply of food and water.

All that night and the next, and through the intervening days, we kept
rigorous watch and ward, while our supply of food and water dwindled
until we were almost as badly off as during our last days in the boat.
A further attempt to replenish our stock of water, which I made in
desperation during the night of the fourth day of our investment, showed
that our enemies were not only still present, but as watchful and
pertinacious as ever.  And that night, or rather in the early hours of
the following morning, came the climax, when the wily foe made a last
desperate attempt to rush our defences and overpower us by force of
numbers.

I had taken the first night watch, from six until ten, and Julius the
middle watch from ten until two o'clock in the morning, when I relieved
him.  He had informed me that he had neither seen nor heard anything of
a disquieting nature during his watch, and had left me about ten minutes
or thereabout, when, as I lay prone near the entrance of the cavern,
with my gaze intently fixed upon the path outside, a slight rustling
sound came to my ear.  I could not at first locate it, so I crept closer
and closer still to the opening, until my head was actually protruding
beyond the portal.  As I glanced cautiously about me, keenly alert to
draw back at the first swish of a spear, I felt something, which I
presently identified as fine dust, dropping lightly upon my neck and
head.  I drew my head back instantly, suspecting a ruse, and waited.

The next thing of which I became aware was a slight crackling sound,
followed by a faint flicker of light that rapidly grew stronger as I
watched.  It came from somewhere immediately above the cavern entrance,
and a few seconds later down came an immense bundle of blazing
brushwood, which hung suspended immediately in front of the upper part
of the opening, brilliantly illuminating the place where I lay.  The
next instant some thirty or more spears and darts came flying across the
ravine into the entrance, impinging sharply upon the rocky side of the
cavern to my right and then falling to the ground with a rattle that
quickly brought Julius to my side.

He gasped with astonishment as he saw the blazing bundle, and the spears
and darts lying upon the floor of the cavern.  But this was no time for
explanations, for I heard the pad of many running feet at no great
distance, drawing rapidly nearer, and recognised that a determined
attack was about to be made upon us.  The blazing brushwood served the
double purpose of brilliantly illuminating the mouth of the cavern and
dazzling our eyes, pretty effectually preventing our seeing what was
happening outside; so I drew Julius into the shelter of a projection
behind which I had already ensconsed myself, and whispered:

"Your rifle, quick!  Then get back to the inner cave, warn the women not
to come out on any account, and bring out our whole stock of cartridges.
This promises to be serious."

The projecting ledge of rock behind which I had sheltered chanced to be
most conveniently placed and shaped for the defence of the cavern
entrance.  It was broad enough to afford me and two or three more
complete shelter, while there was a nick in its outer edge of just the
right height and size to serve as a rest for a rifle barrel.  Standing
comfortably behind this, I placed the barrel of my repeater in the nick,
levelled it at the spot where I expected the first of our foes to
appear, and calmly waited.

I had not long to wait.  Julius had just rejoined me with his pockets
stuffed full of cartridges, and had murmured, "Momma and the others are
all right; they promised not to come out.  You shoot, and I'll reload,"
when the fast-increasing sound of the padding feet suddenly ceased just
outside the cavern entrance.  I heard a few guttural words spoken that
sounded like muttered orders, and then came the light thud of a
ladder-like pole placed in position.  I saw its upper extremity
distinctly in the light of the fire overhead, and sighted my rifle
directly upon it, ready to deflect the muzzle to right or left on the
instant, as might be necessary.  As the pole dropped lightly into
position a shrill whistle sounded, and on the instant a perfect storm of
spears, darts, and stones came whirring into the cavern, some of them
splintering on the sides, but the major portion falling far in beyond
us, causing me to pray fervently that the women would have the sense to
keep well under cover.  The next instant the hideously decorated head of
a savage rose into view as he ascended the ladder; but before he had
risen another foot my rifle cracked and he whirled backward into the
blackness without a cry.

I had but bare time to eject the spent shell and jerk another cartridge
into place when a second head appeared, only to be disposed of in the
same fashion, and this was followed by a third, which I neatly plugged
between the eyes.  While this was happening, the shower of spears,
darts, and stones--the two latter in particular--continued unabated.

With the extinction of the third man there came a pause, of which I took
advantage to exchange my partially-emptied Remington for another, while
Julius attended to the reloading.  But the pause was not a long one.
Presently I saw the top of the pole moving again, and in another moment
a fourth head appeared.  This savage, however, was a clever one; he was
not going to be shot through the head if he could help it, for when his
cranium rose into view it was being rapidly jerked from side to side, so
I waited until his body appeared, and then plugged him through the
lungs.  So the attack continued, the enemy displaying the most dogged
and indomitable determination, as well as the most extraordinary and
disconcerting cunning, and maintaining an incessant fire of darts and
stones--they seemed to be saving the remainder of their spears--while as
fast as the blazing faggots burned out they were replaced by others.
Evidently this attack had been carefully thought out and the most
elaborate preparations made for it.

Then, at the moment when I was beginning to ask myself seriously how
much longer this thing was going to last, and which party would be able
to hold out longest, a most dramatic interruption came,--nothing less
than the boom of a heavy gun from close in under the cliffs, not far
from the harbour's mouth.  A moment later I perceived, through the
flickering light of the blazing faggot, the white glare of a searchlight
focusing itself upon the path outside.  There was a yell of dismay from
the attacking force, loud shouts, and then the quick thud of swiftly
retreating feet as the savages broke and fled.  But before they could
possibly have reached the end of the path another gun spoke, the report
being immediately followed by an explosion, accompanied by a terrible
outburst of yells and shrieks.  Amid these I believed I heard the sharp
patter of shrapnel on the face of the cliff, while other yells arose
from the party who had been attending to the business of keeping up the
supply of burning faggots above the opening of the cavern.

We were saved!  By some extraordinary combination of circumstances a
ship--and a ship of war at that--had come upon the scene at the very
crisis of our fortunes, and, attracted possibly by the light of the
blazing faggots, had approached near enough to hear the sound of our
rifle fire, doubtless greatly intensified by the reverberations of the
cavern, and probably guessing pretty shrewdly at what it all meant, had
intervened in the very nick of time!

"Hurrah!"  I shouted, "hurrah!  A ship!  A ship!  And the savages have
fled.  Go and tell your mother and the others, Julius.  I will keep a
look-out here."

But there was no need for Julius to play the part of messenger; for the
report of the guns, followed by my jubilant exclamations, brought the
others forth with a rush from the innermost recesses of the cavern,
eager to know just exactly what had happened.

The rest of my story can soon be told.

To Mr Julius Vansittart, absorbed in the conduct and management of his
mammoth engineering business, the thought one morning occurred that a
considerable time had elapsed since he had last received news of his
wife and family, and that another letter from them must be about due.
On referring to the last letter received, and noting the date of its
arrival, he instantly perceived that another letter was not only due,
but considerably overdue; and knowing how regular and methodical his
wife was in the matter of correspondence, it did not take him very long
to arrive at the conclusion that something must have gone wrong with the
yacht.  This conclusion once arrived at, he "got a move on" and "humped
himself" (as he himself expressed it).  The consequence was that--
Vansittart being a man of powerful influence--it was not long before the
admiral in command of the U.S. squadron stationed in the Pacific
received a communication from Washington, acquainting him with the most
recent and contemplated future movements of the _Stella Maris_, as
furnished by Mr Vansittart, coupled with the information that she was
overdue, and an instruction to dispatch a vessel in search of the
missing yacht.  The result of this was the dramatic arrival of the U.S.
gunboat _Jefferson_ off our island at the psychological moment.

It appeared that she had already been engaged for nearly a month in a
systematic search for the yacht, during which she had picked up no less
than three of the bottles which we had dispatched from the reef,
containing our appeals for help, and had accordingly visited the scene
of the disaster, only to discover the sunken wreck of the yacht in the
lagoon.  Surmising, or rather hoping that we might somehow have
contrived to effect our escape, the commander of the _Jefferson_, after
a careful study of the prevailing winds and currents in those waters,
had mapped out a definite plan, in pursuance of which, after
unsuccessful calls at a number of other islands, he had headed for the
one upon which we had found shelter.  It had been sighted just before
dark, and the _Jefferson_ had headed for it at half speed, intending to
lay to in the offing upon arrival, and send a boat ashore in the
morning.

But when still some ten miles off the land a light--the light of the
savages' blazing faggots--had been seen; and, regarding this as a
possible signal, the command for full speed ahead had been rung down to
the engine room.  When the _Jefferson_ arrived close under the cliffs
and the searchlight had been turned on, the fact that a fight of some
sort was in progress had become evident, and, making a shrewd guess at
the actual state of affairs, the _Jefferson_ had taken a hand, with the
result already recorded.  By the aid of her searchlight and the sounding
lead, the gunboat then cautiously groped her way into the harbour and
came to an anchor about half a mile from the beach upon which lay the
four big war canoes and our apology for a boat.  The sight of these not
only suggested to the astute commander that at last he had got upon our
track, but also confirmed his surmise as to the state of affairs ashore;
and no sooner was the anchor down than he dispatched a heavily-armed
boat, the officer of which was instructed to make his way instantly to
the cave and investigate.  The meeting was, for both parties, a joyous
one; and as no savages had been seen by the landing party--they had
evidently fled into the woods--we lost no time in making our way to the
beach, taking our rifles and ammunition with us, and from the beach to
the _Jefferson_, where we were cordially welcomed and highly
complimented upon the vigorous defence of the cavern which we had put
up.  To our infinite satisfaction we found that, acting upon
instructions, the commander of the gunboat had brought with him a
well-selected wardrobe for each of us, on the off-chance of his search
proving successful and the articles being needed.  Consequently when, a
few hours later, we all sat down to breakfast in the commander's private
cabin, we scarcely recognised each other, clad as we now were once more
in the garb of civilisation in place of our discarded rags.

The war canoes and our boat were burnt where they lay on the beach, thus
leaving the savages prisoners on the island; and, this done, we got
under way for Manila, where we arrived nine days later.

From Manila a cable message was dispatched to Mr Vansittart,
immediately upon our arrival, informing him of our safety.  And on the
following day a reply came from him expressing his delight at the news,
together with a cabled credit on the bank for funds amply sufficient to
convey the entire party to New York--where, via Yokohama and San
Francisco, we eventually arrived safely, by a freak of coincidence, two
years to a day from the date of our departure from London.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIRST MATE: THE STORY OF A STRANGE CRUISE ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

