










PETERKIN

[Illustration: MAMMA . . . HUGGED HIM AS IF HE'D BEEN LOST FOR A YEAR.

[_Frontispiece._]




PETERKIN


BY


MRS. MOLESWORTH


AUTHOR OF 'CARROTS,' 'CUCKOO CLOCK,' 'TELL ME A STORY'


_WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY H. R. MILLAR_

          =London=
          MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
          NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
          1902


          _All rights reserved_




          TO

          "ALEX"

          ALEXANDER DOBREE HERRIES

          I DEDICATE THIS LITTLE STORY


          155 SLOANE STREET, S.W.
          _May Day_ 1902





CONTENTS


  CHAP.                                             PAGE

     I. WHAT _CAN_ HAVE BECOME OF HIM?                 1

    II. FOUND                                         19

   III. AN INVITATION                                 34

    IV. VERY MYSTERIOUS                               50

     V. 'STRATAGEMS'                                  69

    VI. MARGARET                                      84

   VII. THE GREAT PLAN                               101

  VIII. A TERRIBLE IDEA                              118

    IX. IN A FOG                                     135

     X. BERYL                                        149

    XI. DEAR MAMMA                                   165

   XII. NO MYSTERY AFTER ALL                         182




ILLUSTRATIONS


  MAMMA . . . HUGGED HIM AS IF HE'D BEEN LOST FOR A YEAR  _Frontispiece_

  OUR MISSING PETERKIN                                 _To face page_ 13

  NO SOONER DID HE CATCH SIGHT OF US TWO WITH HIS UGLY
    ROUND BEADY EYES . . . THAN HE SHUT UP                   "   "    52

  PETE HELD OUT HIS BROWN-PAPER PARCEL. 'THIS IS THE
    POETRY-BOOK,' HE SAID                                    "   "    97

  WE HAD NO DIFFICULTY IN FINDING HER BATH-CHAIR             "   "   108

  HE LOOKED AT THE TICKETS . . . 'HOW'S THIS?' HE SAID       "   "   145

  'NOW,' SHE BEGAN . . . DRAWING MARGARET TO HER, 'TELL
    ME ALL ABOUT IT'                                         "   "   159

  THE FRILLS HAD WORKED UP ALL ROUND HIS FACE                "   "   173




PETERKIN




CHAPTER I

WHAT _CAN_ HAVE BECOME OF HIM?


WE were all at tea in the nursery. All except him. The door burst open
and James put his head in.

'If you please, Mrs. Brough,' he began,--'Mrs. Brough' is the servants'
name for nurse. Mamma calls her 'Brough' sometimes, but we always call
her 'nurse,' of course,--'If you please, Mrs. Brough, is Master Peterkin
here?'

Nurse looked up, rather vexed. She doesn't like burstings in.

'Of course not, James,' she said. 'He is out driving with his mamma. You
must have seen them start.'

'It's just that,' said James, in his silly way. 'It's his mamma that
wants to know.'

And then we noticed that James's face was much redder than usual. It may
have been partly that he had run upstairs very fast, for he is really
very good-natured, but it looked as if he was rather in a fuss, too.

Nurse sat very bolt up in her chair, and _her_ face began to get queer,
and her voice to get vexeder. Lots of people get cross when they are
startled or frightened. I have noticed it.

'What do you mean, James? Please to explain,' she said.

'I can't stop,' he said, 'and I don't rightly understand, myself. His
mamma sent Master Peterkin home before her, half-an-hour ago or more,
but he hasn't come in, not as I've seen, nor nobody else, I'm afraid. So
where he's got to, who can say?'

And James turned to go.

Nurse stopped him, getting up from her place as she spoke.

'Was he in the carriage?' she asked.

'Of course not. Beckett would have seen him in, all right, if he had
been,' said James, in a very superior tone. 'He was to run home by
himself a bit of a way, as I take it,' he added, as he hurried off at
last.

'I must go downstairs to your mamma,' said nurse. 'Miss Blanchie, my
dear, will you look after Miss Elvira, and see that she doesn't spill
her tea?'

'_Nursie_,' said Elvira, in a very offended tone, 'you know I never
spill my tea now.'

'Not since the day before yesterday,' I was beginning to say, but I
didn't. For I thought to myself, if there was any real trouble about
Peterkin, it wouldn't be at all a good time to tease each other. I don't
think Elf--that's Elvira's pet name--had understood about him being
lost. Indeed, I don't think I had quite taken it in myself, till I saw
how grave the two eldest ones were looking.

'Clem,' I said, 'do you think there can really be anything the matter?'

Clement is the eldest of us all, and he is always the one we go to first
if we are in any trouble. But he is sometimes rather slow; he is not as
quick and clever as Blanche, and she often puts him down at first,
though she generally comes round to his way in the end. She answered for
him now, though I hadn't spoken to her.

'How can there not be something the matter?' she said sharply. 'If
Peterkin has been half-an-hour or an hour, perhaps, wandering about the
streets, it shows he has at least lost his way, and who knows where he's
got to. I wish you wouldn't ask such silly questions, Giles.'

Then, all of a sudden, Elf burst out crying. It may have been partly
Blanche's sharp tone, which had startled her, and made her take more
notice of it all.

'Oh, Clem, Clem,' she wailed, 'could he have been stolened?'

'No, no, darling,' said Clement, dabbing her face with his
pocket-handkerchief. 'There are kind policemen in the streets, you know.
They wouldn't let a little boy like Peterkin be stolen.'

'But they does take little boys to pison,' said Elf. 'I've see'd them.
It's 'cos of that I'm frightened of them for Peterkin.'

That was not quite true. She had never thought of policemen till,
unluckily, Clem spoke of them in his wish to comfort her. She did not
mean to say what was not true, of course, but there never was such a
child as Elf for arguing, even then when she was only four years old.
Indeed, she's not half as bad now that she is eight, twice as old, and I
often tell her so. Perhaps that evening it wasn't a bad thing, for the
talking about policemen stopped her crying, which was even worse than
her arguing, once she started a good roar.

'It's just because of that, that I'm so frightened about dear sweet
little Peterkin,' she repeated.

'Rubbish, Elf,' I began, but Clem looked at me and I stopped.

'You needn't be frightened that Peterkin will be taken to prison,
Elfie,' he said in his kind, rather slow way. 'It's only naughty little
boys that the policemen take to prison, and Peterkin isn't naughty,' and
then he wiped Elf's eyes again, and she forgot to go on crying, for just
then nurse came upstairs. _She_ was not actually crying, of course, but
she did look very worried, so Clem and Blanche's faces did not clear up
at all. Nor did mine, I suppose. I really did not know what to think, I
was waiting to see what the others thought, for we three younger ones
looked up to Clement and Blanche a good deal, and we still do. They are
twins, and they seem to mix together so well. Blanche is quick and
clever, and Clement is awfully sensible, and they are both very kind,
though Clem is the gentlest. They are nearly sixteen now, and I am
thirteen past, so at the time I am writing about they were twelve and I
was going to be ten my next birthday, and Peterkin was eight and Elvira
five. I won't say much about what sort of a boy Peterkin was, for as my
story is mostly about him and the funny things he did and thought, it
will show of itself.

He _was_ a funny child; a queer child in some ways, I mean, and he still
is. Mamma says it is stupid to say 'funny' when we mean queer or odd,
but I think it says it better than any other word, and I am sure other
children will think so too.

Blanche was the first to speak to nurse.

'Is mamma really frightened about Peterkin, nurse?' she asked. 'Tell us
what it is.'

But nurse had caught sight of her darling pet baby's red eyes.

'Miss Blanchie,' she said, 'I asked you to look after Miss Elvira, and
she's been crying.'

'You asked me to see that she didn't spill her tea, and she hasn't spilt
it. It's some nonsense she has got in her head about policemen taking
strayed children to prison that she has been crying about,' replied
Blanche, rather crossly.

'I only wish,' began nurse, but the rest of her sentence she mumbled to
herself, though I heard part of it. It was wishing that the policemen
_had_ got Peterkin safely.

'Of course, your poor mamma is upset about it,' she went on, though I
could see she did not want to say very much for fear of Elf's beginning
to cry again. 'It was this way. Your mamma had to go round by Belton
Street, and she did not want to keep Master Peterkin out so late to miss
his tea, so she dropped him at the corner of Lindsay Square, and told
him to run home. It's as straight as straight can be, and he's often run
that far alone. So where he's got to or gone to, there's no guessing.'

'And what is mamma doing?' asked Blanche.

'She has sent Mr. Drew and James off in different directions,' said
nurse, 'and she has gone herself again in the carriage to the station,
as it's just time for your papa's train, and he will know what more to
do.'

We did not live in London then; papa went up and down every day from the
big town by the sea where our home was. Clement thinks perhaps I had
better not say what town it is, as some people might remember about us,
and I _might_ say things that would vex them; so I won't call it
anything, though I must explain that it is not at all a little place,
but quite big enough for any one to lose their way in, if they were
strangers. But Peterkin wasn't a stranger; and the way he had to come
was, as nurse said, as straight as straight.

We all listened with grave faces to what nurse told us. Suddenly Clement
got up--I can't say 'jumped up,' for he was always rather slow.

'Nurse,' he said, 'mamma's out, so I can't ask her leave. But I've got
an idea about Peterkin. Will you give me leave to go out for
half-an-hour or so? I promise you I won't go far, but I would rather not
tell you where I want to go, as it may be all nonsense.'

Nurse looked at him doubtfully. She trusted Clem the most of us all, I
know, and she had good reason to do so, for he was and is very
trustworthy. And it was nice of him to ask her leave, considering he was
twelve years old and quite out of the nursery, except that he still
liked having tea there when he came in from school every evening.

'Well, Master Clement,' said nurse, 'I don't quite know. Supposing you
go out and don't get back as soon as you expect? It would be just a
double fright for your poor mamma.'

'Let me go too!' I exclaimed, and I jumped up so suddenly that I made
all the cups rattle and nearly threw over the table altogether. 'Then if
anything stops Clem getting back quickly, I can run home and explain.
Anyway you'd be more comfortable if you knew the two of us were on the
hunt together. You don't mind my coming, do you, Clem?'

'No,' said Clem, 'but do let's go.'

'And you won't be long?' pleaded nurse.

Clem shook his head.

'I don't think we can be--not if there's anything in my idea', he called
out, as we ran off.

We didn't take a minute to pull on our coats, which were hanging in the
hall. I daresay I should never have thought of mine at all, if Clem
hadn't reminded me, even though it was late in November and a cold
evening. And as soon as we were outside and had set off at a good pace,
I begged Clem to tell me what his idea was, and where we were going to
look for Peterkin.

'It's the parrot,' he replied; 'the parrot in Rock Terrace.'

'I don't know what you mean,' I said. 'I never heard of a parrot, and I
don't know where Rock Terrace is.'

'Nonsense,' said Clem, stopping for a moment. 'You must have forgotten.'

'I haven't indeed,' I said.

'Not about the parrot that Peterkin has been dreaming of ever since we
passed it on Saturday, when we were out with mamma--next door to old
Mrs. Wylie's?' Clem exclaimed.

'No,' I repeated. 'I wasn't with you that day, and----'

'No more you were,' said Clem.

'And,' I went on, 'I don't know where Mrs. Wylie lives, though I've
often seen her herself at our house. And you know, Clement, that's just
like Peterkin. If he's got anything very much in his head, he often
doesn't speak of it, except to any one who knows about it already.'

'He hasn't said very much about it, even to me,' said Clement. 'But, all
the same, I know he has got it tremendously in his head.'

'How do you mean? Is he making up fairy stories about it?'

'Perhaps! You see he had never heard a parrot speaking. I'm not sure if
he knew they ever did. But he wanted very much to see it again, and it
just came into my mind all at once, that if he had a chance he might
have run round there and lost his way. I don't suppose he _meant_ to
when mamma told him to go home. It may just have struck him when he got
to the corner of Lindsay Square.'

I did not answer. We were walking so fast that it was not easy to go on
speaking. But I did think it was very clever of Clement to have thought
of it. It was so like Peterkin.

Clement hurried on. It was quite dark by now, but the lamps were
lighted, and Clem seemed quite sure of his way. In spite of feeling
rather unhappy about Peterkin, I was enjoying myself a little. I did not
think it possible that he was really badly lost, and it was very
exciting to rush along the streets after dark like this, and then I
could not help fancying how triumphant we should feel if we actually
found him.

It was not very surprising that I did not know where Rock Terrace was,
or that I had never even heard of it. It was such a tiny little row of
such tiny houses, opening out of one corner of Lindsay Square. The
houses were rather pretty; at least, very neat-looking and
old-fashioned, with a little bit of garden in front, and small iron
gates. They looked as if old maids lived in them, and I daresay there
were a good many.

Clement hurried along till he was close to the farther off end. Then he
stopped short, and for the first time seemed at a loss.

'I don't know the number,' he said, 'but I'm sure it was almost the end
house. And--yes--isn't that a big cage on the little balcony, Giles?
Look well.'

I peeped up. The light of the lamps was not very good in Rock Terrace.

'Yes,' I said. 'It is a big cage, but I can't see if there's a bird in
it.'

'Perhaps they take him in at night,' said Clement. Then he looked up
again at the balconies.

'Let me see,' he went on, 'which side is Mrs. Wylie's? Mamma went in at
the--' but before he had time to finish his sentence his doubts were set
at rest--his doubts and all our fears about Peterkin. For the door on
the left of the parrot's home opened slowly, letting out what seemed, in
contrast with the darkness outside, a flood of light, just within which,
in the small hall or lobby of the miniature house, stood two
figures--the one, that of a short thin old lady with white hair, dressed
all in black; the other, a short fat little boy in a thick coat--our
missing Peterkin!

[Illustration: OUR MISSING PETERKIN.--p. 13.]

They were speaking to each other most politely.

'So pleased to have seen you, my dear,' said Mrs. Wylie. 'Give my love
to your dear mamma. I will not forget about the parrot, you may be sure.
He shall have a proper invitation. And--you are quite certain you can
find your way home? Oh, dear!--that poor child must have been bemoaning
herself again! Polly always knows.'

And as we stood there, our minds scarcely made up as to what we should
do, we heard a queer croaking voice, from inside the house on the right
of Mrs. Wylie--the parrot's voice, of course, calling out--

'I'm so tired, Nana; I'm so tired. I won't be good; no, I won't.'

Mrs. Wylie and Peterkin both stood silent for a moment, listening. So
did we. Then Clement opened the gate and ran up the two or three steps,
I following him.

'Peterkin!' he exclaimed, 'mamma has been so frightened about you.'

And Peterkin turned round and looked up in his face with his big blue
eyes, apparently quite astonished.

'Has mamma come back?' he said. 'I've only been here for a minute or
two. I just wanted to look at the parrot.'

Mrs. Wylie was a quick-witted old lady. She took it all in, in a moment.

'Dear, dear!' she said. 'I am afraid it is my fault. I saw the dear boy
looking up at the parrot next door when I came in from my stroll round
to the pillar-box with a letter, and he told me he was one of Mrs.
Lesley's little sons, and then we got talking. But I had no idea his
mamma would be alarmed. I am afraid it has been much more than a few
minutes. I _am_ sorry.'

It was impossible to say anything to trouble the poor old lady: she
looked as if she were going to cry.

'It will be all right now,' said Clement. 'Mamma will be so delighted to
see him safe and sound. But we had better hurry home. Come along,
Peterkin.'

But nothing would make Peterkin forget his good manners. He tugged off
his sailor cap again, which he had just put on, and held out his hand,
for the second or third time, I daresay, as he and his old lady had
evidently been hobnobbing over their leave-takings for some minutes
before we made our appearance.

'Good-bye!' he said; 'and thank you very much. And I'll ask mamma to let
me come whenever you fix the day for the parrot. And please tell me all
he tells you about the little girl. And--thank you very much.'

They were the funniest pair. She so tiny and thin and white, with bright
dark eyes, like some bird's, and Peterkin so short and sturdy and rosy,
with his big dreamy ones looking up at her. She was just a little taller
than he. And suddenly I saw his rosy face grow still rosier; crimson or
scarlet, really. For Mrs. Wylie made a dash at him and kissed him, and
unluckily Peterkin did not like being kissed, except by mamma and Elf.
His politeness, however, stood him in good stead. He did not pull away,
or show that he hated it, as lots of fellows would have done. He stood
quite still, and then, with another tug at his cap, ran down the steps
after Clem and me.

Clement waited a moment or two before he spoke. It was his way; but just
now it was a good thing, as Mrs. Wylie did not shut the door quite at
once, and everything was so quiet in that little side street, in the
evening especially, that very likely our voices would have carried back
to her. I, for my part, was longing to shake Peterkin, though I felt
very inclined to burst out laughing, too. But I knew it was best to
leave the 'rowing' to Clem.

'Peterkin,' he began at last, 'I don't know what to say to you.'

Peterkin had got hold of Clem's hand and was holding it tight, and he
was already rather out of breath, as Clem was walking fast--very fast
for him--and he has always been a long-legged chap for his age, thin and
wiry, too; whereas, in those days--though, thank goodness, he is growing
like a house on fire _now_--Peterkin was as broad as he was long. So to
keep up with Clement's strides he had to trot, and that sort of pace
soon makes a kid breathless, of course.

'I--I never thought mamma'd be flightened,' he managed to get out at
last. He had been a long time of saying his 'r's' clearly, and now they
still all got into 'l's' if he was bothered or startled. 'I never
thought she'd be flightened.'

'Then you were a donkey,' I burst out, and Clement interrupted me.

'How could she not have been frightened?' he went on. 'She told you to
run straight home, which wouldn't have taken you five minutes, and you
have been at least an hour.'

'I thought it wouldn't be no farther to come this way,' replied
Peterkin, 'and I only meant to look at the pallot one minute. And it
would have been very lu--_rude_ not to speak to the old lady, and go
into her house for a minute when she asked me. Mamma always says we
mustn't be rude,' said Peterkin, plucking up some spirit.

'Mamma always says we must be _obedient_' replied Clement, severely.

Then he relapsed into silence, and his quick footsteps and Peterkin's
short trotty ones were the only sounds.

'I believe,' I couldn't help murmuring, half to myself, half to
Peterkin--'I believe you've got some rubbish in your head about the
parrot being a fairy. If I were mamma I'd stop your----' but at that I
stopped _myself_. If Clement had heard me he would have been down upon
me for disrespectfulness in saying to a baby like Pete what I thought
mamma should or should not do; and I didn't care to be pulled up by
Clement before the little ones.

Peterkin was as sharp as needles in some ways. He guessed the end of my
unfinished sentence.

'No,' he half whispered, 'mamma'd _never_ stop me reading faily
stolies--you know she wouldn't, Gilly, and it's velly unkind of you to
say so.'

'I didn't say so,' I replied.

'Be quiet, both of you,' said Clem, 'and hurry on,' for we had slackened
a little.

But in spite of the breathlessness of the pace, I heard another gasp
from Peterkin--

'It _is_ velly like the blue-bird,' were the words I distinguished.

And 'I knew I was right,' I thought to myself triumphantly.




CHAPTER II

FOUND


THE carriage was standing waiting at our own house when we got there.
And there was some bustle going on, for the front door was not shut, and
we could see into the hall, which of course was brightly lighted up.

Papa was there, speaking to some one; he had his hat on, as if he was
just coming out again. And--yes--it was Drew he was speaking to, and
James too, I think--but behind them was poor mamma, looking so
dreadfully unhappy. It did make me want to shake Peterkin again.

They did not see us as quickly as we saw them, for it was dark outside
and they were all talking: papa giving directions, I fancy.

So they did jump when Clem--hurrying for once--rushed up the steps,
dragging Peterkin after him.

'We've found him--we've found him!' he shouted. 'In with you, Pete: show
yourself, quick.'

For mamma had got quite white, and looked as if she were going to faint
or tumble down in some kind of a fit; but luckily before she had time
for anything, there was that fat boy hugging and squeezing her so tight
that she'd have been clever to move at all, though if she _had_ tumbled
down he would have made a good buffer.

'Oh, mamma, mamma--oh, mummy,' he said, and by this time he was howling,
of course, 'I never meant to flighten you. I never did. I thought I'd
been only five minutes, and I thought it was nearly as quick home that
way.'

And of course mamma didn't scold him! She hugged him as if he'd been
lost for a year, and as if he was the prodigal son and the good brother
mixed up together.

But papa looked rather stern, and I was not altogether sorry to see it.

'Where have you been, Peterkin?' he said. And then he glanced up at us
two--Clem and me--as Peterkin seemed too busy crying to speak. 'Where
has he been?' papa repeated. 'It was very clever of you to find him, I
must say.'

And mamma's curiosity began to awaken, now that she had got old Pete
safe in her arms again. She looked up with the same question in her
face.

'Where--' she began.

And I couldn't help answering.

'It was all Clem's idea,' I said, for it really was only fair for Clem
to get some praise. 'He thought of the parrot.'

'The _parrot_', mamma repeated, growing more puzzled instead of less.

'Yes,' said Clement. 'The parrot next door to Mrs. Wylie's. Perhaps you
don't remember, mamma. It was the day Peterkin and I were out with
you--Giles wasn't there--and you went in to Mrs. Wylie's and we waited
outside, and the parrot was in a cage on the balcony, and we heard it
talk.'

'Yes,' said Peterkin, 'he _talked_,' as if that was an explanation of
everything.

Mamma's face cleared.

'I think I do remember something about it,' she said. 'But I have never
heard you mention it since, Peterkin?'

'No,' said Peterkin, getting rather red.

'He has spoken of it a little to me,' said Clement; 'that's how I knew
it was in his mind. But Peterkin often doesn't say much about what he's
thinking a lot about. It's his way.'

'Yes,' said Peterkin, 'it's my way.'

'And have you been planning all these days to run off to see the parrot
again?' asked mamma. I wasn't quite sure if she was vexed or not, but
_I_ was; it seemed so queer, queer as Pete often was, for him not to
have confided in somebody.

But we were mistaken.

'No, no, truly, mamma,' he said, speaking in a much more determined way
now, and shaking his curly head. 'I didn't ever think of it till after
I'd got out of the calliage and I saw it was the corner of the big
square where the little houses are at one end, and then I only meant to
go for one minute. I thought it was nearly as quick that way, and I ran
fast. I never meant to flighten you, mamma,' he repeated again, his
voice growing plaintive. 'I wasn't planning it a bit all these days. I
only kept thinking it _were_ like the blue-bird.'

The last sentence was almost in a whisper; it was only a sort of honesty
that forced him to say it. As far as Clement and I were concerned, he
needn't have said it.

'I knew he'd got some fairy-story rubbish in his head,' I muttered, but
I don't think Peterkin heard me, though papa and mamma did; for I saw
them glance at each other, and papa said something under his breath, of
which I only caught the words 'getting too fanciful,' and 'schoolboy,'
which made mamma look rather unhappy again.

'I don't yet understand how old Mrs. Wylie got mixed up in it all,' said
papa.

'She lives next door to the parrot,' said Clem, and we couldn't help
smiling at the funny way he said it.

'And she saw me when she was coming back from the post, and she was very
kind,' Peterkin went on, taking up the story again, as the smile had
encouraged him. 'She 'avited me to go in, up to her drawing-room, so
that I could hear him talking better. And he said lots of things.'

'Oh yes, by the bye,' I exclaimed, 'there was something about a little
girl, Mrs. Wylie said. What was it, Pete?'

But Peterkin shut up at this.

'I'll tell you the next time I go there. Mummy, you will let me go to
see that old lady again, won't you?' he begged. 'She was so kind, and I
only thought I'd been there five minutes. Mayn't I go again to see
her?'

'_And_ the parrot,' said mamma, smiling. She was sharp enough to take in
that it was a quarter for Mrs. Wylie and three quarters for the parrot
that he wanted so to go back to Rock Terrace. 'Well, you must promise
never to pay visits on your own account again, Peterkin, and then we
shall see. Now run upstairs to the nursery as fast as you can and get
some tea. And I'm sure Clem and Giles will be glad of some more. I hope
poor nurse and Blanche and Elfie know he is all right,' she added,
glancing round.

'Yes, ma'am. I took the liberty of going up to tell the young ladies and
Mrs. Brough, when Master Peterkin first returned,' said James in his
very politest and primmest tone.

'That was very thoughtful of you,' said mamma, approvingly, which made
James get very red.

We three boys skurried upstairs after that. At least I did. Clement came
more slowly, but as his legs were long enough to take two steps at a
time, he got to the top nearly as soon as I did, and Peterkin came
puffing after us. I was rather surprised that Blanche and Elf had been
content to stay quietly in the nursery, considering all the excitement
that had been going on downstairs, and I think it was very good of
Blanche, for she told me afterwards that she had only done it to keep
Elvira from getting into one of her endless crying fits. They always say
Elf is such a nervous child that she can't help it, but _I_ think it's a
good bit of it cross temper too.

Still she is rather growing out of it, and, after all, that night there
was something to cry about, and there might have been worse, as nurse
said. She had been telling the girls stories of people who got lost,
though she was sensible enough to make them turn up all right at the
end. She can tell very interesting stories sometimes, but she keeps the
_best_ ones to amuse us when we are ill, or when mamma's gone away on a
visit, or something horrid like that has happened.

They all three flew at Peterkin, of course, and hugged him as if he'd
been shipwrecked, or putting out a fire, or something grand like that.
And he took it as coolly as anything, and asked for his tea, as if he
deserved all the petting and fussing.

That was another of his little 'ways,' I suppose.

Then, as we were waiting for the kettle to boil up again to make fresh
tea, if you please, for his lordship--though Clem and I were to have
some too, of course, and we did deserve it--all the story had to be
told over for the third or fourth time, of the parrot, and old Mrs.
Wylie meeting Pete as she came in, and his thinking he'd only been there
about five minutes, and all the rest of it.

'And what did the Polly parrot talk about?' asked Elf. She had a picture
of a parrot in one of her books, and some rhymes about it.

'Oh,' answered Peterkin,' he said, "How d'ye do?" and "Pretty Poll," and
things like that.'

'He said queerer things than that; you know he--' I began. I saw Pete
didn't want to tell about the parrot copying the mysterious child that
Mrs. Wylie had spoken of, so I thought I'd tease him a bit by reminding
him of it. I felt sure he had got some of his funny ideas out of his
fairy stories in his head; that the little girl--for Mrs. Wylie had
spoken of a 'her'--was an enchanted princess or something like that, and
I wasn't far wrong, as you will see. But I didn't finish my sentence,
for Peterkin, who was sitting next me, gave me a sort of little kick,
not to hurt, of course, and whispered, 'I'll tell you afterwards.' So I
felt it would be ill-natured to tease him, and I didn't say any more,
and luckily the others hadn't noticed what I had begun. Blanchie was on
her knees in front of the fire toasting for us, and Elf was putting
lumps of sugar into the cups, to be ready.

Pete was as hungry as a hunter, and our sharp walk had given Clem and me
a fresh appetite, so we ate all the toast and a lot of plum-cake as
well, and felt none the worse for it.

And soon after that, it was time to be tidied up to go down to the
drawing-room to mamma. Peterkin and Elvira only stayed half-an-hour or
so, but after they had gone to bed we three big ones went into the
library to finish our lessons while papa and mamma were at dinner.
Sometimes we went into the dining-room to dessert, and sometimes we
worked on till mamma called us into the drawing-room: it all depended on
how many lessons we'd got to do, or how fast we had got on with them.
Clement and Blanche were awfully good about that sort of thing, and went
at it steadily, much better than I, I'm afraid, though I could learn
pretty quickly if I chose. But I did not like lessons, especially the
ones we had to do at home, for in these days Clem and I only went to a
day-school and had to bring books and things back with us every
afternoon. And besides these lessons we had to do at home for school, we
had a little extra once or twice a week, as we had French conversation
and reading on half-holidays with Blanche's teachers, and they sometimes
gave us poetry to learn by heart or to translate. We were not exactly
_obliged_ to do it, but of course we didn't want Blanche, who was only a
girl, to get ahead of us, as she would very likely have done, for she
did grind at her lessons awfully. I think most girls do.

It sounds as if we were rather hard-worked, but I really don't think we
were, though I must allow that we worked better in those days, and
learnt more in comparison, than we do now at--I won't give the name of
the big school we are at. Clement says it is better not--people who
write books never do give the real names, he says, and I fancy he's
right. It is an awfully jolly school, and we are as happy as sand-boys,
whatever that means, but I can't say that we work as Blanche does,
though she does it all at home with governesses.

That part of the evening--when we went back to the drawing-room to
mamma, I mean--was one of the times I shall always like to remember
about. It is very jolly now, of course, to be at home for the holidays,
but there was then the sort of 'treat' feeling of having got our lessons
done, and the little ones comfortably off to bed, and the
grown-up-ness.

Mamma looked so pretty, as she was always nicely dressed, though I liked
some of her dresses much better than others--I don't like her in black
ones at all; and the drawing-room was pretty, and then there was mamma's
music. Her playing was nice, but her singing was still better, and she
used to let us choose our favourite songs, each in turn. Blanche plays
the violin now, very well, they say, and mamma declares she is really
far cleverer at music than she herself ever was; but for all that, I
shall never care for her fiddle anything like mamma's singing; if I live
to be a hundred, I shall never forget it.

It is a great thing to have really jolly times like those evenings to
think of when you begin to get older, and are a lot away from home, and
likely to be still less and less there.

But I must not forget that this story is supposed to be principally
about Peterkin and his adventures, so I'll go on again about the night
after he'd been lost.

He and I had a room together, and he was nearly always fast asleep, like
a fat dormouse, when I went up to bed. He had a way of curling himself
round, like a ball, that really did remind you of a dormouse. I believe
it kept him from growing; I really do, though I did my best to pull him
out straight. He didn't like that, ungrateful chap, and used to growl at
me for it, and I believe he often pretended to be asleep when he wasn't,
just to stop me doing it; for one night, nurse had come in to know what
the row was about, and though she agreed with me that it was much better
for him to lie properly stretched at his full length, she said I wasn't
to wake him up because of it.

But if he was generally fast asleep at night when I came to bed, he
certainly made up for it by waking in the morning. I never knew anything
like him for that. I believe he woke long before the birds, winter as
well as summer, and then was his time for talking and telling me his
stories and fancies. Once I myself was well awake I didn't mind, as it
was generally rather interesting; but I couldn't stand the being
awakened ages before the time. So we made an agreement, that if I didn't
wake him up at night, he'd not bother me in the morning till I gave a
sign that I was on the way to waking of myself. The sign was a sort of
snort that's easy to make, even while you're still pretty drowsy, and it
did very well, as I could lie quiet in a dreamy way listening to him.
He didn't want me to speak, only to snort a little now and then till I
got quite lively, as I generally did in a few minutes, as his stories
grew more exciting, and there came something that I wanted him to alter
in them.

That night, however, when I went up to bed there was no need to think of
our bargain, for Peterkin was as wide awake as I was.

'Haven't you been to sleep yet?' I asked him.

'Not exactly,' he said. 'Just a sort of half. I'm glad you've come,
Gilley, for I've got a lot of things in my head.'

'You generally have,' I said, 'but _I'm_ sleepy, if you're not. That
scamper in the cold after you, my good boy, was rather tiring, I can
tell you.'

'I'm very sorry,' said he, in a penitent tone of voice, 'but you know,
Giles, I never meant to----'

'Oh, stop that!' I exclaimed; 'you've said it twenty times too often
already. Better tell me a bit of the things in your head. Then you can
go to sleep, and dream them out, and have an interesting story ready for
me in the morning.'

'Oh, but--' objected Pete, sitting up in bed and clasping his hands
round his knees, his face very red, and his eyes very blue and bright,
'they're not dreamy kind of things at all. There's really something
very misterist--what is the proper word, Gilley?'

'"Mysterious," I suppose you mean,' I said.

'Yes, misterous,' repeated he, 'about what the parrot said, and I'm
pretty sure that old lady thinks so too.'

'Didn't she explain about it, at all?' I asked him. I began to think
there _was_ something queer, perhaps, for Peterkin's manner impressed
me.

'Well, she did a little,' he replied. 'But I'd better tell you all,
Gilley; just what I first heard, before she came up and spoke to me, you
know, and----'

Just then, however, there came an interruption.

Mamma put her head in at the door.

'Boys,' she said, 'not asleep yet? At least _you_ should be, Peterkin.
You didn't wake him, I hope, Giles?'

I had no time for an indignant 'No; of course, not,' before Pete came to
my defence.

'No, no, mummy! I was awake all of myself. I wanted him to come very
much, to talk a little.'

'Well, you must both be rather tired with all the excitement there has
been,' mamma said. 'So go to sleep, now, and do your talking in the
morning. Promise,--both of you--eh?'

'Yes,' we answered; 'word of honour, mamma,' and she went away, quite
sure that we would keep our promise, which was sealed by a kiss from
her.

Dear little mother! She did not often come up to see us in bed, for fear
of rousing us out of our 'beauty' sleep, but to-night she had felt as if
she must make sure we were all right after the fuss of Peterkin's being
lost, you see.

And of course we were as good as our word, and only just said
'Good-night!' to each other; Pete adding, 'I'll begin at the beginning,
and tell you everything, as soon as I hear your first snort in the
morning, Giles.'

'You'd better wait for my second or third,' I replied. 'I'm never very
clear-headed at the first, and I want to give my attention, as it's
something real, and not one of your make-ups,' I said. 'So, good-night!'

It is awfully jolly to know that you are trusted, isn't it?




CHAPTER III

AN INVITATION


I SLEPT on rather later than usual next morning. I suppose I really was
tired. And when I began to awake, and gradually remembered all that had
happened the night before, I heartily wished I hadn't promised Peterkin
to snort at all.

I took care not to open my eyes for a good bit, but I couldn't carry on
humbugging that I was still asleep for very long. Something made me open
my eyes, and as soon as I did so I knew what it was. There was
Pete--bolt upright--as wide awake as if he had never been asleep,
staring at me with all his might, his eyes as round and blue as could
be. You know the feeling that some one is looking at you, even when you
don't see them. I had not given one snort, and I could not help feeling
rather cross with Peterkin, even when he exclaimed--

'Oh, I am so glad you're awake!'

'You've been staring me awake,' I said, very grumpily. 'I'd like to know
who could go on sleeping with you wishing them awake?'

'I'm very sorry if you wanted to go on sleeping,' he replied meekly. He
did not seem at all surprised at my saying he had wakened me. He used to
understand rather queer things like that so quickly, though we counted
him stupid in some ways.

'But as I am awake you can start talking,' I said, closing my eyes
again, and preparing to listen.

Pete was quite ready to obey.

'Well,' he began, 'it was this way. Mamma didn't want me to be late for
tea, so she stopped at the end of that big street--a little farther away
than Lindsay Square, you know----'

'Yes, Meredith Place,' I grunted.

'And,' Pete went on, 'told me to run home. It's quite straight, if you
keep to the front, of course.'

'And you did run straight home, didn't you?' I said teasingly.

'No,' he replied seriously, but not at all offended. 'When I got to the
corner of the square I looked up it, and I remembered that it led to
the funny little houses where Clem and I had seen the parrot. So, almost
without settling it in my mind, I ran along that side of the square till
I came to Rock Terrace. I ran _very_ fast----'

'I wish I'd been there to see you,' I grunted again.

'And I thought if I kept round by the back, I'd get out again to the
front nearly as soon--running all the way, you see, to make up. And I'd
scarcely got to the little houses when I heard the parrot. His cage was
out on the balcony, you know. And it is very quiet there--scarcely any
carts or carriages passing--and it was getting dark, and I think you
hear things plainer in the dark; don't you think so, Gilley?'

I did not answer, so he went on.

'I heard the parrot some way off. His voice is so queer, you know. And
when I got nearer I could tell every word he said. He kept on every now
and then talking for himself--real talking--"Getting cold. Polly wants
to go to bed. Quick, quick." And then he'd stop for a minute, as if he
was listening and heard something I couldn't. _That_ was the strange
part that makes me think perhaps he isn't really a parrot at all,
Giles,' and here Pete dropped his voice and looked very mysterious. I
had opened my eyes for good now; it was getting exciting.

'What did he say?' I asked.

'What you and Clement heard, and a lot more,' Peterkin replied. 'Over
and over again the same--"I'm so tired, Nana, I won't be good, no I
won't."'

'Yes, that's what we heard,' I said, 'but what was the lot more?'

'Oh, perhaps there wasn't so _very_ much more,' said he, consideringly.
'There was something about "I won't be locked up," and "I'll write a
letter," and then again and again, "I won't be good, I'm so tired." That
was what you and Clement heard, wasn't it?'

'Yes,' I said.

'And one funny thing about it was that his voice, the parrot's, sounded
quite different when he was talking his own talking, do you see?--like
"Pretty Poll is cold, wants to go to bed"--from when he was copying the
little girl's. It was always croaky, of course, but _squeakier_,
somehow, when he was copying her.'

Peterkin sat up still straighter and looked at me, evidently waiting for
my opinion about it all. I was really very interested, but I wanted
first to hear all he had in his head, so I did not at once answer.

'Isn't it very queer?' he said at last.

'What do you think about it?' I asked.

He drew a little nearer me and spoke in a lower voice, though there was
no possibility of any one ever hearing what he said.

'P'raps,' he began, 'it isn't _only_ a parrot, or p'raps some fairy
makes it say these things. The little girl might be shut up, you see,
like the princess in the tower, by some _bad_ fairy, and there might be
a _good_ one who wanted to help her to get out. I wonder if they ever do
invite fairies to christenings now, and forget some of them,' he went
on, knitting his brows, 'or not ask them, because they are bad fairies?
I can't remember about Elf's christening feast; can you, Gilley?'

'I can remember hers, and yours too, for that matter,' I replied. 'You
forget how much older I am. But of course it's not like that now. There
are no fairies to invite, as I've often told you, Pete. At least,' for,
in spite of my love of teasing, I never liked to see the look of
distress that came over his chubby face when any one talked that sort of
common sense to him, 'at least, people have got out of the way of seeing
them or getting into fairy-land.'

'But we _might_ find it again,' said Peterkin, brightening up.

And I didn't like to disappoint him by saying I could not see much
chance of it.

Then another idea struck me.

'How about Mrs. Wylie?' I said. 'Didn't she explain it at all? You told
her what you had heard, didn't you? Yes, of course, she heard some of it
herself, when we were all three standing at the door of her house.'

'Well,' said Peterkin, 'I was going to tell you the rest. I was
listening to the parrot, and it was much plainer than _you_ heard,
Gilley, for when you were there you only heard him from down below, and
I was up near him--well, I was just standing there listening to him,
when that old lady came up.'

'I know all about that,' I interrupted.

'No, you don't, not nearly all,' Peterkin persisted. He could be as
obstinate as a little pig sometimes, so I said nothing. 'I was just
standing there when she came up. She looked at me, and then she went in
at her own gate, next door to the parrot's, you know, and then she
looked at me again, and spoke over the railings. She said, "Are you
talking to the parrot, my dear?" and I said, "No, I'm only listening to
him, thank you"; and then she looked at me again, and she said, "You
don't live in this terrace, I think?" And I said, "No, I live on the
Esplanade, number 59." Then she pulled out her spectacles--long things,
you know, at the end of a turtle-shell stick.'

'Tortoise-shell,' I corrected.

'Tortoise-shell,' he repeated, 'and then she looked at me again. "If you
live at 59," she said, "I think you must be one of dear Mrs. Lesley's
little sons," and I said, "That's just what I am, thank you." And then
she said, "Won't you come in for a few minutes? You can see the Polly
from my balcony, and it is getting cold for standing about. Are you on
your way home from school?" So I thought it wouldn't be polite not to go
in. She was so kind, you see,' and here his voice grew 'cryey' again, 'I
never thought about mamma being flightened, and I only meant to stay a
min----'

'Shut up about all that,' I interrupted. 'We've had it often enough, and
I want to hear what happened.'

'Well,' he said, quite briskly again, 'she took me in, and up to her
drawing-room. The window was a tiny bit open, and she made me stand just
on the ledge between it and the balcony, so that I could see the parrot
without his seeing me, for she said if he saw me he'd set up screeching
and not talk sense any more. He knows when people are strangers. The
cage was close to the old lady's end of the balcony, so that I could
almost have touched it, and then I heard him say all those queer things.
I didn't speak for a good while, for fear of stopping him talking. But
after a bit he got fidgety; I daresay he knew there was somebody there,
and then he flopped about and went back to his own talking, and said he
was cold and wanted to go to bed, and all that. And somebody inside
heard him and took him in. And then--' Pete stopped to rest his voice, I
suppose. He was always rather fond of resting, whatever he was doing.

'Hurry up,' I said. 'What happened after that?'

'The old lady said I'd better come in, and she shut up the window--I
suppose she felt cold, like the parrot--and she made me sit down; and
then I asked her what made him say such queer things in his squeakiest
voice; and she said he was copying what he heard, for there was a little
girl in the _next_ house--not in his own house--who cried sometimes and
seemed very cross and unhappy, so that Mrs. Wylie often is very sorry
for her, though she has never really seen her. And I said, did she think
anybody was unkind to the little girl, and she said she hoped not, but
she didn't know. And then she seemed as if she didn't want to talk about
the little girl very much, and she began to ask me about if I went to
school and things like that, and then I said I'd better go home, and she
came downstairs with me and--I think that's all, till you and Clement
came and we all heard the parrot again.'

'I wonder what started him copying the little girl again, after he'd
left off,' I said.

'P'raps he hears her through the wall,' said Pete. 'P'raps he hears
quicker than people do. Yes,' he went on thoughtfully, 'I think he must,
for the old lady has never heard exactly what the little girl said. She
only heard her crying and grumbling. She told me so.'

'I daresay she's just a cross little thing,' I said. 'And I think it was
rather silly of Mrs. Wylie to let you hear the parrot copying her. It's
a very bad example. And you said Mrs. Wylie seemed as if she didn't want
to talk much about her.'

'I think she's got some plan in her head,' said Peterkin, eagerly, 'for
she said--oh, I forgot that--she said she was going to come to see
mamma some day very soon, to ask her to let me go to have tea with her.
And I daresay she'll ask you too, Gilley, if we both go down to the
drawing-room when she comes.'

'I hope it'll be a half-holiday, then,' I said, 'or, anyway, that she
will come when I'm here. It is very funny about the crying little girl.
Has she been there a long time? Did your old lady tell you that?'

Peterkin shook his head.

'Oh no, she's only been there since Mrs. Wylie came back from the
country. She told me so.'

'And when was that?' I asked, but Pete did not know. He was sometimes
very stupid, in spite of his quickness and fancies. 'It's been long
enough for the parrot to learn to copy her grumbling,' I added.

'That wouldn't take him long,' said Peterkin, in his whispering voice
again, '_if_ he's some sort of a fairy, you know, Gilley.'

This time, perhaps, it was a good thing he spoke in a low voice, for at
that moment nurse came in to wake us, or rather to make us get up, as we
were nearly always awake already, and if she had heard the word
'fairy,' she would have begun about Peterkin's 'fancies' again.

Some days passed without our hearing anything of the parrot or the old
lady or Rock Terrace. We did not exactly forget about it; indeed, it was
what we talked about every morning when we awoke. But I did not think
much about it during the day, although I daresay Pete did.

So it was quite a surprise to me one afternoon, about a week after the
evening of all the fuss, when, the very moment I had rung the front
bell, the door was opened by Pete himself, looking very important.

'She's come,' he said. 'I've been watching for you. She's in the
drawing-room with mamma, and mamma told me to fetch you as soon as you
came back from school. Is Clem there?'

'No,' I said, 'it's one of the days he stays later than me, you know.'

Peterkin did not seem very sorry.

'Then she's come just to invite you and me,' he said. 'Clement _is_ too
big, but she might have asked him too, out of polititude, you know.'

He was always fussing about being polite, but I don't think I answered
her in that way.

'Bother,' I said, for I was cross; my books were heavier than usual,
and I banged them down; 'bother your politeness. Can't you tell me what
you're talking about? Who is "she" that's in the drawing-room? I don't
want to go up to see her, whoever she is.'

'Giles!' said Peterkin, in a very disappointed tone. 'You can't have
forgotten. It's the old lady next door to the parrot's house, of course.
I told you she meant to come. And she's going to invite us, I'm sure.'

In my heart I was very anxious to go to Rock Terrace again, to see the
parrot, and perhaps hear more of the mysterious little girl, but I was
feeling rather tired and cross.

'I must brush my hair and wash my hands first,' I said, 'and I daresay
mamma won't want me without Clement. She didn't say me alone, did she?'

'She said "your brothers,"' replied Peterkin, 'but of course you must
come. And she said she hoped "they" wouldn't be long. So you must come
as you are. I don't think your hands are very dirty.'

It is one of the queer things about Peterkin that he can nearly always
make you do what he wants if he's really in earnest. So I had to give
in, and he went puffing upstairs, with me after him, to the
drawing-room, when, sure enough, the old lady was sitting talking to
mamma.

Mamma looked up as we came in, and I saw that her eyes went past me.

'Hasn't Clement come in?' she asked, and it made me wish I hadn't given
in about it to Pete.

'No, mamma,' I said. 'It's one of his late days, you know. And Peterkin
made me come up just as I was.'

I felt very ashamed of my hair and crushed collar and altogether. I
didn't mind so much about my hands; boys' hands _can't_ be like ladies'.
But Mrs. Wylie was so awfully neat--she might have been a fairy herself,
or a doll dressed to look like an old lady. I felt as clumsy and messy
as could be. But she was awfully jolly; she seemed to know exactly how
uncomfortable it was for me.

'Quite right, quite right,' she said. 'For I must be getting back. It
looks rather stormy, I'm afraid. It was very thoughtful of you both, my
dear boys, to hurry. I should have liked to see Mr. Clement again, but
that must be another time. And may we fix the day now, dear Mrs. Lesley?
Saturday next we were talking of. Will you come about four o'clock, or
even earlier, my dears? The parrot stays out till five, generally, and
indeed his mistress is very good-natured, and so is her maid. They were
quite pleased when I told them I had some young friends who were very
interested in the bird and wanted to see him again. So you shall make
better acquaintance with him on Saturday, and perhaps--' but here the
old lady stopped at last, without finishing her sentence.

Nevertheless, as each of us told the other afterwards, both Peterkin and
I finished it for her in our own minds. We glanced at each other, and
the same thought ran through us--had Mrs. Wylie got some plan in her
head about the little girl?

'It is very kind indeed of you, Mrs. Wylie,' said mamma. 'Giles and
Peterkin will be delighted to go to you on Saturday, won't you, boys?'

And we both said, 'Yes, thank you. It will be very jolly,' so heartily,
that the old lady trotted off, as pleased as pleased.

Of course, I ran downstairs to see her out, and Pete followed more
slowly, just behind her. She had a very nice, rather stately way about
her, though she was so small and thin, and it never suited Pete to hurry
in those days, either up or down stairs; his legs were so short.

We were very eager for Saturday to come, and we talked a lot about it. I
had a kind of idea that Mrs. Wylie had said something about the little
girl to mamma, though mamma said nothing at all to us, except that we
must behave very nicely and carefully at Rock Terrace, and not forget
that, though she was so kind, Mrs. Wylie was an old lady, and old ladies
were sometimes fussy.

We promised we would be all right, and Peterkin said to me that he
didn't believe Mrs. Wylie was at all 'fussy.'

'She is too fairyish,' he said, 'to be like that.'

That was a very 'Peterkin' speech, but I did not snub him for it, as I
sometimes did. I was really so interested in all about the parrot and
the invisible little girl that I was almost ready to join him in making
up fanciful stories--that there was an ogre who wouldn't let her out, or
that any one who tried to see her would be turned into a frog, or things
like that out of the old fairy-tales.

'But Mrs. Wylie _has_ seen her,' said Peterkin, 'and _she_ hasn't turned
into a frog!'

That was a rather tiresome 'way' of his--if I agreed about fairies and
began making up, myself, he would get quite common-sensical, and almost
make fun of my ones.

'How do you know that she doesn't turn into a frog half the day?' I
said. 'That's often the way in enchantments.'

And then we both went off laughing at the idea of a frog jumping down
from Mrs. Wylie's drawing-room sofa, and saying, 'How do you do, my
dears?' instead of the neat little old lady.

So our squabble didn't come to anything that time.

Blanchie and Elf were rather jealous of our invitation, I think, though
Blanche always said she didn't care to go anywhere without Clement. But
Elf made us promise that some day we would get leave to take her round
by the parrot's house for her to see him.

Of course we never said anything to any one but ourselves about the
shut-up little girl, and Clement had forgotten what he had heard that
evening. He was very busy just then working extra for some prize he
hoped to get at school--I forget what it was, but he did get it--and
Blanche was helping him.




CHAPTER IV

VERY MYSTERIOUS


SATURDAY came at last. Of course jolly things and times _do_ come,
however long the waiting seems. But the worst of it is that they are so
soon gone again, and then you wish you were back at the looking forward;
perhaps, after all, it is often the jolliest part of it.

Clement says I mustn't keep saying 'jolly'; he says 'nice' would be
better in a book. He is looking it over for me, you see. _I_ think
'nice' is a girl's word, but Clem says you shouldn't write slang in a
book, so I try not to; though of course I don't really expect this story
ever to be made into an actual book.

Well, Saturday came, and Peterkin and I set off to Mrs. Wylie's. She was
a very nice person to go to see; she seemed so really pleased to have
us. And she hadn't turned into a frog, or anything of the kind. She was
standing out on the little balcony, watching for us, with a snowy-white,
fluffy shawl on the top of her black dress, which made her seem more
fairyish, or fairy-godmotherish, than ever. I never did see any one so
beautifully neat and spotless as she always was.

As soon as the front door was opened, we heard her voice from upstairs.

'Come up, boys, come up. Polly and I have both been watching for you,
and he is in great spirits to-day, and so amusing.'

We skurried up, and nearly tumbled over each other into the
drawing-room. Then, of course, Peterkin's politeness came into force,
and he walked forward soberly to shake hands with his old lady and give
her mamma's love and all that sort of thing, which he was much better at
than I. She had just stepped in from the balcony, but was quite ready to
step out again at the parrot's invitation.

'Come quick,' he said, 'Polly doesn't like waiting.'

[Illustration: NO SOONER DID HE CATCH SIGHT OF US TWO WITH HIS UGLY
ROUND BEADY EYES . . . THAN HE SHUT UP.--p. 52.]

Really it did seem wonderful to me, though he wasn't the first parrot I
had ever seen, and though I had heard him before--it did seem wonderful
for a bird, only a bird, to talk so sensibly, and I felt as if there
might be something in Peterkin's idea that he was more than he seemed.
And to this day parrots, clever ones, still give me that feeling.

They are very like children in some ways. They are so 'contrairy.' You'd
scarcely believe it, but no sooner did the creature catch sight of us
two with his ugly, round, painted-bead-looking eyes--I don't like
parrot's eyes--than he shut up, and wild horses couldn't have made him
utter another word, much less Mrs. Wylie.

I was quite sorry for her, she seemed so disappointed.

It was just like a tiresome baby, whose mamma and nurse want to show off
and bring it down to the drawing-room all dressed up, and it won't go to
anybody, or say 'Dada,' or 'Mam-ma,' or anything, and just screeches. I
can remember Elvira being like that, and I daresay we all were.

'It is too bad,' said our old lady. 'He has got to know me, and I have
been teaching him some new words. And his mistress and her maid are out
this afternoon, so I thought we should have him all to ourselves, and it
would be so amusing. But'--just then a bright idea struck
her--'supposing you two go back into the room, so that he can't see
you, and I will say "Good-bye, my dears," very loud and plainly, to make
him think you have gone. Then I will come out again, and you shall
listen from behind the curtain. I believe he will talk then, just as he
has been doing.'

Pete and I were most willing to try--we were all three quite excited
about it. It was really quite funny how his talking got the Polly
treated as if he was a human being. We stalked back into the
drawing-room, Mrs. Wylie after us, saying in a very clear tone--

'Good-bye, then, my dears. My love to your mamma, and the next time you
come I hope Poll-parrot will be more friendly.'

And then I shut the door with a bang, to sound as if we had gone,
though, of course, it was all 'acting,' to trick the parrot. Peterkin
and I peeped out at him from behind the curtain, and we could scarcely
help laughing out loud. He looked so queer--his head cocked on one side,
listening, his eyes blinking; he seemed rather disgusted on the whole, I
thought.

Then Mrs. Wylie stepped out again.

'Polly,' she said, 'I'm ashamed of you. Why couldn't you be kind and
friendly to those nice boys who came to see you?'

'Pretty Poll,' he said, in a coaxing tone.

'No,' she replied; 'not pretty Poll at all. Ugly Poll, I should say.'

'Polly's so tired; take Polly in. Polly's cold,' he said, in what we
called his natural voice; and then it seemed as if the first words had
reminded him of the little girl, for his tone suddenly changed, and he
began again: 'I'm so tired, Nana. No, I won't be good; no, I won't. I'll
write a letter, and I won't be locked up,' in the squeakier sort of
voice that showed he was copying somebody else.

'Nonsense!' said Mrs. Wylie. 'You are not tired or cold, Polly, and
nobody is going to lock you up.'

He was silent for a moment, and peeping out again, we saw that he was
staring hard at the old lady.

Then he said very meekly--I am not sure which voice it was in--

'Polly be good! Polly very sorry!'

Mrs. Wylie nodded approvingly.

'Yes,' she said, 'that's a much prettier way to talk. Now, supposing we
have a little music,' and she began to sing in a very soft, very thin,
old voice a few words of 'Home, Sweet Home.'

There was something very piteous about it. I think there is a better
word than 'piteous'--yes, Clement had just told it me. It is 'pathetic.'
I felt as if it nearly made me cry, and so did Peterkin. We told each
other so afterwards, and though we were so interested in the parrot and
in hearing him, I wished he would be quiet again, and let Mrs. Wylie go
on with her soft, sad little song. But of course he didn't. He started,
too, a queer sort of whistle, not very musical, certainly, but yet, no
doubt, there was a bit of the tune in it, and now and then sounds rather
like the words 'sweet' and 'home.' I do think, altogether, it was the
oddest musical performance that ever was heard.

And when it was over, there came another voice. It was the maid next
door, who had stepped quietly on to the balcony--

'I'm afraid, ma'am, I must take him in now,' she said, very
respectfully. 'It is getting cold, and it would never do for him to get
a sore throat just as he's learning to sing so. You are clever with him,
ma'am; you are, indeed: there's quite a tune in his voice.'

Mrs. Wylie gave a little laugh of pleasure.

'And did the young gentlemen you were speaking of never come, after
all?' the maid asked, as she was turning away, the big cage in her hand.

'Oh yes,' said Mrs. Wylie, 'they are here still. But Polly was very
naughty,' and she explained about it.

'He's learnt that "won't be good" from next door,' said the girl, 'and I
do believe he knows what it means.'

'I very sorry; I be good,' here said the parrot.

They both started.

'Upon my word!' exclaimed the maid.

'Has he learnt _that_ from next door?' said Mrs. Wylie, in a lower
voice.

'I hope so. It's very clever of him, and it's not unlikely. The child is
getting better, I believe, and there's not near so much crying and
complaining.'

'So I have heard,' said the old lady, and we fancied she spoke rather
mysteriously, 'and I hope,' she went on, but we could not catch her next
words, as she dropped her voice, evidently not wishing us to hear.

Peterkin squeezed my hand, and I understood. There _was_ a mystery of
some kind!

Then Mrs. Wylie came in and shut the glass door. She was smiling now
with pleasure and satisfaction.

'I did get him to talk, did I not?' she said. 'He _is_ a funny bird. By
degrees I hope he will grow quite friendly with you too.'

I did not feel very sure about it.

'I'm afraid,' I said, 'that he will not see us enough for that. It isn't
like you, Mrs. Wylie, for I daresay you talk to him every day.'

'Yes,' she replied, 'I do now. I have felt more interested in him
since--' here she hesitated a little, then she went on again--'since the
evening I found Peterkin listening to him,' and she smiled very kindly
at Pete. 'Before that, I had not noticed him very much; at least, I had
not made friends with him. But he has a wonderful memory; really
wonderful, you will see. He will not have forgotten you the next time
you come, and each time he will cock his head and pretend to be shy, and
gradually it will get less and less.'

This was very interesting, but what Peterkin and I were really longing
for was some news of the little girl. We did not like to ask about her.
It would have seemed rather forward and inquisitive, as the old lady did
not mention her at all. We felt that she had some reason for it, and of
course, though we could not have helped hearing what she and the
parrot's maid had said to each other, we had to try to think we _hadn't_
heard it. Clement says that's what you should do, if you overhear things
not meant for you, unless, sometimes, when your having heard them might
really matter. _Then_, he says, it's your duty--you're in honour
bound--to tell that you've heard, and _what_ you've heard.

'Now,' said our old lady, 'I fancy tea will be quite ready. I thought it
would be more comfortable in the dining-room. So shall we go
downstairs?'

We were quite ready, and we followed her very willingly. The dining-room
was even smaller than the drawing-room, and that was tiny enough. But it
was all so neat and pretty, and what you'd call 'old-fashioned,' I
suppose. It reminded me of a doll-house belonging to one of our
grandmothers--mamma's mother, who had kept it ever since she was a
little girl, and when we go to stay with her in the country she lets us
play with it. Even Peterkin and I are very fond of it, or used to be so
when we were smaller. There's everything you can think of in it, down to
the tiniest cups and saucers.

The tea was very jolly. There were buns and cakes, and awfully good
sandwiches. I remember that particular tea, you see, though we went to
Mrs. Wylie's often after that, because it was the first time. The cups
_were_ rather small, but it didn't matter, for as soon as ever one was
empty she offered us more. I would really be almost ashamed to say how
many times mine was filled.

And Mrs. Wylie was very interesting to talk to. She had never had any
children of her own, she told us, and her husband had been dead a long
time. I think he had been a sailor, for she had lots of curiosities:
queer shells, all beautifully arranged in a cabinet, and a book full of
pressed and dried seaweed, and stuffed birds in cases. I don't care for
stuffed birds: they look too alive, and it seems horrid for them not to
be able to fly about and sing. Peterkin took a great fancy to some of
the very tiny ones--humming-birds, scarcely bigger than butterflies;
and, long afterwards, when we went to live in London, Mrs. Wylie gave
him a present of a branch with three beauties on it, inside a glass
case. He has it now in his own room. And she gave me four great big
shells, all coloured like a rainbow, which I still have on my
mantelpiece.

Once or twice--I'm going back now to that first time we went to have tea
with her--I tried to get the talk back to the little girl. I asked the
old lady if she wouldn't like to have a parrot of her own. I thought it
would be so amusing. But she said No; she didn't think she would care to
have one. The one next door was almost as good, and gave her no trouble
or anxiety.

And then Peterkin asked her if there were any children next door. Mrs.
Wylie shook her head.

'No,' she said. 'The parrot's mistress is an old maid--not nearly as old
as I am, all the same, but she lives quite alone; and on the other side
there are two brothers and a sister, quite young, unmarried people.'

'And is the--the little girl the only little girl or boy in _her_
house?' asked Peterkin.

He did stumble a bit over asking it, for it had been very plain that
Mrs. Wylie did not want to speak about her; but I got quite hot when I
heard him, and if we had been on the same side of the table, or if his
legs had been as long as they are now, I'd have given him a good kick to
shut him up.

Our old lady was too good-natured to mind; still, there was something in
her manner when she answered that stopped any more questions from Pete.

'Yes,' she said, 'there are no other children in that house, or in the
terrace, except some very tiny ones, almost babies, at the other end. I
see them pass in their perambulators, dear little things.'

It was quite dark by the time we had finished tea, and the lamps were
lighted upstairs in the drawing-room, where Mrs. Wylie showed us some of
the curiosities and things that I have already written about.

They were rather interesting, but I think we've got to care more for
collections and treasures like that, now, than we did then. Perhaps we
were not quite old enough, and, I daresay, it was a good deal that the
great reason we liked to go to Mrs. Wylie's was because of the parrot
and the mysterious little girl. At least, _Peterkin's_ head was full of
the little girl. I myself was beginning to get rather tired of all his
talk about her, and I thought the parrot very good fun of himself.

So when the clock struck six, and Mrs. Wylie asked us if mamma had fixed
any time for us to be home by--it wasn't that she wanted to get rid of
us, but she was very afraid of keeping us too late--we thought we might
as well go, for mamma had said, 'soon after six.'

'Is any one coming to fetch you?' Mrs. Wylie said.

I didn't quite like her asking that: it made me seem so babyish. I was
quite old enough to look after Pete, and the fun of going home by
ourselves through the lighted-up streets was one of the things we had
looked forward to.

But I didn't want Master Peterkin to begin at me afterwards about not
being polite, so I didn't show that I was at all vexed. I just said--

'Oh no, Peterkin will be all right with me!'

And then we said good-bye, and 'thank you very much for inviting us.'
And Pete actually said--

'May we come again soon, please?'

His ideas of politeness were rather original, weren't they?

But Mrs. Wylie was quite pleased.

'Certainly, my dear. I shall count on your doing so. And I am glad you
spoke of it, for I wanted to tell you that I am going to London the end
of this next week for a fortnight. Will you tell your dear mamma so, and
say that I shall come to see her on my return, and then we must fix on
another afternoon? I am very pleased to think that you care to come,
and I hope you feel the same,' she went on, turning to me.

She was so kind that I felt I had been rather horrid, for I _had_
enjoyed it all very much. And I said as nicely as I could, that I'd like
to come again, only I hoped we didn't bother her. She beamed all over at
that, and Peterkin evidently approved of it too, for he grinned in a
queer patronising way he has sometimes, as if I was a baby compared to
him.

I was just going to pull him up for it after we had got on our coats and
caps, and were outside and the door shut, but before I had got farther
than--'I say, youngster,'--he startled me rather by saying, in a very
melancholy tone--

'It's too bad, Giles, isn't it? Her going away, and us hearing nothing
of the little girl. I really thought she'd have asked her to tea too.'

'How you muddle your "her's" and "she's"!' I said. But of course I
understood him. 'I think you muddle yourself too. If there's a mystery,
and you know you'd be very disappointed if there wasn't, you couldn't
expect the little girl to come to tea just as if everything was quite
like everybody else about her.'

'No, that's true,' said he, consideringly. 'P'raps she's invisible
sometimes, or p'raps she's like the "Light Princess," that they had to
tie down for fear she'd float away, or p'raps----'

'She's invisible to us, anyway,' I interrupted, for, as I said, I was
getting rather tired of Pete's fancies about the little girl, 'and
so----'

But just as I got so far, we both stopped--we were passing the railing
of the little girl's house at that moment, and voices talking rather
loudly caught our ears. Peterkin touched my arm, and we stood quite
still. No one could see us, it was too dark, and there was no lamp just
there, though some light was streaming out from the lower windows of the
house. One of them, the dining-room one, was a little open, even though
it was a chilly evening.

It was so queer, our hearing the voices and almost seeing into the room,
_just_ as we had been making up our minds that we'd never know anything
about the little girl; it seemed so queer, that we didn't, at first,
think of anything else. It wasn't for some minutes, or moments,
certainly, that it came into my head that we shouldn't stay there
peeping and listening. I'm afraid it wasn't a very gentlemanly sort of
thing to do. As for Peterkin, I'm pretty sure he never had the
slightest idea that we were doing anything caddish.

What we heard was this--

'No, I don't want any more tea. I'd better go to bed. It's so dull,
Nana.'

Then another voice replied--it came from some one further back in the
room, but we could not distinguish the words--

'There aren't any stars. You may as well shut the window. And stars
aren't much good. I want some one to play with me. Other little--' but
just then we saw the shadow of some one crossing the room, and the
window--it was a glass-door kind of window like the ones up above, which
opened on to the balcony, for there was a little sort of balcony
downstairs too--was quickly closed. There was no more to be heard or
seen; not even shadows, for the curtains were now drawn across.

Pete gave a deep sigh, and I felt that he was looking at me, though it
was too dark to see, and there was no lamp just there. He wanted to know
what I thought.

'Come along,' I said, and we walked on.

'Did you hear?' asked Peterkin at last. 'She said she wanted somebody to
play with her.'

'Yes,' I said, 'it is rather queer. You'd think Mrs. Wylie might have
made friends with her, and invited her to tea. But it's no good our
bothering about it,' and I walked a little faster, and began to whistle.
I did not want Pete to go on again talking a lot about his invisible
princess, for such she seemed likely to remain.

It was far easier, however, to get anything into Peterkin's fancy than
to get it out again, as I might have known by experience. We had not
gone far before I felt him tugging at my arm.

'Don't walk so fast, Gilley,' he said--poor, little chap, he was quite
breathless with trying to keep up with me, so I had to slacken a
bit,--'and do let me talk to you. When we get home I shan't have a
chance--not till to-morrow morning in bed, I daresay; for they'll all be
wanting to hear about Mrs. Wylie, and what we had for tea, and
everything.'

I did not so much mind about _that_ part of it, but I did not want to be
awakened before dawn the next morning to listen to all he'd got to say.
So I thought I might as well let him come out with some of it.

'What do you want to talk about?' I said.

'Oh! of course, you know,' he replied. 'It's about the _poor_ little
girl. I am so dreffully sorry for her, Gilley, and I want to plan
something. It's no good asking Mrs. Wylie. We'll have to do something
ourselves. I'm afraid the people she's with lock her up, or something.
_P'raps_ they daren't let her go out, if there's some wicked fairy, or a
witch, or something like that, that wants to run off with her.'

'Well, then, the best thing to do _is_ to lock her up,' I said sensibly.

But that wasn't Peterkin's way of looking at things.

'It's never like that in my stories,' he said--and I know he was shaking
his curly head,--'and some of them are very, very old--nearly as old as
Bible stories, I believe; so they must be true, you see. There's always
somebody that comes to break the--the--I forget the proper word.'

'The enchantment, you mean,' I said.

'No, no; a shorter word. Oh, I know--the spell,' he replied. 'Yes,
somebody comes to break the _spell_. And that's what we've got to do,
Gilley. At least, I'm sure I've got to, and you must help me. You see,
it's all been so funny. The parrot knows, I should think, for I'm sure
he's partly fairy. But, very likely, he daren't say it right out, for
fear of the bad fairy, and----'

'Perhaps he's the bad fairy himself,' I interrupted, half joking, but
rather interested, all the same, in Peterkin's ideas.

'Oh no,' he replied, 'I know he's not, and I'm sure Mrs. Wylie has
nothing to do with the bad fairy.'

'Then why do you think she won't talk about the little girl, or invite
her, or anything?' I asked.

Pete seemed puzzled.

'I don't know,' he said. 'There's a lot to find out. P'raps Mrs. Wylie
doesn't know anything about the spell, and has just got some stupid,
common reason for not wanting us to play with the little girl, or
p'raps'--and this was plainly a brilliant idea--'_p'raps_ the spell's
put on her without her knowing, and stops her when she begins to speak
about it. Mightn't it very likely be that, Giles?'

But I had not time to answer, for we had got to our own door by now, and
it was already opened, as some tradesman was giving James a parcel. So
we ran in.




CHAPTER V

'STRATAGEMS'


I REALLY don't quite know what made me listen to Peterkin's fancies
about his invisible princess, as I got into the habit of calling her. It
was partly, I suppose, because it amused me--we had nothing much to take
us up just then: there was no skating that winter, and the weather was
dull and muggy--and partly that somehow he managed to make me feel as if
there might really be something in it. I suppose when anybody quite
believes in a thing, it's rather catching; and Peterkin's head was so
stuffed and crammed with fairy stories that at that time, I think, they
were almost more real to him than common things.

He went about, dreaming of ogres and magicians, and all the rest, so
much, that I scarcely think anything marvellous would have surprised
him. If I had suddenly shot up to the ceiling, and called out that I
had learnt how to fly, I don't believe he would have been startled; or
if I had shown him a purse with a piece of gold in it, and told him that
it was enchanted, and that he'd always find the money in it however
often he spent it, he'd have taken it quite seriously, and been very
pleased.

So the idea of an enchanted little girl did not strike us as at all out
of the way.

We did not talk about her any more that night after we had been at Mrs.
Wylie's, for we had to hurry up to get neat again to come down to the
drawing-room to mamma. Blanche and Elf were already there when we came
in, and they, and mamma too, were full of questions about how we'd
enjoyed ourselves, and about the parrot, and what we'd had for tea--just
as I knew they would be; I don't mean that mamma asked what we'd had for
tea, but the girls did.

And then Pete and Elf went off to bed, and when I went up he was quite
fast asleep, and if he hadn't been, I could not have spoken to him
because of my promise, you know.

He made up for it the next morning, however.

I suppose he had had an extra good night, for I felt him looking at me
long before I was at all inclined to open my eyes, or to snort for him
to know I was awake. And when at last I did--it's really no good trying
to go to sleep again when you feel there's somebody fidgeting to talk to
you--there he was, his eyes as bright and shiny as could be, sitting
bolt up with his hands round his knees, as if he'd never been asleep in
his life?

I couldn't help feeling rather cross, and yet I had a contradictory sort
of interest and almost eagerness to hear what he had to say. I suppose
it was a kind of love of adventure that made me join him in his fancies
and plans. I knew that his fancies were only fancies really, but still I
felt as if we might get some fun out of them.

He was too excited to mind my being grumpy.

'Oh, Gilley!' he exclaimed at my first snort, 'I am so glad you are
awake at last.'

'I daresay you are,' I said, 'but I'm not. I should have slept another
half-hour if you hadn't sat there staring me awake.'

'Well, you needn't talk,' he went on, in a 'smoothing-you-down' tone;
'just listen and grunt sometimes.'

I did grunt there and then. There was one comfortable thing about
Peterkin even then, and it keeps on with him now that he is getting big
and sensible. He always understands what you say, however you say it, or
half say it. He was not the least surprised at my talking of his staring
me awake, though he had not exactly meant to do so.

'It has come into my mind, Giles,' he began, very importantly, 'how
queer and lucky it is that the old lady is going away for a fortnight. I
should not wonder if it had been managed somehow.'

He waited for my grunt, but it turned into--

'What on earth do you mean?'

'I mean, perhaps it's part of the spell, without her knowing, of course,
that she should have to go to London. For if she was still there, we
couldn't do anything without her finding out.'

'I don't know what you mean about doing anything,' I said. 'And please
don't say "we." I haven't promised to join you. Most likely I'll do my
best to stop whatever it is you've got in that rummy head of yours.'

'Oh no, you won't!' he replied coolly. 'I don't know that you could if
you tried, without telling the others. And you can't do that, of course,
as I've trusted you. It's word of honour, you see, though I didn't
exactly make you say so. And it's nothing naughty or mischievous, else I
wouldn't plan it.'

'What is it, then? Hurry up and tell me, without such a lot of
preparation,' I grumbled.

'I can't tell you very much,' he answered, ''cos, you see, I don't know
myself. It will show as we go on--I'm certain you'll help me, Gilley.
You remember the prince in the "Sleeping Beauty" did not know exactly
what he would do--no more did the one in----'

'Never mind all that,' I interrupted.

'Well, then, what we've got to do is to try to talk to her ourselves
without any one hearing. That's the first thing. We will tell her what
the parrot says, and then it will be easy to find out if she knows
herself about the spell.'

'But what do you think the spell is?' I asked, feeling again the strange
interest and half belief in his fancies that Peterkin managed to put
into me. 'What do you suppose your bad fairies, or whatever they are,
have done to her?'

'There are lots of things, it might be,' he replied gravely. 'They may
have made her not able to walk, or very queer to look at--p'raps turned
her hair white, so that you couldn't be sure if she was a little girl
or an old woman; or made her nose so long that it trails on the floor.
No, I don't think it's that,' he added, after stopping to think a
minute. 'Her voice sounds as if she was pretty, even if it's rather
grumbly. P'raps she turns into a mouse at night, and has to run about,
and that's why she's so tired. It might be that.'

'It would be easy to catch her, then, and bring her home in your pocket,
if you waited till the magic time came,' I suggested, half joking again,
of course.

'It might be,' agreed Pete, quite seriously, 'or it might be very, very
difficult, unless we could make her understand at the mouse time that we
were friends. We can't settle anything till we see her, and talk to her
like a little girl, of course.'

'You certainly couldn't talk to her like anything else,' I said; 'but
I'm sure I don't see how you mean to talk to her at all.'

'I do,' said Peterkin. 'I've been planning it since last night. We can
go round that way once or twice to look at the parrot, and just stand
about. Nobody would wonder at us if they saw we were looking at him. And
very likely we'd see _something_, as she lives in the very next-door
house. P'raps she comes to the window sometimes, and she might notice
us if we were looking up at the parrot. It would be easiest if she was
in the downstairs room.'

'I don't suppose she is there all day,' I said. 'The parrot would not
have heard her talking so much if she were. I think she must have been
out on the balcony sometimes when it was warmer.'

'Yes,' Peterkin agreed. 'I thought of that. Very likely she only comes
downstairs for her dinner and tea. It's the dining-room, like Mrs.
Wylie's.'

'And if she only comes down there late she wouldn't see us in the dark,
and, besides, the parrot wouldn't be out by then. And besides that,
except for going to tea to Mrs. Wylie's, we'd never get leave to be out
by ourselves so late. At least _you_ wouldn't. Of course, for me, it's
sometimes nearly dark when I come home from school.'

I really did not see how Pete did mean to manage it. But the
difficulties I spoke of only seemed to make him more determined. I could
not help rather admiring him for it: he quite felt, I fancy, as if he
was one of his favourite fairy-tale princes. And in the queer way I have
spoken of already, he somehow made me feel with him. I did not go over
all the difficulties in order to stop him trying, but because I was
actually interested in seeing how he was going to overcome them.

He was silent for a moment or two after my last speech, staring before
him with his round blue eyes.

Then he said quietly--

'Yes; I'd thought of most of those things. But you will see. We'll
manage it somehow. I daresay she comes downstairs in the middle of the
day, too, for she's sure to have dinner early, and the parrot will be
out then, if we choose a fine day.'

'But we always have to be in for our own dinner by half-past one,' I
said.

'Well, p'raps _she_ has hers at one, or even half-past twelve, like we
used to, till you began going to school,' said he hopefully. 'And a
_very_ little talking would do at the first beginning. Then we could be
very polite, and say we'd come again to see the parrot, and p'raps--'
here Peterkin looked rather shy.

'Perhaps what? Out with it!' I said.

'We might take her a few flowers,' he answered, getting red, 'if--if we
could--could get any. They're very dear to buy, I'm afraid, and we
haven't any of our own. The garden is so small; it isn't like if we
lived in the country,' rather dolefully.

'You wouldn't have known anything about Rock Terrace, or the invisible
princess, or the parrot, if we lived in the country,' I reminded him.

'No,' said Pete, more cheerfully, 'I hadn't thought of that.'

'And--' I went on, 'I daresay I could help you a bit if it really seemed
any good,' for I rather liked the idea of giving the little girl some
flowers. It made it all look less babyish.

Peterkin grinned with delight.

'You _are_ kind, Gilley!' he exclaimed. 'I knew you would be. Oh,
bother! here's nurse coming, and we haven't begun to settle anything
properly.'

'There's no hurry,' I said; 'you've forgotten that we certainly can't go
there again till Mrs. Wylie's out of the way. And she said, "the end of
the week"; that means Saturday, most likely, and this is--oh dear! I was
forgetting--it's Sunday, and we'll be late.'

Nurse echoed my words as she came in--

'You'll be late, Master Giles, and Master Peterkin, too,' she said. 'I
really don't think you should talk so much on Sunday mornings.'

It wasn't that we had to be any earlier on Sundays than any other day,
but that dressing in your best clothes takes so much longer somehow,
and we had to have our hair very neat, and all like that, because we
generally went down to the dining-room, while papa and mamma and Clement
and Blanche were at breakfast, after we had had our own in the nursery.

There would be no good in trying to remember all our morning talks that
week about Peterkin's plans. He did not get the least tired of them, and
I didn't, for a wonder, get tired of listening to him, he was so very
much in earnest.

He chopped and changed a good bit in little parts of them, but still he
stuck to the general idea, and I helped him to polish it up. It was
really more interesting than any of his fairy stories, for he managed to
make both himself and me feel as if we were going to be _in_ one of them
ourselves.

So I will skip over that week, and go on to the next. By that time we
knew that Mrs. Wylie was in London, because mamma said something one day
about having had a letter from her. Nothing to do with the little girl,
as far as we knew; I think it was only about somebody who wanted a
servant, or something stupid like that.

It got on to the Monday of the next week _again_, and by that time Pete
had got a sort of start of his plans. He had got leave to come to meet
me at the corner of Lindsay Square, once or twice in the last few days.
I used to get there about a quarter or twenty minutes to one. We were
supposed to leave school not later than a quarter past twelve, but you
know how fellows get fooling about coming out of a day-school, so,
though it was really quite near, I was often later.

Mamma was pleased for Peterkin to want to come to meet me. She was not
at all coddling or stupid like that about us boys, though her being in
such a fuss that evening Pete was lost may have seemed so. And she was
always awfully glad for us to be fond of each other. She used to say she
hoped we'd grow up 'friends' as well as brothers, which always reminded
me of the verse about it in the Bible about 'sticking closer than a
brother.' And I like to think that dear little mummy's hopes will come
true for her sons.

It wasn't exactly a fit of affection for me, of course, that made Pete
want to get into the way of coming to meet me. Still, we _were_ very
good friends; especially good friends just then, as you know.

So that Monday, which luckily happened to be a very nice bright day, he
had no difficulty in getting leave for it again. I had promised him to
hurry over getting off from school, so we counted on having a good bit
of time to spend in looking at the parrot and talking to him, and in
'spying the land' generally, including the invisible princess, if we got
a chance, without risking coming in too late for our dinner. We had
taken care never to be late, up till now, for fear of Peterkin's coming
to meet me being put a stop to; but we hadn't pretended that we would
come straight home, and once or twice we had done a little shopping
together, and more than once we had spent several minutes in staring in
at the flower-shop windows, settling what kind of flowers would be best,
and in asking the prices of hers from a flower-woman who often sat near
the corner of the square. She was very good-natured about it. We
shouldn't have liked to go into a regular shop only to ask prices, so it
was a good thing to know a little about them beforehand.

I remember all about that Monday morning particularly well. I did hurry
off from school as fast as I could, though of course--I think it nearly
always happens so--ever so many stupid little things turned up to keep
me later than I often was.

I skurried along pretty fast, you may be sure, once I did get out, and
it wasn't long before I caught sight of poor old Pete eagerly watching
for me at the corner of Lindsay Square. He did not dare to come farther,
because, you see, he had promised mamma he never would, and that if I
were ever very late he'd go home again.

I didn't give him time to be doleful about it.

'I've been as quick as I possibly could,' I said, 'and it's not so bad
after all, Pete. We shall have a quarter of an hour for Rock Terrace at
least, if we hurry now. Don't speak--it only wastes your breath,' for in
those days, with being so plump and sturdy and his legs rather short, it
didn't take much to make him puff or pant. He's in better training now
by a long way.

He was always very sensible, so he took my advice and we got over the
ground pretty fast, only pulling up when we got to the end, or
beginning, of the little row of houses.

'Now,' said I, 'let's first walk right along rather slowly, and if we
hear the Polly we can stop short, as if we were noticing him for the
first time, the way people often do, you know.'

Peterkin nodded.

'I believe I see the corner of his cage out on the balcony,' he said,
half whispering, 'already.'

He was right. The cage was out.

We walked past very slowly, though we took care not to look up as if we
were expecting to see anything. The parrot was in the front of the cage,
staring down, and I'm almost certain he saw us, and even remembered us,
though, out of contradiction, he pretended he didn't.

'Don't speak or turn,' I whispered to Pete. It was so very quiet along
Rock Terrace, except when some tradesman's cart rattled past--and just
now there was nothing of the kind in view--that even common talking
could have been heard. 'Don't speak or seem to see him. They are awfully
conceited birds, and the way to make them notice you and begin talking
and screeching is to pretend you don't see them.'

So we walked on silently to the farther end of the terrace, in a very
matter-of-fact way, turning to come back again just as we had gone. And
I could be positive that the creature saw us all the time, for the row
of houses was very short, and he was well to the front of the balcony.

Our 'stratagem'--I have always liked the word, ever since I read _Tales
of a Grandfather_, which I thought a great take-in, as it's just a
history book, neither more nor less, and the only exciting part is when
you come upon stratagems--succeeded. As we got close up to the parrot's
house, next door to Mother Wylie's, you understand, _and_, of course,
next door to the invisible princess's, we heard a sound. It was a sort
of rather angry squeak or croak, but loud enough to be an excuse for our
stopping short and looking up.

And then, as we still did not speak, Master Poll, his round eyes glaring
at us, I felt certain, was forced to open the conversation.

'Pretty Poll,' he began, of course. 'Pretty Poll.'

'All right,' I called back. 'Good morning, Pretty Poll. A fine day.'

'Wants his dinner,' he went on. 'I say, wants his dinner.'

'Really, does he?' I said, in a mocking tone, which he understood, and
beginning to get angry--just what I wanted.

'Naughty boy! naughty boy!' he screeched, very loudly. Pete and I
grinned with satisfaction!




CHAPTER VI

MARGARET


THERE'S an old proverb that mamma has often quoted to us, for she's
awfully keen on our all being 'plucky,' and, on the whole, I think we
are--

'Fortune favours the brave.'

I have sometimes thought it would suit Peterkin to turn it into 'Fortune
favours the determined.' Not that he's _not_ 'plucky,' but there's
nothing like him for sticking to a thing, once he has got it into his
head. And certainly fortune favoured him at the time I am writing about.
Nothing could have suited us better than the parrot's screeching out to
us 'naughty boy, naughty boy.'

I suppose he had been taught to say it to errand-boys and boys like that
who mocked at him. But we did not want to set up a row, so I replied
gently--

'No, no, Polly, good boys. Polly shall have his dinner soon.'

'Good Polly, good Polly,' he repeated with satisfaction.

And then--what _do_ you think happened? The door-window of the
drawing-room of the next house, _the_ house, was pushed open a little
bit, and out peeped a child's head, a small head with smooth short dark
hair, but a little girl's head. We could tell that at once by the way it
was combed, or brushed, even if we had not seen, as we did, a white
muslin pinafore, with lace ruffly things that only a girl would wear. My
heart really began to beat quite loudly, as if I'd been running fast--we
had been so excited about her, you see, and afterwards Pete told me his
did too.

The only pity was, that she was up on the drawing-room floor. We could
have seen her so much better downstairs. But we had scarcely time to
feel disappointed.

When she saw us, and saw, I suppose, that we were not errand-boys or
street-boys, she came out a little farther. I felt sure by her manner
that she was alone in the room. She looked down at us, looked us well
over for a moment or two, and then she said--

'Are you talking to the parrot?'

She did not call out or speak loudly at all, but her voice was very
clear.

'Yes,' Peterkin replied. As he had started the whole business I thought
it fair to let him speak before me. 'Yes, but he called out to us first.
He called us "naughty boys."'

'I heard him,' said the little girl, 'and I thought perhaps you _were_
naughty boys, teasing him, you know, and I was going to call to you to
run away. But--' and she glanced at us again. I could see that she
wanted to go on talking, but she did not quite know how to set about it.

So I thought I might help things on a bit.

'Thank you,' I said, taking off my cap. 'My little brother is very
interested in the parrot. He seems so clever.'

At another time Pete would have been very offended at my calling him
'little,' but just now he was too eager to mind, or even, I daresay, to
notice.

'So he is,' said the little girl. 'I could tell you lots about him, but
it's rather tiresome talking down to you from up here. Wait a minute,'
she added, 'and I'll come down to the dining-room. I may go downstairs
now, and nurse is out, and I'm very dull.'

We were so pleased that we scarcely dared look at each other, for fear
that somehow it should go wrong after all. We did glance along the
terrace, but nobody was coming. If only her nurse would stay out for ten
minutes longer, or even less.

We stood there, almost holding our breath. But it was not really--it
could not have been--more than half a minute, before the dark head and
white pinafore appeared again, this time, of course, on the ground
floor; the window there was a little bit open already, to air the room
perhaps.

We would have liked to go close up to the small balcony where she stood,
but we dared not, for fear of the nurse coming. And the garden was very
tiny, we were only two or three yards from the little girl, even outside
on the pavement.

She looked at us first, looked us well over, before she began to speak
again. Then she said--

'Have you been to see the parrot already?'

'Oh yes,' said Peterkin, in his very politest tone, 'oh yes, thank you.'
I did not quite see why he said 'thank you.' I suppose he meant it in
return for her coming downstairs. 'I've been here two, no, three times,
and Giles,' he gave a sort of nod towards me, 'has been here two.'

'Is your name Giles?' she asked me. She had a funny, little, rather
condescending manner of speaking to us, but I didn't mind it somehow.

'Yes,' I replied, 'and his,' and I touched Pete, 'is "Peterkin."'

'They are queer names; don't you think so? At least,' she added quickly,
as if she was afraid she had said something rude, 'they are very
uncommon. "Giles" and "Perkin."'

'Not "Perkin,"' I said, "Peterkin."'

'Oh, I thought it was like a man in my history,' she said, 'Perkin
War--something.'

'No,' said Peterkin, 'it isn't in history, but it's in poetry. About a
battle. I've got it in a book.'

'I should like to see it,' she said. 'There's lots of _my_ name in
history. My name is Margaret. There are queens and princesses called
Margaret.'

Pete opened his mouth as if he was going to speak, but shut it up again.
I know what he had been on the point of saying,--'Are you a princess?'
'a shut-up princess?' he would have added very likely, but I suppose he
was sensible enough to see that if she had been 'shut-up,' in the way he
had been fancying to himself, she would scarcely have been able to come
downstairs and talk to us as she was doing. And she was not dressed like
the princesses in his stories, who had always gold crowns on and long
shiny trains. Still, though she had only a pinafore on, I could see that
it was rather a grand one, lots of lace about it, like one of Elf's very
best, and though her hair was short and her face small and pale, there
was something about her--the way she stood and the way she spoke--which
was different from many little girls of her age.

Peterkin took advantage very cleverly of what she had said about his
name.

'I'll bring you my poetry-book, if you like,' he said. 'It's a quite old
one. I think it belonged to grandmamma, and she's as old as--as old
as--' he seemed at a loss to find anything to compare poor grandmamma
to, till suddenly a bright idea struck him--'nearly as old as Mrs.
Wylie, I should think,' he finished up.

'Oh,' said Margaret, 'do you know Mrs. Wylie? I've never seen her, but I
think I've heard her talk. Her house is next door to the parrot's.'

'Yes,' said I, 'but I wonder you've never seen her. She often goes out.'

'But--' began the little girl again, 'I've been--oh, I do believe that's
my dinner clattering in the kitchen, and nurse will be coming in, and
I've never told you about the parrot. I've lots to tell you. Will you
come again? Not to-morrow, but on Wednesday nurse is going out to the
dressmaker's. I heard her settling it. Please come on Wednesday, just
like this.'

'We could come a little earlier, perhaps,' I said.

Margaret nodded.

'Yes, do,' she replied, 'and I'll be on the look-out for you. I shall
think of lots of things to say. I want to tell you about the parrot,
and--about lots of things,' she repeated. 'Good-bye.'

We tugged at our caps, echoing 'good-bye,' and then we walked on towards
the farther-off end of the terrace, and when we got there we turned and
walked back again. And then we saw that we had not left the front of
Margaret's house any too soon, for a short, rather stout little woman
was coming along, evidently in a hurry. She just glanced at us as she
passed us, but I don't think she noticed us particularly.

'That's her nurse, I'm sure,' said Peterkin, in a low voice. 'I don't
think she looks unkind.'

'No, only rather fussy, I should say,' I replied.

We had scarcely spoken to each other before, since bidding Margaret
good-bye. Pete had been thinking deeply, and I was waiting to hear what
he had to say.

'I wonder,' he went on, after a moment or two's silence,--'I wonder how
much she knows?'

'Why?' I exclaimed. 'What do you think there is to know?'

'It's all very misterous, still,' he answered solemnly. 'She--the little
girl--said she had lots to tell us about the parrot and other things.
And she didn't want her nurse to see us talking to her. And she said she
could come downstairs _now_, but, I'm sure, they don't let her go out.
She wouldn't be so dull if they did.'

'Who's "they"?' I asked.

'I don't quite know,' he replied, shaking his head. 'Some kind of
fairies. P'raps it's bad ones, or p'raps it's good ones. No, it can't be
bad ones, for then they wouldn't have planned the parrot telling us
about her, so that we could help her to get free. The parrot is a sort
of messenger from the good fairies, I believe.'

He looked up, his eyes very bright and blue, as they always were when he
thought he had made a discovery, or was on the way to one. And I, half
in earnest, half in fun, like I'd been about it all the time, let my
own fancy go on with his.

'Perhaps,' I said. 'We shall find out on Wednesday, I suppose, when we
talk more to Margaret. We needn't call her the invisible princess any
more.'

'No, but she is a princess sort of little girl, isn't she?' he said,
'though her hair isn't as pretty as Blanche's and Elf's, and her face is
very little.'

'She's all right,' I said.

And then we had to hurry and leave off talking, for we had been walking
more slowly than we knew, and just then some big clock struck the
quarter.

I think, perhaps, I had better explain here, that none of us--neither
Margaret, nor Peterkin, nor I--thought we were doing anything the least
wrong in keeping our making acquaintance a secret. What Margaret thought
about it, so far as she did think of that part of it, you will
understand as I go on; and Pete and I had our minds so filled with his
fairies that we simply didn't think of anything else.

It was growing more and more interesting, for Margaret had something
very jolly about her, though she wasn't exactly pretty.

I can't remember if it did come into my mind, a very little, perhaps,
that we should tell somebody--mamma, perhaps, or Clement--about our
visits to Rock Terrace even then. But if it did, I think I put it out
again, by knowing that Margaret meant it to be a secret, and that, till
we saw her again, and heard what she was going to tell us, it would not
be fair to mention anything about it.

We were both very glad that Wednesday was only the day after to-morrow.
It would have been a great nuisance to have had to wait a whole week,
perhaps. And we were very anxious when Wednesday morning came, to see
what sort of weather it was, for on Tuesday it rained. Not very badly,
but enough for nurse to tell Peterkin that it was too showery for him to
come to meet me, and it would not have been much good if he had, as we
couldn't have spoken to Margaret.

Nor could we have strolled up and down the terrace or stood looking at
the parrot, even if he'd been out on the terrace, which he wouldn't have
been on at all on a bad day--if it was rainy. It would have been sure to
make some of the people in the houses wonder at us; just what we didn't
want.

But Wednesday was fine, luckily, and this time I got off from school to
the minute without any one or anything stopping me.

I ran most of the way to the corner of Lindsay Square, all the same;
and I was not too early either, for before I got there I saw Master
Peterkin's sturdy figure steering along towards me, not far off. And
when he got up to me I saw that he had a small brown-paper parcel under
his arm, neatly tied up with red string.

He was awfully pleased to see me so early, for his round face was
grinning all over, and as a rule it was rather solemn.

'What's that you've got there?' I asked.

He looked surprised at my not knowing.

'Why, of course, the poetry-book,' he said. 'I promised it her,
and I've marked the poetry about "Peterkin." It's the Battle of
Blen--Blen-hime--mamma said, when I learnt it, that that's the
right way to say it; but Miss Tucker' ('Miss Tucker' was Blanche's
and the little ones' governess) 'called it Blen_nem_, and I always
have to think when I say it. I wish they didn't call him "_little_
Peterkin," though,' he went on, 'it sounds so babyish.'

'I don't see that it matters, as it isn't about you yourself,' I said.
'I'd forgotten all about it; I think it's rather sharp of you to have
remembered.'

'I couldn't never forget anything I'd promised _her_,' said Pete, and
you might really have thought by his tone that he believed he was the
prince going to visit the Sleeping Beauty--after she'd come awake, I
suppose.

We did not need to hurry; we were actually rather too early, so we went
on talking.

'How about the flowers we meant to get for her?' I said suddenly.

'_I_ didn't forget about them,' he answered, 'but we didn't promise
them, and I thought it would be better to ask her first. She might like
chocolates best, you know.'

'All right,' I said, and I thought perhaps it was better to ask her
first. You see, if she didn't want her nurse to know about our coming to
see her it would have been tiresome, as, of course, Margaret could not
have told a story.

There she was, peeping out of the downstairs window already when we got
there. And when she saw us she came farther out, a little bit on to the
balcony. It was a sunny day for winter, and besides, she had a red shawl
on, so she could not very well have caught cold. It was a very pretty
shawl, with goldy marks or patterns on it. It was like one grandmamma
had been sent a present of from India, and afterwards Margaret told me
hers had come from India too. And it suited her, somehow, even though
she was only a thin, pale little girl.

She smiled when she saw us, though she did not speak till we were near
enough to hear what she said without her calling out. And when we
stopped in front of her house, she said--

'I think you might come inside the garden. We could talk better.'

So we did, first glancing up at the next-door balcony, to see if the
parrot was there.

Yes, he was, but not as far out as usual, and there was a cloth, or
something, half-down round his cage, to keep him warmer, I suppose.

He was quite silent, but Margaret nodded her head up towards him.

'He told me you were coming,' she cried, 'though it wasn't in a very
polite way. He croaked out--"Naughty boys! naughty boys!"'

We all three laughed a little.

'And now,' Margaret went on, 'I daresay he won't talk at all, all the
time you are here.'

'But will he understand what we say?' asked Peterkin, rather anxiously.

Margaret shook her head.

[Illustration: PETE HELD OUT HIS BROWN-PAPER PARCEL. 'THIS IS THE
POETRY-BOOK,' HE SAID.--p. 97.]

'I really don't know,' she replied. 'We had better talk in rather low
voices. I don't _think_,' she went on, almost in a whisper, 'that he is
fairy enough to hear if we speak very softly.'

Peterkin gave a sort of spring of delight.

'Oh!' he exclaimed, 'I am _so_ glad you think he is fairyish, too.'

'Of course I do,' said she; 'that's partly what I wanted to tell you.'

We came closer to the window. Margaret looked at us again in her
examining way, without speaking, for a minute, and before she said
anything, Pete held out his brown-paper parcel.

'This is the poetry-book,' he said, 'and I've put a mark in the place
where it's about my name.'

He pulled off his cap as he handed the packet to her, and stood with his
curly wig looking almost red in the sunlight, though it was not very
bright.

'Put it on again,' said Margaret, in her little queer way, meaning his
cap. 'And thank you very much, Perkin, for remembering to bring it. I
think I should like to call you "Perkin," if you don't mind. I like to
have names of my own for some people, and I really thought yours was
Perkin.'

I wished to myself she would have a name of her own for _me_, but I
suppose she thought I was too big.

'I think you are very nice boys,' she went on, 'not "naughty" ones at
all; and if you will promise not to tell any one what I am going to tell
_you_, I will explain all I can. I mean you mustn't tell any one till I
give you leave, and as it's only about my own affairs, of course you can
promise.'

Of course we did promise.

'Listen, then,' said Margaret, glancing up first of all at the parrot,
and drawing back a little into the inside of the room. 'You can hear
what I say, even though I don't speak very loudly, can't you?'

'Oh yes! quite well,' we replied.

'Well, then, listen,' she repeated. 'I have no brothers or sisters, and
Dads and Mummy are in India. I lived there till about three years ago,
and then they came here and left me with my grandfather. That's how
people always have to do who live in India.'

'Didn't you mind awfully?' I said. 'Your father and mother leaving you,
I mean?'

'Of course I minded,' she replied. 'But I had always known it would have
to be. And they will come home again for good some day; perhaps before
very long. And I have always been quite happy till lately. Gran is very
good to me, and I'm used to being a good deal alone, you see, except for
big people. I've always had lots of story books, and not _very_ many
lessons. So, after a bit, it didn't seem so very different from India.
Only _now_ it's quite different. It's like being shut up in a tower, and
it's very queer altogether, and I _believe_ she's a sort of a witch,'
and Margaret nodded her head mysteriously.

'_Who?_' we asked eagerly.

'The person I'm living with--Miss Bogle--isn't her name witchy?' and she
smiled a little. 'No, no, not nurse,' for I had begun to say the word.
'_She_ is only rather a goose. No, this house belongs to Miss Bogle, and
she's quite old--oh, as old as old! And she's got rheumatism, so she
very seldom goes up and down stairs. And nurse does just exactly what
Miss Bogle tells her. It was this way. Gran had to go away--a good way,
though not so far as India, and he is always dreadfully afraid of
anything happening to me, I suppose. So he sent me here with nurse, and
he told me I would be very happy. He knew Miss Bogle long ago--I think
she had a school for little boys once; perhaps that was before she got
to be a witch. But I've been dreadfully unhappy, and I don't know
what's going to happen to me if I go on like this much longer.'

She stopped, out of breath almost.

'Do you think she's going to enchanter you?' asked Peterkin, in a
whisper. 'Do you think she wasn't asked to your christening, or anything
like that?'

Margaret shook her head again.

'_Something_ like that, I suppose,' she replied. 'She looks at me
through her spectacles so queerly, you can't think. You see, I was ill
at Gran's before I came here: not very badly, though he fussed a good
deal about it. And he thought the sea-air would do me good. But I've
often had colds, and I never was treated like this before--never. For
ever so long, _she_,' and Margaret nodded towards somewhere unknown,
'wouldn't let me come downstairs at all. And then I cried--sometimes I
_roared_, and luckily the parrot heard, and began to talk about it in
his way. And you see it's through him that _you_ got to know about me,
so I'm sure he's on the other side, and knows she's a witch, but----'




CHAPTER VII

THE GREAT PLAN


AT that moment the clock--a clock somewhere near--struck. Margaret
started, and listened,--'One, two, three.' She looked pleased.

'It's only a quarter to one,' she said. 'Half-an-hour still to my
dinner. What time do you need to get home by?'

'A quarter-past will do for us,' I said.

'Oh, then it's all right,' she replied. 'But I must be quick. I want to
know all that the parrot told you.'

'It was more what he had said to Mrs. Wylie,' I explained, 'copying you,
you know. And, at first, she called you "that poor child," and told us
she was so sorry for you.'

'But now she won't say anything. She pinched up her lips about you the
other day,' added Peterkin.

Margaret seemed very interested, but not very surprised.

'Oh, then, Miss Bogle is beginning to bewitch her too,' she said. 'Nurse
is a goose, as I told you. She just does everything Miss Bogle wants.
And if it wasn't for the parrot and you,' she went on solemnly, 'I
daresay when Gran comes home he'd find me turned into a pussy-cat.'

'Or a mouse, or even a frog,' said Peterkin, his eyes gleaming; 'only
then he wouldn't know it was you, unless your nurse told him.'

'She wouldn't,' said Margaret, 'the witch would take care to stop her,
or to turn her into a big cat herself, or something. There'd be only the
parrot, and Gran mightn't understand him. It's better not to risk it.
And that's what I'm planning about. But it will take a great deal of
planning, though I've been thinking about it ever since you came, and I
felt sure the good fairies had sent you to rescue me. When can you come
again?'

'Any day, almost,' said Pete.

'Well, then, I'll tell you what. I'll be on the look-out for you passing
every fine day about this time, and the first day I'm sure of nurse
going to London again--and I know she has to go once more at least--I'll
manage to tell you, and _then_ we'll fix for a long talk here.'

'All right,' I said, 'but we'd better go now.'

There was a sound of footsteps approaching, so with only a hurried
'good-bye' we ran off.

We did not need to stroll up and down the terrace to-day, as we knew
Margaret's nurse was away; luckily so, for we only just got home in time
by the skin of our teeth, running all the way, and not talking.

I wish I could quite explain about myself, here, but it is rather
difficult. I went on thinking about Margaret a lot, all that day; all
the more that Pete and I didn't talk much about her. We both seemed to
be waiting till we saw her again and heard her 'plans.'

And I cannot now feel sure if I really was in earnest at all, as she and
Peterkin certainly were, about the enchantment and the witch. I remember
I laughed at it to myself sometimes, and called it 'bosh' in my own
mind. And yet I did not quite think it only that. After all, I was only
a little boy myself, and Margaret had such a common-sensical way, even
in talking of fanciful things, that somehow you couldn't laugh at her,
and Pete, of course, was quite and entirely in earnest.

I think I really had a strong belief that _some_ risk or danger was
hanging over her, and I think this was natural, considering the queer
way our getting to know her had been brought about. And any boy would
have been 'taken' by the idea of 'coming to the rescue,' as she called
it.

There was a good deal of rather hard work at lessons just then for me.
Papa and mamma wanted me to get into a higher class after Christmas, and
I daresay I had been pretty idle, or at least taking things easy, for I
was not as well up as I should have been, I know. So Peterkin and I had
not as much time for private talking as usual. I had often lessons to
look over first thing in the morning, and as mamma would not allow us to
have candles in bed, and there was no gas or electric light in our room,
I had to get up a bit earlier, when I had work to look over or finish.
And nurse was very good about that sort of thing: there was always a
jolly bright fire for me in the nursery, however early I was.

Our best time for talking was when Peterkin came to meet me. But we had
two or three wet days about then. And Margaret did not expect us on
rainy days, even if Pete had been allowed to come, which he wasn't.

It was, as far as I remember, not till the Monday after that Wednesday
that we were able to pass along Rock Terrace. And almost before we came
in real sight of her, I felt certain that the little figure was standing
there on the look-out.

And so she was--red shawl and white pinafore, and small dark head, as
usual.

We made a sort of pretence of strolling past her house at first, but we
found we didn't need to. She beckoned to us at once, and just at that
moment the parrot, who was out in _his_ balcony, most luckily--or
cleverly, Peterkin always declares he did it on purpose--screeched out
in quite a good-humoured tone--

'Good morning! good morning! Pretty Poll! Fine day, boys! Good morning!'

'Good morning, Poll,' we called out as we ran across the tiny plot of
garden to Margaret.

'I'm so glad you've come,' she said, 'but you mustn't stop a minute.
I've been out in a bath-chair this morning--I've just come in; and now
I'm to go every day. It's horrid, and it's all nonsense, when I can
walk and run quite well. It's all that old witch. I'm going again
to-morrow and Wednesday; but I'm going to manage to make it later on
Wednesday, so that you can talk to me on the Parade. Nurse is going to
London all day on Wednesday, but I'm to go out just the same, for the
bath-chair man is somebody that Miss Bogle knows quite well. So if you
watch for me on the Parade, between the street close to here,' and she
nodded towards the nearest side of Lindsay Square, 'and farther on
_that_ way,' and now she pointed in the direction of our own house,
'I'll look out for you, and we can have a good talk.'

'All right,' we replied. 'On Wednesday--day after to-morrow, if it's
fine, of course.'

'Yes,' she said; 'though I'll _try_ to go, even if it's not _very_ fine,
and you must try to come. I know now why nurse has to go to London. It's
to see her sister, who's in an hospital, and Wednesday's the only day,
and she's a dressmaker--that's why I thought nurse had to go to a
dressmaker's. I'm going on making up my plans. It's getting worse and
worse. After I've been out in the bath-chair, Miss Bogle says I'm to lie
down most of the afternoon! Just fancy--it's so _dreadfully_ dull, for
she won't let me read. She says it's bad for your eyes, when you're
lying down. Unless I do something quick, I believe she'll turn me into
a--oh! I don't know what,' and she stopped, quite out of breath.

'A frog,' said Peterkin. He had enchanted frogs on the brain just then,
I believe.

'No,' said Margaret, 'that wouldn't be so bad, for I'd be able to jump
about, and there's nothing I love as much as jumping about, especially
in water,' and her eyes sparkled with a sort of mischief which I had
seen in them once or twice before. 'No, it would be something much
horrider--a dormouse, perhaps. I should hate to be a dormouse.

'You shan't be changed into a dormouse or--or _anything_,' said
Peterkin, with a burst of indignation.

'Thank you, Perkins,' Margaret replied; 'but please go now and
remember--Wednesday.'

We ran off, and though we thought we had only been a minute or two at
Rock Terrace, after all we were not home much too early.

'We must be careful on Wednesday,' I said. 'I'm afraid my watch is
rather slow.'

[Illustration: WE HAD NO DIFFICULTY IN FINDING HER BATH-CHAIR.--p. 108.]

'Dinner isn't always quite so pumptual on Wednesdays,' said Pete, 'with
its being a half-holiday, you know.'

It turned out right enough on Wednesday.

Considering what a little girl she was then--only eight and a
bit--Margaret was very clever with her plans and settlings, as we have
often told her since. I daresay it was with her having lived so much
alone, and read so many story-books, and made up stories for herself
too, as she often did, though we didn't know that then.

We had no difficulty in finding her bath-chair, and the man took it
quite naturally that she should have some friends, and, of course, made
no objection to our walking beside her and talking to her. He was a very
nice kind sort of a man, though he scarcely ever spoke. Perhaps he had
children of his own, and was glad for Margaret to be amused. He took
great care of the chair, over the crossing the road and the turnings,
and no doubt he had been told to be extra careful, but as Miss Bogle had
no idea that Margaret knew a creature in the place I don't suppose 'the
witch' had ever thought of telling him that he was not to let any one
speak to her.

It was a very fine day--a sort of November summer, and when you were in
the full sunshine it really felt quite hot. There were bath-chairs
standing still, for the people in them to enjoy the warmth and to stare
out at the sea.

Margaret did not want to stare at it, and no more did we. But it was
more comfortable to talk with the chair standing still; for though to
look at one going it seems to crawl along like a snail, I can tell you
to keep up with it you have to step out pretty fast, faster than
Peterkin could manage without a bit of running every minute or so, which
is certainly _not_ comfortable, and faster than I myself could manage as
well as talking, without getting short of breath.

So we were very glad to pull up for a few minutes, though we had already
got through a good deal of business, as I will tell you.

Margaret had made up her mind to run away! Fancy that--a little girl of
eight!

Pete and I were awfully startled when she burst out with it. She could
stand Miss Bogle and the dreadful dulness and loneliness of Rock Terrace
no longer, she declared, not to speak of what might happen to her in the
way of being turned into a kitten or a mouse or _something_, if the
witch got really too spiteful.

'And where will you go to?' we asked.

'Home,' she said, 'at least to my nursey's, and that is close to home.'

We were so puzzled at this that we could scarcely speak.

'To your _nurse's_!' we said at last.

'Yes, to my own nurse--my old nurse!' said Margaret, quite surprised
that we didn't understand. And then she explained what she thought she
had told us.

'That stupid thing who is my nurse now,' she said, 'isn't my _real_
nurse. I mean she has only been with me since I came here. She belongs
to Miss Bogle--I mean Miss Bogle got her. My own darling nursey had to
leave me. She stayed and stayed because of that bad cold I got, you
know, but as soon as I was better she _had_ to go, because her mother
was so old and ill, and hasn't _nobody_ but nursey to take care of her.
And then when Gran had to go away he settled it all with that witchy
Miss Bogle, and she got this goosey nurse, and my own nursey brought me
here. And she cried and cried when she went away, and she said she'd
come some day to see if I was happy, but the witch said no, she mustn't,
it would upset me; and so she's never dared to; and now you can fancy
what my life has been,' Margaret finished up, in quite a triumphant
tone.

Peterkin was nearly crying by this time. But I knew I must be very
sensible. It all seemed so very serious.

'But what will your grandfather say when he knows you've run away?' I
asked, while Peterkin stood listening, with his mouth wide open.

'He'd be very glad to know where I was, _I_ should say,' Margaret
replied. 'My own nursey will write to him, and I will myself. It'll be a
good deal better than if I stayed to be turned into something he'd never
know was me. Then, what would Dads and Mummy say to _him_ for having
lost me?'

'The parrot'd tell, p'raps,' said Pete.

'As if anybody would believe him!' exclaimed Margaret, 'except people
who understand about fairies and witches and things like that, that you
two and I know about.'

She was giving _me_ credit for more believing in 'things like that' than
I was feeling just then, to tell the truth. But what I did feel rather
disagreeably sure of, was this queer little girl's determination. She
sometimes spoke as if she was twenty. Putting it all together, I had a
sort of instinct that it was best not to laugh at her ideas at all, as
the next thing would be that she and her devoted 'Perkins' would be
making plans without me, and really getting lost, or into dreadful
troubles of some kind. So I contented myself with just saying--

'Why should Miss Bogle want to turn you into anything?'

'Because witches are like that,' said Peterkin, answering for his
princess.

'And because she hates the bother of having me,' added Margaret. 'She
has written to Gran that I am very troublesome--nurse told me so; nurse
can't hold her tongue--and I daresay I am,' she added truly. 'And so, if
I seemed to be lost, she'd say it wasn't her fault. And as I suppose I'd
never be found, there'd be an end of it.'

'You couldn't but be found _now_,' said Peterkin, 'as, you see, _we'd_
know.'

'If she didn't turn _you_ into something too,' said Margaret, with the
sparkle of mischief in her eyes again.

Pete looked rather startled at this new idea.

'The best thing to do is for me to go away to a safe place while I'm
still myself,' she added.

'But have you got the exact address? Do you know what station to go to,
and all that sort of thing?' I asked. 'And have you got money enough?'

'Plenty,' she said, nodding her head; 'plenty for all I've planned. Of
course I know the station--it's the same as for my own home, and nursey
lives in the village where the railway comes. Much nearer than _our_
house, which is two miles off. And I know nursey will have me, even if
she had to sleep on the floor herself. The only bother is that I'll have
to change out of the train from _here_, and get into another at a place
that's called a Junction. Nursey and I had to do that when we came here,
and I heard Gran explain it all to her, and I know it's the same going
back, for the nurse I have _now_ told me so. When she goes to London she
stays in the same railway; but if you're _not_ going to London, you have
to get into another one. And nursey and I had to wait nearly
half-an-hour, I should think, and that's the part I mind,' and, for the
first time, her eager little face looked anxious. 'The railway people
would ask me who I was, and where I was going, as, you see, I look so
much littler than I am; so I've planned for you two kind boys to come
with me to that changing station, and wait till I've got into the train
that goes to Hill Horton; that's _our_ station. I've plenty of money,'
she went on hurriedly, for, I suppose, she saw that I was looking very
grave, and Peterkin's face was pink with excitement.

'It isn't that,' I said; 'it's--it's the whole thing. Supposing you got
lost after all, it would be----'

'No, no! I won't get lost,' she said, speaking again in her very
grown-up voice. 'And remember, you're on your word of honour as
_gentlemen_!--_gentlemen_!' she repeated, 'not to tell any one without
my leave. If you do, I'll just run away by myself, and very likely get
lost or stolen, or something. And how would you feel then?'

'We are not going to break our promise,' I said. 'You needn't be
afraid.'

'I'm not,' she said, and her face grew rather red. 'I always keep _my_
word, and I expect any one I trust to keep theirs.'

And though she was such a little girl, not much older than Elvira, whom
we often called a 'baby,' I felt sure she _would_ 'keep hers.' It
certainly wouldn't mend matters to risk her starting off by herself, as
I believe she would have done if we had failed her.

It has taken longer to write down all our talking than the talking
itself did, even though it was a little interrupted by the bath-chair
man every now and then taking a turn up and down, 'just to keep Missy
moving a bit,' he said.

Margaret's plans were already so very clear in her head that she had no
difficulty in getting us to understand them thoroughly, and I don't
think I need go on about what she said, and what we said. I will tell
what we fixed to do, and what we did do.

Next Wednesday--a full week on--was the day she had settled for her
escape from Rock Terrace. It was a long time to wait, but it was the day
her nurse was pretty sure--really quite sure, Margaret thought--to go to
London again, for she had said so. She went by a morning train, and did
not come back till after dark in the evening, so there was no fear of
our running up against her at the railway station. There was a train
that would do for Hill Horton, after waiting a little at the Junction,
at about three o'clock in the afternoon; and as it was my half-holiday,
Peterkin and I could easily get leave to go out together if it was fine,
and if it wasn't, we would have to come without! We trusted it would be
fine; and I settled in my own mind that if we _had_ to come without
asking, I'd leave a message with James the footman, that they weren't to
be frightened about us at home, for I didn't want mamma and all the
others to be in a fuss again, like the evening Peterkin was lost.

Margaret said we needn't be away more than about an hour and a half. I
don't quite remember how she'd got all she knew about the times of the
trains. I think it was from the cook or housemaid at Miss Bogle's, for I
know she said one of them came from near Hill Horton, and that she was
very good-natured, and liked talking about Margaret's home and her own.

So it was settled.

Just to make it even more fixed, we promised to go round by Rock Terrace
on Monday at the usual time, and Margaret was either to speak to us from
the dining-room window, or, if she couldn't, she would hang out a white
handkerchief somewhere that we should be sure to see, which would mean
that it was all right.

We were to meet her at the corner of her row of houses nearest Lindsay
Square, at half-past two on Wednesday. How she meant to do about her
bath-chair drive, and all the rest of it, she didn't tell us, and,
really, there wasn't time.

But I felt sure she would manage it, and Peterkin was even surer than I.

The last thing she said was--

'Of course, I shall have very little luggage; not more than you two boys
can easily carry between you.'




CHAPTER VIII

A TERRIBLE IDEA


THAT was on a Wednesday, and the same day the next week was to be _the_
day. On the Monday, as we had planned, we strolled along Rock Terrace.
Luckily, it was a fine day, and we could look well about us without
appearing to have any particular reason for doing so. It would have
seemed rather funny if we had been holding up umbrellas, or, I should
say, if _I_ had been, for when it rained Peterkin wasn't allowed to come
to meet me.

We stood still in front of the parrot's house. He was out on the
balcony. I wondered if he would notice us, or if he did, if he would
condescend to speak to us.

Yes, I felt that his ugly round eyes--don't you think all parrots' eyes
are ugly, however pretty their feathers are?--were fixed on us, and in
a moment or two came his squeaky, croaky voice--

'Good morning, boys! Good morning! Pretty Poll!'

'He didn't say "naughty boys,"' I remarked.

'No, of course not,' replied Peterkin; 'because he knows all about it
now, you see.'

'We mustn't stand here long, however,' I said. 'I wond----'

'I wonder why Margaret hasn't hung out a handkerchief if she couldn't
get to speak to us,' I was going to have said, but just at that moment
we heard a voice on the upstairs balcony--

'Good Polly,' it said, 'good, good Polly.'

And the parrot repeated with great pride--

'Good, good Polly.'

But when we looked up there was no one to be seen, only I thought one of
the glass doors of Margaret's dining-room clicked a little. And I was
right. In another moment there she was herself, on the dining-room
balcony--half on it, that's to say, and half just inside.

'Isn't he good?' she said, when we came as near as we dared to hear her.
'I told him to let me know as soon as he saw you, for I couldn't manage
the handkerchief, and I was afraid you might have gone before I could
catch you. Nurse has been after me so this morning, for the witch was
angry with me yesterday for standing at the window without my shawl. But
you mustn't stay,' and she nodded in her queenly little way. 'It's
keeping all right--Wednesday at half-past two, at the corner next the
Square--wet or fine. Good-bye.'

'Good-bye, all right,' we whispered, but she heard us.

So did the parrot.

'Good-bye, boys; good Polly! good, good Polly!' and something else which
Peterkin declared meant, 'Wednesday at half-past two.'

I felt pretty nervous, I can tell you, that day and the next. At least I
suppose it's what people call feeling very nervous. I seemed half in a
dream, and, as if I couldn't settle to anything, all queer and fidgety.
A little, just a very little perhaps, like what you feel when you know
you are going to the dentist's, especially if you _haven't_ got
toothache; for when you have it badly, you don't mind the thought of
having a tooth out, even a thumping double one.

Yet I should have felt disappointed if the whole thing had been given
up, and, worse than that, horribly frightened if it had ended in
Margaret's saying she'd run away by herself without us helping her, as I
know--I have said so two or three times already, I'm afraid: it's
difficult to keep from repeating if you're not accustomed to writing and
feel very anxious to explain things clearly--as I know she really would
have done.

And then there was the smaller worry of wondering what sort of weather
there was going to be on Wednesday, which did matter a good deal.

I shall never forget how thankful I felt in the morning when it came,
and I awoke, and opened my eyes, without any snorting for once, to hear
Peterkin's first words--

'It's a very fine day, Gilley--couldn't be better.'

'Thank goodness,' I said.

He was sitting up, as usual; but I don't think he had stared me awake
this morning, for he was gazing out in the direction of the window,
where up above the short blind a nice show of pale-blue sky was to be
seen; a wintry sort of blue, with the early mist over it a little, but
still quite cheering and 'lasting' looking.

'All the same,' I went on, speaking more to myself, perhaps, than to
him, 'I wish we were well through it, and your princess safe with her
old nurse.'

For I could not have felt comfortable about her, as I have several times
said, even if _we_ had not promised to help her. More than that--I do
believe she was so determined, that supposing mamma or Mrs. Wylie or any
grown-up person had somehow come to know about it, Margaret would have
kept to her plan, and perhaps even hurried it on and got into worse
trouble.

She needed a lesson; though I still do think, and always shall think,
that old Miss Bogle and her new nurse and everybody were not a bit right
in the way they tried to manage her.

I hurried home from school double-quick that morning, you may be sure.
And Peterkin and I were ready for dinner--hands washed, hair brushed,
and all the rest of it--long before the gong sounded.

Mamma looked at us approvingly, I remember, when she came into the
dining-room, where we were waiting before the girls and Clement had made
their appearance.

'Good boys,' she said, smiling, 'that's how I like to see you. How neat
you both look, and down first, too!'

I felt rather a humbug, but I don't believe Peterkin did; he was so
completely taken up with the thought of Margaret's escape, and so
down-to-the-ground sure that he was doing a most necessary piece of
business if she was to be saved from the witch's 'enchantering,' as he
would call it.

But as I was older, of course, the mixture of feelings in my mind _was_
a mixture, and I couldn't stand being altogether a humbug.

So I said to mamma--

'It's mostly that we want to go out as soon as ever we've had our
dinner; you know you gave us leave to go?'

'Oh yes,' said she. 'Well, it's a very nice day, and you will take good
care of Peterkin, won't you, Giles? Don't tire him. Are any of your
schoolfel----'

But at that moment a note was brought to her, which she had to send an
answer to, and when she sat down at the table again, she was evidently
still thinking of it, and forgot she had not finished her question,
which I was very glad of.

So we got off all right, though I had a feeling that Clement looked at
us _rather_ curiously, as we left the dining-room.

At the _very_ last moment, I did give the message I had thought about
in my own mind, with James. Just for him to say that mamma and nobody
was to be frightened if we _were_ rather late of coming back--_even_ if
it should be after dark; that we should be all right.

And then we ran off without giving James time to say anything, though he
did open his mouth and begin to stutter out some objection. He was
rather a donkey, but I knew that he was to be trusted, so I just laughed
in his face.

We were a little before the time at the corner of the square, but that
was a good thing. It would never have done to keep _her_ waiting,
Peterkin said. He always spoke of her as if she was a kind of queen. And
he was right enough. All the same, my heart did beat in rather a funny
way, thinking to myself what could or should we do if she didn't come?

But we were not kept waiting long. In another minute or so, a little
figure appeared round the corner, hastening towards us as fast as it
could, but evidently a good deal bothered by a large parcel, which at
the first glance looked nearly as big as itself.

Of course it was Margaret.

'Oh,' she exclaimed, 'I am so glad you are here already. It's this
package. I had no idea it would seem so heavy.'

'It's nothing,' said Peterkin, valiantly, taking it from her as he
spoke.

And it really wasn't very much--what had made it seem so conspicuous was
that the contents were all wrapped up in her red shawl, and naturally it
looked a queer bundle for a little girl like her to be carrying. She was
not at all strong either, even for a little girl, and afterwards I was
not surprised at this, for the illness she had spoken of as a bad cold
had really been much worse than that.

'Let's hurry on,' she said, 'I shan't feel safe till we've got to the
station,' for which I certainly thought she had good reason.

I had meant to go by the front way, which was actually the shortest, but
the scarlet bundle staggered me. Luckily I knew my way about the streets
pretty well, so I chose rather less public ones. And before long, even
though the package was not very heavy, Peterkin began to flag, so I had
to help him a bit with it.

But for that, there would have been nothing about us at all noticeable.
Margaret was quite nicely and quietly dressed in dark-blue serge,
something like Blanche and Elvira, and we just looked as if we were a
little sister and two schoolboy brothers.

'Couldn't you have got something less stary to tie up your things in?' I
asked her when we had got to some little distance from Rock Terrace, and
were in a quiet street.

She shook her head.

'No,' she said, 'it was the only thing. I have a nice black bag, as well
as my trunks, of course, but the witch or nurse has hidden it away. I
_couldn't_ find it. It's just as if they had thought I might be planning
to run away. I _nearly_ took nurse's waterproof cape; she didn't take it
to London to-day, because it is so fine and bright. But I didn't like
to, after all. It won't matter once we are in the train, and at Hill
Horton it will be a good thing, as my own nursey will see it some way
off.'

We were almost at the station by now, and I told Margaret so.

'All right,' she said. 'I have the money all ready. One for me to Hill
Horton, and two for you to the Junction station,' and she began to pull
out her purse.

'You needn't get it out just yet,' I said. 'We shall have quite a
quarter of an hour to wait. If you give me your purse once we're
inside, I will tell you exactly what I take out. How much is there in
it?'

'A gold half-sovereign,' she replied, 'and a half-crown, and five
sixpences, and seven pennies.'

'There won't be very much over,' I said, 'though we are all three under
twelve; so halves will do, and returns for Pete and me. Second-class, I
suppose?'

'Second-class!' repeated Margaret, with great scorn; 'of course not.
I've never travelled anything but first in my life. I don't know what
Gran would say, or nursey even, if she saw me getting out of a
_second_-class carriage.'

She made me feel a little cross, though she didn't mean it. _We_ often
travelled second, and even third, if there were a lot of us and we could
get a carriage to ourselves. But, after all, it was Margaret's own
affair, and as she was to be alone from the Junction to Hill Horton,
perhaps it was best.

'_I_ don't want you to travel second, I'm sure,' I said, 'if only
there's enough. I'd have brought some of my own, but unluckily I'm very
short just now.'

'I've--'began Peterkin, but Margaret interrupted him.

'As if I'd let you pay anything!' she said indignantly. 'I'd rather
travel third than _that_. You are only coming out of kindness to me.'

After all, there was enough, even for first-class, leaving a shilling or
so over. Hill Horton was not very far away.

A train was standing ready to start, for the station was a terminus. I
asked a guard standing about if it was the one for Hill Horton, and he
answered yes, but we must change at the Junction, which I knew already.

So we all got into a first-class carriage, and settled ourselves
comfortably, feeling safe at last.

'I wish we were going all the way with you,' said Peterkin, with a sigh
made up of satisfaction, as he wriggled his substantial little person
into the arm-chair first-class seat, and of regret.

'I'll be all right,' said Margaret, 'once I am in the Hill Horton
railway.'

For some things I wished too that we were going all the way with her,
but for others I couldn't help feeling that I should be very glad to be
safe home again and the adventure well over.

'By the day after to-morrow,' I thought, 'there will be no more reason
for worrying, if Margaret keeps her promise of writing to us.'

I had made her promise this, and given her an envelope with our address
on. For otherwise, you see, we should not have heard how she had got on,
as no one but the parrot knew that she had ever seen us or spoken to us.

Then the train moved slowly out of the station, and Margaret's eyes
sparkled with triumph. And we felt the infection of her high spirits.
After all, we were only children, and we laughed and joked about the
witch, and the fright her new nurse would be in, and how the parrot
would enjoy it all, of which we felt quite sure.

We were very merry all the way to the Junction. It was only about a
quarter-of-an-hour off, and just before we got there the guard looked at
our tickets.

'Change at the Junction,' he said, when he caught sight of the 'Hill
Horton,' on Margaret's.

'Of course, we know that, thank you,' she said, rather pertly perhaps,
but it sounded so funny that Pete and I burst out laughing again. I
suppose we were all really very excited, but the guard laughed too.

'How long will there be to wait for the Hill Horton train?' I had the
sense to ask.

'Ten minutes, at least,' he replied, glancing at his watch, the way
guards nearly always do.

I was glad he did not say longer, for the sooner Peterkin and I caught a
train home again, after seeing Margaret off, the better. And I knew
there were sure to be several in the course of the afternoon.

As soon as we stopped we got out--red bundle and all. I did not see our
guard again, he was somewhere at the other end; but I got hold of
another, not so good-natured, however, and rather in a hurry.

'Which is the train for Hill Horton? Is it in yet?' I asked.

He must have thought, so I explained it to myself afterwards, that we
had just come in to the station, and were at the beginning of our
journey.

'Hill Horton,' I _thought_ he said, but, as you will see, my ears must
have deceived me, 'all right. Any carriage to the front--further back
are for----.' I did not clearly hear--I think it must have been 'Charing
Cross,' but I did not care. All that concerned _us_ was 'Hill Horton.'

'Come along,' I called to the two others, who had got a little behind
me, lugging the bundle between them, and I led the way, as the man had
pointed out.

It seemed a very long train, and as he had said 'to the front,' I
thought it best to go pretty close up to the engine. There were two or
three first-class carriages next to the guard's van, but they were all
empty, and I had meant to look out for one with nice-looking people in
it for Margaret to travel with. Farther back there were some ladies and
children in some first-class, but I was afraid of putting her into a
wrong carriage.

'I expect you will be alone all the way,' I said to her. 'I suppose
there are not very many people going to Hill Horton.'

'Not first-class,' said Margaret. 'There are often lots of farmers and
village people, I daresay. Nursey said it was very crowded on market
days, but I don't know when it is market days. But it is rather funny,
Giles, to be getting into the same train again!'

'No,' I replied, 'these carriages will be going to split off from the
others that go on to London. The man said it would be all right for Hill
Horton at the front. They often separate trains like that. I daresay we
shall go a little way out of the station and come back again. You'll
see. And he said--the _first_ man, I mean--that we should have at least
ten minutes to wait, and we've scarcely been two, so we may as well get
in with you for a few minutes.'

'Yes, do,' said Margaret, 'but don't put my package up in the netted
place, for fear I couldn't get it down again myself. The trains never
stop long at our station.'

So we contented ourselves with leaving the red bundle on the seat beside
her. It was lucky, I told her, that the carriage _wasn't_ full,
otherwise it would have had to go up in the rack, where it wouldn't have
been very firm.

'It is so fat,' said Peterkin, solemnly.

'Something like you,' I said, at which we all laughed again, as if it
was something very witty. We were still feeling rather excited, I think,
and rather proud--at least I was--of having, so far, got on so well.

But before we had finished laughing, there came a startling surprise.
The train suddenly began to move! We stared at each other. Then I
remembered my own words a minute or two ago.

'It's all right,' I said, 'we'll back into the station again in a
moment.'

Margaret and Peterkin laughed again, but rather nervously. At least,
Margaret's laugh was not quite hearty; though, as for Peterkin, I think
he was secretly delighted.

On we went--faster and faster, instead of slower. There was certainly no
sign of 'backing.' I put my head out of the window. We were quite clear
of the Junction by now, getting every instant more and more into the
open country. At last I had to give in.

'We're off, I do believe,' I said. 'There's been some mistake about our
waiting ten minutes. We're clear on the way to Hill Horton.'

'_I'm_ very glad,' said Pete. 'I always wanted to come all the way.'

'But perhaps it needn't be all the way,' I said. 'Do you remember,
Margaret, how many stations there are between the Junction and yours?'

'Three or four, I think,' she replied.

'Oh well, then,' I said, 'it won't matter. We can get out the first time
we stop, and I daresay we shall soon get a train back again, and not be
late home after all.'

Margaret's face cleared. She was thoughtful enough not to want us to get
into trouble through helping her.

'We shall be stopping soon, I think,' she said, 'for this seems a fast
train.'

But to me her words brought no satisfaction. For it did indeed seem a
fast train, and a much more horrible idea than the one of our going all
the way to Hill Horton suddenly sprang into my mind--

Were we in the Hill Horton train at all?




CHAPTER IX

IN A FOG


I WAITED a minute or two before I said anything to the others. They went
on laughing and joking, and I kept looking out of the window. At last I
turned round, and then Margaret started a little.

'What's the matter, Giles?' she said. 'You're quite white and funny
looking.'

And Peterkin stared at me too.

'It's--'I began, and then I felt as if I really couldn't go on; but I
had to. 'It's that I am dreadfully afraid,' I said, 'almost quite sure
now, that we are in the wrong train. I've seen the names of two stations
that we've passed without stopping already. Do you remember the names of
any between the Junction and Hill Horton, Margaret?'

She shook her head.

'No,' she said, 'but I know we never pass any without stopping; at
least I think so. They are quite little stations, and I've never known
the train go as fast as this till after the Junction, when we were in
the London train. I've been to London several times with Gran, you see.'

Then it suddenly struck her what I meant.

'Oh!' she exclaimed, with a little scream, 'is it _that_ you are afraid
of, Giles? Do you think we are in the _London_ train? I did think it was
funny that we were getting back into the same one, but you said that the
man said that the carriages at the front were for Hill Horton?'

'Well, I _thought_ he did,' I replied, 'but--' one's mind works quickly
when you are frightened sometimes--'he _might_ have said "Victoria," for
the "tor" in "Victoria" and "Horton" sound rather alike.'

'But wouldn't he have said "London"?' asked Peterkin.

'No, I think they generally say the name of the station in London,' I
explained. 'There are so many, you see.'

Then we all, for a minute or two, gazed at each other without speaking.
Margaret had got still paler than usual, and I fancied, or feared, I
heard her choke down something in her throat. Peterkin, on the
contrary, was as red as a turkey-cock, and his eyes were gleaming. I
think it was all a part of the fairy-tale to him.

'What shall we do?' said Margaret, at last, and I was forced to answer,
'I don't know.'

Bit by bit things began to take shape in my mind, and it was no good
keeping them to myself.

'There'll be the extra money to pay for our tickets to London,' I said
at last.

'How much will it be? Isn't there enough over?' asked Margaret quietly,
and I could not help admiring her for it, as she took out her purse and
gave it to me to count over what was left.

There were only four or five shillings. I shook my head.

'I don't know how much it will be, but I'm quite sure there's not
enough. You see, though we're only halves, it's first-class.'

'And what will they do to us if we can't pay,' she went on, growing
still whiter. 'Could we--could we possibly be sent to prison?'

'Oh no, no. I don't think so,' I answered, though I was really not at
all sure about it; I had so often seen notices stuck up on boards at
railway stations about the punishments of passengers not paying
properly, or trying to travel without tickets. 'But--I'm afraid they
would be very horrid to us somehow--perhaps telegraph to papa or mamma.'

'Oh!' cried Margaret, growing now as red as she had been white, 'and
that would mean my being shut up again at Rock Terrace--worse than
before. I don't know _what_ the witch wouldn't do to me,' and she
clasped her poor little hands in a sort of despair.

Then Peterkin burst out--

'I've got my gold half-pound with me,' he said, in rather a queer voice,
as if he was proud of being able to help and yet half inclined to cry.

'Goodness!' I exclaimed, 'why on earth didn't you say so before?'

'I--I--wanted it for something else,' said he. 'I don't quite know why I
brought it.'

He dived into his pocket, and dug out a very grimy little purse, out of
which, sure enough, he produced a half-sovereign.

The relief of knowing that we should not get into trouble as far as our
journey _to_ London was concerned, was such a blessing, that just for
the moment I forgot all the rest of it.

'Anyway we can't be put in prison now,' said Margaret, and a little
colour came into her face. 'Oh, Perkins, you _are_ a nice boy!'

I did think her praising him was rather rough on _me_, for I had had
bother enough, goodness knows, about the whole affair, even though I had
made a stupid mistake.

We whizzed on, for it was an express train, and for a little while we
didn't speak. Peterkin was still looking rather upset about his money.
He told me afterwards that he had been keeping it for his Christmas
presents, especially one for Margaret, as we had never had a chance of
getting her any flowers. But all that was put right in the end.

After a bit Margaret said to me, in a half-frightened voice--

'What shall we do when we get to London, Giles? Do you think perhaps the
guard would help us to go back again to the Junction, when he sees it
was a mistake? As we've got money to pay to London, he'd see we hadn't
meant to cheat.'

'No,' I said, 'he wouldn't have time, and besides I don't think it'll be
the same one. And if we said anything, he'd most likely make us give our
names, or take us to some station-master or somebody, and then there'd
be no chance of our keeping out of a lot of bother.'

'You mean,' said she, in a shaky voice, 'we should have to go all the
way back, and I'd be sent to the witch again?'

'Something like it, I'm afraid,' I said. 'If I just explain that we got
into the wrong train and pay up, they'll have no business to meddle with
us.'

'But what are we to do, then?' she asked again.

'I don't know,' I replied. I'm afraid I was rather cross. I was so sick
of it all, you see, and so fearfully bothered.

Margaret at last began to cry. She tried to choke it down, but it was no
use.

I felt awfully sorry for her, but somehow the very feeling so bad made
me crosser, and I did not try to comfort her up.

Pete, on the contrary, tugged out his pocket-handkerchief, which was
quite a decently clean one, and began wiping her eyes. This made her try
again to stop crying. She pulled out her own handkerchief and said--

'Dear little Perkins, you are so kind.'

I glanced at them, not very amiably, I daresay. And I was on the point
of saying that, instead of crying and petting each other, they'd better
try to think what we should do, for I knew we must be getting near
London by this time, when I saw something white on the floor of the
carriage.

I stooped to pick it up. It had dropped out of Margaret's pocket when
she pulled out her handkerchief. It was an envelope, or what had been
one, and for a moment I thought it was the one I had given her with our
address on, to use when she wrote to us from Hill Horton, but _that_ one
couldn't have got so dirty and torn-looking in the time. And when I
looked at it more closely, I saw that it was jagged and nibbled in a
queer way, and _then_ I saw that it had the name 'Wylie' on it, and an
address in London. And when I looked still more closely, I saw that it
had never been through the post or had a stamp on, and that it had a
large blot in one corner. Evidently the person who had written on it had
not liked to use it because of the blot, and the name on it was _Miss_,
not _Mrs._ Wylie, '19 Enderby Street
                                 LONDON, S.W.'

I turned it round and round without speaking for a moment or two. I
couldn't make it out. Then I said--

'What's this, Margaret? It must have dropped out of your pocket.'

She stopped crying--well, really, I think she had stopped already, for
whatever her faults were she wasn't a babyish child--to look at it. She
seemed puzzled, and felt in her pocket again.

'No, of course it's not the envelope you gave me,' she said. 'I've got
it safe, and--oh, I believe I know how this old one got into my pocket.
I remember a day or two ago when I was trying if it would do to tie my
handkerchief on to Polly's cage, he was nibbling some paper. He's very
fond of nibbling paper, and it doesn't hurt him, for he doesn't eat it.
But he would keep pecking at me when I was tying the handkerchief, and I
was vexed with him, and so when he dropped this I picked it up and shook
it at him, and told him he shouldn't have it again, and then I put it
into my pocket. He was very tiresome that day, not a bit a fairy; he is
like that sometimes.'

'But how did he come to have an envelope with "Miss Wylie" on?' I said.
'He doesn't live in Mrs. Wylie's house, but in the one between yours and
hers, and this must have come from _her_.'

'I daresay she gave it him to play with, or her servant may have given
it him,' said Margaret, 'You see he's sometimes at the end of the
balcony nearest her, and sometimes at our end. I think his servants have
put him more at our end since she's been away; perhaps they've heard me
talking to him. Anyway, I'm sure this old envelope must have come out of
his cage.'

I did not speak for a moment. I was gazing at the address.

'Margaret,' I exclaimed, 'look at it.'

She did so, and then stared up at me, with a puzzled expression in her
eyes, still red with crying.

'I believe,' I went on, 'I believe this is going to help us.'

Peterkin, who had been listening with all his ears, could contain
himself no longer.

'And the parrot _must_ be a fairy after all,' he said, 'and he must have
done it on purpose.'

But Margaret did not seem to hear what he said, she was still gazing at
me and wondering what I was going to say.

'Don't you see,' I went on, touching the envelope, 'this must be the
house of some of Mrs. Wylie's relations? Very likely she's staying with
them there, and anyway they'd tell us where she is, as we know she's
still in London. She told us she was going to be there for a fortnight.
And she's very kind. We would ask her to lend us money enough to go back
to the Junction, and then we'd be all right. You have got your ticket
for Hill Horton, and we have our returns for home.'

'Oh,' cried Margaret, 'how clever you are to have thought of it, Giles!
But,' and the bright look went out of her face, 'you don't think she'd
make me go back to the witch, do you? Are you sure she wouldn't?'

'I really don't think she would,' I said. 'I know she has often been
sorry for you, for she knew you weren't at all happy. And we'd tell her
more about it. She is awfully kind.'

I meant what I said. Perhaps I saw it rather too favourably; the idea of
finding a friend in London was such a comfort just then, that I felt as
if everything else might be left for the time. I never thought about
catching trains at the Junction or about its getting late and dark for
Margaret to be travelling alone from there to Hill Horton, or anything,
except just the hope--the tremendous hope--that we might find our kind
old lady.

[Illustration: HE LOOKED AT THE TICKETS . . . 'HOW'S THIS?' HE
SAID.--p. 145.]

The train slackened, and very soon we pulled up. It wasn't the station
yet, however, but the place where they stop to take tickets, just
outside. I know it so well now, for we pass it ever so often on our way
from and to school several times a year. But whenever we pass it, or
stop at it, I think of that miserable day and all my fears.

The man put his head in at the window. He was a stranger.

'Tickets, please,' he said.

I was ready for him--tickets, Peterkin's half-sovereign, and all. I held
out the tickets.

'There's been a mistake,' I began. 'I shall have to pay up,' and when he
heard that, he opened the door and came in.

He looked at the tickets.

'Returns--half-returns to the Junction,' he said, 'and a half to Hill
Horton. How's this?'

'We got into the wrong train at the Junction,' I replied. 'In fact, we
got back into the same one we had just got out of. I expect the guard
thought I said "Victoria" when I said "Hill Horton," for he told us to
go to the front.'

'And didn't he tell you, you were wrong when he looked at the tickets
before you started?' the man asked, still holding our tickets in his
hand and examining us rather queerly.

I began to feel angry, but I didn't want to have any fuss, so instead of
telling him to mind his own business, as I was ready to pay the
difference, I answered again quite coolly--

'No one looked at the tickets at the Junction. There were two or three
empty carriages at the front: perhaps no one noticed us getting in.'

I thought I heard the man murmur to himself something about 'rum go.
Three kids by themselves, and first-class.'

So, though I was getting angrier every moment, I just said--

'I don't see that it matters. Here we are, anyway, and I'll pay if
you'll tell me how much.'

He counted up.

'Eight-and-six--no, eight-and-tenpence.'

I held out the half-sovereign. He felt in his pocket and gave me back
the change--a shilling and twopence, and walked off with the halves of
Pete's and my return tickets and the half-sovereign.

We all began to breathe more freely; but, as the train slowly moved
again at last--we had been standing quite a quarter-of-an-hour--a new
trouble started.

'It's very dark,' said Margaret, 'and it can't be late yet.'

I looked out of the window. Yes, it was very dark. I put my head out. It
felt awfully chilly too--a horrid sort of chilly feeling. But that
wasn't the worst of it.

'It's a fog,' I said. 'The horridest kind--I can't see the lights almost
close to us. It's getting worse every minute. I believe it'll be as dark
as midnight when we get into the station. What luck, to be sure!'

The other two seemed more excited than frightened.

'I've never seen a really bad fog,' said Margaret, as if she was rather
pleased to have the chance.

Pete said nothing. I expect he'd have had a fairy-tale all ready about a
prince lost in a mist, if I'd given him an opening. But I was again
rather taken aback. How were we to find our way to Enderby Street?

I had meant to walk, you see, in spite of the red bundle! For I was
afraid of being cheated by the cabman; and I was afraid too of running
quite short of money, in case we _didn't_ find Mrs. Wylie, or that she
had left, and that, if the worst came to the worst, I might have to go
to a hotel with the two children, and telegraph to mamma to say where we
were. Papa, unluckily, was not in London just then. He had gone away on
business somewhere--I forget where--for a day or two, and besides, I was
not at all sure of the exact address of his chambers, otherwise I might
have telegraphed _there_. I only knew it was a long way from Victoria.

Indeed, I don't think I thought about that at all at the time, though
afterwards mamma said to me I might have done so, _had_ the worst come
to the worst.




CHAPTER X

BERYL


YES, the fog _was_ a fog, and no mistake. I don't think I have ever seen
so bad a one since we came to live in London, or else it seemed to me
terribly bad that day because I was not used to it, and because I was so
anxious.

I felt half provoked and yet in a way glad that Margaret and Peterkin
were not at all frightened, but rather pleased. They followed me along
the platform after we got out of the carriage, lugging the bundle
between them. It was not really heavy, and I had to go first, as the
station was pretty full in that part, in spite of the fog. The lamps
were all lighted, but till you got within a few yards of one you
scarcely saw it.

I went on, staring about me for some one to ask advice from. At last,
close to a book-stall, where several lights together made it a little
clearer, I saw a railway man of some kind, standing, as if he was not in
a hurry.

'Can you tell me where Enderby Street is, if you please?' I asked as
civilly as I knew how.

'Enderby Street,' he repeated, in surprise. 'Of course; it's no distance
off.'

Wasn't I thankful?

'How far?' I said.

'Well--it depends upon which part of it you want. It's a long street.
But if you're a stranger you'll never find your way in this fog. Better
take a hansom.'

'Thank you,' I said. 'It's only a shilling, I suppose?'

He glanced at me again; he had been turning away. By this time the two
children were close beside me. He saw that we belonged to each other.

'A shilling for two--one-and-six for three,' he replied. 'Hansom or
four-wheeler,' and then he moved off.

Just then Margaret began to cough, and a new fear struck me. She looked
very delicate, and she had had a bad cold. Supposing the fog made her
very ill? I was glad the man had spoken of a four-wheeler.

'Stuff your handkerchief or something into your mouth,' I said, 'so as
not to get the fog down your throat. I'm going to call a four-wheeler.'

In some ways that dreadful day was not as bad as it might have been.
There were scarcely any cabs about, but just then one stopped close to
the end of the platform.

'Jump in,' I said, and before the driver had time to make any objection,
for I know they do sometimes make a great favour of taking you anywhere
in a fog, we were all inside.

I heard him growling a little, but when I put my head out of the window
again, and said '19 Enderby Street,' he smoothed down.

We drove off, slowly enough, but that was to be expected. I pulled up
both windows, for Margaret kept on coughing, in spite of having her
handkerchief, and Peterkin's too, for all I knew, stuffed over her mouth
and throat. They were both very quiet, but I _think_ they were rather
enjoying themselves. I suppose my taking the lead, as I had had to,
since our troubles began, and managing things, made them feel 'safe,' as
children like to do, at the bottom of their hearts, however they start
by talking big.

It _was_ a horrid fog, but the lights made it not quite so bad outside,
for the shops had got all their lamps on, and we could see them now and
then. There was a lot of shouting going on, and yet every sound was
muffled. There were not many carts or omnibuses or anything on wheels
passing, and what there were, were moving slowly like ourselves.

After a few minutes it got darker again; it must have been when we got
into Enderby Street, I suppose, for there are no shops, or scarcely any,
there. I've often and often passed along it since, but I never do
without thinking of that evening, or afternoon, for it was really not
yet four o'clock.

And then we stopped.

'Nineteen, didn't you say?' asked the driver as I jumped out.

'Yes, nineteen,' I said. 'Stop here for a moment or two, till I see if
we go in.'

For it suddenly struck me that _if_ we had the awful bad luck not to
find Mrs. Wylie, we had better keep the cab, to take us to some hotel,
otherwise it might be almost impossible to get another. And then we
should be out in the street, with Margaret and her bundle, and worse
still, her cough.

I made my way, more by feeling than seeing, up the steps, and fumbled
till I found the bell. I had not actually told the others to stay in
the cab, though I had taken care to keep the window shut when I got out,
and I never dreamt but what they'd stay where they were till I had found
out if Mrs. Wylie was there.

But just as the door opened--the servant came in double-quick time
luckily, the reason for which was explained--I heard a rustling behind
me, and lo and behold, there they both were, and the terrible red bundle
too, looking huger and queerer than ever, as the light from inside fell
on it.

We must have looked a funny lot, as the servant opened the door. She--it
was a parlour-maid--did start a little, but I didn't give her time to
speak, though I daresay she thought we were beggars, thanks to those
silly children.

'Mrs. Wylie is staying here,' I said. I thought it best to speak
decidedly. 'Is she at home?'

I suppose my way of speaking made her see we were not beggars, and
perhaps she caught sight of the four-wheeler, looming faintly through
the fog, for she answered quite civilly.

'She is not exactly staying here. She is in rooms a little way from
here, but she comes round most afternoons. I thought it was her when you
rang, but I don't think she'll be coming now--not in this fog.'

My heart had gone down like lead at the first words--'she is not,' but
as the servant went on I got more hopeful again.

'Can you--' I began--I was going to have asked for Mrs. Wylie's address,
but just then Margaret coughed; the worst cough I had heard yet from
her. 'Why couldn't you have stayed in the cab?' I said sharply, and
perhaps it was a good thing, to show that we _had_ a cab waiting for us.
'Please,' I went on, 'let this little girl come inside for a minute. The
fog makes her cough so.'

The parlour-maid stepped back, opening the door a little wider, but
there was something doubtful in her manner, as if she was not quite sure
if she was not running a risk in letting us in. I pushed Margaret
forward, and not Margaret only! She was holding fast to her precious
bundle, and Peterkin was holding fast to _his_ side of it, so they
tumbled in together in a way that was enough to make the servant stare,
and I stayed half on the steps, half inside, but from where I was I
could see into the hall quite well. It looked so nice and comfortable,
compared with the horribleness outside. It was a square sort of hall.
The house was not a big one, not nearly as big as ours at home, but lots
bigger than the Rock Terrace ones, of course.

'Can you give me Mrs. Wylie's address?' I said. 'I think the best thing
we can do is to--' but I was interrupted again.

A girl--a grown-up girl, a lady, I mean--came forward from the inner
part of the hall.

'Browner,' she said, 'do shut the door. You are letting the fog get all
over the house, and it is bitterly cold.'

She was blinking her eyes a little as she spoke: either the light or the
fog, or both, hurt them. Perhaps she had been sitting over the fire in a
darkish room. 'Blinking her eyes' doesn't sound very pretty, but it was,
I found afterwards, a sort of trick of hers, and somehow it suited her.
_She_ was very pretty. I didn't often notice girls' looks, but I
couldn't help noticing hers. Everything about her was pretty; her voice
too, though she spoke a little crossly. She was rather tall, and her
hair was wavy, almost as wavy as Elf's, and the colour of her dress,
which was pinky-red, and everything about her, seemed to suit, and I
just stood--we all did--staring at her.

And as soon as she caught sight of us--I daresay we seemed quite a
little crowd at the door--she stared too!

Then she came forward quickly, her voice growing anxious, and almost
frightened.

'What is the matter?' she exclaimed. 'Has there been an accident? Who
are these--children?'

Browner moved towards her.

'Indeed, Miss,' she began, but the girl stopped her.

'Shut the door first,' she said decidedly. 'No, no, come in, please,'
this was to me; I suppose I seemed to hesitate, 'and tell me what you
want, and who you are?'

Her voice grew more hesitating as she went on, and it must have been
very difficult to make out what sort of beings we were. Margaret's
colourless face and dark eyes and hair, and the bright red of the
bundle, at the first hasty glance, might almost have made you think of a
little Italian wandering musician; but the moment I spoke I think the
girl saw we were not that class.

'We are friends of Mrs. Wylie's--Mrs. Wylie who lives at Rock Terrace,'
I said, 'and--and we've come to her because--oh! because we've got into
a lot of trouble, and the fog's made it worse, and we don't know
anybody else in London.'

Then, all of a sudden--I'm almost ashamed to tell it, even though it's a
good while ago now, and I really was scarcely more than a little boy
myself--something seemed to get into my throat, and I felt as if in
another moment it would turn into a sob.

Margaret is awfully quick in some ways. She heard the choke in my voice
and darted to me, leaving the bundle to Pete's tender mercies; so half
of it dropped on to the floor and half stuck to him, as he stood there
staring with his round blue eyes.

Margaret stretched up and flung her arms round my neck.

'Giles, Giles,' she cried, 'don't, oh don't!' Then she burst out--

'It's all my fault; at least it's all for me, and Giles and Perkins have
been so good to me. Oh dear, oh dear, what shall I do?' and she began
coughing again in a miserable way. I think it was partly that she was
trying not to cry.

Seeing her so unhappy, made me pull myself together. I was just going to
explain things a little to the girl, when she spoke first. She looked
very kind and sorry.

'I'll tell you what's the first thing to do,' she said, 'and that's to
get this child out of the cold,' and she opened a door a little farther
back in the hall, and got us all in, the maid following.

It was a very nice, rather small dining-room; a bright fire was burning,
and the girl turned on an electric lamp over the table. There were
pretty ferns and things on it, ready for dinner, just like mamma has
them at home.

'Now,' she began again, but there seemed nothing but interruptions, for
just at that moment another door was heard to open, and as the one of
the room where we were was not shut, we could hear some one calling--

'Beryl, Beryl, is there anything the matter? Has your aunt come?'

It was a man's voice--quite a kind one, but rather fussy.

'Wait a moment or two, I'll be back directly,' said the girl, and as she
ran out of the room we heard her calling, 'I'm coming, daddy.'

The parlour-maid drew back nearer the door, not seeming sure if she
should leave us alone or not, and _we_ drew a little nearer the fire. So
that we could talk without her hearing us.

[Illustration: 'NOW,' SHE BEGAN . . . DRAWING MARGARET TO HER, 'TELL ME
ALL ABOUT IT.'--p. 159.]

'Isn't she a kind lady?' said Margaret, glancing up at me. 'I think she
looks very kind. You don't think she'll send me back to the witch, do
you, Giles?'

'Bother the witch,' I was on the point of saying, for I would have given
anything by this time to be back in our homes again, witch or no witch.
But I thought better of it. It wouldn't have been kind, with Margaret
looking up at me, with tears in her big dark eyes, so white and anxious.

'I shouldn't think so,' I replied. 'She must be Mrs. Wylie's niece, and
we'll go on to Mrs. Wylie, and she will tell us what to do.'

The girl--perhaps I'd better call her 'Beryl' now. We always do, though
she is no longer Beryl Wylie. Beryl was back almost at once.

'Now,' she began again, sitting down in an arm-chair by the fire, and
drawing Margaret to her, 'tell me all about it. In the first place, who
are you? What are your names?'

'Lesley,' I said. 'At least _ours_ is,' and I touched Peterkin. 'I'm
Giles and he's Peterkin. We know Mrs. Wylie, and we live on the Marine
Parade.'

Beryl nodded.

'Yes,' she said, 'I've heard of you. And,' she touched Margaret gently,
'this small maiden? What is her name--she is not your sister?'

'No,' I replied. 'She is Margaret----' I stopped short. For the first
time it struck me that I had never heard her last name!

'Margaret Fothergill,' she said quickly. 'I live next door but one to
Mrs. Wylie, and next door to the parrot. Do you know the parrot in Rock
Terrace?'

Beryl nodded again.

'I have heard of him too,' she said.

But suddenly a new idea--I should rather say the old one--struck
Margaret again. Her voice changed, and she clasped her hands piteously.

'You won't, oh, you won't send me back to the witch? Say you won't.'

'What does she mean?' asked Beryl, turning to me, as if she thought
Margaret was half out of her mind, though, all the same, she drew her
still closer.

'She--we--' I began, and Peterkin opened his mouth too. But I suppose I
must have glanced at the servant, for Beryl turned towards her, as if to
tell her not to wait. Then she changed and said instead--

'Bring tea in here, Browner, as quickly as you can. You can put it on
the side table.'

Browner went off at once; she seemed a very good-natured girl. And then,
as quickly as I could, helped here and there by Margaret and by Peterkin
(though to any one less 'understanding' than Beryl, his funny way of
muddling up real and fancy would certainly not have 'helped'), I told
our story. It was really wonderful how Beryl took it all in. When I
stopped at last, almost out of breath, she nodded her head quietly.

'We won't talk it over just yet,' she said. 'The first thing to do is to
see my auntie. You three stay here while I run round to her, and try to
enjoy your tea. I shall not be long. It is very near.'

The idea of tea did seem awfully tempting, but a new thought struck me.

'The cab!' I exclaimed, 'the four-wheeler! It's waiting all this time,
and if we send it away, most likely we shan't be able to get another in
the fog. There'll be such a lot to pay, too. Don't you think we'd better
go with you in it to Mrs. Wylie, and perhaps she'd lend us money to go
to the Junction by the first train? I don't think we should stay to
have tea, thank you,' though, as I said it, a glance at Margaret's poor
little white face made me wish I needn't say it. She was clinging to
Beryl so by this time as if she felt safe.

And Peterkin looked almost as piteous as she did.

Beryl gently loosened Margaret's hold of her, and got up from the big
leather arm-chair where she had been sitting.

'Never mind about the cab,' she said. 'I will go round in it to my aunt,
and perhaps bring her back in it. I will settle with the man. I may be a
quarter-of-an-hour or twenty minutes away. So all you three have got to
do in the meantime is to have a good tea, and trust me. And don't think
about witches, or bad fairies, or anything disagreeable till you see me
again,' she added, nodding to the two children. 'Browner, you will see
that they have everything they want.'

Browner smiled, and Beryl ran off, and in a minute or two we heard her
come downstairs again, with her cloak and hat on, no doubt, and the
front door shut, and I heard the cab drive away.

Talking of fairies, I can't imagine anything more like the best of good
ones than Beryl Wylie seemed to us that afternoon.

Browner was very kind and sensible. For after she had poured out our
tea, and handed us a plateful of bread-and-butter and another of little
cakes, she left the room, showing us the bell, in case we wanted more
milk or anything.

And then--perhaps it may seem very thoughtless of us, but, as I have
said before, even I, the eldest, wasn't very old--we really enjoyed
ourselves! It was so jolly to feel warm and to have a good tea, and,
above all, to know that we had found kind friends, who would tell us
what to do.

Margaret seemed perfectly happy, and to have got rid of all her fears of
being sent back to the witch. And Peterkin, in those days, was never
very surprised at anything, for nothing that could happen was as
wonderful as the wonders of the fairy-land he lived in. So he was quite
able to enjoy himself without any trying to do so.

I do feel, however, rather ashamed of one bit of it all. You'd scarcely
believe that it never came into my head to think that mamma might be
frightened about us, even though the afternoon was getting on into
evening, and the darkness outside made it seem later than it really was!

I can't understand it of myself, considering that I had seen with my
own eyes how frightened she had been the evening Peterkin got lost. I
suppose my head had got tired and confused with all the fears and things
it had been full of, but it is rather horrid to remember, all the same.




CHAPTER XI

DEAR MAMMA


BERYL must have been away longer than she had expected, for when we
heard the front bell ring and a minute later she hurried in, her first
words were--

'Did you think I was never coming back? I will explain to you what I
have been doing.'

When her eyes fell on us, however, her expression changed. She looked
pleased, but a little surprised, as she took in that we had not been, by
any means, sitting worrying ourselves, but quite the contrary. Margaret
was actually in the middle of a laugh, which did not seem as if she was
feeling very bad, even though it turned into a cough. Peterkin was
placidly content, and I was--well, feeling considerably the better for
the jolly good tea we had had.

'We've been awfully comfortable, thank you,' I said, getting up,
'and--will you please tell us what you think we'd better do?
And--please--how much was the cab?'

'Never mind about that,' she said. 'Here is my aunt,' and then I heard a
little rustle at the door, and in came Mrs. Wylie, who had been taking
off her wraps in the hall, looking as neat and white-lacy and like
herself as if she had never come within a hundred miles of a fog in her
life.

'She _would_ come,' Beryl went on, smiling at the old lady as if she
loved her very much. 'Auntie is always so kind.'

I began to feel very ashamed of all the trouble we were giving, and I'm
sure my face got very red.

'I'm so sorry,' I said, as Mrs. Wylie shook hands with us, 'I never
thought of you coming out in the fog.'

'It will not hurt me,' she replied; 'but I feel rather anxious about
this little person,' and she laid her hand on Margaret's shoulder, for
just then Margaret coughed again.

'Oh,' I exclaimed, 'you don't think it will make her cough worse, do
you?' and I felt horribly frightened. 'We'll wrap her up much more, and
once we are clear of London, there won't be any fog. I daresay it's
quite light still, in the country. It can't be late. But hadn't we
better go at once? Will you be so very good as to lend us money to go
back to the Junction? I know mamma will send it you at once.'

All my fears seemed to awaken again as I hurried on, and the children's
faces grew grave and anxious.

Mrs. Wylie sat down quietly.

'My dear boy,' she said, 'there can be no question of any of you,
Margaret especially, going back to-night. The fog is very bad, and it is
very cold besides. My niece has told me the whole story, and----'

'I suppose you think we've all been dreadfully naughty,' I interrupted.
'I did not mean to be, and _they_ didn't,' glancing at the others. 'But
of course I'm older, only----'

Mrs. Wylie laid her hand on my arm.

'There will be a good deal to talk over,' she said, speaking still very
quietly, but rather gravely. 'And I feel that your dear mamma is the
right person to--to explain things--your mistakes, and all about it. I
believe certainly you did not _mean_ to do wrong.'

Her mention of mamma startled me into remembering at last how
frightened she and all of them would be at home.

'Oh!' I exclaimed, 'if we stay away all night, what _will_ mamma do?'

'I was just going to tell you what we have done,' said Mrs. Wylie. 'That
was what kept us--Beryl and me. We have telegraphed to your mamma. She
will not be frightened now. Indeed, I hope she may have got the telegram
in time to prevent her beginning to be anxious. And we also--' but here
she stopped, for a glance at Margaret, as she told me afterwards,
reminded her of Margaret's fears lest she should be sent back to Rock
Terrace and Miss Bogle. And what she had been on the point of saying
was, that they had also telegraphed to 'the witch.'

'It was awfully good of you,' I said, feeling more and more ashamed of
the trouble we were causing.

I would have given anything to go home that night, even if it had been
to find papa and mamma more displeased with me than they had ever been
in their life, and, as I was beginning to see, as they had a right to
be. But in the face of all Mrs. Wylie and Beryl were doing, I could not
possibly have gone against what they thought best.

'I shall also write to your mamma to-night,' Mrs. Wylie went on. 'There
is plenty of time. It is not really as late as the fog makes it seem.
And the first thing we now have to do,' for just then Margaret had
another bad fit of coughing, 'is to put this child to bed. If you are
not better in the morning, or rather if you are any worse, we must send
for the doctor.'

'Oh, _please_ don't!' said Margaret, as soon as she could speak. 'It's
only the fog got into my throat. It doesn't hurt me at all, as it did
when I had that very bad cold at home. I don't like strange doctors,
_please_, Mrs. Wylie. And to-morrow nursey can send for our own doctor
at home at Hill Horton, if I'm not quite well. I may go home to my
nursey quite early, mayn't I? And you will tell their mamma not to be
vexed with them, won't you? They only wanted to help me.'

She looked such a shrimp of a creature, with her tiny face, so pale too,
that nobody could have found it in their heart to scold her. Mrs. Wylie
just patted her hand and said something about putting it all right, but
that she must go to bed now and have a good long sleep.

And just then Beryl, who had left us with Mrs. Wylie, came back to say
that everything was ready for Margaret upstairs, and then she walked
her and the red bundle off--to put her to bed.

I really think that by this time Margaret was so tired that she scarcely
knew where she was: she did not make the least objection, but was as
meek as a mouse. You would never have thought her the same child as the
determined little 'ordering-about' sort of child I knew she could be,
and I, rather suspected, generally _had_ been till she came under
stricter management.

When she was alone with us--with Peterkin and me--Mrs. Wylie spoke a
little more about the whole affair. But not very much. She had evidently
made up her mind to leave things in mamma's hands. And she did not at
all explain any of the sort of mystery there seemed about Margaret.

She rang the bell and told Browner to take us upstairs to the little
room that had been got ready for us, and where we were to sleep, saying,
that she herself was now going to write to mamma.

'_And_ to Miss Bogle,' she added, 'though I thought it better not to say
so to Margaret.'

She looked at us rather curiously as she spoke; I think she most likely
wanted to find out what we really believed about 'the witch.' Peterkin
started, and grew very red.

'You won't let her go back there?' he exclaimed. 'I'm sure she'll run
away again if you do.'

It sounded rather rude, but Mrs. Wylie knew that he did not mean it for
rudeness. She only looked at him gravely.

'I am very anxious to see how your little friend is to-morrow morning,'
she replied. 'I earnestly hope she has not caught any serious cold.'

The way she said it frightened me a little somehow, though we children
often caught cold and didn't think much about it. But then we were all
strong. None of us ever coughed the way Margaret used to about that
time, except when we had hooping-cough, and it wasn't that that she had
got, I knew.

'You don't think she is going to be badly ill?' I said, feeling as if it
would be all my fault if she was.

Mrs. Wylie only repeated that she hoped not.

We couldn't do much in the way of dressing or tidying ourselves up, as
we had nothing with us, not even a red bundle. We could only wash our
faces and hands, which were _black_ with the fog, so having them clean
was an improvement. And there was a very pretty brush and comb put out
for us--Beryl's own. I think it was awfully good of her to lend us her
nice things like that. I don't believe Blanchie would have done it,
though I daresay mamma would. So we made ourselves as decent-looking as
we could, and our collars didn't look as bad that evening as in the
daylight the next morning.

And then Beryl put her head in at the door and told us to come down to
the drawing-room, where her father was.

'He is not able to go up and down stairs just now,' she said. 'His
rheumatism is very bad. So he stays in the drawing-room, and we dine
earlier than usual for his sake--at seven.'

She went on talking, partly to make us more comfortable, for I knew we
were both looking very shy. And just outside the drawing-room door she
smiled and said, 'Don't be frightened of him, he is the kindest person
in the world.'

[Illustration: THE FRILLS HAD WORKED UP ALL ROUND HIS FACE.--p. 173.]

So he was, I am sure. He had white hair and a thin white face, and he
was sitting in a big arm-chair, and he shook hands kindly, and didn't
seem to mind our being there a bit. Of course, Beryl had explained it
all to him, and it was easy to see that he was most awfully fond of
her, and pleased with everything she did. All the same, I was very glad,
though it sounds horrid, that he couldn't come downstairs. It didn't
seem half so frightening with only Mrs. Wylie and Beryl.

Peterkin got very sleepy before dinner was really over. I think he
nodded once or twice at dessert, though he was very offended when I said
so afterwards. I began to feel jolly tired too, and we were both very
glad to go to bed. There was a fire in our room. 'Miss Wylie had ordered
it because of the fog,' the servant said. Wasn't it kind of her?

We couldn't help laughing at the things they had tried to find for us
instead of proper night things--jackety sort of affairs, with lots of
frills and fuss. I don't know if they belonged to mother Wylie or to
Beryl. But we were too sleepy to mind, though next morning Pete was
awfully offended when I said he looked like Red-Riding Hood's
grandmother, as the frills had worked up all round his face, and he
looked still queerer when he got out of bed, as his robe trailed on the
floor, with his being so short.

He did not wake as early as usual, but I did. And for a minute or two I
_couldn't_ think where I was. And I didn't feel very happy when I did
remember.

The fog had gone, but it still looked gloomy, compared with home. Still
I was glad it was clear, both because I wanted so to go home, and also
because of Margaret's cold. I think that was what I first thought of. If
only she didn't get ill, I thought I wouldn't mind how angry they were
with me. As to Peterkin, I would stand up for him, if he needed it,
though I didn't think he would. They'd be sure to remind me how much
older I was, and pleasant things like that. And yet when I went over and
over it in my own mind, I couldn't get it clear what else I could have
done. There _are_ puzzles like that sometimes, and anyway it was better
than if Margaret had run away alone, and perhaps got really lost.

And, after all, as you will hear, I hadn't much blame to bear. The name
of this chapter will show thanks to whom _that_ was.

When we were dressed--and oh, how we longed for clean collars!--we made
our way down to the dining-room. Beryl was there already, and I saw that
she looked even prettier by daylight, such as it was than the evening
before. She smiled kindly, and said she hoped we had managed to sleep
well.

'Oh yes, thank you,' we said, 'but--' and we both looked round the room.
'How is Margaret?'

'None the worse, I am glad to say,' Beryl answered, and then I thought
to myself I might have guessed it, by Beryl's bright face. 'I really
think it was only the fog that made her cough so last night. She looks a
very delicate little girl, however, and she speaks of having had a very
bad cold not long ago, which may have been something worse than a cold.
So I made her stay in bed for breakfast, till----'

At that moment the parlour-maid brought in a telegram. Beryl opened it,
and then handed it to me. It was from mamma.

'A thousand thanks for telegram and letter. Coming myself by earliest
train possible.'

'It's very good of mamma,' I said, and in my heart I was glad she was
coming before we--or I--saw papa. For though he is very kind too, he is
not quite so 'understanding,' and a good deal sharper, especially with
us boys. I suppose fathers need to be, and I suppose boys need it more
than girls.

'Yes,' said Beryl, and though she had been so awfully jolly about the
whole affair, I could tell by her tone that she was glad that some one
belonging to us was coming to look after us all. 'It is very
satisfactory. My aunt said she would come round early too. I think it
will be quite safe for Margaret to get up now, so I will go and tell her
she may. You will find some magazines and picture-papers in my little
sitting-room, behind this room, if you can amuse yourselves there till
auntie comes.'

I stopped her a moment as she was leaving the room, to ask what I knew
Peterkin was longing to hear.

'Mamma will take us home, of course,' I said, 'but what do you think
will be done about Margaret?'

'They--' whom he meant by 'they' I don't know, and I don't think he knew
himself--'they won't send her back to the witch, you don't think, do
you?' he burst out, growing very red.

Beryl hesitated. Then she said quietly--

'No, I _don't_ think so,' and Peterkin gave a great sigh of relief. If
she had answered that she _did_ think so, I believe he would have broken
into a howl. I really do.

It seemed rather a long time that we had to wait in Beryl's room before
anything else happened. Peterkin said it felt a good deal like waiting
at the dentist's, and I agreed with him. It was the looking at the
picture-papers that put it into his head, I think.

We heard the front-door bell ring several times, and once I was sure I
caught Beryl's voice calling, 'Auntie, is it you?' but it must have been
nearly twelve o'clock--breakfast had been a good deal later than at
home--before the door of the room where we were, opened, and some one
came in. I was standing staring out of the window, which looked into a
very small sort of fernery or conservatory, and wishing Beryl had told
me to water the plants, when I heard a voice behind me.

'Boys!' it said; 'Giles?' and turning round, I saw that it was mamma. I
forgot all about being found fault with and everything else, and just
flew to her, and so did poor old Pete, and then--I am almost ashamed to
tell it, though perhaps I should not be--I broke out crying!

Mamma put her arms round me. I don't know what she had been meaning to
say to us, or to me, perhaps, in the way of blame, but it ended in her
hugging me, and saying 'poor old Gilley.' She hugged Peterkin too,
though he wasn't crying, and had no intention of it, _unless_ his
beloved Margaret was to be sent back to Miss Bogle, and then, I have no
doubt, he would have howled loudly enough. His whole mind was fixed on
this point, and he had hardly patience even to be hugged, before he
burst out with it.

'Mummy, mummy,' he said,'they're not going to send her back to the
witch, are they?'

Mamma understood. She knew Peterkin's little ways so well,--how he got
his head full of a thing, and could take in nothing else,--and she saw
that it was best to satisfy him at once if we were to have any peace.

'No,' she said. 'The little girl is not to go back to Miss Bogle.'

Peterkin gave a great sigh of comfort. After all, he _had_ rescued his
princess, I suppose he said to himself. _I_ thought it very
extraordinary that mamma should be able to speak so decidedly about it,
and I daresay she saw this, for she went on almost at once--

'I have a good deal to explain. Some unexpected things happened
yesterday and this morning. But for this, I should have come by an
earlier train.'

Here, I think, before I go on to say what these unexpected things were,
is a good place for telling what mamma said to me afterwards, when we
were by ourselves, about the whole affair, and my part in it. She quite
allowed that I had not meant to do wrong or to be deceitful, or anything
like that, and that I had been rather in a hole. But she made me see
that, to start with, I should not have promised Margaret to keep it a
secret, and she said she was sure that Margaret would have given in to
our telling _her_--mamma, I mean--of her troubles, if I had spoken to
her sensibly and seriously about it. And now that I know Margaret so
well, I think so too. For she is particularly sensible for her age,
especially since she has got her head clearer of fairy-tales and witches
and enchantments and ogres and all the rest of it; and even then, there
was a good deal of sense and reasonableness below her self-will and
impatience.

Now, I can go on with what mamma told us. The first she heard of it all
was the telegram from Mrs. Wylie, for she had been out till rather late
and found it lying on the hall-table when she came in, before she had
even heard that Pete and I had not turned up at the nursery tea. That
was what Beryl had hoped--that the news of our being all right would
come before mamma had had a chance of being anxious. At first she was
completely puzzled, but James, who was faithful to his promise, though
rather stupid, helped to throw a little light on it by giving her my
message.

And then, as she was still standing in the hall, talking to him and
trying to think what in the world had made us dream of going to London
to Mrs. Wylie's, all by ourselves, there came a great ring at the bell,
and when James opened, a startled-looking maid-servant's voice was heard
asking for Mrs. Lesley.

'I am Mrs. Wylie's parlour-maid,' she said, 'and I offered to run round,
for the old lady next door to us, Miss Bogle, to ask if Mrs. Lesley
would have the charity--I was to say--to come to see her. The little
young lady, Miss Fothergill, who lives with her, has been missing all
the afternoon. Miss Bogle did not know it till an hour or two ago, as
she always rests in her own room till four o'clock. But I was to say she
would explain it all to Mrs. Lesley, if she could possibly come to see
Miss Bogle at once.'

Mamma had gone forward and heard this all herself, though the maid had
begun by giving the message to James. And she said immediately that she
would come. She still had her going-out things on, you see, so no time
was lost.




CHAPTER XII

NO MYSTERY AFTER ALL


WE listened with all our ears, you may be sure, to what mamma told us;
she did so, very quickly. It takes me much longer to write it.

'And did you see Miss Bogle?' I asked. 'And what _is_ she like?'

'The witch herself,' said Peterkin, his eyes nearly starting out of his
head.

'No, Peterkin,' said mamma, 'you are not to call her that any more. You
must help me to explain to little Margaret, that Miss Bogle is a good
old lady, who has meant nothing but kindness, though she made a great
mistake in undertaking the charge of the child, for she is old and
infirm and suffers sadly. Yes, of course, I saw her. She was terribly
upset, the tears streaming down her poor face, though she had scarcely
had time to be actually terrified about Margaret, thanks to Mrs.
Wylie's telegram. She was afraid of the child having got cold, and she
was altogether puzzled and miserable. And I was not able to explain very
much myself, till I got Mrs. Wylie's _letter_ this morning, fully
telling all. Still, I comforted her by saying I knew Mrs. Wylie was
goodness itself, and would take every care of all the three of you for
the night. Miss Bogle had not missed Margaret, as she always rests in
the afternoon, till about four. And, strange to say, the servants had
not missed her either. The nurse was away for the day, and I suppose
that the others, not being used to think about the child, had not given
a thought to her, though it seems strangely careless, till it got near
her tea-time, and then they ran to Miss Bogle and startled her terribly.
The first thing she did was to send in to the next-door house'--('The
parrot's house?' interrupted Pete)--'and to Mrs. Wylie's,' mamma went
on, 'where the parlour-maid knew that you boys and Margaret had made
friends, and she offered to speak to Miss Bogle, thinking that perhaps
you had all gone a walk together, and would soon be coming in. And
_while_ she was telling Miss Bogle this, came the telegram, showing that
indeed you had gone a walk, and more than a walk,'--here mamma turned
away for a moment, and I _think_ it was to hide a smile that she could
not help. I suppose to grown-up people there was a comical side to the
story,--'together. And then the poor old lady sent for me.'

'And was that all that happened?' I asked.

Mamma shook her head.

'No,' she said. 'While I was still talking to Miss Bogle, came another
telegram, from the little girl's nurse, her present nurse, to say that
her sister was so ill that she could not leave her, and that she was
writing to explain. Poor Miss Bogle! Her cup of troubles did seem full;
I felt very sorry for her, and I promised to go back to see her, first
thing this morning, which I did, before starting to fetch you boys. The
nurse's letter had come, saying she did not know _when_ she could
return. And so--' mamma stopped for a moment--'it all ended--papa came
back last night, so he was with me, and it was his idea first of all--in
a way which I don't think you will be very sorry for,'--and again mamma
smiled,--'in our settling that Margaret is to come home with _us_, and
stay with us till there is time to hear from her grandfather, General
Fothergill, what he wishes. How do you like the idea?'

'I'm awfully glad of it,' I said. And so I was. Not so much for the sake
of having Margaret as a companion, as because it quite took away all
responsibility and fears about her. For I felt sure she would never have
settled down happily or contentedly in Miss Bogle's house.

But as for Peterkin! You never saw anything like his delight. He took
all the credit of it to himself, and was more certain than ever that the
parrot was a fairy, Miss Bogle a witch, and himself a hero who had
rescued a lovely princess. His eyes sparkled like--I don't know what to
compare them to; and his cheeks got so red and fat that I thought they'd
burst.

And when I said quietly--I thought it a good thing to sober him down a
bit, but I really meant it too--that I hoped Blanchie and Elf would like
Margaret, he really looked as if he wanted to knock me down--ungrateful
little donkey, after all I'd done and gone through for him and his
princess! But mamma glanced at me, and I understood that she meant that
it was better to say nothing much to him. He would grow out of his
fancies by degrees. And she just said, quietly too, that she was sure
the little girls would get on all right together, and that Blanche and
Elvira would do all they could to make Margaret happy.

'And I am so thankful,' mamma went on, 'that the poor child is none the
worse for her adventures, and able to travel back with us to-day. And I
can never, never be grateful enough to Mrs. Wylie and her niece for
their goodness to you. Miss Wylie is perfectly sweet.'

Just as she said this the door opened and Beryl came in, leading
Margaret with her. Mamma, of course, had already seen them upstairs,
before she saw us.

Margaret looked pale, naturally, paler than usual, I thought, and she
never was rosy in those days, though she is now. But she seemed very
happy and smiling, and she was not coughing at all. And another thing
that pleased me, was that she came round and stood by mamma's chair, as
if she already felt quite at home with her.

Beryl drew a chair close to them and sat down.

'I was just saying,' said mamma, 'that we shall never be able to thank
you enough, dear Miss Wylie, for your goodness to these three.'

'I am so glad, so _very_ glad,' said Beryl, in her nice hearty sort of
way, 'to have been of use. It was really quite a pleasant excitement
last night--when it all turned out well, and Margaret was clever enough
not to get ill. But please don't call me Miss Wylie. You have known dear
old auntie so long--and she counts me almost like her own child. Do call
me "Beryl."'

And from that time she has always been 'Beryl' to us all.

They, the Wylies, made us stay to luncheon. It was just about time for
it by this. We did not see Mr. Wylie again, though he sent polite
messages to mamma, and was very kind about it all.

And Mrs. Wylie came in to luncheon, and petted us all round, and said
that we must _all_--Blanche and Elvira, and Clement too, if he wasn't
too big, come to have tea with her, as soon as she got back to Rock
Terrace.

We thanked her, of course. At least Peterkin and I did, but I noticed
that Margaret got rather red and did not say anything except 'thank you'
very faintly. She was still half afraid of finding herself again where
she had been so unhappy, and indeed it took a good while, and a good
deal of quiet talking too, to get it _quite_ out of her head about Miss
Bogle being a witch who was trying to 'enchanter' her, as her dear
'Perkins' (she calls him 'Perkins' to this day) would persist in saying.

Mrs. Wylie noticed her manner too, I fancy. For she went on to say, with
a funny sort of twinkle in her eyes--

'There will be a great deal to tell the parrot. And I don't expect that
he will feel quite happy in his mind about you, little Margaret, till he
has seen you again. He will miss you sadly, I am afraid.'

And at this, Margaret brightened up.

'Yes,' she said, 'I _must_ come to see dear Poll. But I may talk to him
from your side of the balcony, mayn't I, Mrs. Wylie?'

'Certainly,' said the kind old lady, 'and you must introduce your new
friends to him. Mrs. Lesley's little girls, I mean.'

Margaret liked the idea of this, I could see. She is not at all shy, and
she still is very fond of planning, or managing things, and people too,
for that matter, though of course she is much more sensible now, and not
so impatient and self-willed as she used to be. Still, on the whole, she
gets on better with Peterkin than with any of us, though she is fond of
us, I know, and so are we of her. But Peterkin is just a sort of slave
to her, and does everything she asks, and I expect it will always be
like that.

What a different journey it was that day to the miserable one the day
before! To _me_, at least; for though I wasn't feeling particularly
happy, as I will explain, in some ways, the horrible responsibility
about the others had gone. _They_ were as jolly as could be, but then I
knew they hadn't felt half as bad as I had done. They sat in a corner,
whispering, and I overheard that they were making plans for all sorts of
things they would do while Margaret stayed with us. And Pete was telling
her all about Blanche and Elf, especially about Elf, and about the lots
of fairy story-books he had got, and how they three would act some of
them together, till Margaret got quite pink with pleasure.

I saw mamma looking at me now and then, as if she was wondering what I
was thinking about. I _was_ thinking a good deal. There were some things
I couldn't yet quite understand about it all--why there should have been
a sort of mystery, and why Mrs. Wylie had pinched up her lips when we
had asked her about Margaret the day we went to tea with her. And
besides this, I was feeling, in a kind of a way, rather ashamed of being
taken home like a baby, even though mamma--and all of them, I must
say--had been so very good, not to make a regular row and fuss, after
the fright we had given them, or had _nearly_ given them.

But I didn't say anything more to mamma just then. For one thing, I saw
that she was looking very tired, and no wonder, poor dear little mamma,
when you think what a day of it she had had, and all the bother with the
witch the night before, too.

I never saw Miss Bogle, and I've never wanted to. I shall always
consider that she was nearly as bad as if she _had_ been a witch, and it
was no thanks to her that poor little Margaret didn't get really lost,
or badly ill, or something of that kind.

They were expecting us when we got home. Blanche and Elf were in the
hall, looking rather excited and very shy. But there was not much fear
of shyness with Margaret and Peterkin, as neither of them was ever
troubled with such a thing.

I left Pete to do the honours, so to say, helped by mamma, of course.
They all went off together upstairs to show Margaret her room and the
nursery, and to introduce her to nurse and all the rest of it, and I
went into the schoolroom--a small sort of study behind the dining-room,
and sat down by myself, feeling rather 'out of it' and 'flat,' and
almost a little ashamed of myself and the whole affair somehow.

And the fire was low and the room looked dull and chilly, and I began
thinking how horrid it would be to go to school the next morning without
having done my lessons properly, and not knowing what to say about
having missed a day, without the excuse, or good reason, of having been
ill.

I had sat there some time, a quarter-of-an-hour or so, I daresay, when I
heard the front-door bell ring. Then I heard James opening and the door
shutting, and, a moment after, the door of the room where I was opened,
and some one came in, and banged something down on to the table. By that
I knew who it was. It was Clement, with his school-books.

It was nearly dark by this time, and the room was not lighted up at all.
So he did not see me at first, till I moved a little, which made him
start.

'Good gracious!' he exclaimed, 'is that you, Gilley? What are you doing
all alone in the dark? James told me you had all come--the kid from Rock
Terrace too. By jove--' and he began to laugh a little to himself.

It seemed a sort of last straw. I was tired and ashamed, and all wrong
somehow. I did not speak till I was at the door, for I got up to leave
the room at once. Then I said--

'You needn't go at me like that. You might let me sit here if I want to.
You don't suppose I've been enjoying myself these two days, do you?'

He seemed to understand all about it at once. He caught hold of my arm
and pulled me back again.

'Poor old Gilley!' he said.

Then he took up the poker and gave a good banging to the coals. There
was plenty on the fire, but it had got black for want of stirring up. In
a moment or two there was a cheery blaze. Clement pushed me into a seat
and sat down near me on the table, his legs dangling.

I have not said very much about Clem in this story--if it's worth
calling a story--except just at the beginning, for it has really been
meant to be about Peterkin and his princess. But I can't finish it
without a little more about him--Clem, I mean. Some day, possibly, I may
write about him especially, about our real school-life and all he has
been to me, and how tremendously lucky I always think it has been for me
to have such a brother. He is just as good as gold, without any pretence
about it, and jolly too. And I can never forget how kind he was that
afternoon.

'Poor old Gilley!' he repeated. 'It must have been rather horrid for
you--much worse than for those two young imps. Mamma told me all about
it, as soon as she got the letter--she told me a good deal last night
about what Miss Bogie, or whatever the old thing's name is, had told
her.'

I looked up at this.

'Yes?' I said. 'I don't understand it at all, yet. But, Clem, what shall
I do about school to-morrow? I've no lessons ready or anything.'

'Is it that that you are worrying about?' he said.

'Partly, and----'

'Well, you can put _that_ out of your head. It's all right. Mamma told
me what to say--that there'd been a mistake about the trains, and you'd
had to stay the night in London. It wasn't necessary to say more, and
you'll find it all right, I promise you.'

I was very glad of this, and I said so, and thanked Clem.

He sat still for a minute or two as if he was expecting me to speak.

'Well?' he said at last.

'Mamma's been very good, _very_ good about it altogether,' I said at
last, 'and so has papa, by what she says. But still--' and then I
hesitated.

'Well?' said Clement again. 'What? I don't see that there's much to be
down in the mouth about.'

'It's just that--I feel rather a fool,' I said. 'Anybody would laugh so
at the whole affair if they heard it. I daresay Blanche will think I've
no more sense than Pete. She has a horrid superior way sometimes, you
know.'

'You needn't bother about that, either,' said he. 'She and Elf have got
their heads perfectly full of Margaret. I don't suppose Blanche will
ever speak of your part of it, or think of it even. As long as papa and
mamma are all right--and I'm sure they are--you may count it a case of
all's well that ends well.'

I did begin to feel rather cheered up.

'You're sure I'm not going to get a talking to, after all?' I said,
still doubtfully. 'I saw mamma looking at me rather funnily in the
train.'

'Did you, my boy?' said another voice, and glancing round, I saw mamma,
who had come into the room so quietly that neither of us had heard her.

She sat down beside us. And then it was that she explained to me what I
had done wrong, and been foolish about. I have already told what she
said, and I felt that it was all true and sensible. And she was so
kind--not laughing at me a bit, even for having a little believed about
the witch and all that--that I lost the horrid, mortified, ashamed
feelings I had been having.

Just then the nursery tea-bell rang. I got up--slowly--I still felt a
little funny and uncomfortable about Blanche, and even nurse. You see
nurse made such a pet of Peterkin that she never scarcely could see that
he should be found fault with, and of course he was a very good little
chap, though not exactly an angel without wings--and certainly rather a
queer child, with all his fairy-tale fancies.

But mamma put her hand on my arm.

'No,' she said. 'Clem and you are going to have tea in the drawing-room
with me. The nursery party will be better left to itself to-day, and
little Margaret is not accustomed to so many.'

'I don't believe anything would make her feel shy, though,' I said. 'She
is just as funny in her way as Peterkin in his. And, mamma, there are
some things I don't understand still. Is there any sort of mystery? Why
did Mrs. Wylie leave off talking about Margaret, and you too, I think,
all of a sudden? I'm sure it was Mrs. Wylie's way of pinching up her
lips about her, that made Pete surer than ever about the enchantment and
the parrot and the witch and everything.'

Mamma smiled.

'No,' she said, 'there is no mystery at all. I will explain about it
while we are having tea. It must be ready for us.'

And she went into the drawing-room, Clement and I following her. It
looked so nice and comfortable--I was jolly glad, I know, to be at home
again!

Then mamma told us--or me; I think Clem had heard it already--about
Margaret.

Her father and mother were in India, as I have said, have I not? And her
grandfather was taking care of her. He was not a very old man, though he
was a General. He had vineyards or something--yes, I am sure it was
vineyards, in the south of France, and he had had to go, suddenly, to
look after some business to do with them. And just when he was starting,
Margaret got ill. It was the illness she had spoken of several times,
which she called a very bad cold. But it was much worse than that,
though she didn't know.

Her grandfather put off going till she was getting better, and the
doctors said she must have change of air. He couldn't take her with him,
and he had to go, so the only thing he could think of was to ask old
Miss Bogle, who had been Margaret's father's governess once--or General
Fothergill's own governess when he was a little boy; I am not sure
which--to take charge of her. He had forgotten how old, Miss Bogle was,
and I think she must have forgotten it herself! She wasn't fit to look
after a child, especially as Margaret's nurse had to leave just then.

So you can pretty well understand how dull and lonely Margaret was. And
General Fothergill was in such a fuss about her, and so terrified of her
getting any other illness, that he forbade her making friends with any
one out of Miss Bogle's house, unless he was asked about it, and wrote
to give leave.

And when Mrs. Wylie found out about her, she--or Miss Bogle--_did_ write
to ask leave for her to know _us_, explaining how good and sensible
mamma was about children every way. But till the leave came Mrs. Wylie
and mamma settled that it was better to say nothing about it to us. And
in this, _I_ think, they made a mistake.

That was all. The leave _did_ come, while Margaret was with us. Of
course, all that had happened was written to her grandfather, but she
wasn't a bit scolded!

Neither was her 'Perkins'; the big people only said that they must not
be given so many fairy-stories to read.

_I_ wasn't scolded either, though, so I should not complain. And several
nice things came of it: the knowing Beryl Wylie, and the going to stay
at General Fothergill's country house, and the having Margaret with us
sometimes.

I don't know what the parrot thought of it all. I believe he is still
there, as clever and 'uncanny' as ever; at least so Mrs. Wylie said, the
last time she came to see us.

THE END

          _Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_




BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS.

=By Mrs. MOLESWORTH.=


=THE WOODPIGEONS AND MARY.= Illustrated by H. R. MILLAR. Crown 8vo. 4s.
6d.

_Illustrated by_ =Alice B. Woodward=. _Globe 8vo. 2s. 6d._


=THE HOUSE THAT GREW.=

_Illustrated by_ HUGH THOMSON. _Globe 8vo. 2s. 6d._


=THIS AND THAT: A Tale of Two Tinies.=

_Illustrated by_ WALTER CRANE. _Globe 8vo. 2s. 6d. each._

          =A CHRISTMAS POSY.=
          ="CARROTS," JUST A LITTLE BOY.=
          =A CHRISTMAS CHILD.=
          =CHRISTMAS-TREE LAND.=
          =THE CUCKOO CLOCK.=
          =FOUR WINDS FARM.=
          =GRANDMOTHER DEAR.=
          =ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY.=
          =LITTLE MISS PEGGY.=
          =THE RECTORY CHILDREN.=
          =ROSY.=
          =THE TAPESTRY ROOM.=
          =TELL ME A STORY.=
          =TWO LITTLE WAIFS.=
          ="US"; an Old-Fashioned Story.=
          =CHILDREN OF THE CASTLE.=

_Illustrated by_ LESLIE BROOKE. _Globe 8vo. 2s. 6d. each._

          =SHEILA'S MYSTERY.=
          =THE CARVED LIONS.=
          =MARY.=
          =MY NEW HOME.=
          =NURSE HEATHERDALE'S STORY.=
          =THE GIRLS AND I.=
          =THE ORIEL WINDOW.=
          =MISS MOUSE AND HER BOYS.=

_Illustrated by_ ROSIE M. M. PITMAN. _Globe 8vo. 2s. 6d._


=THE MAGIC NUTS.=

_Also in Ornamental Binding._ _Crown 8vo._ _2s. 6d. each._

_Cloth elegant, gilt edges._ _3s. 6d. each._

          ="CARROTS."=
          =A CHRISTMAS CHILD.=
          =GRANDMOTHER DEAR.=
          =THE CUCKOO CLOCK.=
          =THE TAPESTRY ROOM.=
          ="US."=
          =ADVENTURES OF HERR BABY.=


MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD., LONDON.




BOOKS FOR YOUNG READERS.

=By LEWIS CARROLL.=


          =ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND.= With 42
          Illustrations by JOHN TENNIEL. Eighty-ninth
          Thousand. Crown 8vo. 6s. net. _People's Edition._
          One Hundred and Twenty-second Thousand. Crown 8vo.
          2s. 6d. net.

          =AVENTURES D'ALICE AU PAYS DES MERVEILLES.=
          Traduit de l'Anglais par HENRI BUÉ. Ouvrage
          Illustré de 42 Vignettes par JOHN TENNIEL. Crown
          8vo. 6s. net.

          =LE AVVENTURE D'ALICE NEL PAESE DELLE MERAVIGLIE.=
          Tradotte dall' Inglese da T. PIETROCÒLA-ROSSETTI.
          Con 42 Vignette di GIOVANNI TENNIEL. Crown 8vo.
          6s. net.

          =ALICE'S ADVENTURES UNDER GROUND.= Being a
          facsimile of the original MS. book afterwards
          developed into "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."
          With 37 Illustrations by the Author. Fourth
          Thousand. Crown 8vo. 4s. net.

          =THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS, AND WHAT ALICE FOUND
          THERE.= With 50 Illustrations by JOHN TENNIEL.
          Sixty-third Thousand. Crown 8vo. 6s. net.
          _People's Edition._ Seventy-fifth Thousand. Crown
          8vo. 2s. 6d. net.

          =ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND, AND THROUGH THE
          LOOKING-GLASS, AND WHAT ALICE FOUND THERE.= With
          92 Illustrations by JOHN TENNIEL. _People's
          Edition._ Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

          =THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK: An Agony in Eight
          Fits.= With 9 Illustrations by HENRY HOLIDAY.
          Twenty-third Thousand. Crown 8vo. 4s. 6d. net.

          =RHYME? AND REASON?= With 65 Illustrations by
          ARTHUR B. FROST, and 9 by HENRY HOLIDAY. Eighth
          Thousand. Crown 8vo. 6s. net.

          =SYLVIE AND BRUNO.= With 46 Illustrations by HARRY
          FURNISS. Seventeenth Thousand. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d.
          net. _People's Edition._ Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

          =SYLVIE AND BRUNO=, Concluded. With Illustrations
          by HARRY FURNISS. Fifth Thousand. Crown 8vo. 7s.
          6d. net. _People's Edition._ Crown 8vo. 2s. 6d.

          =SYMBOLIC LOGIC.= Part I. ELEMENTARY. Crown 8vo,
          limp cloth. 2s. net. Second Thousand.

N.B.--_An Envelope, containing two blank diagrams (Biliteral and
Triliteral) and nine counters (four red and five grey), can be had for
3d., by Post 4d._


MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD., LONDON.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 62, "little's girl" changed to "little girl's" (little girl's
house)

Page 81, "eagly" changed to "eagerly" (old Pete eagerly)

Page 83, "get" changed to "got" (we got close)

Page 121, italics removed from the word "the" (thankful I felt in the)






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PETERKIN ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

