Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net








[Illustration]

          _"Come with me for a visit
             To Fairyland, dear Ned.
            I'll show you many won'drous things,"
              The tiny Gnomeman said._

[Illustration]

          _"I've lost a magic golden ring,"
              The pretty Bluebird sighed.
           "Don't worry," laughed the kind old fish,
              "I have it safe inside."_

[Illustration]

          _"I'll hurry, Mother," Jimmy cried,
              As down the road he ran,
            When in a jiffy up there jumped
              A little Rabbitman._

[Illustration]

          _"Come, Mr. Elephant," cried Shem,
              "Don't fear the dreadful Shark.
            The Circus Folk are calling us
              To leave the big Noah's Ark."_




[Illustration]

THE MAGIC SOAP BUBBLE

by

DAVID CORY




LITTLE JOURNEYS TO HAPPYLAND

          The Cruise of the Noah's Ark
          The Magic Soap-Bubble
          The Iceberg Express
          The Wind Wagon
          The Magic Umbrella

          BY
          DAVID CORY
          Author of
          Little Jack Rabbit Series
          (Trademark Registered)

[Illustration: NED ATE THE MAGIC CAKE

_The Magic Soap Bubble_ _Frontispiece_]




LITTLE JOURNEYS TO HAPPY LAND

(Trademark Registered)

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MAGIC SOAP BUBBLE

BY

DAVID CORY

AUTHOR OF

THE LITTLE JACK RABBIT BOOKS

[Illustration]

PROFUSELY ILLUSTRATED

BY

E.I. JONES AND P.H. WEBB

          GROSSET & DUNLAP
          PUBLISHERS  NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

Made in the United States of America




          COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY
          GROSSET & DUNLAP.




CONTENTS


                                PAGE

          THE MAGIC SOAP PIPE      9

          THE MAGIC CAKE          25

          THE MAGIC NECTAR        39

          THE MAGIC AXE           53

          THE MAGIC SPRING        63

          MAGIC FOOD              73

          MAGIC EARS              85

          THE MAGIC BASKET        95

          THE MAGIC RING         123

          THE MAGIC BALLOON      139




THE MAGIC SOAP PIPE

The King of the Gnomes prepares the Magic Pipe for making the Magic Soap
Bubble.

[Illustration]

THE MAGIC SOAP PIPE


NED had been reading a very interesting book about fairies and goblins,
and how these real queer little folk inhabit dense forests and lofty
mountain caves and lead a wonderful life apart from the homes and cities
of men.

The book was very large and heavy, and the afternoon was very warm, and
the big armchair in which he was curled up was so comfortable that by
and by he let the book slip to one side.

He had just closed his eyes for a moment to rest them, when he was
startled by a little squeaky voice at his elbow.

He opened his eyes with a start and saw a Gnome standing on the
window-sill just in front of him. Yes, there was no mistake about it, it
was a Gnome. For had not Ned a moment before seen his picture in the big
book he had been reading? Indeed, it almost seemed as if the picture
itself had stepped out of the page from between the covers, so exactly a
duplicate did the little man appear.

"Hello, Ned!" said the little squeaky voice again. "I say, hello! You
ought to know me well enough by this time to answer, since you've been
reading about me for the last hour."

"Hello, yourself!" replied Ned, laughing in spite of himself, and
rubbing his eyes again to make sure that it was not a picture from the
book.

[Illustration]

"Can't you see a fellow is sleepy after reading so long a time? I
didn't think you were coming out of the book to speak to me, you know."

"Neither did I," retorted the Gnome, with a funny wink. "I came from the
forest to invite you to take a little journey with me through Gnomeland.
I am the King of the Gnomes, and my subjects have told me how interested
you are in reading about us, so I have come to take you for a trip
through our kingdom. I know you will love to see all the wonderful
things you have been reading about. Will you come?"

"Indeed, I will," said Ned.

"Then follow me," replied the Gnome.

Ned jumped through the window after the little fellow, who ran swiftly
down the walk and across the fields to the forest beyond.

As they neared the brook that ran through the meadow, the Gnome paused.
Taking from his pocket a clay pipe, he stooped over and filled it with
water.

"Did you ever blow soap bubbles?" he asked, taking a piece of soap from
another pocket and rubbing it carefully around the inside of the
pipe-bowl.

"Yes," replied Ned, "lots of times."

"Well, you wait and see what sort of a bubble I'll blow," replied the
Gnome.

It was a bubble! But the strangest part of it all was that Ned found
himself inside of it with his companion.

"How did we get inside, or how did the bubble get around us?" asked Ned,
but before his question was answered away went the bubble up in the air,
across the meadow, above the little brook, yes, over the roof of his own
house, higher and higher, until finally it reached the big high mountain
that he had so often dimly seen from the window of his bedroom at home.

After circling about the highest peak the bubble at length safely
landed on a rocky ledge.

Before Ned could ask how they were ever going to get out the Gnome
opened a little door through which he led him to the outer air.

There was a great change in the temperature, or else the inside of the
bubble was very warm, for Ned began to shiver and shake. "Who-o-!" he
cried; "it's co-old!"

"Of course it is. Look," answered the Gnome, and Ned's eyes, following
the pointing finger of his little friend, fell upon a strange and
terrifying figure.

Behind a bank of icicles stood a giant, with an immense helmet upon his
head, from which hung long sharp pieces of ice. The top part was covered
with snow which slipped off at intervals like a small avalanche to the
ground below. His beard and mustache were festooned with thin slivers
of ice, and his shoulders bore epaulets of frosted snow. The cuffs of
his greatcoat were fringed with snowflakes, and altogether he was a
startling and frigid looking individual. In his hands he held a
monstrous bellows, from which he forced out a blast of icy air which,
scattering the snow in whirling clouds, went howling down the rocky
ravines.

"He's the Wind Man of the Mountain," explained the Gnome, turning to
shivering Ned, whose toes and fingers by this time were quite numb with
the cold.

"Well, I'd like to meet a Hot Air Man," said Ned, blowing on his hands
to keep them from freezing. "I'd like to feel warm again."

"Well, then follow me!" cried the Gnome, and turning to a big rock he
tapped upon it twice with the toe of his little red boot. In a moment a
door opened, showing a pair of rocky steps leading down into the
mountain.

"Be careful," admonished the Gnome, as he and Ned descended the rough
flight. "Don't slip, for you might fall a long way."

Ned assured him he had no desire to fall, but that his feet were so numb
he wasn't at all sure but what he might slip, no matter how hard he
tried to be careful.

Although it was not exactly dark, at the same time the light was not
sufficient for Ned to make out anything distinctly, and as the stairway
was narrow and the walls dim he kept his eyes closely upon the ground.

Soon they came to a level corridor and he perceived a dim light in the
distance. "Where are we going?" he asked. But at this point an iron door
arrested their progress, and without pausing to answer, the Gnome took
from his pocket a key. Inserting it in the lock, the door slowly swung
open, and Ned heard the faint beating of a drum.

"Sit down," said the Gnome, drawing forward a wooden stool, much too
small for Ned, but probably just the right size for a Gnome; "sit down
and wait a moment while I go in search of the Gnomeland Band. I want you
to hear them play, and I hear them practising now."

Ned glanced curiously around the strange place. It suddenly occurred to
him that he was a long, long way from home. Here he was, deep down in
the mountain, in a rocky cavern, sitting on a little Gnome stool,
waiting for his friend to return. But what if he did not come back?

Ned's hair suddenly stood on end at the thought. Going over to the big
iron door, he tried to turn the great knob, but his fingers either were
not strong enough or he did not know the secret of the lock. Returning
to his seat, he made up his mind to wait a while before allowing his
fears to get the better of him. This is what every brave boy would do
under the circumstances, he said to himself, resolving not to be a
coward.

Presently he was relieved to hear music, as the Gnome, at the head of
the Gnomeland Band, came into view; and the funniest band that Ned had
ever seen. Why, each instrument was playing itself and dancing the
Mountain Tango at the same time!

The big drum went "Bum, bum, bum, diddle dum," and pranced around on a
pair of short, fat legs in red stockings. Two fat little arms beat the
drumsticks on the top of his head, or what appeared to be the top of his
head, which was in reality a funny face, which winked and blinked as
the drumsticks traveled over the queer little features.

"Toot! toot!" went the big yellow horn, as his fat little fingers
pressed in the brass stops that made the notes high or low, or soft or
shrill. Over the floor he skipped, after the round, fat drum.

The 'cello and the violin came next. The latter ran his bow across his
stringed waistcoat in perfect time, while the former twanged the strings
that covered his happy face in a jolly fashion. The rest of the band
played on themselves beautifully, and the Gnome, with his baton, proved
a most capable leader. In fact, the music was so delightful that Ned
finally could restrain himself no longer, and, jumping up, began dancing
around to the tune of "For He's a Jolly Good Fellow!"

          "Heigh-ho! hey diddle-do!
             Down in the mountain deep,
           Fiddle and drum, tiddle-dy-um,
             Are doing the Leopard Leap!"

Just then the music stopped, or, rather, the Musical Instruments paused
to take breath, and Ned sat down again, wondering what next would
happen. In a few minutes the round, fat drum commenced to beat "Left,
right! left, right!" and the Gnomeland Band fell into line and marched
slowly down the long cavern until it was out of sight.




THE MAGIC CAKE

Ned and the Gnome landed safely on a big soft bunker of moss.

[Illustration]

THE MAGIC CAKE


AS the last drum beat died away in the distance, the Gnome turned to Ned
and said: "Come, let us hasten, for I am rather hungry, and you no doubt
are in need of nourishment also."

Ned obeyed willingly, for he had tasted nothing since breakfast and was
now as hungry as a healthy youngster should be.

At the farther end of the cavern was an inclined plane, very much like
the chutes at Coney Island.

Carefully seating Ned at his side the Gnome said: "Now hold tight, and
hold your breath and hold your tongue--in fact, hold everything you've
got--for we are going to take a swift shoot to the bottom of the
mountain and you'll find out what the word swift means if you never have
before!"

At this they began to move, and in another moment they were traveling as
fast as a bullet from a gun.

The wind, whistling by, cut Ned's cheeks like little sharp needles; his
hair stood out behind like feathers on a speeding arrow.

They were going so fast it was almost impossible to breathe.

Presently a tiny light appeared in the distance, and he saw that they
were now on a level, although still going at a tremendous rate of speed.

In another moment they shot through the little round hole of light,
which turned out to be the opening at the other end, and he and the
Gnome landed safely on a big soft bunker of moss in the midst of a
beautiful forest.

Birds were singing in the treetops and little rabbits were skipping on
the soft carpet of the woodland.

Pretty flowers sent forth a delicious perfume and a brook close at hand
rippled over the pebbly bottom of its bed.

"Wait," cried the Gnome, as Ned leaned over to drink the cool water.
"Wait; I have for you the most delicious drink if you will restrain your
impatience a moment longer."

Ned obeyed and followed the Gnome along a narrow path until they came to
a small clearing, where the blue sky smiled down upon them.

In the center of the spot was a monstrous watermelon, standing up on
end, the thick vine supporting it like a strong round barrel stave.

A large wooden spigot protruded from one side and over it leaned a
Gnome, who had climbed upon the vine in order to reach the handle.

Ned's little companion lifted a goblin cup to catch the drops of
delicious looking pink juice which began to drip slowly from the spigot
when the Gnome carefully turned the handle.

"Careful, now," commanded the Gnome, as he handed the brimming goblet to
Ned. "See that you spill not a drop of the precious nectar.

"Good, is it?" he inquired, seeing the sparkle in Ned's eyes and hearing
the smack on his lips as the last drop disappeared. "Pretty good, eh?"

"Better'n soda water," replied Ned; "lots better."

The little Gnome at the spigot smiled. "I grew the melon," he said with
pride. "It's the largest so far in Gnomeland. But next year I'm going to
grow even a bigger one!"

"How do you make them grow so large?" inquired Ned, hoping he would be
invited to have another glass of the juice.

"Not another drop!" said Ned's little friend. "A second goblet and you
would be so hungry you could eat stones."

"Come with me," said the small Gnome guide. "We must eat."

Ned eagerly followed him, and they pressed forward at a rapid walk until
they came to a queer little hut, from which issued a most delicious odor
of sponge cake.

Around the door, or, more properly, what appeared to be one, but which
was in fact but a small opening, stood several goblins, evidently
awaiting orders from someone.

As Ned drew near he perceived that instead of a hut it was in reality a
huge oven, in which something very delicious was being baked.

"Minions!" called out Ned's friend, "is not the goblin cake ready?"

"Yes, sire!" responded several voices, and in another moment the oven
was taken apart and removed from the most delicious looking sponge cake
that Ned had ever seen. A soft, warm brown color made it most tempting
to the eyes, and the delicious smell made Ned so anxious to commence
eating that he could with difficulty restrain himself.

"Help yourself," cried his little friend, and without a moment's
hesitation Ned pulled off a piece of cake and eagerly commenced.

"Begone!" commanded the Gnome to the small bakers, who still stood
around curiously watching their cake disappearing down the mouth of a
mortal as rapidly as its owner could cram it in; "begone and leave us to
enjoy the cake alone!"

At this they turned away and descended the steep hill which lay to the
right and disappeared below.

"Be careful," admonished the Gnome, as Ned showed no signs of finishing,
"you may eat too much. Gnome cake, while most delicious, is more filling
than that of mortal make!"

But Ned paid no heed. Already he had eaten a great hole in the cake and,
finding the inside warm and flaky, he squeezed himself in.

It was much easier to eat the inside, as it was softer, and the crust
had already grown quite hard.

He was so busy eating and, I'm sorry to say, so greedy, that he did not
notice that as he ate away the interior of the sponge cake the outside
gradually grew tighter, and the opening which he had made at the
beginning of his feast, and through which he had crowded, became smaller
and smaller, until finally it closed altogether.

When Ned perceived this, and it was some time after, I assure you, he
was indeed frightened. He pounded on the walls of his sponge cake prison
and called loudly to the Gnome, but for some time he heard nothing.

Finally, after frantically running around and around inside the huge
cake ball, he thought he heard the voice of his small friend. He pressed
his ear close to the wall and listened.

Sure enough, he could just hear the words, "Hold on tight to one side,
and brace your feet," and the next moment he perceived that the cake was
in motion.

Slowly at first, but in a few minutes the great cake ball began to
revolve faster and faster.

Ned was terrified at first, as it was with great difficulty that he kept
his body from playing battledore and shuttlecock. The greater the speed
of the huge mass, however, the less inclination there was to bounce
about, and he soon found himself literally glued, as it were, to one
side.

While thus traveling in this novel way, he began to entertain some fear
as to what would happen should an obstacle be encountered, and by some
strange coincidence no sooner had, the idea come than it was followed by
a terrific crash!

The crust of the cake ball broke into a thousand pieces, and Ned landed
safely some distance from the spot, still clinging to a huge piece of
sponge cake, which acted like a cushion between him and the ground.

Looking anxiously around, after wiping some stray crumbs from his eyes,
he saw his little friend, the Gnome, running frantically down the steep
incline, which, luckily for Ned, had been the cause of his liberation.

Finding him unhurt, the Gnome sat down on the piece of cake to rest
himself and regain his breath before speaking.

When he did, however, what he said caused Ned to run quickly over to the
brook to look at himself in the water.

To his dismay, what the Gnome had said was, indeed, too true. Ned was
nearly as broad as he was high.

The cake he had eaten had evidently occupied the same space inside of
him as it had inside the brown crust.

"What am I ever going to do?" said Ned.

"'Twas a lucky think I kept you from drinking another gobletful of the
watermelon juice," answered the Gnome. "Otherwise you might have eaten
the whole cake, and then you might have been twice as large as you are
now."

"I don't think there is anything to laugh at," said Ned, as his small
friend burst into a hearty peal of laughter.

"Of course you don't," replied the Gnome, "you can't see yourself. If
you could, though--oh, my!" and he again burst into peals of laughter.

Ned waited a few moments and then asked: "Well, what are we going to
do?"

"Don't worry, Ned, dear," replied his little friend, touched by his good
nature and feeling sorry for him, "don't worry. The watermelon juice
made the sponge cake swell. All that is necessary now is to take the
antidote, and I know where it can be found without any trouble."




THE MAGIC NECTAR

The Fairies brought a lily filled with the Magic Nectar.

[Illustration]

THE MAGIC NECTAR


NED and the Gnome continued their journey down the valley, following the
crystal stream, in whose waters he had just a short time before seen his
distorted figure, until they came to a beautiful waterfall, down whose
silvery sheen slid numerous water sprites and water fairies.

"Over yonder," exclaimed the Gnome, "lives the Fairy of the Lake. She
brews a magic liquid from checkerberries, which, I am told, if you but
drink a thimbleful, will enable you to regain your natural shape. There
she goes now, over the bridge, on some such errand I dare say."

Ned watched the fairy stepping across the silver network which hung
above a miniature Niagara that he could easily have spanned with a
single step. Catching up a handful of berries he followed her, not
heeding the Gnome's remark "that she would probably prefer to pick them
herself," and, almost treading on some of the fairies who were blowing
about in the long grass like the flowers they represented, threw the
berries in a heap at the door of her castle.

It was, indeed, a most beautiful little palace. Made of brilliant
crystals, it sparkled in the sun like a rainbow. Inside, it was even
more exquisite, for all her little subjects, the flower fairies and the
woodland fays, had adorned it with many lovely things.

Ned stooped over and peeped in at the doorway. There was a bright light
inside which came from a little star suspended from the ceiling, the
crystal walls on all sides reflecting the light with great brilliancy.
Here and there were draped beautiful laces, no doubt spun by the spiders
kept by the fairies for that purpose.

"Come," said the Gnome somewhat impatiently, as Ned's curiosity still
held him at the little castle's doorway. "Come away, or else the Queen
will not return. How is she to enter if you block up her entrance?"

Following his advice, Ned withdrew some little distance and stood
watching the gay scene around him.

Hundreds of insects were flying about and large, gay-winged butterflies
fluttered over the flowers. On some he noticed tiny figures and others
with blades of grass tied around the necks of robins, bluebirds and
golden orioles were also flying about in mid-air, while some sailed on
the silver backs of fishes or floated in shells upon the water near his
feet.

"Look!" cried the Gnome suddenly, "here she comes."

A half horsechestnut, with damask roseleaf cushions, mounted on four
ivy-berry wheels and with four shining beetles for horses came driving
up from the waterfall.

Leaning back in her carriage sat the Queen Fairy, fanning her face with
a fly's wing.

The beetles came to a stand in front of the palace, and the Queen,
gathering up her white satin dress, stepped out.

Instantly numerous ladies in waiting, jumped from off their butterfly
steeds and escorted her through the palace door.

Ned cautiously peeped in again. The room was filled with fairies about
as large as your thumb, dancing here and there and singing a low, sweet
song.

On perceiving that a mortal was gazing at them they began to dance more
slowly, and presently ceased altogether. Whereupon the Queen, looking
about to ascertain the reason and catching sight of Ned's admiring face,
exclaimed:

"No wonder you feel so faint, my little fays, and that you stop your
merry dancing. The hot air is pouring in upon us from a fiery furnace
outside. Look here, my giant friend," she added, coming up to Ned, "if
you want to see how we live you mustn't hold your mouth open with
astonishment. Your breath is very hot to us little people!"

With that the mischievous Queen jumped quite unexpectedly on Ned's nose
and gave it a sharp pinch.

"Don't cry," said the fairy in a cheery voice, the laughs falling from
her like waterdrops from the cascade just outside; "I only wanted to
let you know what I could do; but I am ready to be as polite as you
wish."

"May it please your highness," interposed the Gnome, who at this point
squeezed himself through Ned's legs and entered the door, "to give my
mortal friend a drop of your crystal nectar, in order that he may regain
his boyish shape again?"

The Queen Fairy looked politely inquisitive.

"You see, your highness," the Gnome went on to explain, "he has eaten
too heartily of gnome cake, and that together with a gobletful of gnome
watermelon juice, has caused him much inconvenience, as well as an
entire change of form."

No sooner had he finished speaking than the Queen called the Waterfall
Fairy, the Brook Fairy and yet another, somewhat smaller, called Violet
Water.

"Hasten," she said to them when they had assembled before her, "hasten
to make a draft of crystal nectar, that this mortal may drink and assume
once more his natural shape."

"Move off!" cried a shrill voice in Ned's ear, and, looking up, he saw a
Snapdragon, who seemed to be a sort of policeman for the fairies.

"How can you expect these Ladies-in-Waiting to fulfill their Queen's
commands if you stand there blocking the royal exit?"

"Tell your friend to sit him down and wait patiently, for it will take
some time to brew the magic draft," said the Queen to the Gnome, who
repeated her words to Ned.

He was very glad indeed to rest, for, not being accustomed to carry so
much weight on his young legs, he felt very weary and somewhat
discouraged.

However, relief was in sight, and, following the suggestion of the good
fairy, he threw himself down on a mossy bank and waited.

Before long the three fairies returned, bearing between them a lily
filled with a white liquid.

As they approached the Queen herself came forth from her crystal palace,
followed by many of her subjects.

Stepping up to where Ned lay, she said in a soft voice: "Do not rise,
for even now you are much too tall. I myself must pour this magic nectar
upon your lips."

So saying, she stepped lightly upon a stone close by and, bending
forward, placed the lily to Ned's mouth.

[Illustration: "DO NOT RISE," SAID THE FAIRY QUEEN.]

The next moment he felt a strange sensation running through him, and
looking down at his hands and feet was delighted to see that they
were becoming smaller and smaller.

Though great was his delight, he did not forget his manners, and,
turning to the little fairy, said: "How may I ever repay you for your
great kindness? Indeed," he added, scarcely able to restrain the tears
which came to his eyes, "whatever would my dear mother have thought had
I returned to her in the form of a giant?"

"Thank me no more," answered the Fairy Queen, "for gladly will I do any
favor for the boy who thinks of his mother first. In the future, should
you need my aid, hang this ring about a bluebird's throat and send him
to me."

And with these words she placed a slender gold ring upon Ned's little
finger.

"But how shall I catch the bird?" asked Ned, his curiosity aroused
before he had time to think of thanking her small highness.

"Whistle thrice upon a blade of grass," she answered, "and the bird will
fly to thee. Then place the ring about his neck and bid him hasten to
the Fairy Queen of the Lake."

During all this time Ned had been growing smaller and smaller. He had
almost forgotten this, when his little friend, the Gnome, exclaimed:
"There! You're your own self again!" At which Ned turned to the Queen,
and, after thanking her again ran hastily to the brook to assure himself
that such was the case.

So, bidding farewell to his kind friend, the Fairy Queen, and her three
Ladies-in-Waiting, he accompanied the Gnome down the valley.




THE MAGIC AXE

Ned meets the King and proposes to cut down the big Oak Tree.

[Illustration]

THE MAGIC AXE


PRESENTLY the Gnome turned to Ned and said:

"I must leave you for a time. But with the Fairy Queen's magic ring upon
your finger, you will be safe from harm. Self reliance is what all boys
should practise. Therefore, travel for a few days alone. At the end of
that time I will join you." And with these words the Gnome disappeared.

For a moment Ned felt a wild desire to call him back. But with a shrug
of his shoulder, he put away the thought and bravely set out in search
of further adventure.

He had gone but a short distance when he came to a Magic Axe, chopping
away all by itself at one of the tallest trees.

"Good morning, Mistress Axe," he said. "Doesn't it tire you to be
chopping away all alone there at that old tree?"

"Not at all, my son. Put me in your knapsack and I will make you
famous."

Picking up the axe, Ned placed it in his knapsack and set off once more.
After a while, he came to a place where the road was hollowed out of a
mass of solid rock, and here, in the distance, he heard a sharp noise
like that of iron striking against stone.

"Some giant must be breaking rocks away up there," he said to himself,
and climbed up the mountain. When he reached the top of the high rock,
he found a Magic Pickaxe, all alone by itself, digging away at the hard
stone as if it were soft clay.

Every time that wonderful pickaxe struck a blow it went more than a foot
into the rock.

"Good morning, Mistress Pickaxe," said Ned. "Doesn't it tire you to be
digging alone here, hollowing away at that old rock?"

"Not at all, my little man. Put me in your knapsack and I will make you
famous."

Ned picked up the pickaxe and placing it in his knapsack, again went on.

After a while he came to a brook which he followed up the hillside.

The farther he went the smaller it grew until finally, it ended in a
little nutshell, from which this tiny stream began its journey down the
mountain.

"Good morning, Miss Spring," said Ned. "Doesn't it tire you to be
gushing away all alone by yourself in your little corner?"

"Indeed it does, my little man. Put me in your knapsack and I will make
you famous."

Ned picked up the little nutshell and plugging it up with moss, placed
it carefully in his knapsack with the Magic Axe and the Magic Pickaxe.

After some little time he came to a king's palace. Now, although it was
a magnificent palace, everyone living there was perfectly miserable, for
one morning, without the least warning, an immense oak had sprung up,
with leaves and branches so thick that they shut out the sun from all
the windows, making the castle as dark as night.

Of course in those days there was no gas and electricity, and although
the king had commanded that candles be made as high as barber poles,
they spluttered and often went out when the wind blew.

All the woodcutters in the kingdom had tried to cut down this tree, but
its bark was so tough that it turned the edge of every axe, and for
every branch that was lopped off, two instantly grew in its place. At
last the king had offered three bags of gold to anyone who would rid him
of his troublesome oaktree.

Now this was not the only trouble that beset the poor king. For,
although the surrounding country was rich in springs and brooks, the
royal gardens were dry as the desert of Sahara. And although the king
had also promised three bags of gold to anyone who would dig a well, no
one had yet been able to dig deeper than a foot, as the palace was built
on a rock of solid granite.

Each day the king grew more angry, but of course that did no good. At
last calling the poet laureate of his kingdom, he asked him what should
be done.

Running his fingers through his long curly hair, the poet thought a
while. Then summoning the Royal Carpenter, ordered him to make an
immense placard, on which, when finished, this wise poet printed:

          "To him who cuts my oaktree down
             I'll give three bags of gold
          But he who fails shall lose his life
             And lie beneath the mold."

"But what good will that exquisite poem do?" asked the king,
sarcastically.

"It will keep your Royal Highness from being irritated by this endless
sound of chop, chop, chop," replied the poet. "I verily believe every
man in your kingdom has had a hack at the tree. Now, he who reads this
sign, will first make sure his axe is a good one. And my poetic ears
will be spared much of this frightful noise which is far worse than a
steel rivetter at work on a ninety story building in New York City."
Which shows that this poet had an eye that could see into the future,
for at that time, as far as I know, Columbus hadn't even asked the Queen
of Spain to pawn her diamond rings!

"Very well," replied the king, "have the sign nailed on this dreadful
tree and we will see what happens."

As soon as Ned arrived at the castle he bowed politely to the king, who
happened to be standing nearby with all his courtiers.

"Ha, ha," laughed the king, as Ned read the sign. "Do you, too, wish to
lose your ears?" At which all the courtiers laughed heartily, the first
time in many months that anybody in that castle had laughed, or even
smiled, for that matter.

"I can but try," answered Ned bravely, and opening his knapsack, took
out his Magic Axe. Standing it up, with the handle leaning against the
enchanted tree, he stepped back a few feet and shouted: "Chop, chop,
chop!"

At once the axe began to chop, now right, now left, and up and down, and
in an incredibly short time that immense tree was cut to bits. It took
only a quarter of an hour, and yet there was such a monstrous heap of
wood that the whole court needed nothing else to burn for a whole year.

But when Ned asked the king for the three bags of gold, that stingy old
monarch said, "Before I give you the reward, you must perform another
task."

"What is it?" asked Ned.

"You must dig me a well so that I may have plenty of water," answered
the king.




THE MAGIC SPRING

Ned mounted the little Donkey and rode away.



[Illustration]

THE MAGIC SPRING


"I CAN but try, your Majesty," said Ned bravely, and again opening his
knapsack, took out his Magic Pickaxe. Laying it carefully on the ground
in the proper position, he shouted:

"Pick, pick, pick!"

At once the pick began to burst the granite to splinters, and in less
than a quarter of an hour had dug a well more than a hundred feet deep
in the solid rock.

"Is the well deep enough, your Majesty?" asked Ned politely.

"Certainly," answered the king, "but where is the water to come from?"
And he winked at his courtiers, who smiled to themselves, for they all
thought Ned would fail, after all, for as yet there wasn't a drop of
water in the well.

But Ned wasn't discouraged. He quietly opened his knapsack again and
took out the nutshell covered with moss, and placed it on a magnificent
fountain vase which, not having any water, had been filled with a
beautiful bouquet of flowers.

"Gush, gush, gush!" he shouted, stepping aside to avoid a wetting.

At once water began to burst out among the flowers, singing with a
gentle murmur, and falling down in a sparkling cascade, that was so cold
it made everybody shiver. And in less than a quarter of an hour the well
was filled, and a deep trench had to be dug to take away the overflow,
otherwise the whole palace would have been flooded.

"You have indeed earned the reward," said the king. And he ordered a
little donkey saddled and bridled and the six bags of gold hung from his
back, three on either side. After which Ned was invited to a great
feast, and when that was over, he mounted the little donkey and rode
away, with the three bags of gold hanging from each side of the saddle
and a little gold ring on his finger, which the king's daughter gave him
after washing her pretty face in water for the first time in many
months.

But before Ned rode away, he put his Magic Axe and his Magic Pickaxe
back in his knapsack, "for who can tell," he said to himself, "what need
I may have of these two useful tools."

His knapsack was now well filled, for the cook in the royal kitchen had
also placed in it a loaf of bread, a cheese and a knife in case he
became hungry while on his journey of adventure.

As Ned traveled on, the forest became darker and darker, for the trees
grew so close together that the sun could hardly shine through the thick
leafy roof. Suddenly he heard a great voice singing:

          "I am the master of this wood
             And everyone bows to me,
          My head is as big as a drygoods box
             And my legs as long as a tree."

Then, all at once, the voice changed to a whistle, which sounded like
the siren on a sound steamer when the weather is foggy.

"It must be a giant singing," thought Ned. "Goodness! but he's a loud
whistler. I guess he blows through his fingers!" and he hid beneath a
clump of bushes.

"Ho, ho!" cried the voice, and a giant came crashing through the forest.

On seeing Ned, he shouted:

"Come out of there, and I'll make a mouthful of you."

"Don't be in a hurry," replied Ned bravely. "I'm going to make you my
servant."

"Ho, ho!" laughed the giant, "that is a good joke! I'll pitch you into
that raven's nest up there to teach you to make less noise in my
forest."

"_Your_ forest!" laughed Ned. "It's as much mine as yours, and if you
say another word, I'll cut it down in a quarter of an hour."

"Ha, ha!" shouted the giant, "I should like to see you begin, my brave
Sir Kid!"

Carefully placing his Magic Axe on the ground, Ned shouted, "Chop, chop,
chop!"

At once the axe began to chop, now right, now left, and up and down,
till the branches tumbled down on the giant's head like hail in autumn.

"Stop, stop!" cried the giant. "Don't destroy my forest. Who the
mischief are you?"

"Sit down and I'll tell you the story of the famous Puss in Boots, who
once killed a giant and gave his castle to his Master, the Lord of
Carabas," said Ned.

"How could a cat kill a giant? You are making sport of me."

"Not at all," replied Ned. "Have you never read the story of Puss in
Boots?"

"No, but I once heard my cousin, the Giant of the Beanstalk, speak of a
cat who wore boots. But that was long ago when we were both boys."

"Well, I'll tell you then," said Ned. "Puss in Boots' master was the
youngest of three sons. When their father died, the two older brothers
received the farm and money, while he was left nothing but a Cat, who
said to him one day, 'Do just what I tell you and I will make you rich.
Give me a bag and a pair of boots, because the brambles scratch my legs,
and you shall see what I will do for you.'

"Well, when the boots were made and he had put them on, he hung the bag
about his neck, and set out for a rabbit warren where lived great
numbers of rabbits. Opening the bag he stretched himself out as though
he were dead, and waited for a hungry rabbit to poke his nose into the
bag to eat the bran. Pretty soon along came a young rabbit and as soon
as it had crept in to eat the bran, Puss in Boots pulled the string, and
that was the last of the little rabbit.

"Then, running off to the palace, he gave it to the king, saying it was
a present from his master, my Lord of Carabas, the name he had invented
for his young master. Every day he brought some kind of game, until by
and by the king thought my Lord of Carabas a great man and Puss in Boots
a most wonderful cat, which indeed he was."

"He was indeed," said the big giant, moving uneasily on the log on which
he was sitting.

"Well, one day," continued Ned, "Puss in Boots bade his master bathe in
the river, and leave the rest to him. Just then the King passed by.

"'Help, help!' cried Puss. 'Robbers have stolen my master's clothes!'

"At once the king ordered his guards to the rescue, and fitting out my
Lord of Carabas with a new suit of clothes, invited him to ride in the
coach with his beautiful daughter.

"As they rolled along they came in sight of a castle owned by a bad
giant."




MAGIC FOOD

The Giant cannot understand how Ned can eat cheese.

[Illustration]

MAGIC FOOD


"PUSS IN BOOTS, who had reached the castle in advance of the royal
party, opened the door and said with a low bow to the wicked ogre:

"'I hear you have the power to change yourself into any animal.'

"'That is true,' answered the ogre, so pleased that at once he turned
himself into a lion.

"'I doubt if you can become as small as a mouse,' said Puss in Boots.

"Instantly the ogre changed himself into a mouse, whereupon Puss in
Boots pounced upon him and ate him up.

"At that moment up drove the coach. Throwing open the castle door, Puss
in Boots said with a hospitable bow:

"'Welcome to the castle of my Lord of Carabas.' And, to make a long
story short," laughed Ned, "his master married the King's daughter and
lived happily ever after."

"Whew!" gasped the giant. "He certainly was a wonderful cat," and he
looked anxiously at the Magic Axe.

Presently Ned began to feel hungry, and opening his knapsack, took out
his bread and cheese.

"What is that white stuff?" asked the giant, who had never seen cheese
before.

"That is a stone," answered Ned, commencing to eat it with a hungry
appetite.

"Do you eat stones?" asked the giant.

"Oh yes," answered Ned. "That's my regular food, which explains why I'm
not so big as you who eat oxen; but it's also the reason why, little as
I am, I am ten times as strong as you are. Now take me to your house."

The giant looked at the Magic Axe which had so nearly destroyed his
forest, and then at Ned eating a stone with apparent relish.

"I will," he said, and humbly led the way to his monstrous cabin.

"Now listen," said Ned to the giant after they were fairly seated, "one
of us must be the master, and the other the servant. If I can't do
whatever you do, I am to be your slave; if you're not able to do
whatever I do, you are to be mine."

"Agreed," said the giant. "I'd be tickled to death to have a little
servant like you. It's too much work for me to think, and you have
brains enough for both. Well, let's start the trial. Here are my two
buckets,--go and get the water to make the soup!"

Ned looked at the buckets, the tops of which he couldn't even see, for
they were two enormous hogsheads, ten feet high and six broad. It would
have been much easier for him to drown himself in them than to move
them.

"Ho, ho!" shouted the giant. "Do what I do and get the water."

"What's the good of that?" replied Ned. "I'll go get the spring itself
to put in the pot," knowing that he could easily run back to the king's
castle for the little magic nutshell.

"No, no!" said the giant, "that won't do. You have already half spoiled
my forest with your Magic Axe. I don't want you to take my spring away.
You may attend to the fire, and I'll go for the water."

So the giant hung up the kettle, put into it an ox cut into pieces,
fifty cabbages, and a wagon-load of carrots, skimming the broth with a
frying pan, tasting it every now and then until it was done. When
everything was ready, he turned and said:

"Now we'll see if you can do what I can. I feel like eating the whole
ox, and you into the bargain. I think I'll serve you for dessert."

"All right," answered little Ned. But before sitting down he slipped his
knapsack under his jacket.

Then the two champions set to work. Perhaps Ned was a trifle nervous,
knowing only too well that if he failed he must be the giant's servant.

Well, the giant ate and ate, and Ned wasn't idle; only he pitched
everything, beef, cabbage, carrots, and all, into his knapsack when the
giant wasn't looking.

"Ouf!" at last grunted the giant, "I can't do much more. I've got to
undo the lower button of my waistcoat."

"Eat away, starveling!" cried Ned, sticking half a cabbage into his
knapsack.

"Ouf!" groaned the giant, "I must loosen another button. But what sort
of an ostrich's stomach have you got, Kiddo? I should say you were used
to eating stones!"

"Eat away, lazy-bones!" said Ned, sticking a huge chunk of beef into his
knapsack.

"Ouf!" sighed the giant for the third time, "I must open the third
button."

"Bah!" answered Ned. "It's the easiest thing to relieve yourself," and
taking his knife, he slit his jacket and the knapsack under it the whole
length of his stomach. "Now's your turn. Do as I do, _if you can!_"

"Excuse me!" gasped the giant. "You win. I'd rather be your servant
than do that."

Then kissing Ned's hand in token of submission, he lifted his little
master on his shoulder, and slinging the six bags of gold over his back,
started off through the forest.

"Wait a minute," said Ned, "I've forgotten my Magic tools." So the giant
picked them up and thrusting them in his pocket, again set off at a
tremendous rate.

After a while, they came in sight of a great castle where lived a lord
even more wicked than the cruel Blue Beard. As they drew nearer, they
heard loud screams like those of some fair lady in distress. The next
minute the wicked lord dragged a lovely lady by the hair across the
courtyard.

With one stride the giant stepped over the castle wall.

"Shall I toss him over the moon?" he asked.

"No, leave him to me," replied Ned. The wicked lord trembled and grew as
pale as a white swan that swam nearby in a beautiful fountain.

"My giant servant at a sign from me, will pitch you over the moon. But
instead, as you have the reputation of being the greatest liar that ever
lived, we will see who can tell the biggest story, you or I. If you
lose, you shall give your castle to this fair lady and take yourself
off, I don't care where, but you must never return."

At once the wicked lord commenced to tell the biggest story he could
imagine.

"I have a bull so large that a man can sit on each of his horns, and the
two can't touch each other with a twenty foot pole."

"Oh, that's nothing," replied Ned. "At home on the farm we have a bull
so large that a servant sitting on one of his horns can't see the
servant sitting on the other."

"You win," laughed the pretty princess, clapping her hands at Ned. Then
the wicked lord went to his stable and saddling his best horse, rode
away. But as he passed through the gate, Ned touched his steed with his
magic gold ring. Instantly the horse turned into an immense bird and
flew away. But where he went no one knows to this day.




MAGIC EARS

The Man with Ears like a Donkey invited Ned to eat with him.

[Illustration]

MAGIC EARS


"DEAR me," said the giant suddenly. "I've forgotten all about my errand.
You and your Magic Axe have robbed me of my memory," and the big man
scratched his hand and looked anxiously at Ned.

"What is it?"

"I was to take a chicken to my old mother," answered the giant sadly.

"Go ahead," said Ned. "I can take care of myself. At any rate it is
about time my friend the Gnome came back to me."

"You are very kind," said the giant. "Here are your Magic Axe and your
Magic Pickaxe. I almost forgot them," and he set off at a great rate for
his mother's house.

Ned, too, quickened his pace, for it was growing late, and the shadows
creeping from tree to tree. At length he saw a light in the distance. It
was a very little light, not much larger than a star, and at first Ned
thought it might be a giant firefly. However, he kept on and after a
while it turned out to be a little candle in the window of a poor
woodcutter's hut. Knocking on the door, it was presently opened by a
strange looking man. He had long hairy ears like a donkey and was
dressed in the skins of wild animals.

"Welcome," he said in a kindly voice, "I am just preparing my evening
meal. Come in and eat." Ned followed the donkey-eared man into the
cottage and sat down at the rude wooden table on which were spread black
bread and beans.

"I have but humble fare to offer you," said the donkey-eared man, but
his smile was a kind one as he helped Ned to the beans with a large
wooden spoon. "But as I see you are a traveler, you no doubt have fared
worse at times," and he smiled again in such a friendly way, that Ned
took a great liking to him.

"You are right. I'm a traveler, seeking adventures and many strange
things I have seen while visiting Gnomeland."

"I have heard little of the world since my ears were changed into those
of a donkey," sighed the donkey-eared man.

"Is there no magic charm which will remove them?" asked Ned, as he
finished the last bean on his plate and wiped his mouth carefully with
the pocket handkerchief which his kind mother had given him the very
morning he had set out for Gnomeland.

"None whatever," answered the man with a sigh. "There is no charm nor
magic herb, but I've heard tell of a Magic Axe that once cut down a
charmed oak tree overshadowing a king's palace. But where am I to find
that Magic Axe?"

          "Oh master dear, pray ask this lad
             Your donkey ears to sever;
          For then your own two ears will take
             Their place as good as ever,"

sang a little bird from her tree in the forest.

When Ned heard that, he jumped up and went behind the door where he had
hung his knapsack. Taking out the Magic Axe, he laid it on the table
before the donkey-eared man.

"Cut off my ears!" shouted the donkey-eared man.

"I can't do it," said Ned, trembling all over.

"Do as I ask you," begged the donkey-eared man, laying his head on the
table.

Instead, however, Ned touched the donkey ears with his little magic gold
ring, at the same time whispering, "Away with you!"

Off went the long, hairy ears, and the next minute, two grew in their
place, just like yours and mine.

          "Oh, now I'm free from donkey ears,
          Three cheers and once, again, three cheers!
          No more the witch's evil snare
          Shall force me donkey ears to wear!"

sang the donkey-eared man, dancing about the room.

All the next day Ned trudged on alone until towards evening, he came to
the edge of a pine-forest, where close at hand stood a small hut made of
pine-branches, plastered with mud and thatched with rye-straw. No sooner
had he tapped on the door than it was opened by a girl. She looked out
timidly, thinking, I suppose, it might be a robber. But when she saw
Ned, she smiled.

"Come in," she said, and Ned saw four small children staring curiously
at him.

The room was very smoky, for there was no chimney to the rude hut. A
hole in the roof let the smoke out, and there were no windows, for the
father of these children was a poor peasant who made his living by
gathering turpentine in the pine forest.

Ned sat down, while the girl went on with her work until the black beans
were ready for supper, when she put them all in a big wooden bowl, and
invited Ned to join her and the four children.

While they were eating out of the bowl with a wooden spoon, a tame
jackdaw who had been sitting on an old stool by the fireside, hopped
over and perched himself close to Ned.

When the supper was over, and the children were ready for bed, he
whispered, "This little family is very poor. Their father is away
selling turpentine, and there is little food in the cupboard. But if you
will come with me tonight, I will show you how we can help them."

When all the children were sound asleep, Ned looked over to the fireside
where the jackdaw sat, his eyes shining brighter and brighter through
the darkness, till they made the room so light that Ned could plainly
see the five sleeping children huddled together on the straw bed in the
corner.

Then the jackdaw nodded, and hopping down from the stool on which he
sat, walked softly over to the door.

The moon shone brightly on the bare brown fields silvered with white
frost, and in the still, cold air, the forest looked like a black cloud
just dropped upon the earth.




THE MAGIC BASKET

The Little Old Woman made a low bow to the Jackdaw.

[Illustration]

THE MAGIC BASKET


ON and on they went, the jackdaw hopping over the rough fields, and now
and then turning his head and winking his fiery eyes at Ned, until they
found themselves at the foot of a high, round hill.

At one side of the great mound the stream which they had been following
suddenly stopped short, making a deep well, over which hung an old oak
tree, leafless now, but still strewing the ground with dry acorns.

Right at the foot of this tree was an upright gray stone, apparently
part of a rock deeply sunk in the hillside. Beside this stone the
jackdaw paused, and, turning to nod reassuringly at Ned, picked up a
pebble about the size of an acorn and dropped it into the well, at the
same time knocking gently on the flat stone with his bill.

In a moment the rock opened in the middle, and there stood a little old
woman, as withered as a spring apple and as bright as a butterfly,
dressed in a scarlet bodice covered with spangles and a black petticoat
worked in square characters with all the colors of the rainbow.

Ned thought she was not nearly as attractive as the fairies whom he had
but lately left, although she had on more colors than even the Queen
Fairy.

On seeing the jackdaw she made a low bow, and in a shrill eager voice
invited them in. Ned hesitated, but the little old woman snatched his
hand and pulled him in, asking in a whisper, "Dost thou fear for thyself
when visiting the King of the Gnomes?"

Then, opening a low door in the side of the cavern, she beckoned them to
follow. In the middle of a still larger vault stood an arm chair
fashioned from beryl and jasper, with knobs of amethyst and topaz, in
which sat Ned's friend, the Gnome.

He was dressed in a robe of velvet, green and soft as forest moss, and a
ring of gold lay on his grizzled hair. His little eyes shone keen and
fiery, and his hands, withered and brown, were now covered with
glittering jewels.

About the cave a hundred little men, smaller than he, were busy in a
hundred ways. Some stirred kettles of smoking broth; others sliced fresh
vegetables for crisp salads. Some spread a table, with golden plates
and crystal goblets; three turned huge pieces of meat on a spit before a
fire at the end of the cavern, while a dozen more watched the simmering
pots.

The jackdaw hopped gravely past all this toward the chair of the Gnome
King, who stretched out his sceptre, a tall bulrush of gold, and touched
the jackdaw, who at once turned into a dwarf.

Making a low bow to the Gnome King, he turned to Ned and said:

"I was forced to take the form of a jackdaw for twenty years because I
once said that gold was not as yellow as buttercups nor so bright as
sunshine. This made the Gnomes angry, because their belief is that gold
is the most beautiful thing in the world. My punishment is now over and
I need never return to the earth again. But I would do a favor to the
poor peasant children who were so good to me."

"What favor would you ask for the poor peasant children?" asked the
Gnome King.

"I would send them a Magic Basket filled with food," answered the dwarf.

No sooner had he spoken, than the Gnome ordered his subjects to fill a
Magic Basket with all kinds of good things to eat. There was a golden
bowl of smoking stew, a crystal goblet of wine, a golden dish of mashed
potatoes and another of rice pudding.

And when the Magic Basket was covered with a damask napkin, it was
handed to a dwarf messenger to take to the poor woodcutter's children,
while all the little dwarfs stood around him and sang:

          "In this basket they will find
          Food and drink of magic kind.
            Never will it empty grow
          And no hunger they shall know."

"Hereafter," said the Gnome King, looking kindly at Ned, "a bluebird
shall be your companion and will show you many and curious things. I can
spare no more time, for my people must be governed, and while I have
given you more attention than any other mortal because of your great
fondness for fairy tales, I must now leave you in the care of this
bluebird, unless, perchance, you wish to return to earth at once."

To which Ned answered eagerly that he would much rather see more of
Gnomeland before again returning to the everyday routine of grammar
school and lessons.

"Good luck to you, then!" cried his friend, as he shook Ned warmly by
the hand.

The door opened and Ned once more found himself by the side of the great
flat stone in the hillside, where rippling waters of the little stream
flowed into the pool at the foot of the great oak tree, on which sat a
lovely bluebird.

Following the bluebird, Ned turned to one side to avoid climbing the
hill, and continued his journey for some time, keeping ever in sight the
bluebird's beautiful form.

It was almost dark when they were confronted by a dense forest. This was
not particularly reassuring to Ned, especially as the bluebird flew back
and settled herself on his shoulder, evidently not wishing to enter the
woods at so late an hour. For in a deep, black forest, with all sorts of
strange shadows and ghostly trees, one never knows what may be lurking
about, and the same Ned who, with his two stout fists, in broad daylight
would have undertaken to keep any living boy or man from doing serious
mischief, felt his teeth set hard and his heart stand still as he came
into the shadow of the great trees.

The little bird nestled close to his cheek and refused to leave his
shoulder.

Ned, indeed, felt that he must now look out for himself, and though his
heart beat high, he bravely trudged forward.

It was very unlike the woods to which he had been accustomed to go with
his schoolmates at home, where bright green maples, beeches and birches
made a leafy bower overhead. Instead, there were solemn pines and
hemlocks, and as he entered deeper, great caverns appeared in the rocks
and narrow gulleys, into which one might easily fall and break one's
neck.

Through this dismal place he trudged along, with his knees shaking, but
with a brave heart, until he came to a great pine, which evidently had
been struck by lightning, for it stood up white and tall, lifting its
bare arms to the sky, like some specter giant crying for vengeance.

Luckily he had placed the bluebird in his pocket, fearing that the low
hanging branches would sweep it from his shoulders. Had he not done so
before arriving at this spot the opportunity would not have presented
itself again.

Right at the foot of the pine, on a decaying log, sat a little old man,
who was altogether the ugliest looking object that Ned had ever seen. He
was about half the size of ordinary men, though the whiteness of his
hair and beard showed plainly that he would never be any taller, and
though his body was short and crooked to the last degree, his face was
long and pale, but was lighted up by wonderfully brilliant eyes.

These were fixed on Ned from the moment he came in sight, and, piercing
through the darkness, it is no wonder that they chilled the poor boy's
blood and failed to quicken his pace. Indeed, it is not quite certain
that he would have gone forward at all if the greater part of the forest
had not been behind him, though there seemed to be a spell in the
strange eyes that drew the boy on in spite of himself.

"Come along! What are you afraid of?" cried the dwarf in a little, dry
voice, that sounded like the cracking of a dry twig beneath one's foot.

Ned hesitated, and, as if seeking the comfort of something alive and
friendly, thrust his hand into his pocket alongside of the little
bluebird.

"Come on! Come on, little master," repeated the dwarf. "Here I have been
waiting more than an hour to tell you some good news, and now that you
are here you would hinder me because you are such a coward."

"I don't know you," said Ned, as an excuse.

"Well, well, no matter for that. I know you well enough. Would you read
about gnomes and then be so cowardly that you would fear to associate
with them?"

As he finished speaking, he arose, disclosing a doorway in the trunk of
the pine tree behind him.

At that moment, a beautiful dwarf maiden emerged therefrom, and, as if
having heard the conversation, said: "He is no coward, father. See, he
will shake hands with me!"

Ned put out his hand, but drew it back just in time to escape having the
gold ring which the Fairy Queen had given him, slipped off his finger by
the dwarf maiden.

"Selfish mortal," she cried, "'tis nothing but a little gold band. Give
it to me. See, I will exchange this beautiful diamond for it," and she
held out a sparkling stone set in a gold ring.

Ned drew back in alarm, more especially as the dwarf himself advanced
with a threatening attitude.

Continuing to step back, Ned kept his eyes upon the dwarf, who advanced
now with upraised fist. Seeing this, Ned quickly threw off his coat and
picking up a stout stick, prepared to defend himself.

It would have gone ill with him, for the dwarf was surprisingly strong
and agile, had not relief come from an unexpected quarter.

[Illustration: NED THREW OFF HIS COAT.]

The little bluebird had quietly slipped out of Ned's pocket, and flying
up to him, received the gold ring about her neck in accordance with the
command of the Fairy Queen, which Ned remembered suddenly and luckily
in time.

Off flew the bird to the great tall pine and touched it with the magic
ring. In an instant it changed into a giant, who stretched forth one of
his great hands, and catching up the dwarf, hurled him headlong down the
side of the ravine close by.

The dwarf maiden, with a cry, rushed after him, climbing down the sides
with wonderful agility.

The giant now turned to Ned, saying: "Little Master, I owe it to you
that I am once more my natural self. An evil spirit transformed me into
yonder tree, but the magic of your ring has restored me once more to my
natural shape. I will henceforth serve you while the occasion lasts,"
and with these words he knelt before Ned most humbly.

At the same time the bluebird handed Ned his magic ring, and with this
faithful little friend, his gold ring, and the giant for a servant, Ned
felt that he had nothing further to fear while traveling in Gnomeland.

"Thank you, my good friend," said Ned, placing his hand upon the bowed
head of the giant. "You are certainly grateful for what I have done for
you, which is more than can be said of many mortals. But had I not had
the magic ring and the assistance of my little companion, the bluebird,
you would still be the tree you were. Let us, therefore, the three of
us, pledge allegiance to one another and set out upon our journey of
adventure."

As he finished speaking the giant arose and carefully placing Ned upon
his shoulder, started off at a rapid stride.

The little bluebird flew ahead, and in a short time the three comrades
emerged from the forest.

In the distance could be seen the turrets of a stately castle, which
looked down from a high point of land upon a beautiful river that wound
in and out like a silver ribbon through the meadow.

"Who lives in yonder castle?" asked Ned, unconsciously adopting the
style of language of Gnomeland.

"I know not," answered the giant, "but with a few more steps we will be
able to inquire at the postern gates."

It was indeed a stately castle, and upon reaching the drawbridge Ned was
surprised to find that it was not lowered for them to cross over,
although they waited for some time.

"I think I'll blow upon my policeman's whistle," said Ned, hunting
through his pockets. "I certainly had it when I left home."

"Blow hard," advised the giant as Ned brought it forth, "blow hard, that
those within may think us worthy of admittance."

Upon which Ned let out a blast that would do justice to any Knight of
the Round Table. He was himself surprised at the volume of sound, but
was too much interested in what was about to happen to realize that the
touch of his magic ring had made it possible for the small nickel-plated
whistle to create such a sound.

Presently the drawbridge began slowly to descend, and when the creaking
chains ceased their noise, our three comrades crossed over to the castle
gates. These were thrown wide open, and just as the giant placed Ned
upon his feet in front of the castle doors, they opened, disclosing a
beautiful princess on the threshold.

"Welcome, Ned, to you and your two friends."

Whereupon the giant bowed very low, and the little bluebird flew over
and nestled on her shoulder.

Ned was too delighted to speak for a moment, for up to this time his
experiences had been most trying, but here at last it seemed that
fortune smiled upon him.

So he and the giant followed her into the stately hall, the latter
finding it necessary to stoop each time he entered a doorway, for
although the castle was built on magnificent lines it had not occurred
to the architect that a giant would ever be a guest.

When they were all seated, except the giant, who sprawled on the floor,
as there was no chair large enough to accommodate him, the beautiful
princess said:

"I would ask you to spend the night here, but my wicked stepfather
returns tonight, and I fear he will do you some injury."

"I fear nothing," answered Ned courageously, standing up to appear more
dignified, "and if I can be of any service to you, say but a word, for I
have a trusty friend in the giant, and also a clever one in my little
bluebird, to say nothing of the magic of this ring," and he touched the
gold band about his finger and bowed again to the beautiful princess.

"My stepfather is very crafty," said the princess, looking at Ned
intently, as if weighing the possibilities of his assistance. "He once
changed a giant into a pine tree!" At these words, the giant began to
shake and tremble so that the cut glass chandeliers rattled all over the
castle.

"Remember, I have the magic ring," Ned whispered, leaning over to where
the giant lay upon the floor; "nothing can harm us with that in our
possession."

"What would you have me do?" asked Ned, turning again to the beautiful
princess, for he felt that she was unwilling to ask him the favor,
fearing it might prove of harm to him.

Still the beautiful princess remained silent until the bluebird began to
sing a sweet song, perching meanwhile upon her shoulder, as if intending
the song for her ears especially.

Then tears fell from her eyes.

"'Tis the song my brother was wont to sing," she said, "but now"--and
hiding her face in her hands, she wept more bitterly than before--"he
has been sent away and hidden by my cruel stepfather I know not where."

"We will find him for you, princess," cried Ned. "Fear not, for I have
confidence in my two comrades and in myself. Give us all something to
eat that we may have strength to undertake this adventure."

The princess immediately ordered a great feast to be set before them,
and when our three comrades had eaten their fill they once more set out
upon their journey, with the prayers of the beautiful princess for their
safety and successful return.

As they wound their way through the pleasant valley, every so often the
little bluebird would sing her song, loud and sweet, and then would
pause, with folded wing, to listen, as if expecting an answer.

So they went on for many miles, until, as they approached a cottage by
the roadside, Ned thought he heard a familiar air. Indeed, he was sure
that something important was about to happen, for the bluebird was
whirring around in circles and singing as if her life depended upon the
way she trilled and warbled.

"Why, there is a bluebird in that wicker cage!" exclaimed Ned, pointing
toward the cottage porch, from which swung a bird cage.

It was, indeed, true, and in another moment Ned's bluebird was perched
on the railing close by.

Scrambling down from the giant's friendly shoulder, Ned touched the
cage, and, to his amazement, the little door flew open and out walked a
handsome young prince, about his own age.

"Who are you?" cried Ned, but before he could reply the giant exclaimed:
"He must be the brother of the princess! We have, indeed, completed our
adventure, or nearly so," he added, remembering they had yet to deal
with the crafty stepfather.

"How can I ever repay you?" cried the little prince, who was at first
unable to speak from the joy of it all. "I am free! I am free!" And he
almost cried with delight, flinging his arms about Ned's sturdy form
and patting the leg of the giant.

"Come, little bluebird, and let me thank you, too," he added, as the
pretty bird circled in the air and alighted on Ned's shoulder. Indeed,
it was a happy moment for all.

"And now," said Ned, "let us think of the best way to return to the
castle, so that the princess may receive her long-lost brother."

"The easiest way is the best way," said the giant. "Both you boys climb
up on my back, and in 500 short seconds we'll be back at the castle, or
I have forgotten my early training on the cinder path."

All of which goes to show that even in Gnomeland there are sports,
although few fairy tales tell us anything about them.

When Ned and the prince had seated themselves comfortably on the great
shoulders of the obliging giant, he set off at a tremendous rate, and
soon they were ascending the hill on which stood the castle of the
beautiful princess.




THE MAGIC RING

The Unhappy Little Princess leaned out of the window and sobbed.

[Illustration]

THE MAGIC RING


NED followed the beautiful princess and her brother into the castle,
while the giant, who had to stoop nearly to the floor in order to enter
the doorway, brought up the rear.

As it was late, everyone decided to go to bed. Besides, they were all
well tired out after their exciting day.

You would have laughed to see the giant ascend the stairway to the royal
bedchambers, for the steps were too small for his feet, and it was with
great difficulty that he managed to get a foothold with the toes of his
boots.

When at last he was safely inside his bedroom, the largest in the
castle, it was found that the bedstead was not nearly long enough for
him.

So the princess gave orders that two cot beds be placed ends together,
and in this way the giant, by allowing his feet to project through the
open window, could lie down at full length. His feet nearly reached the
tree that grew just outside, on which the little bluebird had perched
for the night, and it was lucky, indeed, that it was midsummer, for
otherwise our big friend might have caught a severe cold.

After bidding the giant goodnight the little bluebird had a few minutes'
talk with Ned while he undressed himself.

[Illustration: THE STEPS WERE TOO SMALL FOR THE GIANT.]

She agreed to act as sentinel during the night, to keep a vigilant
lookout from the treetop, and in case of approaching danger instantly to
awaken Ned and the giant.

Gradually the great castle grew quiet, until nothing was stirring, "not
even a mouse."

At times the night wind rustled the leaves in the tree where the little
bluebird sentinel sat winking and blinking, and the big yellow moon
glistened fantastically on the big toe of the giant.

Toward midnight a faint sound in the distance, like the beat of horses'
hoofs, startled the bluebird.

Hastily flying toward the castle entrance she gazed out upon the roadway
that wound up from the valley below.

At some distance she made out dimly the figures of a number of horsemen.

Returning swiftly to the castle, she tweaked the giant's big toe. That,
you can easily imagine, awoke him with a start.

"What's the matter?" he asked in a frightened whisper which, although
only a whisper, was enough to make the castle tremble, thereby awakening
Ned and the princess herself.

"The crafty stepfather of the princess is coming," answered the
bluebird.

"Then it's all up with me," cried the giant, "for he'll change me again
into a pine tree."

The bluebird made no reply, but hastened to find Ned. On entering his
bedroom through the half open window she found him already dressing.
"Take the ring," he said, slipping it over her glossy neck, after she
had informed him of what she had seen. "If you can manage to touch him
with it, this wicked man will find that he has no power whatever to harm
us."

"I will make haste," replied the little bird, "for they must by this
time have reached the drawbridge."

So saying she flew swiftly away and reached the other side of the moat
just as the cavalcade set foot upon the bridge.

Awaiting her opportunity to touch the wicked stepfather of the princess
with the magic ring, she alighted quietly on the tip of a spear which
one of the horsemen carried.

As they neared the center of the drawbridge the king, as if suddenly
aware of an unseen power, exclaimed: "I feel there is danger near!"

Then the horseman shook his spear defiantly and so startled the little
bluebird that she nearly lost her footing, and alas! what was much more
serious, caused her to loosen her hold upon the little magic gold ring,
which slipped from between her bill and fell into the waters of the
moat.

Like a falling star, it shivered and glimmered in the rays of the moon
as it descended, attracting the attention of a speckled trout, who
opened his mouth and swallowed it as it splashed upon the silvery
surface of the water.

"Your trusty spear has done me good service in times gone by," exclaimed
the wicked king, not knowing that its owner had unknowingly been the
cause of saving him at the present moment.

On came the cavalcade, the wicked attendants of the king inside the
castle opening the gates and allowing him and his men to enter the
courtyard.

Ned looked down from his window and wondered what had become of the
bluebird. He did not feel afraid, but at the same time he realized that
he was not in friendly hands. The giant, on hearing the gates open, had
quickly drawn in his feet and was struggling to get his shoes on when
Ned appeared at the door.

"It's all up!" said the big fellow, with a wry face and a catch in his
gruff voice. "I can feel already the pine-needles beginning to stick out
all over me."

"Oh, that's gooseflesh, you're so scared!" replied Ned, smiling in spite
of the gravity of the situation. "It may not be as bad as you think!"

Just then a great pounding on the front doors told them that the King
was seeking admittance. "Who has locked the doors?" he shouted.

"Wait a minute," said the sweet voice of the princess; "we did not
expect you so late," and she ran down the stairs and opened the door
herself.

"I have two visitors upstairs," she said, as the angry monarch stepped
inside.

"What!" he shouted hoarsely, "bring them to me. How do I know but that
they are enemies?"

"Indeed they are not," she replied, "as you will see in 500 short
seconds."

"Ned, come down!" she called, "bring your friend with you, for I would
have you meet the King!"

Ned turned to the giant, whose big face was twitching with terror.
"He'll recognize me as sure as eggs is eggs!" he groaned.

"What! is that thunder?" exclaimed the King below, mistaking the giant's
moan for a thunderclap, but before his question was answered Ned and his
friend appeared at the head of the stairway.

After shaking hands with Ned in quite a friendly way the wicked King
turned to the giant. "Ha, ha!" he cried, "have I not had the pleasure of
meeting you before, my fine friend?"

The giant said nothing, for what could he say?

"Have I not met you before?" repeated the King, with a fierce gesture.
"Methinks you would look better as a pine tree than a hulking giant,"
and before the words were fairly out of the King's mouth a stately pine
tree was standing in the courtyard, through which the wind of the early
morning made a moaning noise much like the pitiful groan of the poor,
late giant.

"And you, my little cockatoo," continued the wicked King, turning
quickly to Ned, "would look better in a cage!"

And in another minute Ned found himself in a wicker cage, suspended from
the lowest limb of the pine tree.

"And now," cried the wicked King, "where is your third guest?" The
princess paused a moment. "Oh, the little bluebird!" she exclaimed,
"where has it gone?"

"No, not the little bluebird, but he that was the bluebird."

At this the poor princess became very pale. She had hidden her brother
the evening before when they had gone to bed in a closet in her room,
hoping to have the opportunity of disguising him and sending him away
with Ned and the giant the first thing in the morning. But, now, alas,
her wicked stepfather undoubtedly suspected something. For else why
should he ask for him?

She was in despair, for she knew not what to say. And where was Ned's
little friend, the bluebird herself, all this time? Had she deserted her
friends, the little princess asked herself?

"Answer my question!" cried the King, grasping hold of her wrist.

The princess screamed with terror and her brother, hearing her cry,
rushed forth from the closet and down the stairs.

Whipping his sword from its scabbard, he made for the cruel tyrant.

Alas, that bravery and valor do not always win! It was useless for him
to fight against so experienced a swordsman as the King, and in short
time the prince was wounded and his sword thrown from his grasp.

"Little gamecock!" cried his conqueror, "you must needs grow larger
spurs before you tackle an old rooster like me! And since you remind me
of one, a rooster you shall be," and in five short seconds the little
prince was changed into a young gamecock.

"Out into the courtyard!" cried the King; "a castle is no chicken
house," and the little prince found himself unceremoniously thrown under
the big pine tree.

"Have pity!" cried the little princess. "Is there no pity for a little
orphan princess?"

"Enough," answered the King, with a stamp of his foot. "Go to your
room, else you may find yourself also changed into a bird, or a tree,
or a pretty butterfly."

So the unhappy little princess went up the stairs, crying bitterly, to
her own chamber. Closing the door, she leaned out of the window and
sobbed as if her heart would break.

For a moment she did not notice that the topmost branch of the pine tree
was close to her casement. In fact, she would not have noticed it for
some time probably, as her face was buried in her hands, had not the
branch brushed against her fingers.

As she withdrew her hands from her face she heard the giant's voice,
very much subdued, speaking to her.

"Ned says not to despair, for he feels sure that his little friend, the
bluebird, will yet find a way to liberate us all."




THE MAGIC BALLOON

Ned leaves the Magic Soap Bubble.

[Illustration]

THE MAGIC BALLOON


GREAT was the grief of the little bluebird as she skimmed over the
waters of the moat, realizing how impossible it was for her to regain
the lost ring.

She had not the heart for the moment to return to the castle to inform
Ned of his loss; so she perched herself disconsolately on a bush which
grew close to the margin of the moon-lit water, wondering what was best
to do.

Suddenly the speckled trout rose to the surface, and, seeing how
despondent was the pretty bluebird, inquired the cause of her grief.

"Ah, me!" she sighed in answer. "I have lost a magic gold ring, and I
know not what to do, nor how to recover it."

At this the speckled trout flapped his silvery tail gleefully, and
answered: "Worry no more, pretty bluebird, for I have it safely tucked
away inside of me."

"If that be the case, Sir Trout," joyously chirped the happy bird, "swim
at your greatest speed and deliver the ring to her majesty, the
Waterfall Fairy, Queen of the Lake. Tell her that Ned, her little mortal
friend, is in dire peril and that he needs her aid."

"That will I gladly do," answered the speckled trout, and without more
delay he darted off down the moat toward the dam at the farther side,
over which the water ran in a clear stream into the purling brook,
which finally led to the lake, where lived Ned's friend, the Fairy
Queen. Down the silvery cascade he glided and whirled away through the
running water, frightening the minnows and miller's thumbs lying among
the stones in the shallow places, and startling the crawfishes and
little fresh water lobsters hidden under the hollow banks.

Faster and faster he swam, like a courier with important dispatches,
down the clear stream running over its pebbly bed, with the luscious
meadow sweet and the large blue geranium blooming all about its banks,
and the wild rose on its bushes.

Nor did he pause until with a loud splash he dived over the waterfall
safely into the lake and rose to the surface close to the palace of the
Queen of the Lake.

A big black spider was busily at work mending the suspension bridge
which spanned the water at this narrow point, for the heavy drops of
dew had broken the slender strands in several places.

He stopped his work to look at the speckled trout, who at once addressed
him.

"I am the bearer of a most important dispatch for her highness," he
began.

"Well, and I am engaged in the most important duty of repairing her
highness' bridge," replied the spider.

"So, I see," answered the trout, "but----" At this very moment the Queen
herself, hearing voices at so early an hour outside her window, peeped
out. Catching sight of her the trout called out boldly:

"Listen to me, I beg of you, most gracious Queen. I have brought you the
gold ring from Ned, who sorely needs thy aid!"

[Illustration: "HERE IS THE RING," SAID THE TROUT.]

At this the Queen quickly withdrew her head, and in a short time
emerged from the doorway of her castle.

Hastily running to the water's edge, she leaned over, grasping hold of a
stalk to keep her from falling.

"Here is the ring," said the trout, holding it in his teeth and swimming
as close to the bank as he was able.

The Queen reached out and took it safely from him.

"I will make you king of my fishes, noble Sir Trout," she cried, "for
what you have this day accomplished. Remain here in my lake henceforth,
and now, to the rescue!"

In an incredibly short time she was mounted on her swiftest robin and
with her three ladies in waiting flew away toward the castle, where Ned
and the beautiful princess, her brave brother and the giant were held
prisoners by the magic of the wicked king.

Now, the little bluebird, as she saw her friend, the trout, swim away,
suddenly thought of her former master, the King of the Gnomes, and
decided to seek aid from him. So, whirling around in a circle to get her
bearings, she darted off swiftly through the air toward the cave in the
forest.

She made rapid progress until she reached the thick foliage of the
woods, and here, in her eagerness, she nearly lost her way.

Indeed, in the uncertain light that struggled through the thick boughs,
it was not easy to make out certain familiar landmarks which would guide
her to her destination.

At length, just at dawn, she found herself at the foot of the hill
wherein was the cave of the King of the Gnomes.

Worn out with her arduous journey, she fluttered down to the edge of
the bubbling fountain and drank of its refreshing waters.

Then, picking up a pebble, she dropped it into the little gravelly
basin, hopped painfully over to the great flat stone, and tapped upon it
three times with her beak.

No one replied, but the rock opened in the middle, and there stood the
King of the Gnomes himself.

On seeing the little bluebird, he stretched out a kindly hand for her to
rest upon, and carried her into the inner room.

It was his breakfast hour, for gnomes are early risers. Seating himself
at the table, he ordered that the little bird be served with breakfast
at once, for well he knew that a hungry bird's first wish must be for
food.

The King had scarce given this order before several nimble little men of
the forest placed seeds and grains of wheat and a goblet of golden
fruit juice before the bluebird.

Soon she was sufficiently revived to address the gnomes, and it took her
but a few moments to tell him all.

"Come, let us hasten," he said, as she finished, and, slipping into his
pocket his magic pipe and little pieces of soap, he left the cave and
walked rapidly toward a small clearing.

Leaning over a little pool in the hollow of the grassy earth, he filled
his pipe, rubbed the soap about the rim, and in a moment more blew a
large soap bubble.

Taking the little bluebird in his hand, he opened a small door and
entered the magic balloon. Up and up it went, until it was well above
the tops of the trees.

Then it took a course toward the east, where the rising sun was gilding
the sky with its golden fingers.

Faster and faster it sailed, overtaking in a short time the Fairy Queen
and her three ladies-in-waiting, mounted on their friendly robins.

In the distance could be seen the turrets of the castle, gleaming in the
morning sun like bayonets thrust up from the earth in monster guns.

"Now, little bluebird," said the Gnome, opening the little door and
thrusting her out upon his hand, as the big Soap Bubble hovered above
the castle, "fly down and tell Ned that deliverance is near at hand. So
also inform the beautiful Princess, who, I see, is still sitting at her
window, but asleep!"

Off flew the bluebird on her happy errand.

"Your Majesty," cried the Gnome, addressing the Fairy Queen, as she drew
rein at the doorway of the soap bubble, "I would suggest that you touch
with the Magic Ring only the cage wherein is confined our friend Ned,
instructing him, while still in the form of a cockatoo, to fly up to the
topmost branch of the pine tree. Also for the Princess' brother, while
he is still a gamecock, to do likewise. After I have brought the bubble
close to the window ledge, so that the beautiful Princess may step
easily inside, I will cause it to rise to the treetop, from which
advantageous position Ned and the Princess' brother can step within. But
what to do with the Pine Tree Giant," said the Gnome, scratching his
beard reflectively, "gets me! However, one thing at a time, as my old
grandfather used to say when I was a boy, 'one thing at a time!'"

As the bluebird whispered in the ear of the beautiful Princess, the
Magic Soap Bubble approached the window ledge.

Rubbing her eyes, but making no outcry, although she was very much
startled, she obeyed the bluebird's command to "step softly," and
entered the Bubble. It then ascended till it was on a line with the
topmost branch, where it swayed in the gentle morning breeze, like a
barnyard weather cock, the game rooster on one side and the cockatoo on
the other!

The Fairy Queen touched them with the ring as they hopped into the
bubble, and they regained immediately their natural shape.

The Princess threw her arms around her dear brother and hugged Ned, so
great was her delight.

Ned ran over to his little friend, the Gnome, and thanked him again and
again for his aid, and was about to lean out of the doorway to also
thank the Fairy Queen when the Gnome restrained him.

"Not so fast, Ned, my boy! All is not yet over."

"No, indeed," answered Ned, "we must rescue the giant."

"Aye, there's the rub," replied the Gnome. "How are we ever to get him
in the bubble, either as a tree or as a giant?"

At this point the Fairy Queen joined in the conversation, kissing Ned at
the same time as he attempted to thank her.

"Let me first change him into his natural form," she said. "Then he can
walk across the courtyard and out upon the drawbridge. From there he can
easily step off into the bubble, which your majesty can lower to the
right height above the water of the moat."

"Good!" said the Gnome. "Go and do your part and I will attend to the
bubble."

Just as the bubble cleared it the pine tree became once more the
friendly giant, who immediately strode across the courtyard.

Quickly lowering the drawbridge he hastened out upon it.

The creaking of the chains, however, had aroused the wicked King, who
looked out of his window to see what was the cause of the noise. In
another moment he was rushing toward the gates at the head of the castle
guard.

"Quick!" shouted the Gnome to the giant. "Get in!"

But, alas! The doorway was too small. In vain the giant wiggled and
squirmed. In vain Ned and the princess' brother pulled his arms. His
great shoulders could not be forced through the doorway. Finally, with a
tremendous shove he managed to go half way in, but no further, for at
this point his head was against the opposite side of the bubble.

On came the wicked King and his castle attendants, who, seeing the
predicament of the giant, fitted arrows to their strong bows, preparing
to shoot the hapless fellow.

"Blow the bubble larger!" shouted Ned. "Put the pipe in his mouth and
tell him to blow like thunder."

The Gnome placed the pipestem between the lips of the giant and
commanded him to blow for his life, and before an arrow left a bow the
bubble widened sufficiently to enable the giant to crawl inside.
Slamming the door shut the Gnome cried out exultingly: "We are safe!"

Away sailed the Magic Soap Bubble, with the Fairy Queen and her little
robin perched securely on the top, and her three ladies in waiting
standing close by on their own little feathered steeds.

Back to the beautiful Waterfall Lake, where the Fairy Queen bade Ned
goodby; back to the friendly Gnome's cave in the woods, where he said
farewell to Ned; back to Big Man's Land, where lived the Giant with his
kind old mother; back to the castle where lived the beautiful Princess
and her brother before the wicked King had kidnapped them, and back at
last to Ned's own home, where it left him in the old easy chair by the
window, from which he had started out to visit Gnomeland.

Well, well, little reader, here we are, you and I, at the end of the
book. What shall we do, for we have grown to be such good friends while
you have been reading this story of mine.

Listen, I will tell you another story, it's called "The Iceberg
Express"--it is one of The Little Journeys to Happyland books. So come
with me on the Iceberg Express.

                         Yours for a story,
                                           DAVID CORY.




LITTLE JOURNEYS TO HAPPYLAND

By DAVID CORY

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Profusely Illustrated. Individual Colored Wrappers.=

       *       *       *       *       *

          Printed in large type--easy to read.
          For children from 6 to 8 years.

       *       *       *       *       *

A new series of exciting adventures by the author of the LITTLE JACK
RABBIT books. This series is unique in that it deals with unusual and
exciting adventures on land and sea and in the air.


THE CRUISE OF THE NOAH'S ARK

          This is a good rainy day story. On just such a day
          Mr. Noah invites Marjorie to go for a trip in
          Noah's Ark. She gets aboard just in time and away
          it floats out into the big wide world.


THE MAGIC SOAP BUBBLE

          The king of the gnomes has a magic pipe with which
          he blows a wonderful bubble and taking Ned with
          him they both have a delightful time in Gnomeland.


THE ICEBERG EXPRESS

          The Mermaid's magic comb changes little Mary
          Louise into a mermaid. The Polar Bear Porter on
          the Iceberg Express invites her to take a trip
          with him and away they go.


THE WIND WAGON

          Little Hero stepped aboard the Wind Wagon and
          started on a journey to many wonderful places and
          had a delightful time.


THE MAGIC UMBRELLA

          A little old man gave Jimmy the Magic Umbrella
          which took him to Happyland, where he had many
          adventures.

       *       *       *       *       *

GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK




Little Jack Rabbit Books

(Trademark Registered)

By DAVID CORY

Author of "Little Journeys to Happyland"

       *       *       *       *       *

          Colored Wrappers With Text Illustrations.

       *       *       *       *       *

A new and unique series about the furred and feathered little people of
the wood and meadow.

Children will eagerly follow the doings of little Jack Rabbit, and the
clever way in which he escapes from his three enemies, Danny Fox, Mr.
Wicked Wolf and Hungry Hawk will delight the youngsters.

          LITTLE JACK RABBIT'S ADVENTURES
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND DANNY FOX
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE SQUIRREL BROTHERS
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND CHIPPY CHIPMUNK
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE BIG BROWN BEAR
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND UNCLE JOHN HARE
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND PROFESSOR CROW
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND OLD MAN WEASEL
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND MR. WICKED WOLF
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND HUNGRY HAWK
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE POLICEMAN DOG
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND MISS MOUSIE
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND UNCLE LUCKY
          LITTLE JACK RABBIT AND THE YELLOW DOG TRAMP

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




THE PUSS-IN-BOOTS, Jr. SERIES

By DAVID CORY

Author of "The Little Jack Rabbit Stories" and "Little Journeys to
Happyland"

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Handsomely Bound. Colored Wrappers. Illustrated.
          Each Volume Complete in Itself.=

       *       *       *       *       *

To know Puss Junior once is to love him forever. That's the way all the
little people feel about this young, adventurous cat, son of a very
famous father.

          THE ADVENTURES OF PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR.

          FURTHER ADVENTURES OF PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR.

          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR. IN FAIRYLAND

          TRAVELS OF PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR.

          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND OLD MOTHER GOOSE

          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., IN NEW MOTHER GOOSE LAND

          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND THE GOOD GRAY HORSE

          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND TOM THUMB

          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND ROBINSON CRUSOE

          PUSS-IN-BOOTS, JR., AND THE MAN IN THE MOON

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET & DUNLAP, _Publishers_, NEW YORK




THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS SERIES

By LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY

       *       *       *       *       *

          Handsomely Bound. Colored Wrappers. Illustrated.
          For Children 6 to 12 Years

       *       *       *       *       *

This series presents early American history in a manner that impresses
the young readers. Because of George and Martha Washington Parke, two
young descendants of the famous General Washington, these stories follow
exactly the life of the great American, by means of playing they act the
life of the Washingtons, both in battles and in society.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS

Their thrilling battles and expeditions generally end in "punishment"
lessons read by Mrs. Parke from the "Life of Washington." The culprits
listen intently, for this reading generally gives them new ideas for
further games of Indian warfare and Colonists' battles.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS RELATIVES

The Davis children visit the Parke home and join zealously in the games
of playing General Washington. So zealously, in fact, that little Jim
almost loses his scalp.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS' TRAVELS

The children wage a fierce battle upon the roof of a hotel in New York
City. Then, visiting the Davis home in Philadelphia, the patriotic
Washingtons vanquish the Hessians on a battle-field in the empty lot
back of the Davis property.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS AT SCHOOL

After the school-house battle the Washingtons discover a band of gypsies
camping near the back road to their homes and incidentally they secure
the stolen horse which the gypsies had taken from the "butter and egg
farmer" of the Parkes.


THE LITTLE WASHINGTONS' HOLIDAYS

They spend a pleasant summer on two adjoining farms in Vermont. During
the voyage they try to capture a "frigate" but little Jim is caught and
about to be punished by the Captain when his confederates hasten in and
save him.

       *       *       *       *       *

          GROSSET & DUNLAP, PUBLISHERS, NEW YORK

[Illustration]

          _"Give me the bag," the Steward said,
             A frown upon his face.
           "I'll lock you in a dungeon deep
             That you may know your place."_


[Illustration]

          _"Help, help! The Polar Bears are left
              Upon the Iceberg chill.
            Turn back the Ark; we cannot leave
              Them on that icy hill!"_


[Illustration]

          _"Your Highness," cried the Polar Bear,
             "The fast Iceberg Express
           Has broken into smithereens;
             Too bad, I must confess."_


[Illustration]

          _When Little Hero met the Goose
             He asked her what to do.
           So, children, read the Wind Wagon
             And learn how it came true._


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Page 70, opening quotation mark added ("As they rolled along)

Page 157, "Ed." changed to "Ned" (and taking Ned with him)






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAGIC SOAP BUBBLE ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

