



The Lily of Leyden, by W.H.G. Kingston.
________________________________________________________________________

________________________________________________________________________
THE LILY OF LEYDEN, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.


CHAPTER ONE.

The warm sun of a bright spring day, in the year of grace 1574, shone
down on the beautiful city of Leyden, on its spacious squares and
streets and its elegant mansions, its imposing churches, and on the
smooth canals which meandered among them, fed by the waters of the
sluggish Rhine.  The busy citizens were engaged in their various
occupations, active and industrious as ever; barges and boats lay at the
quays loading or unloading, some having come from Rotterdam, Delft,
Amsterdam, and other places on the Zuyder Zee, with which her watery
roads gave her easy communication.  The streets were thronged with
citizens of all ranks, some in gay, most in sombre attire, moving
hurriedly along, bent rather on business than on pleasure, while
scattered here and there were a few soldiers--freebooters as they were
called, though steady and reliable--and men of the Burgher Guard,
forming part of the garrison of the town.  Conspicuous among them might
have been seen their dignified and brave burgomaster, Adrian Van der
Werf, as he walked with stately pace, his daughter Jaqueline,
appropriately called the Lily of Leyden, leaning on his arm.  She was
fair and graceful as the flower from which she derived her name, her
features chiselled in the most delicate mould, her countenance
intelligent and animated, though at present graver than usual.  After
leaving their house in the Broedestrat, the principal street of Leyden,
they proceeded towards an elevation in the centre of the city, on the
summit of which rose the ancient tower of Hengist, generally so called
from the belief that the Anglo-Saxon conquerors of Britain crossed over
from Holland.  Mynheer Van der Werf and Jaqueline reaching the foot of
the mound, slowly ascended by a flight of winding steps, till they
gained the battlements on the top of the ancient tower, the highest spot
for many miles around.  Here they stood for some minutes gazing over the
level country, of which they commanded a perfect panoramic view.  Below
them lay the city, surrounded by a moat of considerable width and stout
walls, which had already been proved capable of resisting the attack of
foes eager to gain an entrance.  Here and there bridges led over the
moat, protected by forts of no mean strength.  In all directions were
silvery threads glittering in the sun, marking the course of the canals
which led to Haarlem and Amsterdam on the north, and Delft, Rotterdam,
Gouda, and many other towns on the banks of the Yessel and the Meuse on
the south, while occasionally wide shining expanses showed the existence
of meers or lakes of more or less extent, while westward the blue ocean
could be seen, and to the south-west Gravenhague, or The Hague, as the
place is more generally called.  On every side were smiling villages,
blooming gardens, corn-fields, and orchards, betokening the industry and
consequent prosperity of the inhabitants.  The city at this time bore
but few traces of the protracted siege it had endured for a whole year,
and which had been raised only three months before, when the Spanish
force under Valdez, a lieutenant of the ferocious Alva, had been
summoned to the frontier, in consequence of the rumoured approach of a
patriot army under Prince Louis of Nassau.

At the period when our story commences, the heroic Prince William of
Orange, loyally aided by his brothers, Louis, Henry, and John, and by
other noble patriots, had struggled for seven long years to emancipate
Holland from the cruel yoke imposed upon her by the bigot Philip of
Spain and the sanguinary Duke of Alva.  Their success had been varied;
though frequently defeated, they had again rallied to carry on the
desperate struggle.  Several of their most flourishing cities had been
besieged by the hated foe, some had fallen, and the inhabitants had been
mercilessly slaughtered; others had successfully resisted, and the
Spaniards had been compelled to retire from their walls.  Count Louis
had been defeated in a campaign in Friesland, but had escaped into
Germany, where he had lost no time in endeavouring to raise another
army.  The Prince of Orange himself was then in possession of Rotterdam,
Delft, and the intermediate country.  Between those two cities was the
important fortress of Polderwaert, which secured him in the control of
the quadrangle watered on two sides by the Yessel and Maas or Meuse.
The Spaniards meantime occupied the coast from the Hague to Vlaardingen,
on the bank of the Maas.  It should be understood that the country
extending northward from the rivers which have been mentioned towards
Leyden was generally level, and considerably lower than the ocean, which
was kept out by enormous banks or dykes, and that it had been, by the
industry of the inhabitants, brought under a perfect state of
cultivation.  There were certain spots, however, raised slightly above
the surrounding flat, on all of which villages had been built.  Enormous
sluices existed at Rotterdam, Schiedam, and other places, by which the
supply of water in the canals could be regulated; over these, as well as
the dykes along the banks of the river, the Prince of Orange held
perfect control.  Besides the small force which enabled him to hold
Rotterdam and Delft, he possessed a fleet of broad, flat-bottomed
vessels, well suited for the navigation of the shallow waters of
Zealand, where, under the brave and able Admiral Boisot, they were able
to bid defiance to the ships sent against them by the Spaniards.  Their
crews consisted of those hardy sons of the ocean who, under the name of
"The Beggars of the Sea," had already rendered such good service in the
cause of Freedom by the capture of Brill, the first place in Holland
where the Prince of Orange was proclaimed Stadtholder, and in many other
enterprises, when, according to their rule, no quarter was given to
their hated foe.  Besides Rotterdam, Delft, and Leyden, many other towns
in various parts of Holland were garrisoned by the partisans of the
Prince of Orange, and had either, with some exceptions, not been
attacked by the Spaniards, or had successfully resisted the forces sent
against them.  Two, unhappily, had fallen; the fearful cruelties to
which their inhabitants had been subjected by their conquerors showed
the others what they must expect should they be unable to hold out.  Of
these, in Naarden, a small city on the coast of the Zuyder Zee, scarcely
a man had been left alive, the whole population having been given over
to indiscriminate slaughter.  Haarlem, after an heroic defence of seven
months, had been compelled to capitulate, when, notwithstanding the
promises of Don Frederic, Alva's son, a large number of the principal
citizens, as well as others of all ranks, and every man who had borne
arms, were cruelly put to death, the survivors being treated with the
greatest cruelty.  The mind shrinks from contemplating such horrors, and
the Hollanders might well desire to emancipate themselves from the rule
of a sovereign capable of allowing them.

The burgomaster and his daughter had stood for some minutes without
speaking, their eyes gazing down on the smiling landscape which has been
described, yet the minds of neither of them had been engaged in admiring
its beauties.

"Would that I had been more determined in endeavouring to induce our
citizens to level those forts and redoubts left by the Spaniards, and
had also taken steps to re-victual the city and to strengthen our
garrison.  I have just received a letter from our noble Stadtholder,
urging me to see to these matters, and I must do so without delay."  The
burgomaster, as he spoke, pointed to several redoubts and forts which in
different directions had been thrown up by the Spaniards during their
former investment of the place.  To the south-east and east were two of
especial strength--Zoeterwoude and Lammen, the first about 500 yards
from the walls, the latter not more than half that distance.  From these
forts a bank or causeway ran westward towards the Hague.

"I ought to have exerted all the influence I possessed to get the task
accomplished," continued the burgomaster.  "By God's merciful providence
we were before preserved, but He helps those who, trusting to Him,
labour as He would have them.  The Spaniards may not return, but it is
our duty to be prepared for them, though I trust that we shall soon hear
of a glorious victory gained over them by the noble Count Louis."

"Heaven defend him and his brave troops," murmured Jaqueline; and she
thought of one who had accompanied the Count to the field and who had
from his earliest days engaged in the desperate struggle both at sea and
on shore.  Again the burgomaster was silent, and Jaqueline's thoughts
wandered far away to the army of Count Louis.  The chief magistrate had
come up, as was his wont, to consider the measures which it might be
necessary to take for the benefit of the city over which he presided.
Here, under ordinary circumstances, he was not likely to be interrupted
by visitors.  Jaqueline's thoughts were recalled to the present moment
by hearing a light footstep ascending the stairs of the tower.  A young
boy appeared, whose dress showed that he belonged to the upper orders,
his countenance animated and intelligent.  "Why, Albert Van der Does,
what has brought you here in so great a hurry?" asked Jaqueline, as she
cast a glance at the boy's handsome face glowing with the exertion he
had made.

"I had gone to your house, and finding that you had come up here, I
thought you would give me leave to follow you," he answered.

"You have taken the leave, at all events," she said, smiling; "but what
object had you in coming here this morning?"

"A very important one; I want you to accept the remainder of my pigeons;
those I before gave you have become so tame and look so happy that I am
unwilling to deprive the others of the privilege of belonging to you."

"Is it only affection for your feathered friends that induces you to
make me the offer?" she asked, archly.

"I confess that I have another reason," he answered.  "I shall no longer
have time to attend to my pets; I heard my father say that we shall soon
be engaged in more stirring work than we have had since the Spaniards
marched to the eastward.  As soon as Count Louis forms a junction with
the Prince, every person capable of bearing arms should be prepared to
engage in the struggle, and I want, therefore, to practice the use of
weapons and to learn to be a soldier."

"You will make a brave one, I am sure," said Jaqueline.

"And will you accept my birds?" asked Albert.

"I cannot refuse what you so freely offer, though, if you repent, you
shall have them again," said Jaqueline.

"Then may I bring them to you this evening?" asked Albert.

"Thank you, Albert; we are always glad to see you; and if you bring your
pigeons, I promise to train and pet them as I have those you before gave
me," she answered.

"Then I will come this very evening, with your cousin Berthold, whom I
left at his books in my father's study.  Fond as he is of his books, he
says that he must lay them aside to learn the use of arms with me; for
as soon as Count Louis appears, we intend to go out and join him.  We
have but a short time to prepare, as, before many days are over, the
Count and his army will have fought their way to Delft, and we must
commence the work of driving the Spaniards out of our country or into
the rivers and meers, where they have sent so many of our brave
Hollanders."

Jaqueline smiled approvingly, admiring, as she did, the enthusiasm of
the gallant boy, so consonant with her own feelings.

"I am much obliged to you for your readiness to accept my birds, and now
I must deliver a message I have brought from my father to the
burgomaster.  My father desires to see him about the fortifications, and
as he bade me say that the matter is of importance, I ought to have
given it first."

The burgomaster had been so pre-occupied with his own thoughts that he
had not observed young Albert Van der Does, and now started as the boy
addressed him with that deference due to his age and rank.

"Tell your father that I will at once visit him.  Although a man of
letters and devoted to study, I know that he possesses, among his other
talents, a military genius, which makes me value his opinion; say also
that it is the very subject which has been occupying my thoughts."

"My father is more out of spirits than I have ever seen him," said
Albert.  "It is owing to a letter he lately received from a friend at
Utrecht, detailing an extraordinary circumstance which occurred in that
city some time ago.  It is said that five soldiers of the Burgher Guard
were on their midnight watch, when, the rest of the sky being as dark as
pitch, they observed, directly over their heads, a clear space, equal in
extent to the length of the city, and of several yards in width.
Suddenly two armies, in battle array were seen advancing upon each
other; one moved rapidly up from the north-west, with banners waving,
spears flashing, trumpets sounding, accompanied by heavy artillery and
squadrons of cavalry; the other came slowly from the south-east.  They
at length met and joined in a desperate conflict for a few moments; the
shouts of the combatants, the heavy discharge of cannon, the rattle of
musketry, the tramp of foot soldiers, the rush of cavalry, were
distinctly heard.  The very firmament trembled with the shock of the
contending hosts, and was lurid with the fire of their artillery.  Then
the north-western army was beaten back in disorder, but, rallying again,
formed into solid column, and once more advanced towards the
south-eastern army, which was formed into a closely-serried square, with
spears and muskets.  Once more the fight raged, and the sounds were
heard as distinctly as before; the struggle was but short, the lances of
the south-eastern army snapped like hemp-sticks, and their firm columns
went down together in mass beneath the onset of their foes.  The
overthrow was complete.  Scarcely had the victors and vanquished
vanished, than the clear blue space where they had stood appeared
suddenly streaked with broad crimson streams flowing athwart the sky.
The five soldiers reported the next day what they had witnessed to the
magistrates of Utrecht, who examined them separately, and each swore to
what he had seen.  My father said that he should not have been inclined
to believe the account had not the evidence been so strong in favour of
its truth."

"This is strange," observed the burgomaster.  "Your father will
assuredly show me the letter, and I shall then the better be able to
judge how far I can give the account credence.  We know that strange
portents have appeared in the sky before great events, at the same time
these men of the Burgher Guard may have allowed their imaginations to
run riot.  They knew that a battle was likely ere long to take place
should the Spaniards attempt to impede the march of Count Louis, and
some passing clouds may have appeared to them to represent the scene
they have described.  Grant that they beheld something extraordinary,
yet they may have been mistaken, and the south-eastern army--for from
that direction the Count must be advancing--may prove victorious."

"My father would fain hope as you do, Mynheer Van der Werf, but his
friend, one of the magistrates of Utrecht, fully believes in the
apparition, and has imbued him with his own desponding spirit."

"Bear to him my regards, and beg him to cheer up," said the burgomaster.
"He must not allow his brave spirit to be agitated by a tale which may
after all have originated in the heated imaginations of a few ignorant
men.  Had the whole city witnessed the spectacle it might have been
different."

While the burgomaster and Jaqueline were looking out from the summit of
Hengist's tower, two gentlemen approached it from opposite directions;
the one was of good figure, handsomely dressed in silken doublet and
cloak, with a feather in his cap, and a rapier, apparently more for
ornament than use, by his side.  He walked with no laggard step, looking
up ever and anon towards the top of the tower.  The other came on at
still greater speed, his appearance contrasting greatly with that of the
first; a heavy sword hung by his side, and over his shoulders was an
orange sash, which partly covered a breastplate showing many a deep
dent, while his dress was travel-stained and bespattered with dark red
marks, while his frank and open countenance wore an expression of grief
and anxiety.  The two as they met exchanged salutes, the manner of the
latter being hurried, as if he desired not to be stopped.

"Why, what has happened, Captain Van der Elst?" exclaimed the young
gallant who has just been introduced.

"I am in search of the burgomaster, and have been told that he was seen
going to the Tower of Hengist," said the other, without answering the
question.

"I am also bound there, and will gladly accompany you," was the reply.

"Pardon me, Van Arenberg, but the business I am on is of too great
importance to brook delay."  And Karl Van der Elst sprang on up the
ascent at a rate which Baron Van Arenberg, without lowering his dignity,
could not venture to imitate.  A blush rose for a moment on the Lily's
fair cheek as she saw him coming; her countenance, however, the next
moment assumed an expression of alarm when she remarked his appearance.
He bowed as he approached, gazing at her with a look of sorrow in his
dark eyes which did not tend to reassure her, and without offering any
other greeting, much as he might have desired it, he addressed himself
to the burgomaster, who inquired in an anxious tone, "What news do you
bring, Captain Van der Elst?  Has Count Louis defeated the Spaniards?
Has he yet formed a junction with the Prince?"

The young officer, his feelings almost mastering him, could with
difficulty reply, "Count Louis with his brother, Count Henry, the brave
Duke Christopher, and the whole army have been annihilated.  We met the
foe near the village of Mookie, where we were hemmed in; in vain we
tried to cut our way through the ranks of the Spaniards.  Count Louis,
his brother, and Duke Christopher, with four thousand gallant men, fell
in the attempt.  I had just before been despatched to make a circuit in
order to get upon the enemy's flank, which I was ordered to attack.
Before I could reach it the day was lost; the victorious cavalry of the
Spaniards charged over the field, butchering all they met.  Many of our
men were suffocated in the marshes or in the river, and others were
burnt in the farmhouses where they had taken refuge.  Finding that
success was hopeless, and that I could do nothing to retrieve the day, I
drew off my shattered troop, and I have deemed it my duty to hasten on
to warn the inhabitants of Leyden that the enemy are rapidly advancing
again to lay siege to their walls."  At first the burgomaster seemed
inclined to discredit the intelligence.

"Surely all could not have been destroyed, some of the soldiers may have
cut their way through, and escaped as you have done?"  Karl shook his
head.

"I obtained too distinct a view of the fatal field to allow me to
indulge in such a hope," he answered.  "I would gladly have sought for
an honourable death myself among my friends had I not reflected that the
safety of my brave band depended on me, and that we might yet render
service to our country."

While he was speaking, Baron Van Arenberg joined the party, and, after
saluting Jaqueline in a self-confident manner, stood listening with a
supercilious air to the young soldier.

"That you have escaped from the field, Captain Van der Elst, is evident;
but I fain would doubt that so many brave men would have yielded to the
Spaniards," he observed.

"They yielded not to the Spaniards, but to death," answered Captain Van
der Elst.  "I myself visited the field of slaughter at night, when the
Spaniards had withdrawn, in search of my beloved leader.  His body, if
it was there, lay among the heaps of slain, most of whom had been
stripped by rapacious plunderers, and disfigured by the hoofs of the
enemy's horses."

"I believe your report, captain," said the burgomaster, stretching out
his hand and pressing that of Van der Elst.  "Our duty is clear, not a
moment is to be lost in preparing for the defence of our city, and the
burghers of Leyden must resist to the last.  You will remain and aid us
with your advice?"

"Would that I could," answered Karl, glancing for a moment at Jaqueline;
"but I must hasten to the Prince of Orange, to give him a full account
of the events which have taken place, and to receive his orders.
Bereaved as he is of his brothers, it is the duty of every true-hearted
man to rally round him."

"You are right," said the burgomaster; "but I must beg you to bear a
message from me to the Prince, requesting that he will allow you to
return, and, if possible, to bring some men-at-arms with you.  Lay
before him the weak state of our garrison; say that we have but five
companies of the Burgher Guard and a small corps of freebooters; but
that our walls are strong, the hearts of our citizens staunch, and that
they will, I feel assured, fly to arms the instant they receive the
summons.  Assure him that we will endeavour to imitate the example of
the brave citizens of Alkmaar, and hold out till he can send us
succour."

"I will faithfully deliver your message, mynheer, and you may rest
assured that if it depends on my freedom of action I will gladly return
to render you such assistance as I can give," answered Captain Van der
Elst, his countenance brightening as he spoke, his eyes once more
turning towards Jaqueline, who, with Baron Van der Arenberg and Albert,
stood a little distance apart.

"The citizens of Leyden can well dispense with the service of one who,
by his own showing, seems to have fled from the scene of battle,"
whispered Van Arenberg to Jaqueline in too low a tone for Captain Van
der Elst to hear him.  On hearing this, without replying, she turned
away, and moved closer to her father.

"He is as brave a soldier as ever lived," exclaimed Albert, who had
overheard the remark, his countenance flushing as he spoke.  "My father
knows and admires him, and was only the other day speaking of the many
gallant deeds he has performed.  He was with De la Marck on board the
fleet of the `Beggars of the Sea,' when they captured Brill, he was at
Flushing when the standard of liberty was raised there, he assisted in
the defence of Alkmaar, and I scarcely know how many sea battles he has
been engaged in, while he served with Prince Louis during his campaign
in Friesland; and I am very sure that it was his good fortune, or rather
his courage and discretion, enabled him to escape from the Battle of
Mookerheyde."

The Lily's bright eyes sparkled, and she gave Albert an approving look
as he was speaking.

"You would make out this young captain a very Amadis," said Van
Arenberg, in a sarcastic tone.  "Your father must have obtained the
report of his heroic deeds from himself I suspect, for I never heard him
spoken of in the same laudatory manner."

"Why, Baron, one would suppose, from the way you speak, that you were
jealous of him," said Albert, with the boldness of a brave boy who felt
that he was defending a maligned friend.  "You insinuate that he ran
away from Mookerheyde, and I am very sure that he did nothing of the
sort.  He went back to the field to look for the dead bodies of the
Count and his brother, and he could not have done that without running a
great risk of being killed or taken prisoner, and it was not till he had
assured himself of the sad fact that Count Louis and the rest were dead
that he led off his men, and came here to give us warning that we might
prepare for the enemy."

The baron, whose features were flushed with annoyance, for Jaqueline
overheard all that was said, was about to make an angry reply, when the
burgomaster called Albert.  "Hasten to your father, my good Albert,
break the sad news you have heard, and say that I shall esteem it a
favour if he will come forthwith to meet me at the council hall, as I
would desire to have some time to speak with him on these matters before
the rest of the councillors arrive.  I will, on my way, send round to
summon them, as we must lose no time in preparing to defend our city."

Albert, with the activity of youth, leaped down the steps, while the
burgomaster prepared to descend with greater caution.  "Baron Van
Arenberg," he said, "I must request you to escort my daughter to her
home, while Captain Van der Elst accompanies me to the Stadhuis, as we
have matters of importance to discuss on our way.  I hope that you will
afterwards join us there, and will offer your services to aid in the
defence of the place."

Baron Van Arenberg expressed the honour and pleasure he felt at the
charge committed to him, although Jaqueline, while bowing her head in
acquiescence, showed by her manner that the arrangement afforded her no
especial satisfaction.  The Lily, as may be conjectured, had many
admirers, for not only was she fair and graceful, with a sweet
disposition, but it was supposed that she would inherit the wealth of
the burgomaster; hitherto, however, as far as was known, her heart was
untouched, and she had favoured no one.



CHAPTER TWO.

On reaching the foot of the mound the burgomaster and Captain Van der
Elst proceeded to the Stadhuis, while Baron Van Arenberg accompanied
Jaqueline in the direction of her own house.  She walked on, though with
graceful step, far more rapidly than her companion wished, looking
directly before her without turning her head, unless it was absolutely
necessary to do so.

"I am still not altogether satisfied as to the entire truth of the
report brought by this young captain regarding the destruction of Count
Louis and his army.  The Spanish troops are undoubtedly brave and
disciplined, but it seems incredible to me that they should have cut to
pieces in so short a time the large number of levies the Count is
reported to have had with him.  If they allowed themselves to be so
easily defeated all I can say is, that they deserved their fate.  In my
opinion it is a pity that we Hollanders should so persistently hold out
against the troops of our lawful sovereign; far better by yielding with
a good grace to bring the fighting to an end."

"And share the fate of the unhappy inhabitants of Haarlem," answered
Jaqueline, for the first time turning her head and glancing at him with
a look which betokened as much contempt as her features were capable of
exhibiting.  "Think of the thousands of our countrymen who have been
cruelly butchered because they were determined to hold fast to our
Protestant faith rather than confess that of our foreign tyrants.  I
should say, let every man and woman perish bravely, fighting to the last
rather than basely give up their birthrights."

"I will not venture to argue with you on that point, fair Jaqueline,"
answered Van Arenberg.  "I wish as much as any Hollander can do to
preserve our birthrights, as well as my castle and broad estates, but I
assure you that you underrate the power of the Spaniards.  Our cause,
the patriot cause, is desperate; it is on account of the deep admiration
I feel for you, if I may use no warmer term, that I would save you from
the horrors to which others have been exposed."

"I speak the sentiments held by my father and every right-minded man in
our city--ay! and woman too," answered Jaqueline, in a firm tone.  "We
would imitate our sisters in Haarlem and Alkmaar and join the citizens
in defending our walls."

"But should the city be again besieged--and it assuredly will be should
the report of the total defeat of Count Louis prove correct--how can
Leyden hope to hold out against the disciplined and experienced troops
of the king?  The Prince of Orange has no force sufficient to relieve
the city, and be assured that the fate which overtook Haarlem will be
that of Leyden, though the inhabitants are not likely to be treated with
that measure of forbearance which those of Haarlem received."

"If you speak of the measure of forbearance awarded to Haarlem, that was
small indeed," said Jaqueline.  "You seem to forget that every citizen
of wealth was massacred, that every Hollander who had borne arms in the
siege was put to death, while many hundreds of other citizens were
afterwards murdered by the savage Spaniards who desired to strike terror
into the hearts of the survivors.  I should say, rather than submit to
so terrible a fate, let us struggle to the last, and then perish amid
the ruins of the town."

"You are indeed, lovely Jaqueline, worthy of being a heroine of romance,
and already you inspire me with some of the enthusiasm which you feel,
though I cannot pretend to believe that the efforts which the citizens
of Leyden may make will be crowned with success; yet believe me that I
was prompted entirely by my earnest desire to preserve one I prize so
highly and her family from impending destruction to give the advice I
venture to offer."

"I am well aware of the admiration in which you hold me, Baron Van
Arenberg," answered Jaqueline, "but whatever are your motives, even were
I certain that our cause is desperate, and I do not believe that it is
(for I feel assured that God will prosper the right in the end), I would
not by word or act counsel my father and the citizens of Leyden to yield
while a single man remains alive to strike a blow for freedom."

Gentle as Jaqueline looked while she spoke, her voice and manner were
firm and determined, while she showed that she was anxious to bring the
discussion to an end.  It might have afforded more encouragement to the
baron had she endeavoured to win him over to the opinions she held, but
beyond expressing them she made no attempt to do so.  The baron,
however, fancied that he was too well acquainted with the female heart
to despair of success; he was young, good-looking, and wealthy, and as
far as was known his moral character was irreproachable.  The
burgomaster, deceived by his plausible manners, trusted him fully, and
considering from his rank and wealth that he would be a suitable husband
for his fair daughter, invited him frequently to the house, and had
always received him in a cordial manner.  The baron had therefore good
reason to believe that his suit would be successful.

On reaching her father's house, Jaqueline politely, though somewhat
stiffly, thanked him for the service he had rendered in escorting her
home, and the door opening, she entered without expressing the slightest
wish that he would remain.  He lingered, expecting that she would at
last remember what he looked upon as her neglect, but she ascended the
steps without further notice of him.  He stamped impatiently as he
walked away, muttering, "It is clear that I have a rival, or the fair
Lily would not treat my advances so coldly, supported, as she knows I
am, by her father.  Instead of feeling honoured, as she ought, at being
sought in marriage by a noble, she seems utterly regardless of my rank
and personal qualifications.  I am very sure that I can make myself as
agreeable to women as can most men, and from her beauty alone,
independent of her fortune, she is well worth winning, so I must not
despair.  Still it will never do to have her cooped up in this hapless
town should it be again invested by the Spaniards; I have no fancy
indeed to stay in it myself, and I must bend all my efforts towards
finding the means of carrying her away before the siege commences.
There is not a day, however, to be lost.  She appears to have no fear
herself, but I may work upon the feelings of her father, and induce him,
for the sake of preserving her from the horrors of the siege, to entrust
her to my care.  I must venture upon some warmer expressions of love and
devotion than I have hitherto exhibited, and by describing the horrible
fate which may be hers should she remain, and the happiness which awaits
her if she will consent to accompany me, as my wife, out of the country,
I may induce her to yield more willingly than she at present seems
inclined to do."  Such were the thoughts which occupied the mind of the
baron as he proceeded with leisurely step towards the Stadhuis, where he
had no great desire to make his appearance, although having been
expressly invited by the burgomaster he could not avoid going.  He found
the chief magistrates, most influential citizens, assembled.  The
burgomaster had informed them of the sad intelligence he had just
received, and Captain Van der Elst, at his desire, had described the
battle and its disastrous termination.  One circumstance alone afforded
satisfaction, it was that Count John, now the Prince's only surviving
brother, who had already done so much for the cause, although expecting
to participate in the battle, had, at the urgent request of the other
leaders, left the army two days before the action, in order to obtain at
Cologne money to pay the troops.  The young captain had just finished
his account.  The first point to be settled was the selection of a
military chief whom all would be ready to obey.

The burgomaster rose.  After expressing his readiness to devote his
fortune, his life, and everything he possessed to the cause, he
acknowledged that he had no military experience or talents, and urged
upon his fellow-citizens the importance of selecting a man who possessed
the talents in which he was wanting.  "There is one," he said.  "John
Van der Does, Seigneur of Nordwyck, a gentleman of distinguished family,
but still more distinguished for his learning, his poetical genius, his
valour and military accomplishments; if we select him, the Prince I am
sure will sanction our appointment."

Without a dissentient voice the Seigneur of Nordwyck was elected
military commandant.  The burgomaster did not conceal from them the
dangers and the sufferings which perchance they would have to undergo,
but he added, "Remember Naarden, my friends, we cannot too often reflect
on the fate of Naarden; although the inhabitants offered no resistance,
they were indiscriminately slaughtered, and such may be our lot even if
we go humbly forth to sue for pardon from the conquerors of Mookerheyde.
Remember Haarlem, which, although defended with the heroism which ought
to have inspired respect and consideration in the hearts of the
conquerors, was treated with cruelties from the bare contemplation of
which the mind shrinks back with horror; then let us think of Alkmaar
which so bravely and successfully resisted, and imitate the example of
its citizens with the hope and confidence that we shall be equally
successful in driving back the hated foe."

Other patriotic magistrates spoke in the same strain, and all were
unanimous in their resolution to defend their city to the last, while it
was agreed that steps should instantly be taken for that object.
Unhappily much precious time had already been lost; the forts and
redoubts thrown up by the Spaniards still remained, and at present the
defenders of the city had too much to do within the walls to attempt
levelling them.  The new commandant urged them to strengthen the
fortifications, and in the meantime to obtain such stores of provisions
from the immediate neighbourhood as could be collected.  There were a
_few_, however, who, although they did not vote in opposition to the
opinions of the majority, yet spoke of the hopelessness of the
undertaking in which they were about to engage.  Among these was Baron
Van Arenberg, although he expressed himself carefully he did his best to
persuade the citizens that their wisest course would be to yield before
proceeding to extremities.

"I say not that such is what I advise," he observed.  "But conciliatory
measures might prove successful; if they fail let us by all means
endeavour to keep out the enemy as long as we can."

"The Spaniards have already shown us the uselessness of conciliatory
measures as well as the utter worthlessness of their guarantees for the
safety of those who submit," said the burgomaster.  "It would be
suicidal madness to trust them; let us put faith in God, who defends the
right, in our own resolute courage and power of endurance, in our strong
walls, and in the assistance which the Prince of Orange will afford us
at our need."

The baron was silent; he was especially anxious not to say anything
which might offend the burgomaster by openly differing from him; but his
remarks encouraged others connected with certain persons, their
relations or friends, recreant Hollanders, who had sided with the
Spaniards and professed to have returned to the Faith of Rome.  These
men were familiarly called Glippers; their object was to induce their
countrymen to follow their example.  A few holding their opinions
remained in the city, either kept there by business or with the
intention of creating dissension among the patriots.  Although Baron Van
Arenberg openly professed to be a patriot, yet from the expressions he
let fall many already began to suspect his designs.  When those who
followed him spoke, their opinions were received with loud expressions
of disapprobation.  He saw that in the present state of the public mind
it would be prudent for the future more carefully to conceal his
sentiments than he had hitherto done.  "I must bide my time," he said to
himself.

Numerous matters of importance were discussed, and the persons supposed
best suited for certain duties were selected to superintend the various
tasks which had to be performed to prepare the city for the expected
siege.  One undertook to procure cattle, another fodder, a third corn;
others to collect arms and ammunition.  The strengthening of the
fortifications was allotted to several who had some experience in such
matters.  The guns and their carriages had to be looked to, such
buildings as were suited for storehouses were to be prepared, and
hospitals fitted up to receive the sick or wounded; indeed, no point was
neglected.  All these arrangements having been made, the brave John Van
der Does, the newly-elected commandant, rose.

"We have not concealed from ourselves the difficulties and dangers of
the task we have undertaken," he said.  "But, my friends and
fellow-citizens, on God, on your stout arms, and on the energy of our
Prince we will rely to defend our city against all the foes who may
appear before our walls," he exclaimed, as he drew his sword; and
raising it above his head, he added, "Never will I again sheathe this
weapon till the hated Spaniard has been driven from our country, and we
may henceforth repose in peace."



CHAPTER THREE.

Not a moment was lost after the Council broke up in commencing the
all-important tasks which each member had undertaken.  The burgomaster,
however, did not forget the duties of hospitality; taking the arm of
Captain Van der Elst, he said--

"Come with me, my friend, and partake of some refreshment, which you
must sadly need.  You have ridden hard all this morning, and have still
a long journey to perform before you can reach Rotterdam, with the risk
of encountering marauding parties of Spaniards, who may have ventured
forth from Gravenhague.  I will give orders in the meantime that you may
be provided with the best horse the city affords, for your own steed has
scarcely had sufficient time to rest to carry you as rapidly as you
desire on your journey."

Karl acknowledged that his horse was wellnigh knocked up, and thankfully
accepted the burgomaster's invitation, though he was anxious not to
delay a moment longer than was necessary before proceeding on his
journey.  Directly the burgomaster, accompanied by Van der Elst, arrived
at his house, the repast, which had long been ready, was placed on the
table, and Jaqueline appeared to preside at it.  She received the young
captain with less frankness than she might generally have bestowed on
her father's friends.  There was a slight timidity in her manner, which,
in spite of herself, she could not help exhibiting, and a blush rose for
a moment to her cheek as she replied to his greeting.

"And are you able to remain and assist us in preparing for the defence
of our town?" she asked.

"Would that I were able to remain," he answered.  "But I must hurry on
as fast as my steed can go to see the Prince and to receive his
directions for my future guidance; but I will not fail to suggest to him
that I may be of service in assisting in the defence of Leyden, and
unless he should require me for important work elsewhere, I hope that he
will allow me to return."

"I trust so," murmured Jaqueline, raising her eyes and casting a
momentary glance at him.

The meal was soon concluded, for Captain Van der Elst was unwilling to
spend a moment longer than was necessary at the table, though he would
fain probably have enjoyed a longer conversation with Jaqueline.  He had
to wait a short time for the arrival of his horse, which enabled him to
exchange a few more words with Jaqueline.  While they were speaking
Berthold and Albert arrived, each laden with a cage containing some
beautiful white pigeons, which might easily, from the gracefulness of
their form, have been mistaken for doves.

"You see, Vrouw Jaqueline, that I have not forgotten my promise, and I
am sure that you will take better care of them than I could do," said
Albert.  "They each have got their names, and will come when you summon
them, besides which, if they are carried to any distance, however great,
they will always fly back as fast as their wings can bear them.  I have
trained them carefully to perform this duty; see here is one I call the
Lily, because it is the fairest and most beautiful of all.  See how
smooth and glossy are its feathers, every one of the most snowy white."

Jaqueline thanked Albert for the birds, and promised to tend them
carefully.

"They will be content, however, at present to remain in their cage, so
you need not trouble yourself about them," he observed.

Captain Van der Elst did not fail to admire the pigeons.  "Should the
city be beleaguered they may be of the greatest possible use some day,
if you can send them to the head-quarters of the Prince, as beneath
their wings they can carry the messages far more securely and rapidly
than the fastest runner," he remarked.  "At present the country is open,
and I shall have to ride hard.  I will not ask your permission to carry
any of the birds with me, but perhaps in a few days before the Spaniards
gather round the city you will allow four of them to be taken to Delft
or Rotterdam that they may return with such messages as the Prince may
desire to send."

"It did not occur to me when I undertook to tend the pretty birds that
they might prove of the service you suggest," said Jaqueline.  "You are
indeed most welcome to take as many as you can employ.  I shall prize
them more than ever when they have thus assisted our glorious cause."

Suddenly Berthold, on hearing that Captain Van der Elst was about to set
out for Rotterdam, started up.  "If my uncle will give me leave may I
accompany you?" he exclaimed.  "I know all the crossways and cross cuts
better probably than you do, or indeed than anybody you can find, and I
might be useful in guiding you."

"Will you have my nephew as your companion?" asked the burgomaster.

"I would gladly have his society, but I am unwilling to expose him to
the risks I may incur," answered Captain Van der Elst.  "The Spaniards
are likely to be more vigilant than ever, and their light horse will
probably be scouring the country either to forage or to interrupt the
communication between the cities."

"That is the very reason why I wish to go with you," said Berthold.  "I
know the roads thoroughly, for as soon as the Spaniards had retired,
feeling like a bird set free I scoured over the whole country, and
amused myself in making a plan of them."

"As Berthold knows the country so well, surely it will lessen the risk
you would have to run alone if you will take him with you," observed
Jaqueline.  "I am sure that he will feel it an honour to accompany you,
and he can return speedily with any message the Prince may have to
send."

Captain Van der Elst's scruples being overcome by these arguments, he no
longer hesitated to accept the offer made by Berthold, who hurried out
as soon as he had snatched some food to see that his horse was got
ready.

"I quite envy you," said Albert to him.  "I should like to go also, but
I know that my father will require my services, and I must even now
hurry back to him."

In a short time, the two steeds being brought to the door, Captain Van
der Elst and his young companion, having bid farewell to the burgomaster
and Jaqueline, proceeded towards the Cowgate, the southern entrance to
the town, leading towards Rotterdam.  Jaqueline watched them eagerly as
they rode off, undoubtedly a prayer ascended from her heart for their
safe arrival.  The country was green with the bright grass of early
spring, the fruit trees in numerous orchards were covered with bloom,
giving fragrance to the air.  For the first part of the distance there
was but little risk of their encountering enemies, and by the time they
had got further on the sun would already be setting, and they would have
the advantage of being concealed by the shades of evening.  The village
of Zoeterwoude, standing on a slight elevation above the surrounding
plain, was soon passed, and that of Zuidbrunt, close to a large and
shallow meer, was next reached, but they neither of them entered lest a
party of Spaniards might have ventured thus far from their
head-quarters.  They had already passed three enormous dykes running
across their road, one beyond the other, built for the purpose of
protecting the city from the inroads of the sea.  Roads, of course, ran
along the top of these, some towards the Hague, others towards Delft,
Gouda, and numerous towns and villages to the right and left.  Although
hitherto not a Spanish soldier had been seen, at any moment some might
be encountered.  There were no heights or even tall trees from the top
of which a view could be obtained of the surrounding country, so that
they might know how to avoid their foes.  Their anxiety was much
relieved when they saw the sun sinking into the not distant ocean.  The
Prince frequently visited Delft, but Captain Van der Elst believed that
he was now to be found at Rotterdam, and although the former city was
but slightly out of their course, he proposed avoiding it and riding
directly for Rotterdam.  More than half the distance had been performed.
A short way to the left lay the village of Zoetermeer, raised, like
others, slightly above the plain, and they already perceived the green
trees and red roofs of the houses peeping up among them, lighted up by
the last rays of the setting sun.

"Too much haste the less speed," observed the captain.  "It is a true
saying, and we must therefore bait our horses and give them a short
breathing time, or they may break down before we reach our journey's
end."

"Might we not push on without stopping, and trust to the animals to keep
up their strength to the last?" asked Berthold.  "They are both good
nags and sound in wind, and can manage a pretty broad ditch when pressed
at it."

"We may have to try their mettle even yet," said the captain.  "And they
will the better do their work after a feed of corn; besides, we may have
to ride back, and we shall probably find no horses to exchange for them
in Rotterdam."

"As you think best," said Berthold.  And they rode along a causeway
which seemed to lead directly for the village.  On reaching it they
pulled up at the door of a small inn, the only one the place afforded.
The landlady hurried out to meet them, and desired to know whether they
intended to stop there the night.

"No, friend, we wish only to bait our horses, and must be in the saddle
again as soon as they are rested.  It may be more prudent than
remaining, for we cannot tell at what moment we might receive a visit
from those savage hounds the Spaniards."

"Reports have been brought in of several foraging parties being out, who
take what they can find without paying a styver in return, besides which
they ill-treat the people on all occasions," observed the landlord.  "It
would be a satisfaction if some of our young fellows were to break their
heads, but if they were to make the attempt our village would to a
certainty be burnt down, so we must humbly submit to save our skins."

"I cannot advise you for the present to do otherwise," answered Captain
Van der Elst.  "But the time may shortly arrive when we shall drive our
hated foes into the sea."

"Would that it may come soon before they have, like a flock of locusts,
eaten up every green thing in the land," exclaimed the landlord.

"The information you give shows me the importance of our being on the
road again without delay," said Captain Van der Elst, as he and Berthold
accompanied the landlord to the stable, where room was at once made for
their horses by turning out a couple of others.  The landlord then
pressed them to come in and take some refreshment, but they both
declined.

"Not even a glass of Rhenish wine?  I have some of the best," said mine
host.  But they refused, considering that their time would be better
occupied in rubbing down their steeds, and moistening their lips from a
bucket of water, after they had finished their corn.

"You can still render us a service, friend, by sending out to learn if
any Spaniards are yet in the neighbourhood," said the captain, "Surely
that I will do," answered the landlord, and he summoned a couple of
active-looking lads and directed them to run out as far as their legs
could carry them in ten minutes, and to try and discover if any cavalry
were near at hand.  "Foot soldiers are not likely to venture thus far,
so we need have no fear of them," he observed.

The lads clearly understood what was required of them, and started
together in opposite directions.  They had not been gone the allotted
time when one of them came hurrying back, covering the ground with long,
rapid strides.

"If the mynheers do not wish to be made prisoners, they had better be
out of the village as soon as they can saddle up," he said.  "I caught
sight of a party of horsemen just passing the border of the Meer where
the willows grow; there must have been a dozen of them or more; but I
only stopped to count thus far and then took to my heels, expecting
every moment to have a shot whistle by my ears."

"You have done well, Hans," said the landlord.

"And here is a reward for your service," added Berthold, giving the
youth a coin.

"I did it of my own free will," answered Hans.  "It is not the first
time I have been set to watch the Spaniards, or that they have tried to
catch me, and found that they had a Will-o'-the-Wisp to deal with; but
this was an easy task, and nothing to boast of."  Hans was saying this
while he was assisting Berthold to replace the bit in the horse's mouth,
and to tighten the girth of his saddle, the landlord rendering the same
service to Captain Van der Elst.  The next moment they were in the
saddle and pushing full speed through the village to the southward.
Should they be discovered, they would not only run the risk of being
shot at, but would expose the landlord to punishment for having
entertained them.  Looking back, they could see no one following, and
hoped, therefore, that they had escaped observation, while their horses,
refreshed, made up for the short delay by getting on at full speed.
They soon passed the village of Bleiswijk, between which and the next
place ran a broad causeway forming the high road to Rotterdam.  Though
the gloom of evening was increasing, there was still sufficient light to
enable them to see objects at some distance.  Berthold, who knew the
road best, was leading, when suddenly he reined in his horse, and made a
sign with his right hand for his companion to do the same.

"See, just coming from the right, are a score of horsemen; they may be
Hollanders, or Free Lances, though from the height of their helmets they
look more like Spaniards," he exclaimed.  "We had better avoid them."

"How is that to be done?" asked Captain Van der Elst.

"We passed just now on the left a narrow dyke, which runs, I know, in a
south-westerly direction; at the farther end is a bridge which leads
across the Rotte.  If we are pursued, we must leave the road and ride
across the country.  We can without difficulty swim the river, when the
Spaniards, with the heavy trappings of their horses, would not be able
to follow."

Scarcely had Berthold said this when they could see against the sky the
figures of a large number of horsemen moving along a road to the right.

"We might even now, by dismounting, lead our horses down into the plain,
and perhaps escape observation," said Berthold.

"No, no, as we can see them they must have discovered us," said the
captain.  "Lead the way across the dyke you spoke of; I will follow
closely at your heels."

As there was no time for further deliberation, Berthold, turning his
horse's head and passing the captain, galloped along the way they had
come for a few minutes and then turned off along the top of the dyke he
had described.  The moment they turned they heard shouts, evidently
coming from the horsemen they wished to avoid.

"Those are Spanish voices," said the captain.  "I know them well.  Push
on, Berthold!"  But the road along the top of the dyke was much rougher
than the one they had left, and it made it necessary for them to keep a
careful hand on their reins to prevent their horses from falling.  From
the way the dyke ran it formed an angle with the high road, and they
were soon again brought within sight of the Spanish horsemen, who
shouting out to them to stop, fired several shots in rapid succession.

"The fellows are not bad marksmen," said Berthold, "for I heard two or
more bullets whistle close to my ears."

Captain Van der Elst continued shouting out, "Ride on! ride on!" more to
show that he himself was unhurt than that there was any necessity to
urge on Berthold.  The Spaniards were evidently unwilling to trust
themselves to the low ground for fear of finding that it was a morass,
into which their steeds might plunge with little hope of extricating
themselves.  On seeing that the fugitives had a good chance of escaping,
although some of the Spaniards galloped after them along the road, the
others continued firing their carbines, though fortunately they missed
their aim.  The two fugitives were soon beyond the range of the Spanish
musketeers, but Captain Van der Elst still cried out to his companion,
"Go on! go on!" for, glancing behind him, he saw indistinctly through
the gloom the heads of several horsemen following them.

"We shall soon be at the bridge," cried Berthold.  "I do not think the
Spaniards will attempt to cross it."  Just as he had announced that they
were close upon it they saw a body of horse who had evidently galloped
round to take possession of the post.  This discovery was made, however,
in time to enable Berthold to ride his horse down the side of the dyke,
the captain following his example.  "Come along," he cried out, "the
ground is somewhat soft, but these horses are accustomed to it, and we
may get over it much faster than our pursuers."  Having proceeded some
distance, they had good reason to hope that they had not been seen.

"We must now make for the river, and a few minutes will carry us safe
across it," said Berthold.

The horses as they reached the bank, without hesitation plunged in, and
bravely breasted the smooth water.  They had got more than halfway
across when again they heard the shouts of a number of Spaniards
ordering them to return.

"You may shout yourselves hoarse, my men," cried Berthold.  "We have no
intention of obeying you."  Finding that their shouts produced no
effect, they fired several bullets from their fire-arms, and the bullets
came spattering into the water like a shower of hail, but the gallant
steeds bore their riders to the opposite bank unhurt, and soon
scrambling up, the captain and Berthold continued their course over the
fields.

"Will not the Spaniards cross the bridge and attempt to overtake us?"
asked the captain.  "We must be prepared for the contingency."

"I think not," answered Berthold.  "They might encounter some of the
Prince's cavalry, and are not likely to venture further south."

They at length gained another dyke, on the summit of which the road ran
directly for Rotterdam.  They now galloped forward with less
apprehension of meeting an enemy, and at length, about two hours after
dark, entered Rotterdam.  They immediately inquired the way to the house
where the Prince was residing.  From the remarks they heard made, they
discovered that the news of the disaster at Mookerheyde had already
reached the city, for which the captain was thankful, as it would save
him from the painful necessity of announcing it to the Prince.  They
found guards before the door, and several grooms and other servants, to
one of whom they committed their horses.  Captain Van der Elst at once
delivered to a gentleman-in-waiting his name and the object of his
visit, and they had no time even to shake off the water which still
clung to the lower part of their garments, when they were informed that
the Prince desired to see them.  They followed their guide into an
apartment plainly furnished, with several writing-tables; at one of
these sat a tall, dignified man with brown hair, moustachios and beard,
a forehead broad and lofty, and eyes bright and full of expression.  The
captain advancing, bowed, and introduced his young companion as the
nephew of the Burgomaster of Leyden.  The Prince, who had risen,
received them gravely, but at the same time in a cordial manner.

"You bring further intelligence, Captain Van der Elst, from the field of
Mookerheyde?" he said.  "Of the main particulars I have already been
informed by some few who escaped and made their way here."

Captain Van der Elst briefly explained how he himself had escaped, and
being well assured that Leyden would again be attacked that he had
considered it his duty to ride round to that city in order to prepare
the inhabitants for what was likely to occur.  He then gave an account
of the meeting of the Council, stating that John Van der Does had been
elected military commandant, subject to his approval.

"They could not have made a better choice," remarked the Prince.  "It
shall be confirmed."  In a few brief sentences he questioned the captain
regarding the battle of Mookerheyde.  A tone of melancholy pervaded all
he said, but he in no other way showed the deep grief which weighed him
down.  The Prince sat silently listening, his countenance unmoved, while
the captain made his report, and Berthold began to fear that his friend
might be blamed for his conduct.  He was, therefore, greatly relieved
when the Prince remarked, "You have exhibited courage and discretion,
Captain Van der Elst, qualities we greatly need in the present
emergency.  I must send you back with a message to the citizens of
Leyden to urge them to maintain the town against the foes of our country
to the last gasp.  They ought to have destroyed the forts the Spaniards
left, to have amply provisioned the city, and to have secured an
efficient garrison; but I will not now speak of what is passed.  Remind
them from me that they are about to contend not for themselves alone,
but that the fate of our country of unborn generations may, in all human
probability, depend on the issue about to be tried.  Eternal glory will
be their reward if they manifest the courage worthy of their race, and
of the sacred cause of religion and liberty.  Say that I implore them to
hold out at least three months, and I pledge my word that I will within
that time devise the means of delivering them.  Advise them immediately
to take an account of their provisions of all kinds, including the live
stock, and let the strictest economy be employed in their consumption.
Stay, I will sign the commission appointing the Seigneur of Nordwyck as
Commandant, and write what I deem necessary to confirm the message I
verbally send by you.  When can you again set out?"

The captain acknowledged that he and his young companion had had no
refreshment or rest since they left Leyden, but that he himself was
willing to start immediately could a fresh horse be found for him.  He,
however, considered that he ought to mention having encountered several
parties of Spaniards, and that there would be some risk of being
captured on the return journey.  When he also explained the energetic
measures the burgomaster and commandant were already taking, the Prince
replied, "Wait, then, till to-morrow, when you may get over the most
hazardous part of the distance during the night."

The Prince having spoken a few words of encouragement to Berthold, which
he was never likely to forget, signified to them that they might retire,
and gave orders to one of the officers to attend to their wants.



CHAPTER FOUR.

The brave commandant, attended by young Albert, set an example of
enduring energy to his fellow-citizens.  From morning till night he was
to be seen going round and round the fortifications, showing were points
might be strengthened with advantage, and to encourage the labourers,
often himself taking a spade or pick in hand.  Where fresh batteries had
to be thrown up, the work was one which greatly taxed the strength of
the citizens, but they all knew that their lives depended on their
repairing and strengthening their defences before their foes should
again attack them.  Not only the citizens of all ranks, but their wives
and children assisted, many who had never before engaged in manual
labour offering their services to carry baskets of earth to the
ramparts, and otherwise aiding in the work going forward.  In this task
the commandant was ably supported by the burgomaster and other
magistrates.  Jaqueline often accompanied the burgomaster, and set an
example to the citizens' wives and daughters by carrying baskets of
earth, nor did her father, tenderly cherished though she had always
been, attempt to prevent her from performing the task which she
considered right.  He felt the importance of the example she set to
others, for when they saw the fair Lily, the admired of all, engaged in
manual labour for the common good, no one, not even the most delicate,
could venture to hold back.  It would have been well for the citizens if
they could have obtained provisions as easily as they could repair their
walls, but the country had already been drained by the Spaniards,
mounted parties of whom were even now ranging as near as they could
venture, to prevent supplies from being sent into Leyden.  Barges laden
with corn, and carts, however, were constantly arriving at the city, and
occasionally a few oxen, while horsemen rode out in various directions
to induce the peasantry to send in all the provisions they could spare,
reminding them that they would before long fall into the hands of their
foes, who would take them without payment.  Still the amount of food
collected fell far short of what was required.  The citizens did not
labour with the dull apathy of despair, but with warm enthusiasm, they
all being resolved to rival their countrymen at Alkmaar.  The men sang
at their work, and the girls chatted as if they were engaged in some
holiday task.  The only person who appeared not in any way to partake of
the general enthusiasm was the Baron Von Arenberg, who excused himself
on the plea that he was out of health, and that any exertion would be
exceedingly injurious to him, though he had no objection to standing
still and watching others at work, which he declared ought to afford the
labourers ample encouragement.  He did not, however, make his appearance
in public as often as he had been accustomed to do.  He was greatly put
out from the circumstance that when calling at the house of the
burgomaster he had seldom found him at home, and that Jaqueline had
invariably excused herself from seeing him during the absence of her
father.  He had therefore not known how she was employed.  Curiosity
had, however, prompted him one bright morning to take a walk round the
ramparts, and he arrived at a spot where a new battery was being thrown
up.  On a high mound stood the burgomaster, and near him a number of men
were engaged in the more severe labour of the undertaking, while troops
of women, some with full baskets, were bringing up earth from the trench
which was being dug, while others were returning with the empty ones.
The baron started with astonishment, for at the head of one of the
parties appeared the Lily of Leyden carrying with a companion a basket
of earth; her dress, though not ungraceful, was suited to her
occupation.  Me gazed as if at first unable to believe his senses, a
flush mantled on his brow.

"Can her father thus allow her to degrade herself?" he exclaimed to one
of the eldest and chief citizens who was standing by, whose daughters
and grand-daughters were similarly employed, though the baron was not
aware of the fact.  "The task too is utterly useless; should the
Spaniards again lay siege to the town, they will, before two weeks are
over, have gained an entrance, and they have already shown the penalties
they intend to exact from those who resist their authority."

"Baron Van Arenberg, such I am bound to believe is your honest opinion,
but understand that we trust in God, in the true courage which animates
the breasts of patriots, and in that aid which our noble Prince will
most assuredly send us," answered the old man, in a stern tone.  "The
task in which the fair Jaqueline is engaged raises her higher than her
beauty, her position, or her wealth can do in the eyes of her
countrymen.  Look at my daughters and grand-children, they feel proud of
imitating her; when you communicate with your friends, the `Glippers,'
tell them how the matrons and maidens of Leyden are employed, and let
them warn the Spaniards of the death which awaits them should they
assail our ramparts."

The baron again started, but with a different feeling than before, and
declared that he was no "Glipper," though he was not inspired, he
confessed, with the same enthusiasm which at present animated the
citizens of Leyden.

"It may be that you are not a `Glipper,' but your remarks savour much of
the principles which animate them," observed the old citizen, in a dry
tone.  "Speak them not aloud to others, or you may chance to be looked
upon as a traitor and be treated as such."

By a strong effort the baron quelled his rising anger; he could gain no
credit by a dispute with the aged and highly esteemed citizen who had
thus spoken to him, and turning aside he directed his steps homeward.
He fancied that it would be derogatory to his rank to engage in manual
labour, and yet he could not stand by and see the fair Jaqueline and
other young ladies of position thus employed without offering to assist
them, unless he was prepared to be regarded as destitute alike of all
chivalric and patriotic feelings.  On reaching the handsome mansion he
inhabited, after pacing several times across the room, he threw himself
into a chair to consider what course he should pursue.  The old
citizen's remarks had warned him of the danger he would incur should he
be supposed to advocate a surrender to the Spaniards, and he would be in
still greater danger should it be discovered that he was carrying on a
secret correspondence with Valdez through his "Glipper" friends; he was
also mortified and annoyed at seeing Jaqueline so degrading herself, as
he considered, by labouring like any peasant girl at the fortifications.
"How can her father, who dotes on her as the apple of his eye, allow
her thus to demean herself?" he exclaimed, "to exhaust her health and
strength, to soil her fair hands with the moist and black earth; the
very thought is unbearable!"  He again rose and paced across the room,
half inclined to order his servants to prepare for an instant journey.
"If I remain I shall have to share the sufferings these obstinate
citizens are preparing to bring down on themselves, or indeed I may lose
my life.  I would rather sacrifice my property than do that.  I may by
joining General Valdez at once gain better terms for them, little as
they deserve it at my hands, at all events I shall secure my own
possessions."  He rang a bell to summon an attendant, but no one
answered to the call.  At length he inquired of the old one-legged
porter who had admitted him, when, to his disgust, he found that the
whole of his establishment had gone out to labour at the fortifications.
"They will soon get tired of the work and return," he said to himself,
but the delay gave him further time for reflection.  "If I go I must
abandon all hope of winning the Lily of Leyden, unless the city is
speedily captured and I am able to save her from the terrible danger she
would incur during the assault.  For her sake I must not allow her to
run that risk; no, the only safe course, as far as she is concerned, for
me to follow is to remain either to gain her father's consent to our
immediate union, or to persuade her to fly with me, while there is yet
time, to a place of safety.  She might be unwilling to go to the Hague,
but I might take her to Delft or Rotterdam, where she would be equally
safe; and although she might at first regret having left her father and
other friends in this city, a very few weeks will show her what a
merciful escape she has had.  It may yet be some days before Valdez and
his army can reach the neighbourhood, I will remain and employ the time
in endeavouring to persuade her to take the only step which can secure
her safety.  I cannot bear the thought that one so lovely should be
doomed to the fearful fate in which she will be involved when the
Spaniards capture the city."

Fortunately there were few in Leyden who entertained the baron's
opinions.  While he remained at home, his mind agitated by conflicting
doubts and fears, the rest of the inhabitants were engaged as has been
described.  The commandant, accompanied by his son Albert, remained
chiefly on the ramparts; he had to inspect the firearms as they were
repaired or manufactured by the armourers, ceaselessly working day and
night, and he had likewise to examine the few recruits who could be
collected from the country round to assist in the defence, and especial
attention had to be given to the exercising of the men at the great guns
placed in the various forts.  The burgomaster, among his many other
duties, daily visited the storehouses to see the progress made in
collecting food, both for man and beast, and he also inspected the pens
and sheds in which the cattle were placed as they were driven in, while
he made preparation for all the various contingencies which might occur.
And, although he desired his daughter to set the example to the women
and girls of Leyden, remembering that she was utterly unused to manual
work, he, after a time, summoned her home to take the rest and
refreshment she required.

"Go, my sweet Jaqueline," said Vrouw Margaret de Munto, the wife of one
of the chief magistrates.  "You have shown us how the most delicate can
work, and we will not be idle during your absence."

Jaqueline, whose arms and shoulders were aching with the unwonted
labour, was, it must be confessed, thankful to obey her father's summons
to return home.  She was rewarded with the consciousness that she had
performed her duty, and she hoped to have strength to continue it, but
she was more out of spirits than was usual with her.  Some days had
passed since her young cousin Berthold had accompanied Captain Van der
Elst to Rotterdam and they had not again made their appearance.  The
burgomaster could not account for the delay, but felt sure that the
Prince would immediately send them back with despatches confirming John
Van der Does in his appointment as Commandant, and stating what plans he
proposed for their relief.  The Lily cast many a glance over the plain
in the hopes of seeing the two horsemen approaching; but though
occasionally trains of carts and baggage-horses laden with sacks of
corn, and small herds of cattle were seen on the roads, the two absent
ones whose safe return would have relieved her anxiety failed to appear.
As the foragers brought in word that parties of Spaniards who had come
from the direction of the Hague had been met with, some fears were
entertained that Captain Van der Elst and Berthold might have fallen
into their hands.

"Berthold is too well acquainted with the country to allow himself and
his companion easily to be caught," observed the burgomaster.  "Perhaps
the Prince is waiting to decide on the plan he proposes to adopt for our
relief.  We shall see them in a day or two; though it is but natural
that you should feel as anxious about your cousin Berthold as I do.
They will arrive, I feel sure, before the Spaniards approach our walls,
as the Prince, who keeps himself well acquainted with the enemy's
movements, will not detain them too long, so as to prevent them getting
in with safety."

The Lily sighed, for she feared there might be some miscalculation as
day after day notice had been brought of the rapid approach of the hated
foe, and at any hour it seemed that their advanced guard might appear
before the walls.  The burgomaster had thrown himself into an armchair
the first rest he had sought that day since early dawn, having
especially desired his daughter to retire.  Scarcely, however, had he
taken his pen in hand to sign certain documents which had been brought
to him, than the bells of the nearest church struck a peculiar note,
which was taken up by the others in different parts of the city in rapid
succession.  It was the tocsin peal, announcing the approach of an
enemy, and summoning the citizens to the ramparts.  The burgomaster
immediately rose, and sending word to Jaqueline on no account to leave
the house, set forth to the Stadhuis, where he knew that the principal
magistrates would quickly assemble.  As he was leaving the door of his
house he was met by young Albert Van der Does.

"The commandant has sent me, Burgomaster, to request your presence on
the north-western rampart, where he, with several officers, is waiting
your arrival.  A body of troops has been seen approaching along the
causeway from the direction of the Castle of Valkenburg."

The burgomaster, notwithstanding his fatigue, accompanied young Albert
at a rapid pace.  From every direction people of all ranks were
hastening through the streets, some girding on their swords as they left
their doors, while their wives or daughters handed to them their
firearms.  Many an eye was turned in the direction of the approaching
troops.

"They march more quickly than the Spaniards are wont to do," observed
the commandant to the burgomaster.

"Can they be troops sent by the Prince to assist in the defence of the
city?" asked the latter.

"They would not be coming from that direction," said the commandant.
"By their pennons, and the sombre appearance which pervades their ranks,
I suspect that they are English."

The foreign troops drew nearer, and no doubt longer remained that they
were English, and as far as could be calculated numbered between five
and six hundred men.

"They will be a welcome addition to our garrison," observed one of the
magistrates.  "For those islanders are brave fellows and fight well on
all occasions."

"Notwithstanding, unless they bring a written order to me from the
Prince to admit them, I will dispense with their services wherever they
come from," said the commandant.  "The English are trustworthy enough,
and fight well if they are well fed and are satisfied with their
quarters, but I would not trust them should a famine get within our
walls; and should they begin to feel the pinchings of hunger, they would
then cry out that we must surrender, and would induce others to follow
their evil example.  They well know that it is the policy of the
Spaniards just now to behave courteously to the English, and these
mercenaries would hope that their lives would be spared, though every
other man in the place were put to death.  No, no; even though our
numbers be few let us rather trust to the stubborn hearts of our
Hollanders than to such men as those probably are."

The burgomaster and the other magistrates, after a short consideration,
fully agreed with the sentiments expressed by the commandant.  In a
short time the English commander, galloping ahead of his men, rode up to
the walls and in the name of William, Prince of Orange, demanded instant
admittance.

"Whence do you come, Colonel Chester?" inquired the commandant, who
recognised the officer as the commander of a body of English troops in
the service of the Prince.

"From Valkenburg," was the answer.  "I have been obliged to abandon that
fortress, from being assured that it would be hopeless to attempt
holding out against the Spaniards, who I hear are advancing with an
overwhelming force, and I had neither provisions nor sufficient
ammunition to stand a lengthened siege, I therefore judged it prudent to
march here to assist you in the defence of your city."

"I regret that I cannot admit you or your men, Colonel Chester," said
the commandant.  "Our garrison is already of sufficient strength, and we
have as many mouths to feed as we can find provisions for."

"But my men and I shall be cut to pieces by the Spaniards, who, if they
overtake us in the open country, and we cannot hope to reach any other
fortress in which we can defend ourselves, have threatened vengeance
against all who side with the Prince of Orange."

"There was one fortress you might have defended, and that you thought
fit to abandon, regardless of the interests of the noble prince whom you
engaged to serve," answered the commandant, sternly.

In vain the English colonel pleaded that the lives of his whole band
would be sacrificed if they were not admitted within, the city.  The
commandant was firm in his resolution and declined their services, and
they at length finding that they pleaded in vain, forming themselves
into compact order moved on till they reached the causeway leading to
the Hague.  At length they were lost to sight in the distance; some few
regretted that the commandant had refused the assistance of so many
sturdy men-at-arms, but the act inspired the citizens with fresh
courage, each man now feeling that on his own bravery and resolution the
safety of the city depended.



CHAPTER FIVE.

Active and intelligent scouts had been sent out to watch the movements
of the enemy, and to bring back due notice of their approach to Leyden.
The citizens meantime were labouring as before at their fortifications;
they well knew that there was no time to spare to complete their work.
Van Arenberg, who had still managed to retain the confidence of the
burgomaster, was a constant visitor at his house during the short time
in the evening that he was at home.  The baron, however, was convinced
that there was no longer a hope of persuading the stout-hearted
magistrate to submit, and yet anxious as he was to get outside and avoid
the miseries he saw impending, he could not bring himself to abandon the
prospects of winning the fair Lily.  He still, therefore, endeavoured to
work on her feminine nature by pointing out to her the horrors and
sufferings in which she must share with the other inhabitants of the
place should she remain.

"You have often spoken to me on this subject, Baron Van Arenberg," she
answered, regarding him calmly; "but know that I would rather trust to
the pikes and swords of the citizens of Leyden to defend our poor women
and children from the clutches of the Spanish soldiery than I would to
the tender mercies of their general.  It is useless again to speak to me
on the subject; but since you fancy that you see so clearly the dreadful
doom prepared for those who remain, I advise you to quit the city while
there is time."

The baron could say no more, but he muttered as he walked homeward that
evening, "I must take other means of carrying out my object."

The next morning Jaqueline had repaired with her father to the ramparts
on the south side of the town.  They were soon joined by Albert.

"I met Arenberg just now," he said to Jaqueline, "looking as sulky as a
bear.  He asked where you were gone, as he had not found you at home.  I
could not tell him, as I did not know, and would not have told him if I
had known; but I saw him start off to the north side of the town, so
there is no fear of your being troubled by his presence."

"But how do you know his presence troubled me?" asked Jaqueline.

"Because I am very sure you cannot like a man who is a `Glipper' at
heart, whatever he may seem to be to people openly; and I have observed
the way you always speak to him, and very glad I have been to see it."

Jaqueline was inclined to smile, and she could not chide Albert for his
frankness.

"Hulloa! look up there!" he exclaimed, pointing along the road.  "I see
two men on horseback and another on foot.  What if they should prove to
be the captain and Berthold with a guide?  Perhaps they will bring us
good news."

"They do not come on as fast as I should have expected," said Jaqueline,
watching them intently.  "Yet they seem to be cavaliers, not common
horse soldiers.  Perhaps they have to wait for their guide."

The two horsemen and their attendant on foot drew near.

"It is Captain Van der Elst and my cousin Berthold!" exclaimed
Jaqueline, in a more joyous tone than she had spoken for many a day.
"The message they bring from the Prince will, I trust, encourage our
citizens."

"Encouragement they will certainly bring if they come from William the
Silent, who is very sure to inspire all whom he addresses with the
spirit which animates his own dauntless mind.  We will go down to the
gate to meet them," said the burgomaster.

The captain and Berthold, with their companion, having answered the
challenge of the sentries, were forthwith admitted.  Perceiving the
burgomaster and Jaqueline, they leaped from their steeds, and giving the
reins to their companion, advanced towards them.

"We have been a much longer time in reaching the city than the Prince or
we ourselves expected," said the captain, after the usual greetings.
"We were pursued by a party of Spaniards, and had to take refuge in the
fortress of Polderwaert, from which for several days we were unable to
make our escape; but the message we bring will, I trust, encourage the
citizens and garrison of Leyden to defend the city until the Spaniards
are compelled to retire."

"There is little doubt about that," said Berthold.  "He has not told you
how, after we had taken refuge in the fortress, through his vigilance
and courage, the Spaniards, who attempted to surprise it, were driven
off, and had he not been charged with the message from the Prince, he
would have been detained to assist in its defence should it again be
attacked."

"And who is that lanky fellow you brought with you, who is leading on
the horses after us?" asked Albert of his friend, as they followed the
burgomaster with Jaqueline and the captain.

"A first rate fellow, Hans Bosch, he has done us good service twice
already, besides piloting us along last night by paths which I could not
have found by myself, though I know the country pretty well; he
volunteered to come in order to carry messages from the city, and very
useful we are likely to find him."

As it was important at once to communicate the message brought by
Captain Van der Elst, the burgomaster summoned the chief inhabitants
forthwith to the Stadhuis.  The captain having delivered his written
despatches, spoke as he had been directed, employing the very words the
Prince himself had used, and advancing the most powerful arguments to
induce the citizens not to yield to their foes.  "He implores you," he
continued, "to hold out for at least three months, and he pledges his
word that he will within that time devise the means of delivering you
from the Spaniards."

"For six months, if necessary, even if we have to eat the grass in our
squares, the shoes on our feet, the rats and dogs to be found in the
streets," was the reply.

"I will announce your resolution to the Prince, and it will, I am sure,
encourage him to continue the efforts he is making for your relief,"
answered the captain.  "Had Prince Louis lived and joined him he would
have had an army at his disposal, but the forces he can at present
muster are only sufficient for the protection of Rotterdam and Delft."

The address of the Prince was printed and circulated throughout the
city.  After the meeting broke up, the burgomaster invited the young
captain to accompany Berthold to his house.

"And who's your attendant, he appears to be a strange being?"

"There are not many like Hans Bosch," remarked Berthold.  "He has twice
saved us from falling into the hands of the Spaniards, and, if I mistake
not, will still render us good service, he can run like a deer and leap
like a young calf.  There are few who can dodge the Spaniards as he can,
and if we get shut up in the city, he will manage to get out again and
slip through their ranks so as to let the Prince know what we are
about."

"Berthold does not over-praise Hans Bosch," observed the captain.  "I
commend him to your care, Burgomaster, while he remains in the city, and
he will be ready to make himself useful when his services are required."
It was the first evening since preparations for the defence were
commenced, that any of the inhabitants were able to take rest.  Though
labourers were still employed on the works, they were nearly completed,
and Jaqueline felt that she might, without neglecting her self-imposed
duty, return home and resume her ordinary attire, so that she could
preside at her father's table.  There were no guests besides Captain Van
der Elst and Albert--Berthold always resided with his uncle.

"Can you now remain with us?" asked the burgomaster of Captain Van der
Elst.

"Would that I could," answered Karl, his eyes turning for a moment
towards Jaqueline.  "But our Prince requires my services and directed me
to return without delay, he has, as you know, but few officers.  His
great object is forthwith to raise a force of sufficient strength to
drive the Spaniards from your gates; he did not inform me how it was to
be done, but it will be no easy task, for he has to garrison Rotterdam
and Delft, and to guard the immediate country.  Were he to leave those
places unprotected, all might be lost."

"We will trust to his sleepless energy and determination, both to devise
and carry out a project for our relief," observed the burgomaster.

"An idea has occurred to me, Captain Van der Elst!" exclaimed Albert.
"I lately gave four beautiful carrier pigeons to the Vrouw Jaqueline,
and if she will consent to make them over to you, you can carry them
with you, and by their means inform us what progress the Prince is
making in his plans for our relief.  Do you consent to give up your
pets, Vrouw Jaqueline?"

"Most willingly," she answered, "if Captain Van der Elst will undertake
the charge of the birds."

"I will tend them carefully, and trust that they may become the
messengers of happy news," he said, a smile for a moment lighting up his
countenance.

Albert proposed that they should at once visit the pigeons with Captain
Van der Elst, and instruct him how they were to be fed and treated, as
it was possible that he might have to depart at an early hour the next
morning.  As Jaqueline expressed her readiness to do as Albert proposed,
the whole party, with the exception of the burgomaster, accompanied her
to the tower of the house in which they were kept.  In the same tower
was situated her boudoir, and hence she could enjoy a wider view over
the country than from any other part of the house.

"We must put them into two small cages, so that they may be carried
easily on horseback, or by a man on foot, if necessary," said Albert.
"Come, Berthold, if your cousin will allow us, we will go and procure
such cages.  I know where they are to be found, and we will be back in a
few minutes."  As Jaqueline did not forbid them, they set off.

It was the first time that Jaqueline and Karl Van der Elst had been
together.  They had never spoken of love, and the present moment seemed
most inappropriate.  Karl did not conceal from himself the dangers to
which he must be exposed in carrying out the projects of the Prince, nor
could he shut his eyes to the fearful risk all the inhabitants of Leyden
must run, even though relief might soon be brought to them.  He, almost
against his intentions, spoke a few words to Jaqueline, the meaning of
which she could not fail to understand.

"It may be weeks--months--before we meet again, but my feelings, when I
have learned once to esteem, are not given to change," she said.  The
young captain had reason to be content with the look which accompanied
her words, even more than with the words themselves.  The two lads soon
returned with the cages, which were so small that two pigeons could only
be pressed into each.

"They will be hurt, poor things," cried Jaqueline.

"Oh, no, no," said Albert, "they will support each other, and travel far
more comfortably than if they had more space, and were allowed to tumble
about."

As the captain had to start the following morning, Arthur and Berthold
undertook to carry the birds to his lodgings that evening.

Captain Van der Elst, accompanied by Hans Bosch, for whom a horse had
been provided, and who carried the two cages, set off at an early hour
the following morning.  Secretly as his departure had been arranged, it
was discovered by Baron Van Arenberg, who had that morning risen at an
earlier hour than usual and gone out to the ramparts.  The baron
recognised him, and muttered, as he observed him leaving the gate, "It
will be many a long day before he is again within the walls of Leyden,
for ere long the Spaniards, if I mistake not, will be in possession of
them."

In the evening the burgomaster, accompanied by his daughter and nephew
and Albert, had ascended to the top of the Tower of Hengist, when
Albert, whose eyes were of the sharpest, exclaimed, pointing over the
city to the eastward, "See, see, there come a large body of men; they
must be either the troops the Prince has promised to send to our
assistance, or the Spaniards."

The rest of the party gazed in the same direction.  "They form the
advance guard of our foes," said the burgomaster.  "Albert and Berthold,
hasten and give the information to the commandant; he will take good
care that the walls are forthwith manned, though the Spaniards, after a
day's march, will be in no mood to make an attack when they know full
well that we shall give them as warm a reception as did our friends at
Alkmaar."

In a few minutes the bells of all the churches were ringing forth the
well-known call to arms, and the citizens, with their weapons in hand,
were seen hurrying to man the forts and ramparts.  The burgomaster, with
Jaqueline, remained some time longer on the top of the tower that he
might judge what positions the Spanish general was likely to take.  The
head of the leading column advanced till it reached a spot just beyond
range of the guns in the batteries, then it halted to wait for the
arrival of other troops; these quickly followed, the whole force
numbering not less than eight thousand men, Walloons and Germans.  Some
immediately took possession of Leyderdorp, and of the other forts which
ought to have been destroyed, while others, armed with pickaxes and
spades, without a moment's loss of time began throwing up fresh lines
and forts, a third party being employed in pitching the tents and
forming a camp just beyond them.  All night long a vigilant watch was
kept, as it was very possible that the Spaniards might attempt to
surprise the city in the hopes of capturing it at once, and saving
themselves from the annoyance and sufferings of a protracted siege.
Young Albert and Berthold together went the rounds to see that the
sentries were at their posts and wide awake, and that no post was left
without a sufficient guard.  No experienced officers could have been
more on the alert.  More than once they met the commandant, who,
entrusting nothing of importance to others, was himself going the
rounds.

He gave the lads some words of approval.  "While the young ones show
such zeal I feel confident that we shall keep the foe in check till they
are compelled ignominiously to retreat," he observed.

For several days the citizens beheld the foreign troops gathering round
them, bringing their batteries closer to the walls, till Leyden was
invested by no less than sixty-two redoubts, while fresh troops were
seen coming in to swell the ranks of the besiegers.  The city was now
placed on a strict allowance of food, all the provisions having been
purchased by the authorities, with an allowance of half a pound of meat,
half a pound of bread allotted to each full-grown man, and to the rest
in due proportion.  At length the soldiers, and even some of the
burghers began to murmur at their own inactivity; to give them
confidence the commandant allowed a sortie to be made, promising a
reward to each man who brought in the head of a Spaniard.  The men of
Leyden waited till nightfall, having previously carefully surveyed the
point it was proposed to attack.  All was still in the city, the
Spaniards might have supposed that the besieged were sleeping, when
suddenly the gate at which the sortie was to be made was thrown open,
three hundred men eager for the fray noiselessly rushed out, not a word
was spoken, not a shout raised till they were upon their foe.  The
Spaniards, the work of the day over, had piled their arms, and had
scarcely time to fall into their ranks before their enemies were upon
them; though a score or more fell yet they were too well disciplined to
remain long in a state of confusion, and the officer leading the sortie
deemed it prudent to call back his men.  They returned without the loss
of one of their number, bringing back at least a dozen Spanish heads,
such was the savage commencement of the struggle.  Night after night
similar enterprises were undertaken, not always with the same result,
though the Hollanders were invariably successful, so silently and well
executed were all their sorties, but several brave men fell, and the
commandant, from fear of losing too many of his troops, deemed it
necessary to prohibit any from leaving the gates without his express
order.



CHAPTER SIX.

The inhabitants of Leyden were already fearfully hard pressed for food.
Their bread was entirely consumed; they had but a small supply of malt
cake, with a few cows--kept as long as possible for their milk--besides
these an equal number of horses and sheep; but every day these
provisions were becoming more and more scanty, and unless they could
speedily be relieved, starvation threatened them.  The burgomaster and
Council were assembled when a letter which had been sent in from Valdez,
with a flag of truce, was received.  The burgomaster read it aloud.  It
offered an amnesty to all Hollanders, except a few mentioned by name,
provided they would return to their allegiance; it promised forgiveness,
fortified by a Papal Bull which had been issued by Gregory the
Thirteenth to those Netherland sinners who duly repented and sought
absolution for their sins, even though they sinned more than seven times
seven.  Besides this public letter were received epistles despatched by
the "Glippers" from the camp to their rebellious acquaintances in the
city, exhorting them to submission, and imploring them to take pity upon
their poor old fathers, their daughters, and their wives.

"What say you, my friends?" exclaimed the burgomaster, who read these
letters aloud.  "The Spanish general offers us free pardon for defending
our hearths and homes as we have hitherto done, and by God's grace we
will continue to do.  The same plausible offers Don Frederic made to the
citizens of Haarlem.  And what happened?  The slaughter which overtook
old and young alike, their city plundered, their homes ruined, can
testify as to the value of such offers.  Shall we share their fate, or
shall we hold out like men until the relief, which assuredly will come,
arrives, although we have only malt cake to live upon, and but little of
that, and a few cows, horses, goats, and dogs; and as to the remark of
these `Glippers,' the best pity we can show our poor old fathers,
daughters, and wives is to keep them from the clutches of the Spanish
soldiery."

"We will fight to the last!  We will fight to the last!" was the
unanimous response taken up by all the citizens in the streets.  It was
agreed that no answer should be sent to the Spanish general; indeed some
proposed hanging the herald, who was glad to make his escape with a
single line in Latin, on a sheet of paper, handed to him--

"When the trapper seeks to lure his bird, he softly plays his pipe."

Good care was taken that the herald should see nothing going on within
the walls, or be able to report a word about the haggard countenances of
the defenders.  From their frowning looks and taunting expressions he
was probably glad to escape with his life.  Meantime the condition of
the inhabitants became worse and worse.

Jaqueline, with other maidens and matrons of rank, had formed themselves
into a band to carry such relief as they could obtain for the sufferers.
Day after day they nobly prosecuted their self-imposed duties, and many
by their means were aided who might otherwise have perished.  Returning
one evening to her tower to attend her remaining pigeons, which as yet
she had not allowed to be killed in the hopes that they might serve some
useful purpose, after feeding them as was her wont, she was seated at
the window, inhaling the pure air which the lower part of the city had
failed to afford, when she observed a white spot in the sky glittering
in the rays of the setting sun.  Nearer and nearer it came till she
perceived that it was a bird.  It soon flew in at the window and
alighted in her arms.  It was one of her own pigeons; beneath its wing
she discovered, securely fastened by a silken thread, a small folded
paper.  Quickly untieing and releasing her bird, which she placed with
its companions, she hurried down with the document to her father.  It
was, as she hoped, from Captain Van der Elst, written by the directions
of the Prince.  He assured the citizens that he was already preparing
the promised aid, and that he hoped all difficulties would soon be
overcome.  He again reminded the garrison of Leyden that the fate of
their country depended on their holding out.  The captain did not say,
what was really the case, that the Prince himself was lying ill of a
fever at Rotterdam, and that unforeseen delays had occurred.  As may be
supposed he added a few words of his own to be read only by Jaqueline,
who would, he trusted, receive the epistle.  The burgomaster lost no
time in communicating the contents of the letter to the brave
commandant.  The despatch served to revive the drooping spirits of the
garrison; still there was a further delay.  Again the Spaniards attacked
the walls and were once more repulsed, but the numbers of the garrison
were slowly though surely decreasing, yet neither the burgomaster nor
John Van der Does entertained a thought of submission.  As only one of
the pigeons had returned, Jaqueline hoped that another might soon appear
bringing more certain news of relief.  She paid, as may be supposed,
frequent visits to her tower, gazing in the direction when she hoped her
winged messenger would appear.  Her numerous duties compelled her
frequently to be absent, but each time she returned home she hurried
there, as often to be disappointed.  She had risen one morning rather
later than usual from her couch, when going to the tower she perceived
that the number of her pigeons was increased, quickly searching out the
new arrival she discovered, as she had expected, a letter below its
wing, it was longer than the previous one.  As the burgomaster, to whom
she carried it, read the news it contained his eyes brightened.  It was
from the Prince himself; it said that the sluices at Rotterdam and
Schiedam had been opened, that the dykes were all pierced, that the
water was rising upon the Land-Scheiding, the great outer barrier which
separated the city from the sea; that he had a fleet of two-hundred
vessels in readiness stored with provisions, under the command of
Admiral Boisot, and that as soon as there was sufficient depth of water,
the fleet would fight its way to the walls of Leyden and bring the
citizens relief.

"This is indeed joyous news!" exclaimed the burgomaster.  He at once
directed Berthold to summon the city musicians to meet him, with their
instruments, in the market-place, to which, accompanied by Jaqueline, he
immediately repaired.  He knew that many of the chief citizens would
soon collect there.  Taking the letter, he read it publicly, when the
bands of music striking up, marched through the streets playing lively
melodies and martial airs.  The bells rang out merry tunes, and salvos
of cannon were fired not at the foe but at brief intervals, to give
indubitable signs that the city was rejoicing.

"These scenes will astonish our enemies, who will at first be unable to
comprehend their import, but I've an idea they will soon find out, and
may deem it wise to decamp," exclaimed Berthold.  Albert proposed making
a sortie to attack the Spaniards before they had recovered from their
astonishment at hearing the joyful sounds from the city, and seeing the
waters flowing over the land.

"No! no!" answered the commandant.  "Many valuable lives might be
sacrificed, and the ocean will ere long fight for us far more
effectually than our swords."

The burgomaster, generally accompanied by Jaqueline, paid frequent
visits to Hengist Tower.

Already from its summit the waters could be seen covering spaces which
had hitherto been dry land, the canals having in many places risen ten
inches and were overflowing their banks, though the great dyke five
miles off still prevented the flood from reaching the Spanish camp.  The
had one evening gone there with Berthold and Albert, who were especially
eager in watching the rise of the flood.  Already in the far distance
the rays of the sun glittered on the rising waters, where hitherto only
green fields and orchards had been seen, but between that shining
expanse and the city lay about five miles off the Land-Scheiding, a
strong dyke which had been spoken of, and within it were also several
circumvallations thrown up to defend the city from the encroachments of
the ocean.  These all had to be passed before the fleet could reach the
walls.  Though there were canals navigable at all times by vessels of
small burden, the Land-Scheiding was still a foot and a half above the
water, forming an impassable barrier, besides which in the intermediate
space were numerous villages held by the king's troops.  While the two
lads were standing somewhat apart from the burgomaster and Jaqueline
they observed a person approaching the tower.  "It is that fellow Van
Arenberg," whispered Albert.  "I wonder he has ventured to remain so
long in the city, he might all this time have been with the Spaniards,
whom he is so constantly praising and advising the people to confide in.
When the fighting is going on he is never to be seen on the ramparts,
and though he receives his rations I suspect that it is only a
make-believe, and that he has a secret store of provisions in his own
house."

"It would not do to say that to the burgomaster," observed Berthold.
"He still believes him to be honest, though wanting in spirit, and
would, I suspect, even now let Jaqueline marry him if he were to press
his suit and she were to consent."

"That is not very likely to happen," said Albert.  "She would be more
ready to marry Captain Van der Elst."

"I do not know," answered Berthold.  "During our journey he never, that
I recollect, once spoke to me about her; but here comes the baron, we
had better keep out of his way, for if I meet him I shall be inclined to
say something he won't like."

The baron, who certainly seemed to have suffered less than most of the
inhabitants of Leyden from scanty food and constant watching, now
reaching the top of the tower approached the burgomaster and Jaqueline.
Having in his usual courteous and polished manner paid his respects to
the Lily and her father, he pointed southward.

"You are looking out there, I conclude, for the appearance of admiral
Boisot and his Sea Beggars, but I fear that we shall look in vain; his
flotilla may reach the Land-Scheiding, but beyond that no mortal power
can enable his ships to advance; even should they pierce it, as the
Prince expects, it is impossible that they can pass all those other
barriers with the victorious troops of Valdez opposing them and
garrisoning every village and fort."

"God can make a way if man cannot," answered the burgomaster.

"But He may not think fit to make one for those daring outlaws to reach
Leyden," said the baron.  "Would that I could hope that relief was
likely to come, but I have long despaired, as you know, of obtaining it,
and I have sought you, Burgomaster, to entreat you that even should you
consider it your duty to remain you will allow me to escort your fair
daughter to some place where she may escape the unspeakable miseries
which are gathering round the inhabitants of this unhappy city.  I can,
through some influential friends, obtain a safe pass from Valdez, and
can also through their means arrange for her secret departure from the
city, so that whatever happens she will at all events be preserved."

"Even should she wish it, my duty to my fellow-citizens will prevent me
from permitting her to go," answered the burgomaster.  "Her departure
would tend to dishearten those who have already sufficient to try them;
but you may ask her."

Jaqueline had, while the baron was speaking to her father, withdrawn
from his side, and was about to join her cousin and Albert when the
young noble approached her.  In carefully measured words he spoke of his
love and devotion, and offering his hand and heart, entreated her at
once to become his wife that he might be able to rescue her from the
dangers by which she was surrounded.

"I have your father's permission," he added, "and whatever opinion he
may consider it his duty to express publicly I cannot but believe that
his mind will be greatly relieved when he knows that you are beyond the
reach of harm."

"It may be that you have my father's permission to speak to me," she
answered, "but he would never counsel me to play a dastard's part and
dishearten my fellow-citizens, whom I am bound to encourage.
Understand, Ernst Van Arenberg, sooner would I remain among those who
are stricken down every day by famine and pestilence, and share their
fate, if God so wills it, than wed one who traitorously counsels
submission to the foe."

As she spoke she fixed her clear blue eyes on him with a look the
meaning of which he could not misinterpret, for it showed the scorn his
proposal had inspired.  He might have seen that his cause was hopeless,
yet he could not even now abandon her, and was again about to speak when
Berthold and Albert came up with an independent air, the former
exclaiming--

"Look out there, Jaqueline!  Look out, your eyes are keen enough to see
the sun shining on some score of white sails far away to the southward;
they form, I doubt not, the vanguard of a relieving fleet, and before
long the Spaniards, the `Glippers,' and their friends will be scampering
off to escape being overwhelmed by the rising tide."

"It is high time for you, Baron, to go and give the Spaniards warning if
you wish to serve them a good turn," said Albert.

The baron frowned at the lad, who looked so unconscious of having said
anything disagreeable that he did not venture to reply.  At length the
burgomaster, addressing Jaqueline, proposed to return home, and desired
his nephew and Albert to follow him, but a word from Jaqueline prevented
him from inviting the baron, as he might otherwise have done, to his
house.  Van Arenberg descended the steps close behind them, but
receiving no intimation that he might accompany them from Jaqueline or
her father, he was compelled to lift his beaver, which he did with a
somewhat haughty air, and without taking the slightest notice of the
lads, walked away in an opposite direction.  The burgomaster, who had
overheard some of the boy's remarks, chided them for speaking so rudely
to the baron.

"Though the opinion you have formed of him is, I fear, right, it becomes
you not thus to address a person so much your senior in age as well as
in rank," he said.

Jaqueline, however, interfered, and told her father that she was
thankful to them for coming so opportunely to her assistance, and
preventing her from uttering expressions which the baron might have
deemed far more severe than anything her cousin and Albert could say.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

Jaqueline had welcomed a third of her white-winged birds to her tower.
The pigeon bore a letter dictated by Admiral Boisot, though she
recognised the handwriting of Captain Van der Elst.  It stated that the
fleet led by an enormous vessel, the "Ark of Delft," with shot-proof
bulwarks, and moved by paddle-wheels turned by a crank, had reached the
Land-Scheiding, and that he hoped, ere long, the large dyke would be
broken through and that the way would be opened to the very walls of the
city.  The Prince also sent a message urging the citizens yet longer to
hold out, reminding them that with Leyden all Holland must also perish.
This letter for a time greatly encouraged the suffering garrison; those
who understood the nature of the undertaking were aware that much
depended on the direction of the wind.  An easterly gale was calculated
to blow back the waters and prevent their rising, while one from the
south or west would force them on towards the city.  The wind was now
blowing from the cast and the tides were at their lowest, so that the
waters were making but slow progress.  Still the loyal-hearted among the
population, trusting to their Prince's promises, were assured that if it
was in the power of human help they would in time be relieved.  The
"Glippers," however, who professed to know the country well, ridiculed
the desperate project.  Those in the town taunted their fellow-citizens,
frequently crying out, "Go up to the tower and tell us if you can see
the ocean coming over the dry land to our relief."  Day after day they
did go up, hoping, praying, fearing, and at last almost despairing of
relief from God or man.  Letters were also daily received from those
with Valdez urging the inhabitants to spare themselves further
suffering.  Young Albert and Berthold had made themselves especially
useful by going round the ramparts, not once or twice a day, but many
times during the day and night, at all hours, so that they might not
only see that the sentinels were keeping a vigilant watch, but that they
might be able to discover treachery should any have been attempted.
They had one evening gone to the top of Hengist's Tower, a spot they
were especially fond of visiting at all hours of the day and night, when
they saw the hitherto dark sky to the southward suddenly illumined by
bright flashes of light following one another in rapid succession.

"Hark, I can hear the roar of guns," exclaimed Berthold.  They listened,
there was no doubt about it.  The flashes continued, now fires blazed up
in various directions.  There was more firing, not always in the same
place, the tide of battle was evidently moving on.  The lads were at
length joined by several citizens.

"The Sea Beggars are coming!" shouted Albert, unwittingly, "they are
fighting their way towards us."

"We must not be too sanguine," observed one of the citizens.  "There may
be fighting taking place, but we cannot tell who is gaining the victory.
It may be that the Spaniards are driving back our friends."

"I am very sure that they are not," cried Albert.  "Admiral Boisot and
his gallant followers are victorious--of that I am certain."

"Count Louis and his whole army were cut to pieces not long ago,"
remarked this citizen, in a melancholy tone.  The mystery was not solved
that night, and the whole of the next day went by without any
information having been received of what had taken place.

The following night the two lads were passing along the top of the wall
in the neighbourhood of the Cowgate, looking southward, when they caught
sight of the figure of a person close below them who had suddenly come
into view.

"Send me down a rope and be quick about it, or I may be caught by the
Spaniards, for they are close upon me," he exclaimed.

"They will scarcely venture within range of our guns," said Berthold.
"But we will haul you up as soon as we can get a rope."

"I know where to find one not far off," said Albert, and he hurried
away, while Berthold summoned two or three of the guard to the
assistance of the stranger.  Albert quickly returned with a rope of
sufficient length and strength.  Scarcely was it lowered when the
stranger hauled himself up with the agility of a monkey.

"Don't you remember me?" he said, looking at Berthold.  "I am Hans
Bosch, you know that you can trust me; I have accompanied Captain Van
der Elst, and he will be up here before long.  I have led the Spanish
guard a pretty dance to draw off their attention, that he might the more
easily pass by them.  I don't think they are likely to have caught him,
though if he does not appear soon I must go back again.  I know part of
his message, which I may give if he does not appear, but I hope that he
will deliver it himself."

This news so greatly excited Berthold and Albert that they were much
inclined to set out with Hans to look for their friend, but he advised
them to do nothing of the sort.

"They might as well try to catch a Will-o'-the-Wisp as me," he said,
"but they would trap you in a moment.  No, no; if I go, I go alone."

At length, to their great joy, another figure was seen.

"Quick! quick!  That's him!" exclaimed Hans.  "That's the captain.
Quick! quick!  The chances are he has a dozen Spaniards at his heels!"

The rope was lowered, and the captain was quickly hauled up to to the
top of the wall.  He shook Albert and Berthold warmly by the hand.

"I must lose no time," he said, "in reporting to the burgomaster and
commandant the steps the Prince has taken for the relief of the city.
You are undoubtedly eager to hear, but I must reserve my report for your
ciders."

The two lads hastened on with their friend, and fortunately found the
burgomaster in consultation with the commandant.  The boys stood eagerly
listening while the captain delivered his message.

"You heard that the admiral had received directions from the Prince to
take possession of the Land-Scheiding.  This was done two nights ago.
But a few Spaniards were found stationed on the dyke, and they were
quickly driven off when we fortified ourselves upon it.  In the morning
the enemy endeavoured to recover the lost ground, and attacked us in
considerable force, but we drove them back, they leaving hundreds of
dead on the field.  No time was lost in breaking through the dyke in
several places.  The water rushing on, the fleet sailed through the
gaps; but, to our disappointment, we found another dyke, that of the
Greenway, three quarters of a mile further on, rising at least a foot
above the waters.  This had also been left ill-protected, and our
admiral promptly attacking it, took possession, and levelling it in many
places, brought the flotilla over its ruins.  Soon afterwards, however,
the further progress of the fleet was arrested by the shallowness of the
water; but our admiral, knowing the anxiety you must be feeling,
dispatched me to inform you of this, and to assure you that he waits but
the rising of the tide and a favourable wind to bring you succour."

The news was thus far satisfactory, and the captain was warmly thanked
for bringing it, but that he received his reward when at the
burgomaster's invitation he accompanied him home, there could be little
doubt.

The wind, however, still blew from the east, and the inhabitants well
knew that as long as it came from that quarter they must look in vain
for the wished-for ocean to reach their walls.

Day after day the siege continued; the inhabitants were suffering not
only from famine, but from pestilence, produced by the scantiness of
their food.  Hapless infants were starved to death, mothers dropped dead
in the streets with their dead children in their arms, and in many a
house the watchmen in their rounds found whole families of corpses,
father, mother, and children, lying side by side, struck down by
pestilence.  Bread, malt cake, and horse-flesh had entirely disappeared.
A small number of cows had been kept as long as possible for their
milk, but a few of these were killed from day to day, and distributed in
minute proportions, scarcely, however, sufficient to support life among
the famishing population, while their hides chopped and boiled were
greedily devoured.  Green leaves were stripped from the trees, every
living herb was converted into human food; dogs and rats were caught and
eaten.  Still, although papers offering a free pardon were sent into the
city, the inhabitants spurned them, and refused to listen to treacherous
promises of the foe.

The commandant was anxious to send a trusty messenger to the Prince, and
while pointing out the urgent necessity for relief, promising to resist
to the last.

"Will you return, Captain Van der Elst?" he asked of Karl, who was in
attendance on him.  "I dare not order any man on so desperate an
undertaking, for the Spaniards keep a vigilant watch, and will have no
mercy on any one whom they capture."

"If it were to certain death, I would go," answered Karl.  "And I place
my services at your disposal.  At the same time the danger is not so
great as you suppose.  Several of the forts in the lower ground have
been flooded, and the trenches filled with water, so that the Spaniards
have been compelled to evacuate them, and thus to those who are
acquainted with their position the way is far more open than it has been
heretofore, while numerous sentries at the outposts have been
withdrawn."

"To-night be prepared to set out; a skiff shall be in readiness having
served at sea, you know well how to manage her," answered the
commandant.

Karl took his leave, and repaired to the house of the burgomaster to
receive any message he might desire to send.  He might have had another
motive.  He found the chief magistrate and his daughter seated alone.
Though suffering from the severe privation she had undergone in common
with the rest of the population, if possible the Lily looked more lovely
than ever.  She smiled as the young soldier entered, but her lip
trembled on hearing of the duty he had undertaken, yet not a word did
she utter to dissuade him from it.

"My prayers will be offered that Heaven protect you," she murmured, in a
low voice as he approached her, while the burgomaster was writing some
brief notes.

"I trust that I may return, perhaps ere many hours are over, on board
the fleet to bring you succour," he answered.  "You will know of our
approach, for our guns will thunder against the fortresses of the enemy
when the waters rise sufficiently to enable us to advance."

"The wind still blows from the cast and keeps back the fleet," she
observed.

"But the wind may ere long change, and depend upon it our brave admiral
and his `Sea Beggars' will not linger the moment there is sufficient
water to float their ships," said Karl, in an encouraging tone.  When
her eyes were lifted towards his countenance, their expression was very
different to that with which she had regarded the baron.  With natural
reluctance Karl, having received his dispatches, at length rose to take
leave and prepare for his enterprise.  As there were traitors within the
gates he kept all his arrangements secret.  They were known only to his
two young friends and Hans Bosch, who undertook to accompany him.  Not
till late on the following day was it even known that he had set out
when the burgomaster announced that he had despatched another messenger
to entreat their friends to hasten to their relief.  Desperate as had
been the state of matters in the besieged city, they hourly became
worse.  Leyden, indeed, appeared to be at its last gasp.  The noble
burgomaster maintained his heroic bearing, ever moving about to
encourage the wavering and to revive the drooping spirits of the loyal;
but a trial greater than any he had yet had to endure was in store for
him.

Jaqueline had from the first employed herself in going among the sick
and suffering, and carrying such relief as she was able to afford, and
consoling the afflicted ones from that Book in which true comfort alone
can be found.  In these active duties she found her chief solace.  Not
only was she enduring physical suffering! but no certain tidings had
been received of Captain Van der Elst, and reports were current that he
had been captured by the Spaniards, it being well known that if such was
the case a cruel death must have been his fate.  One evening the Lily
was returning to her home from one of her expeditions of mercy, attended
by Margaret, an old and faithful servant, who was her constant
companion.  As darkness was already overspreading the city, she hurried
on, unwilling to be out so late at night, when she was accosted by a
poor woman, who, with a piteous tale, too likely to be true, entreated
that she would visit her perishing family.  Without hesitation she
desired Margaret to return home and obtain such scanty provisions as
remained, while she accompanied the suppliant.  Margaret, having
collected a small amount of food, hurried back to rejoin her mistress at
the address given by the woman who had spoken to her, but no living
beings were in the house; three corpses alone lay on the floor.
Margaret, without a moment's loss of time, went to all the neighbouring
houses, inquiring for the Vrouw Jaqueline, but no one had seen her.
Almost frantic she hurried through the streets of the city, but her
search was fruitless.  At last she went back with the overwhelming
intelligence, which she entreated Berthold to break to his uncle.  The
burgomaster, who had hitherto held out so bravely, for a moment seemed
stunned, but quickly recovering himself he directed Berthold to send all
the servants of the house to him, but no one was able to afford the
slightest information to account for Jaqueline's disappearance.

"I would lay my life that the Baron Van Arenberg has had something to do
with it," exclaimed Berthold.  "If you will let me I will get Albert and
we will go to his house.  We shall soon judge by the way he receives the
intelligence whether he knows anything about the matter."  Berthold
received the leave he requested, while the burgomaster himself forthwith
sent a band of watchmen round in all directions through the town in
search of Jaqueline, while he called at numerous houses and visited all
the friends on whom he could rely to obtain their assistance in the
search.  The first to make their appearance at his house were Albert and
Berthold.

"We were right," they exclaimed.  "The baron's servants know nothing of
him; he left home at an early hour this afternoon, and has not since
returned.  Most of his domestics, who were `Glippers,' have long ago
made their escape.  The watchmen in the course of the night came in with
equally unsatisfactory reports--not a trace of the Vrouw Jaqueline had
been discovered."

"May God protect my child," exclaimed the burgomaster, bowing his head.
"She is beyond human aid."

No one would have believed from his appearance the next morning, when he
left his home to attend to his magisterial duties, that a deep domestic
sorrow had overtaken him.  He started as he quitted his door, for there,
on the very threshold, lay a dead body, thus placed as if to reproach
him for his stern determination in holding out.

"We shall all soon be like him who lies there," cried many voices.

"It were better to have yielded than have been compelled to endure such
suffering," shouted others.

Unheeding them, the burgomaster proceeded to a triangular space in the
centre of the town, into which many of the principal streets opened, and
in which stood the church of Saint Pancras, two ancient lime trees
growing on either side of the entrance now stripped bare of leaves by
the famishing people.  Ascending the steps, Adrian Van der Werf stopped
while he regarded the numberless angry faces turned towards him.  For a
moment he stood there, his figure tall and imposing, his visage dark and
haggard, his eye yet tranquil and commanding, and then waving his
broad-brimmed hat for silence, he exclaimed, "What would you, my
friends?  Why do you murmur that we do not break our vows and surrender
our city to the Spaniards, a fate more horrible than the agony which she
now endures?  I tell you I have made a vow to hold the city, and may God
give me strength to keep it.  I can die but once, whether by your hands,
by the enemy's, or by the hand of God.  My own fate is indifferent to
me, not so that of the city entrusted to our care.  I know that we shall
soon starve, but starvation is preferable to the dishonoured death which
is the only alternative.  Your menaces move me not.  My life is at your
disposal.  Here is my sword, plunge it into my breast and divide my
flesh among you, take my body to appease your hunger, but expect no
surrender as long as I remain alive."

The words of the brave burgomaster inspired a new courage in the hearts
of those who heard him.  Shouts of applause and defiance rose from the
famishing, but enthusiastic crowd, they hurried to the ramparts to hurl
renewed defiance at the enemy.

"Ye call us rat-eaters and dog-eaters," they cried; "so long as ye hear
a dog bark or a cat mew within the walls ye may know that the city holds
out; when the last hour has come, we will with our own hands set fire to
the houses and perish in the flames rather than suffer our homes to be
polluted and our liberties to be crushed."



CHAPTER EIGHT.

Truly it has been said that Leyden was sublime in its despair.  Day
after day went by and yet no relief came, but the wind, which had long
blown steadily from the cast, suddenly changed to the westward.  At
length Albert and Berthold, who had regularly visited Jaqueline's tower,
discovered the fourth pigeon.  They eagerly examined its wing, beneath
it was a letter which came from the admiral.  The fleet had reached
North Aa, and in a few days at furthest he expected to reach the gates
of the city.  The burgomaster read the letter as before in the
market-place, and the bells rang out a joyous peal.  Once more, however,
the wind shifted, and the hopes of the garrison of Leyden sank to the
lowest ebb.

We must now return to the evening when Jaqueline, having sent her
attendant Margaret to obtain provisions for the suffering family,
accompanied the woman who had supplicated her.  Suddenly, as she was
passing close to a canal, she found herself lifted from her feet, while
a thick cloak was thrown over her.  In vain she attempted to shriek for
help, in another instant she heard the splash of oars.

"Do not fear, you are in the safe keeping of one who desires to save you
from horrible suffering and death," whispered a voice in her ear.
Notwithstanding these assurances, Jaqueline entreated that she might be
placed on shore, and endeavoured by her cries to attract the attention
of any who might be passing.  Vain were her efforts, the thick folds of
the cloak prevented her voice being heard, while a heavy mist, together
with the shades of night, shrouded the canal as the boat glided forward.
Jaqueline knew that the canal extended out beneath the city walls, and
she hoped that the boat would be challenged as it passed under them and
be compelled to put to shore.  Keeping silent, she resolved to take the
opportunity of making another effort to escape from her captors; as the
spot was approached, however, she felt a hand pressed on her mouth.  In
vain she struggled to free herself, she heard the sign and counter-sign
given, and the boat impelled by four sturdy rowers soon left the city
walls behind.  Strange as it might seem, thinking more of the safety of
her townsmen than of herself, the idea occurred to her that if persons
could thus, undiscovered, leave the city, an armed force might be
introduced by the gates, and disastrous might be the consequences.  She
was, she had reason to fear, being carried to the Spanish camp, but who
could have been guilty of so treacherous an act?  She was not left long
in doubt, the person who had before addressed her in a subdued tone now
raised his voice, and she recognised it as that of Van Arenberg.  For
some time she could not sufficiently command herself to speak, at
length, however, she said in a calm tone, "I will not pretend to be
ignorant that it is you who have committed this unwarrantable act of
violence, and I insist that you carry me back to the city and restore me
to my father, his mental anxiety already so overwhelming, when he finds
that I am lost, may bring him to the grave."

"I have but acted, my beloved Jaqueline, as you would secretly wish, to
save you from that destruction which must, ere many days have passed,
descend on the city.  My object is to carry you to a place of safety,
all I ask being your hand and love."

"The former I will not give, the other I cannot bestow," answered
Jaqueline, firmly.  "Had I before been willing in obedience to my
father's wishes to try and love you, the outrage you have committed
would have changed my sentiments, and I again insist that you return
with me to the city."

"To do so is utterly impossible," answered Van Arenberg.  "The sentries,
as we passed beneath the fortress of Zoeterwoude, nearly detected the
boat, and we should certainly be captured were we to make the attempt.
We will now, therefore, proceed towards Delft, where you will be among
friends, and safe from the foes you dread."

Jaqueline greatly doubted that the baron spoke the truth.  Again and
again she insisted, notwithstanding all the risks they might run, that
they should return to the city.  She saw at length that all
expostulation was useless, the darkness of night prevented her from
observing the direction they were taking.  Suddenly the sound of heavy
guns broke on her ear, followed by the rattle of musketry.  Looking
southward she saw bright flashes glancing over the water in rapid
succession; she thought, too, that she could even hear the shouts of the
combatants, the clashing of swords and battle-axes.  It was evident that
a fierce fight was raging in that direction.  The rowers, who had
hitherto been exerting themselves to the utmost, paused, and exchanged a
few hurried words.  It appeared to her that they had lost their way, for
many new channels, deepened by the inflowing waters, branched off on
every hand.

Van Arenberg ordered them to row on.

"In what direction shall we go?" asked one of the men.  "We may chance
to run our noses into the lion's den.  See, fires are blazing on all
sides, and friends and foes are likely to treat us in the same fashion."
Van Arenberg, anxious for Jaqueline's safety, and perhaps for his own,
urged his crew to row away from the point where the engagement appeared
to be raging most furiously.  Already round shot and bullets came flying
across the water, and a stray one might chance to hit the boat.  The men
appeared undecided which way to go, when one of them cried out, "There's
a boat astern!  She may, perchance, be that of an enemy, and if so we
shall to a certainty be knocked on the head."

"Row then for your lives!" cried Van Arenberg, for he had equally to
fear the Hollanders and Spaniards; the latter, not aware of his
treachery, might, before he could show his pass, shoot him down or run
him through with their pikes, while his own countrymen would treat him
as a hated renegade.  The crew, needing no second bidding, bent to their
oars with all the strength they possessed.  Their flight was, however,
discovered by the boat they had seen, which immediately gave chase.
Jaqueline believed that their pursuers were Spaniards, and was as eager
to escape as the baron, but sturdily as the crew of the villagers whom
he had hired plied their oars, the others came on faster.  The night was
so dark that it was impossible to distinguish objects ahead.  At any
moment they might find themselves stranded on the shore, or stopped by
some impassable shallow.  The baron now urged the men to be cautious,
now to row with might and main.

Ever and anon the glare from the burning villages, and from fires on the
dykes, showed that the boat in chase was gaining on them.

"It were far better to stop and fight," cried the chief man of the crew.
"As to escaping, there is no chance of that in the end, for the fellows
astern have a much lighter boat than ours."

"Fifty guilders if you beat them off," cried the baron.  "Lady, you must
lie down at the bottom of the boat, or you may chance to be struck by a
shot, or injured by the pikes of our pursuers, should they overtake us."

"I fear less the weapons of our foes than I do your designs," answered
Jaqueline, with a tone of scorn, retaining her seat.  There was little
time to hold parley on the subject.  In another moment the boat was
alongside, and a voice in Dutch shouted, "Yield! inform us whither you
are bound."

"Treachery! treachery!" cried the baron.  "They are Spaniards; we may
yet escape them."

But Jaqueline recognised the voice.  "Karl," she exclaimed, "save me,
save me!" and she sprang towards the boat.

Van Arenberg would have prevented her reaching it, but his sword whirled
from his hand, the next instant he was driven overboard by a thrust from
a pike through his breast.  A despairing cry was heard, and before the
people could clutch his clothes he was swept away by the current.  In a
few words Jaqueline told of the outrage to which she had been subjected.
Captain Van der Elst accounted for the circumstance of his having so
providentially rescued her by saying that he had been sent to
reconnoitre the enemy's position, and supposing that the boat was manned
by Spaniards he had given chase.  She entreated that he would proceed in
his duty.

"No harm can come to me while I am by your side," she said, scarcely
thinking of the interpretation which might be put upon the words she
uttered.  He pressed her hand.  Having ordered the villagers' boat to
follow at a distance, warning them of the punishment they would receive
should they attempt to escape, he continued on till he had performed the
duty on which he had been despatched.  Morning was approaching when he
returned to the fleet, which had just broken through the second great
dyke and destroyed the villages of Zoetermeer and Benthuyzen, and now
borne on by the rising waters was advancing towards Leyden.  Karl
conveyed Jaqueline on board the admiral's ship, manned by a
savage-looking crew, the wild Beggars of the Sea.  Ferocious, however,
as they were to their foes, to her they were civil and courteous.  Eight
hundred of them, mostly Zealanders, manned the fleet.  The greater
number were scarred, hacked, and even maimed in the unceasing conflicts
in which their lives had been passed, while they were renowned far and
wide as much for their nautical skill as their ferocity.  Their
appearance was both eccentric and terrific; they wore crescents in their
caps with the inscription, "Rather Turkish than Popish."  They were
known never to give nor take quarter; they went to mortal combat only.
They had sworn to spare neither noble nor simple, neither King, Kaiser,
nor Pope, should they fall into their power.  Each ship carried ten
guns, and was propelled, the smaller by ten, the larger by eighteen
oars, the whole fleet having on board 2,500 veterans, experienced both
on land and water.  Jaqueline was conducted to the admiral's cabin; it
boasted neither of magnificence nor elegance; indeed, very little of
comfort, for the vessels had been fitted out for rough work, and no
ladies had been expected on board.  The stout old admiral welcomed his
guest.

"You may rest here in security, my pretty maiden," he said; "and I trust
ere many days are over to restore you to the arms of your brave father."

Not long afterwards the order was issued for the fleet once more to
advance, and Jaqueline's heart beat high with hope, for the second dyke
was attacked.  The Spaniards, scarcely stopping to encounter the enemy,
flung away their arms as they saw the dreaded sea rovers approaching.
The barrier was quickly broken, and again the fleet pushed forward over
the submerged country till it reached North Aa.  Scarcely, however, had
the ships arrived there than once more the easterly wind began to blow,
driving the waters away from the city.  Lower and lower they sank, until
the ships grounded, and further progress became impossible.  The delay
sorely tried the patience of the eager crews, and many leaping into the
water, attempted to lift their ships over the shallows, but their
strength was unequal to the task.  There they lay stranded, with
scarcely nine inches of water round them.  Jaqueline's anguish of mind
was increased from knowing too well the consequences of the delay to the
starving inhabitants of the beleaguered city.  Though confident of the
resolution of her father and the commandant, she was aware of the
direful effect which starvation had already produced among the
inhabitants.  Would they continue to hold out?  Ten thousand Spaniards
still surrounded the walls, and at any moment might break in, and
massacre and rapine would sweep over her native city.  Night and day she
prayed that the dreaded catastrophe might be averted, yet day after day
passed, and the fleet lay in sight of the walls, but too far distant for
their cannon to reach the enemy.  Even Admiral Boisot was in despair.
He despatched a letter to the Prince, stating his belief that if the
spring tides, soon to be expected, should not, together with the strong
south-westerly wind, come immediately to their relief, he should be
compelled to abandon the expedition.  Not many hours after the letter
had been despatched a large boat was seen rowing swiftly towards the
fleet from the southward.  She soon came alongside the admiral's ship.
A cry, "It is the Prince! our noble Prince," burst from the throats of
the sea rovers as they welcomed him on board, though they observed with
sorrow that his commanding figure was fearfully emaciated, his noble
face pale as death.  He had, indeed, only just risen from a bed of
sickness, and few knew how near to death's door he had been, his disease
aggravated by a report which had reached him that Leyden had fallen, yet
all the time he had been directing the plans for bringing the fleet
across the land.  His countenance assumed a cheerful aspect as he spoke
to the almost despairing admiral and his officers.

"I know the people of Leyden," he said, "they will hold out till you can
reach them.  Ere long the sea will rise.  Already the water is deeper
than when I came on board."

The Prince was right, he had observed clouds gathering in the
south-western horizon, and ere long a strong wind from that quarter
began to blow, the tide flowed in, the water swept over the dykes,
cheers rose from the throats of the seamen.  Once more their ships were
afloat, sails were spread, the oars run out, and now they went gliding
on led by the "Ark of Delft," until Zoetermeer was reached.  Here a
desperate effort was made by the Spaniards to stop their progress, but
that village and others in the neighbourhood were attacked, the enemy
driven out, and they were set on fire.  The blaze lighted up the
midnight sky, announcing to the fainting garrison that relief was
approaching.  Barrier after barrier was passed, and for many an hour in
the midst of the howling storm and pitchy darkness a fierce battle
raged.  The victorious Hollanders pushed further on, but still two forts
of great strength, those of Zoeterwoude and Lammen, lay between them and
the city, garrisoned by the enemy's best troops and armed with heavy
artillery.  They must be captured before the city could be gained.
Stout as were the rovers' hearts, their vessels, though large, were
slightly built, and, except the "Ark of Delft," were incapable of
standing the heavy shot which would be hurled against them.  The Spanish
vessels, hitherto kept in reserve, advanced to the fight, but were
quickly sunk, their crews miserably perishing, and ere a shot was fired
against Zoeterwoude the Spaniards were seen in full flight along the top
of the dyke leading towards the Hague.  The rovers followed, leaping
from their vessels and slaying all whom they could overtake, many of the
fugitives perishing in the fast advancing waves as the dykes crumbled
beneath their feet.  But yet another fort, that of Lammen, the strongest
of all, remained, held by the main body of the enemy.  The fleet
approached, but the admiral dared not expose his ships to the storms of
shot hurled towards them, and therefore waited for the return of night,
resolving either to make a desperate assault--though he almost despaired
of success--or, should the waters rise, to carry his ships round by a
circuitous way to the opposite side; but this as yet the depth of water
would not allow.

That day was one of the deepest anxiety, although the rain and wind
which came from the south-west were undoubtedly causing the waters to
rise.  As evening drew on the storm increased, the night became darker
and darker.  Loud crashes were heard, lights were seen flitting across
the black face of the waters proceeding from the direction of the fort,
but no one could account for the cause of these sounds and appearances.
At length a fearful report ran through the fleet that the enemy had
burst into the city, and thus that all the efforts they had made were in
vain.  Still the strange lights appeared and vanished in the darkness;
what they portended no one could say.  At dawn the admiral issued the
order to assault the fortress; the eager crews sprang into their boats
fully expecting a desperate encounter, but no shot saluted them, all was
silent within.  Had the Spaniards really then, at the last moment,
captured the city?  The fleet pushed on, though it was believed that
some fearful treachery was intended and that they might suddenly be
attacked by an overwhelming force.

As soon as the ships got near enough, Captain Van der Elst, who had
undertaken to lead the assault, plunging into the waters waded towards
the fort.  As he was striding on a voice from the summit hailed him and
he saw young Albert Van der Does who, having crossed from the city and
climbed to the top of the embankment, was waving his cap and loudly
cheering.  Karl soon joined him, and they were in time to see the
rearguard of the Spaniards escaping towards the Hague.  Albert's shouts
quickly attracted the attention of the inhabitants of Leyden and gave
them the first intimation that the enemy had fled.  In a few minutes,
led by Albert, Karl was in the presence of the burgomaster, and had
assured him both of the success of their enterprise and of his
daughter's safety.

"God be praised, for He has fought for us," exclaimed the burgomaster.
"Had not the Spaniards fled when they did, what earthly powers could
have prevented them from entering our city?"  And he pointed to a large
portion of the wall which had fallen during the night and left a breach
through which the foe might have poured into the streets.  The fleet now
sailed up through the canals, the famishing people who lined the quays
stretching out their hands to receive the food bestowed on them by the
rough Sea Beggars, many of whom dashed aside their tears as they beheld
the emaciated forms of the citizens, the corpse-like look of the women
and children, and heard their plaintive cries for food.  The first act
of the brave admiral and his crew was to repair to the great church,
accompanied by the commandant, the chief magistrate, and other citizens,
to return thanks for their success, then a hymn arose which was abruptly
terminated by the sounds of weeping though the tears were those of joy
and gratitude.  Among the first to land, escorted by the brave Captain
Van der Elst, who had returned on board for the purpose of conducting
her to the shore, was the Lily of Leyden; he had the happiness of
restoring her to her father's arms.  The burgomaster, who had hitherto
sternly refused to yield to the foe, melted into tears as he embraced
his daughter, then turning to Captain Van der Elst, he said--

"You have proved yourself worthy of the fairest in the land; I can no
longer refuse to bestow my daughter's hand on one who will, I am sure,
in these times of danger protect her with his life."

Thus was Leyden saved after enduring a siege of five months, having
experienced sufferings never surpassed by any recorded on the page of
history.  The Prince was the first to acknowledge the deep debt of
gratitude Holland owed to the heroic fortitude of the noble burgomaster
and his fellow-citizens.  The people of Holland and Zealand, to show how
much they were indebted to the citizens, established that university
which, thus founded at the darkest period of their country's struggle,
was in after times to become so celebrated.  Imposing as were the
ceremonies which took place on its establishment, the following winter
they were, in the opinion of many, surpassed by the magnificence of the
entertainment given on the occasion of the marriage of Captain Van der
Elst and the fair Lily of Leyden.

THE END.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LILY OF LEYDEN ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

