booksmiths at http://www.eBookForge.net









_True Occult Knowledge Gives You Practical Power and Strength_


THE HUMAN AURA
Astral Colors and Thought Forms


By
SWAMI PANCHADASI



Printed by
YOGA PUBLICATION SOCIETY

COPYRIGHT, 1940

COPYRIGHT
1912
YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY




CONTENTS


Chapter I. What Is the Human Aura                                      5

  The subtle, invisible emanation radiating from every individual.
  An ethereal radiation. The egg-shaped human nebula. Psychic
  atmosphere sensed by everyone, but seen by but few. The
  clairvoyant vision. The phosphorescent flame, and luminous cloud.
  The colors in the aura and what they mean. Effect of mental
  states, emotion and passion, upon its aura. The human aura is a
  very important and interesting phase of every personality. The
  finer forces, the most powerful.


Chapter II. The Prana Aura                                            15

  Prana, the Vital Force, Life Essence. How it affects the human
  aura. Health Aura. Physical Aura. Health Magnetism. Peculiar
  appearance of Prana Aura. How animals follow trails of Prana Aura
  particles. The tiny electric sparks, and vibratory movements. How
  one may perceive the vibrations of Prana Aura. Interesting
  experiments. Seeing Prana Aura by ordinary vision. Prana Aura and
  Magnetic Healing.


Chapter III. The Astral Colors                                        23

  Each mental or emotional state has its own astral hue, tint,
  shade or color. The Primary Colors, Red, Blue and Yellow. The
  Secondary Colors, Green, Orange and Purple. The combinations of
  Olive, Russet and Citrine. Black and White, and how formed. Key
  to the Astral Colors. Red the Physical Color; Blue, the
  Spiritual; Yellow, the Mental. White and Black the two poles of
  Spirituality. Rainbow astral colors. Whirlpools of flame. Flashes
  of astral light. A wonderful phenomena. Practice will enable
  almost everyone to perceive plainly the outlines of the Prana
  Aura.


Chapter IV. The Astral Colors (Continued)                             31

  Interpretations of the Astral Color Group. The Red Group. The
  varying reds of vitality and health; the shades of love; high and
  low; the crimson of sensuality; the scarlet plane of anger and
  passion. The Yellow Group of Orange, and the Pride of Intellect.
  The Golden Yellow of Intellectual Attainment. The haloes of the
  great teachers. The lemon hue of inferior intellect. The Green
  Group. The high and low greens. The green of love of nature. The
  green of Altruism. The green of sympathy. The dull green of
  insincerity and deceit. The ruddy green of Jealousy and malice.
  The Blue Group. The great souls of the spiritual and religious
  emotions. The Brown Group. The Gray Group. Black Group. White
  Group. The Great White light.


Chapter V. The Aura Kaleidoscope                                      39

  What the astral body is composed of. Also the etheric double. The
  ever changing clouds of aura coloring. Placid scenes and furious
  storms of the Aura. Opalescent effects. The pearly color of the
  etheric substance. The Aura of mental activity. The Aura of
  reverie or sleep. The Aura of anger and passion. The Aura of
  hate. The Aura of love. The Aura of churches, prisons, hospitals
  and places of vice. The Aura of character and of passing feeling.
  Astral atmospheres of buildings and places. Collective and
  composite auras. A key to some great and deep occult teachings,
  and esoteric mysteries. How the trained occultist is able to
  ascertain the character, and tendencies of a person.


Chapter VI. Thought Form                                              47

  What a Thought Form is and what it is made of. How Thought Forms
  are created. How Thought Forms travel. How Thought Forms affect
  persons. Why some Thought Forms are semi-living, elemental
  forces. Various forms and classes of Thought Forms. Full
  description of their character, appearance and effect. Thought
  Form whirls and swirls. Rotation Thought Forms. Thought Form
  whirlpools. Explosive Thought Forms. Thought Form bombs. Octopus
  Thought Form. How Thought Forms are projected and why they
  travel. A wonderful study of a fascinating subject.


Chapter VII. Psychic Influence of Color                               55

  Action and Re-action. Effect of Color on Mental States and
  Emotions. How certain tints affect persons favorably and
  unfavorably. The calming effect of restful greens. "Seeing Red."
  Gloomy Black. Depressing Grays. Angry Reds. Soothing Blues.
  Illuminating Yellows. The Psychology of Color. Healing Effect of
  Colors. The principles of Healing by Colors. Effect of color upon
  character and morals. Color in Child Life. Interesting and
  instructive information and teaching.


Chapter VIII. Auric Magnetism                                         63

  Human Magnetism. The Auric Reservoir of Magnetism. Magnetic
  Healing, how caused and why it occurs. Use of its hands. Flow of
  etheric force. New Methods of Magnetic Healing. Use of Auric
  Colors. Analysis and Full Explanation. Absent treatment by Auric
  Color Vibration. Tables of Auric Healing Colors, showing effect
  on Nervous System, Blood and Organs. Helpful suggestion in Auric
  Color Healing. How to Treat yourself and others by this method.
  Healing by the Great White Light.


Chapter IX. Developing the Aura                                       71

  How to build up a strong, positive Aura. How to flood the Aura
  with the right vibration. How to influence the color in the Aura.
  "Holding the Thought." Reflecting Color States. Principles of
  Occult Color Re-action. Self-analysis. Self-Treatment for
  Character and Qualities. Effect of visualizing colors. How to get
  the keynote of Color vibrations. The Key of Success.


Chapter X. The Protective Aura                                        79

  A forbidden subject plainly discussed. Need of Occult protection.
  How to change the Aura so that it will repel physical contagion
  and psychic attacks. How to Guard the body by Auric Colors. How
  to energize and illumine the mind, so as to protect against
  mental influences. The protective Golden Aura. How to protect
  your emotional nature from undesirable vibrations. The Great
  Auric Circle of Protection. The oldest occultist's instructions
  regarding building up of the protective Aura. How to fill the
  aura with vibrations of health and physical strength. How to
  protect yourself from the low passions and feelings of others.
  The Aura of great moral teachers. How those in ignorance of
  occult laws have been led from the moral path. The Auric Circle
  of Protection. The crumbs of teaching scattered through this
  book, other than those concerning the Aura. Those for whom these
  teachings are intended will recognize and appreciate them. A
  shelter for soul, mind and body against psychic influence. An
  infallible Armor against all force of attack. The Great White
  Light. Words from the Master.




CHAPTER I.

WHAT IS THE HUMAN AURA?


The above question is frequently asked the student of occultism by some
one who has heard the term but who is unfamiliar with its meaning.
Simple as the question may seem, it is by no means easy to answer it,
plainly and clearly in a few words, unless the hearer already has a
general acquaintance with the subject of occult science. Let us commence
at the beginning, and consider the question from the point of view of
the person who has just heard the term for the first time.

The dictionaries define the word aura as: "Any subtle, invisible
emanation or exhalation." The English authorities, as a rule, attribute
the origin of the word to a Latin term meaning "air," but the Hindu
authorities insist that it had its origin in the Sanscrit root _Ar_,
meaning the spoke of a wheel, the significance being perceived when we
remember the fact that the human aura radiates from the body of the
individual in a manner similar to the radiation of the spokes of a wheel
from the hub thereof. The Sanscrit origin of the term is the one
preferred by occultists, although it will be seen that the idea of an
aerial emanation, indicated by the Latin root, is not foreign to the
real significance of the term.

Be the real origin of the term what it may, the idea of the human aura
is one upon which all occultists are in full agreement and harmony, and
the mention of which is found in all works upon the general subject of
occultism. So we shall begin by a consideration of the main conception
thereof, as held by all advanced occultists, ancient and modern,
omitting little points of theoretical variance between the different
schools.

Briefly, then, the human aura may be described as a fine, ethereal
radiation or emanation surrounding each and every living human being. It
extends from two to three feet, in all directions, from the body. It
assumes an oval shape--a great egg-shaped nebula surrounding the body on
all sides for a distance of two or three feet. This aura is sometimes
referred to, in ordinary terms, as the "psychic atmosphere" of a person,
or as his "magnetic atmosphere."

This atmosphere or aura is apparent to a large percentage of persons in
the sense of the psychic awareness generally called "feeling," though
the term is not a clear one. The majority of persons are more or less
aware of that subtle something about the personality of others, which
can be sensed or felt in a clear though unusual way when the other
persons are near by, even though they may be out of the range of the
vision. Being outside of the ordinary range of the five senses, we are
apt to feel that there is something queer or uncanny about these
feelings of projected personality. But every person, deep in his heart,
knows them to be realities and admits their effect upon his impressions
regarding the persons from whom they emanate. Even small children,
infants even, perceive this influence, and respond to it in the matter
of likes and dislikes.

But, human testimony regarding the existence and character of the human
aura does not stop with the reports of the psychic senses to which we
have just referred. There are many individuals of the race--a far
greater percentage than is generally imagined--who have the gift of
psychic sight more or less developed. Many persons have quite a
well-developed power of this kind, who do not mention it to their
acquaintances for fear of ridicule, or of being thought "queer." In
addition to these persons, there are here and there to be found
well-developed, clear-sighted, or truly clairvoyant persons, whose
powers of psychic perception are as highly developed as are the ordinary
senses of the average individual. And, the reports of these persons, far
apart in time and space though they may be, have always agreed on the
main points of psychic phenomena, particularly in regards to the human
aura.

To the highly developed clairvoyant vision, every human being is seen as
surrounded by the egg-shaped aura of two or three feet in depth, more
dense and thick in the portion nearest the body, and then gradually
becoming more tenuous, thin and indistinct as the distance from the body
is increased. By the psychic perception, the aura is seen as a luminous
cloud--a phosphorescent flame--deep and dense around the centre and then
gradually shading into indistinctness toward the edges. As a matter of
fact, as all developed occultists know, the aura really extends very
much further than even the best clairvoyant vision can perceive it, and
its psychic influence is perceptible at quite a distance in many cases.
In this respect it is like any flame on the physical plane--it
gradually fades into indistinctness, its rays persisting far beyond the
reach of the vision, as may be proved by means of chemical apparatus,
etc.

To the highly developed clairvoyant vision, the human aura is seen to be
composed of all the colors of the spectrum, the combinations of colors
differing in various persons, and constantly shifting in the case of
every person. These colors reflect the mental (particularly the
emotional) states of the person in whose aura they are manifested. Each
mental state has its own particular combination formed from the few
elementary colors which represent the elementary mental conditions. As
the mind is ever shifting and changing its states, it follows that there
will ever be a corresponding series of shifting changes in the colors of
the human aura.

The shades and colors of the aura present an ever changing kaleidoscopic
spectacle, of wonderful beauty and most interesting character. The
trained occultist is able to read the character of any person, as well
as the nature of his passing thoughts and feelings, by simply studying
the shifting colors of his aura. To the developed occultist the mind and
character become as an open book, to be studied carefully and
intelligently.

Even the student of occultism, who has not been able to develop the
clairvoyant vision to such a high degree, is soon able to develop the
sense of psychic perception whereby he is able to at least "feel" the
vibrations of the aura, though he may not see the colors, and thus be
able to interpret the mental states which have caused them. The
principle is of course the same, as the colors are but the outward
appearance of the vibrations themselves, just as the ordinary colors on
the physical plane are merely the outward manifestation of vibration of
matter.

But it must not be supposed that the human aura is always perceived in
the appearance of a luminous cloud of ever-changing color. When we say
that such is its characteristic appearance, we mean it in the same sense
that we describe the ocean as a calm, deep body of greenish waters. We
know, however, that at times the ocean presents no such appearance, but,
instead, is seen as rising in great mountainous waves, white capped, and
threatening the tiny vessels of men with its power. Or again, we may
define the word "flame" in the sense of a steady bright stream of
burning gas, whereas, we know only too well, that the word also
indicates the great hot tongues of fiery force that stream out from the
windows of a burning building, and lick to destruction all with which it
comes in contact.

So it is with the human aura. At times it may be seen as a beautiful,
calm, luminous atmosphere, presenting the appearance of a great opal
under the rays of the sun. Again, it blazes like the flames of a great
furnace, shooting forth great tongues of fire in this direction and
that, rising and falling in great waves of emotional excitement, or
passion, or perhaps whirling like a great fiery maelstrom toward its
centre, or swirling in an outward movement away from its centre. Again
it may be seen as projecting from its depths smaller bodies or centres
of mental vibration, which like sparks from a furnace detach themselves
from the parent flame, and travel far away in other directions--these
are the projected thought-forms of which all occultists are fond of
speaking and which make plain many strange psychic occurrences.

So, it will be seen, the human aura is a very important and interesting
phase of the personality of every individual. The psychic phase of man
is as much the man himself as is the physical phase--the complete man
being made up of the two phases. Man invisible is as much the real man
as is man visible. As the finer forms of nature are always the most
powerful, so is the psychic man more potent than the physical man.

In this book, I speak of the human aura, and its colors, as being
perceived by astral or clairvoyant vision, for this is the way in which
it is perceived and studied by the occultist. The occult teaching is
that, in the evolution of the race, this astral vision will eventually
become the common property of every human being--it so exists even now,
and needs only development to perfect it.

But modern physical science is today offering corroborative proof
(though the same is not needed by the occultist who has the astral
vision) to the general public, of the existence of the human aura. In
Europe, especially, a number of scientists have written on the subject
of the aura, and have described the result of the experiments in which
the aura has been perceived, and even photographed, by means of
fluorescent screens, such as are used in taking X-Ray photographs, etc.
Leading authorities in England, France, and still more recently, in
Germany, have reported the discovery (!) of a nebulous, hazy,
radio-active energy or substance, around the body of human beings. In
short, they now claim that every human being is radio-active, and that
the auric radiation may be registered and perceived by means of a screen
composed of certain fluorescent material, interposed between the eye of
the observer, and the person observed.

This aura, so discovered (!) by the scientists, is called by them the
"human atmosphere," and is classified by them as similar to the
radiations of other radio-active substances, radium, for instance. They
have failed to discover color in this atmosphere, however, and know
nothing, apparently, of the relation between auric colors and mental and
emotional states, which are so familiar to every advanced occultist. I
mention this fact merely as a matter of general interest and information
to the student, and not as indicating, even in the slightest degree, any
idea on my part that the old occult teaching, and the observed phenomena
accompanying the same, regarding the human aura, require any proof or
backing up on the part of material scientists. On the contrary, I feel
that material science should feel flattered by the backing up by occult
science of the new discovery (!) of the "human atmosphere." A little
later on, material science may also discover (!) the auric colors, and
announce the same to the wondering world, as a new truth.




CHAPTER II.

THE PRANA-AURA.


Many writers on the subject of the human aura content themselves with a
description of the colors of the mental or emotional aura, and omit
almost any reference whatsoever to the basic substance or power of the
aura. This is like the play of Hamlet, with the character of Hamlet
omitted, for, unless we understand something concerning the fundamental
substance of which the aura is composed, we cannot expect to arrive at a
clear understanding of the phenomena which arises from and by reason of
the existence of this fundamental substance. We might as well expect a
student to understand the principles of color, without having been made
acquainted with the principles of light.

The fundamental substance of which the human aura is composed is none
other than that wonderful principle of nature of which one reads so much
in all occult writings, which has been called by many names, but which
is perhaps best known under the Sanscrit term, _Prana_, but which may
be thought of as Vital Essence, Life Power, etc.

It is not necessary in this book to go into the general consideration of
the nature and character of Prana. It is sufficient for us to consider
it in its manifestation of Vital Force, Life Essence, etc. In its
broadest sense, Prana really is the Principle of Energy in Nature, but
in its relation to living forms it is the Vital Force which lies at the
very basis of manifested Life. It exists in all forms of living things,
from the most minute microscopic form up to living creatures on higher
planes, as much higher than man as man is higher than the simple
microscopic life-forms. It permeates them all, and renders possible all
life activity and functioning.

Prana is not the mind or the soul, but is rather the force or energy
through which the soul manifests activity, and the mind manifests
thought. It is the steam that runs the physical and mental machinery of
life. It is the substance of the human aura, and the colors of mental
states are manifested in that substance, just as the colors of chemical
bodies are manifested in the substance of water. But Prana is not
material substance--it is higher than mere matter, being the underlying
substance of Energy or Force in Nature.

While it is true, as we have seen, that all auras are composed of the
substance of Prana, it is likewise true that there is a simple and
elementary form of auric substance to which occultists have given the
simple name of the prana-aura in order to distinguish it from the more
complex forms and phases of the human aura. The simplicity of the
character of the prana-aura causes it to be more readily sensed or
perceived than is possible in the case of the more complex phases or
forms of the aura. For whereas it is only the more sensitive organisms
that can distinguish the finer vibrations of the mental and emotional
aura, and only the clairvoyant sight which can discern its presence by
its colors, almost any person, by a little careful experimenting, may
become aware of the presence of the prana-aura, not only in the way of
"feeling" it, but in many cases of actually seeing it with the ordinary
vision rightly directed.

That which is known as the prana-aura is of course the most simple form
or phase of the human aura. It is the form or phase which is more
closely bound up with the physical body, and is less concerned with the
mental states. This fact has caused some writers to speak of it as the
"health aura," or "physical aura," both of which terms are fittingly
applied as we shall see, although we prefer the simpler term we have
used here, i. e., the prana-aura. For the prana-aura does show the state
of the health of the individual radiating it, and it also really
contains physical power and magnetism which may be, and is imparted to
others.

The basic prana-aura is practically colorless, that is to say, it is
about the color of the clearest water or a very clear diamond. By the
clairvoyant vision it is seen to be streaked or marked by very minute,
bristle-like lines, radiating outward from the physical body of the
individual, in a manner very like "the quills upon the fretful
porcupine," as Shakespeare puts it. In the case of excellent physical
health, these bristle-like streaks are stiff and brittle-looking,
whereas, if the general health of the person be deficient these
bristle-like radiations seem to be more or less tangled, twisted, or
curly; and, in some cases present a drooping appearance, and in extreme
cases present the appearance of soft, limp fur.

It may interest the student to know that minute particles of this
prana-aura, or vital magnetism, is sloughed off the body in connection
with physical exhalations such as scent, etc., and remain in existence
for some time after the person has passed from the particular place at
which they were cast off. In fact, as all occultists know, it is these
particles of the prana-aura which serve to give vitality to the "scent"
of living creatures, which enables dogs and other animals to trace up
the track of the person, or animal, for a long time after the person has
passed. It is not alone the physical odor, which must be very slight as
you will see upon a moment's consideration. It is really the presence of
the particles of the prana-aura which enables the dog to distinguish the
traces of one person among that of thousands of others, and the feat is
as much psychical as physical.

Another peculiarity of the prana-aura is that it is filled with a
multitude of extremely minute sparkling particles, resembling tiny
electric sparks, which are in constant motion. These sparks, which are
visible to persons of only slightly developed psychic power, impart a
vibratory motion to the prana-aura which, under certain conditions is
plainly visible to the average person. This vibratory movement is akin
to the movement of heated air arising from a hot stove, or from the
heated earth on a mid-summer day.

If the student will close his eyes partially, until he peers out from
narrowed lids, and then will closely observe some very healthy person
sitting in a dim light, he may perceive this undulating, pulsing
vibration extending an inch or two from the surface of the body. It
requires some little knack to recognize these vibrations, but a little
practice will often give one the key; and after the first recognition,
the matter becomes easy.

Again, in the case of persons of active brains, one may perceive this
pulsating prana-aura around the head of the person, particularly when he
is engaged in concentrated active thought. A little practice will enable
almost any one to perceive faintly the dim outlines of the prana-aura
around his own fingers and hand, by placing his hand against a black
background, in a dim light, and then gazing at it with narrowed
eye-lids, squinting if necessary. Under these circumstances, after a
little practice, one will be apt to perceive a tiny outlined aura, or
radiation, or halo, of pale yellowish light surrounding the hand.

By extending the fingers, fan shape, you will perceive that each finger
is showing its own little outlined prana-aura. The stronger the vital
force, the plainer will be the perception of the phenomenon. Often the
prana-aura, in these experiments, will appear like the semi-luminous
radiance surrounding a candle flame or gas light. Under the best
conditions, the radiation will assume an almost phosphorescent
appearance. Remember, this is simply a matter of trained ordinary
sight,--not clairvoyant vision.

This prana-aura is identical with human magnetism, which is employed in
ordinary magnetic healing. That is to say it is the outer manifestation
of the wonderful pranic force. It is felt when you shake hands, or
otherwise come in close physical contact with a strongly magnetic
person. On the other hand it is what the weakly, human vampire-like
persons unconsciously, or consciously, try to draw off from strong
persons, if the latter allow them so to do from want of knowledge of
self protection. Who has not met persons of this kind, who seem to sap
one's very life force away from him? Remember, then, that the prana-aura
is the aura or radiation of life force, or vital power, which is the
steam of your living activity, physical and mental. It is the pouring
out of the vital "steam" which is running your vital machinery. Its
presence indicates Life--its absence Lifelessness.




CHAPTER III.

THE ASTRAL COLORS.


The term "astral," so frequently employed by all occultists, is
difficult to explain or define except to those who have pursued a
regular course of study in occult science. For the purpose of the
present consideration, it is enough to say that over and above the
ordinary physical sense plane there is another and more subtle plane,
known as the Astral Plane. Every human being possesses the innate and
inherent faculty of sensing the things of this astral plane, by means of
an extension or enlargement of the powers of the ordinary senses, so to
speak. But, in the majority of persons in the present stage of
development, these astral senses are lying dormant, and only here and
there do we find individuals who are able to sense on the astral plane,
although in the course of evolution the entire race will be able to do
so, of course. The colors of the human aura, mentioned in the preceding
two chapters, and which arise from the various mental and emotional
states, belong to the phenomena of the astral plane, and hence bear the
name of "the astral colors." Belonging to the astral plane, and not to
the ordinary physical plane, they are perceived only by the senses
functioning on the astral plane, and are invisible to the ordinary
physical plane sight. But, to those who have developed the astral sight,
or clairvoyance, these colors are as real as are the ordinary colors to
the average person, and their phenomena have been as carefully recorded
by occult science as have the physical plane colors by physical science.
The fact that to the ordinary physical senses they are invisible, does
not render them any the less real. Remember, in this connection, that to
the blind man our physical colors do not exist. And, for that matter,
the ordinary colors do not exist to "color blind" persons. The ordinary
physical plane person is simply "color blind" to the astral
colors--that's all.

On the astral plane each shade of mental or emotional state has its
corresponding astral color, the latter manifesting when the form
appears. It follows then, of course, that when once the occultist has
the key to this color correspondence, and thus is able to perceive the
astral colors by means of his astral vision, he also is able to read the
mental and emotional states of any person within the range of his
vision, as easily as you are now reading the printed words of this book.

Before proceeding to a consideration of the list of astral colors in the
human aura, I wish to call your attention to a slight variation in the
case of the prana-aura, of which I have spoken in our last chapter. I
have stated therein that the prana-aura is colorless like a diamond or
clear water. This is true in the average case, but in the case of a
person of very strong physical vitality or virility, the prana-aura
takes on, at times, a faint warm pink tinge, which is really a
reflection from the red astral color, of the meaning of which color you
shall now learn.

Like their physical plane counterparts, all the astral colors are formed
from three Primary Colors, namely (1) Red; (2) Blue; and (3) Yellow.
From these three primary colors, all other colors are formed. Following
the Primary Colors, we find what are known as the Secondary Colors,
namely: (1) Green, derived from a combination of Yellow and Blue; (2)
Orange, formed from a combination of Yellow and Red; and (3) Purple,
formed from a combination of Red and Blue. Further combinations produce
the other colors, as for instance, Green and Purple form Olive; Orange
and Purple form Russet; Green and Orange form Citrine.

Black is called an absence of color, while White is really a harmonious
blending of all colors, strange as this may appear to one who has not
studied the subject. The blending of the Primary Colors in varied
proportions produce what is known as the "hues" of color. Adding white
to the hues, we obtain "tints;" while mixing Black produces "shades."
Strictly speaking Black and White are known as "neutral" colors.

Now for the meaning of the astral colors--that is, the explanation of
the mental or emotional state represented by each. I ask that the
student familiarize himself with the meaning of the Primary Colors and
their combinations. A clear understanding of the key of the astral
colors is often an aid in the development of astral sight.


KEY TO THE ASTRAL COLORS.

RED. Red represents the physical phase of mentality. That is to say, it
stands for that part of the mental activities which are concerned with
physical life. It is manifested by the vitality of the body, and in
other hues, tints and shades, is manifested by passions, anger,
physical cravings, etc. I shall describe the various forms of Red
manifestation, a little later on.

BLUE. Blue represents the religious, or spiritual, phase of mentality.
That is to say, it stands for that part of the mental activities which
are concerned with high ideals, altruism, devotion, reverence,
veneration, etc. It is manifested, in its various hues, tints, and
shades, by all forms of religious feeling and emotion, high and low, as
we shall see as we proceed.

YELLOW. Yellow represents the intellectual phase of mentality. That is
to say, it stands for that part of the mental activities which are
concerned with reasoning, analysis, judgment, logical processes,
induction, deduction, synthesis, etc. In its various hues, tints and
shades, it is manifested by the various forms of intellectual activity,
high and low, as we shall see as we proceed.

WHITE. White stands for what occultists know as Pure Spirit, which is a
very different thing from the religious emotion of "spirituality," and
which really is the essence of the ALL that really is. Pure Spirit is
the positive pole of Being. We shall see the part played by it in the
astral colors, as we proceed.

BLACK. Black stands for the negative pole of Being--the very negation of
Pure Spirit, and opposing it in every way. We shall see the part played
by it in the astral colors as we proceed.

The various combinations of the three Astral Primary Colors are formed
in connection with Black and White as well as by the blending of the
three themselves. These combinations, of course, result from the shades
of mental and emotional activity manifested by the individuality, of
which they are the reflection and the key.

The combinations and blending of the astral colors, however, are
numberless, and present an almost infinite variety. Not only is the
blending caused by the mixing of the colors themselves, in connection
with black and white, but in many cases the body of one color is found
to be streaked, striped, dotted or clouded by other colors. At times
there is perceived the mixture of two antagonistic color streams
fighting against each other before blending. Again we see the effect of
one color neutralizing another.

In some cases great black clouds obscure the bright colors beneath, and
then darken the fierce glow of color, just as is often witnessed in the
case of a physical conflagration. Again, we find great flashes of bright
yellow, or red, flaring across the field of the aura, showing agitation
or the conflict of intellect and passion.

The average student, who has not developed the astral vision, is
inclined to imagine that the astral colors in the human aura present the
appearance of an egg-shaped rainbow, or spectrum, or something of that
sort. But this is a great mistake. In the first place, the astral colors
are seldom at rest, for all mental and emotional activity is the result
of vibration, change, and rhythmic motion. Consequently, the colors of
the aura present a kaleidoscopic appearance, of constant change of
color, shape and grouping--a great electrical display, so to speak,
constantly shifting, changing, and blending.

Great tongues of flamelike emanations project themselves beyond the
border of the aura, under strong feeling or excitement, and great
vibratory whirls and swirls are manifested. The sight is most
fascinating, although somewhat terrifying at first. Nature is wise in
bestowing the gift of astral vision only gradually and by almost
imperceptible stages of advance. There are many unpleasant, as well as
pleasant, sights on the Astral Plane.




CHAPTER IV.

THE ASTRAL COLORS (Continued).


Remembering, always, the significance of the three primary colors on the
astral plane, let us consider the meaning of the combinations, shades,
hues, and tints of these colors.

THE RED GROUP. In this group of astral colors seen in the human aura, we
find strongly in evidence the clear bright red shade, similar to that of
fresh, pure arterial blood as it leaves the heart, filled with pure
material freshly oxygenated. This shade, in the aura, indicates health,
life-force, vigor, virility, etc., in pure and untainted form. The aura
of a healthy, strong child shows this shade of color very plainly and
strongly.

Strong, pure natural emotions, such as friendship, love of
companionship, love of physical exercise, healthy clean sports, etc.,
are manifested by a clear clean shade of red. When these feelings become
tainted with selfishness, low motives, etc., the shade grows darker and
duller. Love of low companionship, unclean sports, or selfish games,
etc., produce an unpleasant muddy red shade.

A shade of red, very near to crimson, is the astral color of Love, but
the tint and shade varies greatly according to the nature of this form
of emotional feeling. A very high form of love, which seeks the good of
the loved one, rather than the satisfaction of oneself, manifests as a
beautiful rose tint--one of the most pleasing of the astral tints, by
the way. Descending in the scale, we find the crimson shade becoming
darker and duller, until we descend to the plane of impure, sensual,
coarse passion, which is manifested by an ugly, dull, muddy crimson of a
repulsive appearance, suggesting blood mixed with dirty earth or
barnyard soil.

A peculiar series of red shades are those manifesting anger in its
various forms, from the vivid scarlet flashes of anger color, arising
from what may be called "righteous indignation," down the scale to the
ugly flashes of deep, dull red, betokening rage and uncontrolled
passion. The red of anger generally shows itself in flashes, or great
leaping flames, often accompanied by a black background, in the case of
malicious hate, or by a dirty, greenish background when the rage arises
from jealousy, or envy. The color of avarice is a very ugly combination
of dull, dark red, and a dirty ugly green. If persons could see their
own astral colors accompanying these undesirable mental states, the
sight would perhaps so disgust them with such states as to work a cure.
At any rate, they are most disgusting and repulsive to the occultist who
beholds them in the human aura, and he often wonders why they do not
sicken the person manifesting them--they often do just this thing, to
tell the truth.

THE YELLOW GROUP. In this group of astral colors seen in the human aura
we find as many varieties as we do in the red group. Yellow, denoting
intellect, has many degrees of shade and tint, and many degrees of
clearness.

An interesting shade in this group is that of Orange, which represents
different forms of "pride of intellect," intellectual ambition, love of
mastery by will, etc. The greater degree of red in the astral orange
color, the greater the connection with the physical or animal nature.
Pride and love of power over others, has much red in its astral color,
while love of intellectual mastery has much less red in its composition.

Pure intellectual attainment, and the love of the same, is manifested by
a beautiful clear golden yellow. Great teachers often have this so
strongly in evidence, that at times their students have glimpses of a
golden "halo" around the head of the teacher. Teachers of great
spirituality have this "nimbus" of golden yellow, with a border of
beautiful blue tint, strongly in evidence.

The paintings of the great spiritual teachers of the race usually have
this radiance pictured as a "halo," showing a recognition of the
phenomenon on the part of the great artists. Hoffman's celebrated
painting of the Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane shows this nimbus so
accurately depicted that the occultist is convinced that this artist
must have actually witnessed a similar scene in the astral light, so
true to the astral facts are its details. The images of the Buddha also
show this radiance.

The rich golden shades of intellectual yellow are comparatively rare, a
sickly lemon color being the only indication of intellectual power and
found in the aura of the great run of persons. To the sight of the
occultist, employing his power of astral vision, a crowd of persons will
manifest here and there, at widely separated points, the bright golden
yellow of the true intellect, appearing like scattered lighted candles
among a multitude of faintly burning matches.

THE GREEN GROUP. This is a peculiar group, consisting as of course it
does of various combinations of blues and yellows, tinted and shaded by
white or black. Even skilled occultists find it very difficult to
account for the fact of certain green shades arising from the spiritual
blue and the intellectual yellow--this is one of the most obscure points
in the whole subject of the astral colors, and none but the most
advanced occultists are able to explain the "why" in some instances. To
those who are fond of analysis of this kind, I will drop the following
hint, which may help them out in the matter, viz. The key is found in
the fact that Green lies in the centre of the astral spectrum, and is a
balance between the two extremes, and is also influenced by these two
extremes in a startling manner.

A certain restful green denotes love of nature, out of door life, travel
in the country, etc., and also, slightly differing in tint, the love of
home scenes, etc. Again, a clear beautiful lighter tint of green
indicates what may be called sympathy, altruistic emotion, charity, etc.
Again, illustrating variety in this group of astral colors, another
shade of green shows intellectual tolerance of the views of others.
Growing duller, this indicates tact, diplomacy, ability to handle human
nature, and descending another degree or so blends into insincerity,
shiftiness, untruth, etc. There is an ugly slate-colored green
indicating low, tricky deceit--this is a very common shade in the colors
of the average aura, I am sorry to say. Finally, a particularly ugly,
muddy, murky green indicates jealousy and kindred feelings, envious
malice, etc.

THE BLUE GROUP. This interesting group of astral colors represents the
varying forms and degrees of religious emotion, "spirituality," etc. The
highest form of spiritual, religious feeling and thought is represented
by a beautiful, rich, clear violet tint, while the lower and more gross
phases of religious emotion and thought are represented by the darker
and duller hues, tints, and shades until a deep, dark indigo is reached,
so dark that it can scarcely be distinguished from a bluish black. This
latter color, as might be expected, indicates a low superstitious form
of religion, scarcely worthy of the latter name. Religion, we must
remember, has its low places as well as its heights--its garden grows
the rarest flowers, and at the same time the vilest weeds.

High spiritual feelings--true spiritual unfoldment--is indicated by a
wonderfully clear light blue, of an unusual tint, something akin to the
clear light blue of the sky on a cool autumn afternoon, just before
sunset. Even when we witness an approach to this color in Nature, we are
inspired by an uplifting feeling as if we were in the presence of higher
things, so true is the intuition regarding these things.

Morality, of a high degree, is indicated by a series of beautiful shades
of blue, always of a clear inspiring tint. Religious feeling ruled by
fear, is indicated by a shade of bluish gray. Purple denotes a love of
form and ceremony, particularly those connected with religious offices
or regal grandeur of a solemn kind. Purple, naturally, was chosen as the
royal color in the olden days.

THE BROWN GROUP. The brown group of astral colors represents desire for
gain and accumulation, ranging from the clear brown of industrious
accumulation, to the murky dull browns of miserliness, greed and
avarice. There is a great range in this group of brown shades, as may be
imagined.

THE GRAY GROUP. The group of grays represents a negative group of
thought and emotions. Gray represents fear, depression, lack of
courage, negativity, etc. This is an undesirable and unpleasant group.

BLACK. Black, in the astral colors, stands for hatred, malice, revenge,
and "devilishness" generally. It shades the brighter colors into their
lower aspects, and robs them of their beauty. It stands for hate--also
for gloom, depression, pessimism, etc.

WHITE. White is the astral color of Pure Spirit, as we have seen, and
its presence raises the degree of the other colors, and renders them
clearer. In fact, the perception of the highest degree of Being known to
the most advanced occultist is manifested to the highest adepts and
masters in the form of "The Great White Light," which transcends any
light ever witnessed by the sight of man on either physical or astral
plane--for it belongs to a plane higher than either, and is absolute,
rather than a relative, white. The presence of white among the astral
colors of the human aura, betokens a high degree of spiritual attainment
and unfoldment, and when seen permeating the entire aura it is one of
the Signs of the Master--the token of Adeptship.




CHAPTER V.

THE AURIC KALEIDOSCOPE.


As we have seen, the human aura is never in a state of absolute rest or
quiet. Motion and change is ever manifested by it. It has its periods of
comparative calm, of course, but even in this state there is a pulsing,
wave-like motion apparent. The clouds of changing color fly over its
surface, and in its depth, like the fast driven fleecy clouds over the
summer sky, illumined by the rays of the setting sun.

Again, fierce storms of mental activity, or emotional stress, disturb
its comparative calm, and the wildest scenes are witnessed in the aura
by the observer. So intense are the vibrations of some of these mental
storms that their effect is plainly felt by the average person, though
he is not able to distinguish the colors or the great whirls and swirls
of auric substance accompanying them.

A person sunk in reverie, dream-states, or sleep, presents an
interesting auric kaleidoscope, which possesses great beauty if the
person be normal and of average morality. In such a case there is a
cloudy-clearness (if the term may be used) tinged with tints and shades
of varying colors, blending in strange and interesting combinations,
appearing gradually from previous combinations, and sinking gradually
into new ones.

To the observer of the aura the term "opalescent" instinctly presents
itself, for there is a striking resemblance to the opaline peculiar play
of colors of delicate tints and shades in a body of pearly or milky hue.
Color shades into color, tint into tint, hue into hue, as in the color
scale of the spectrum of which the rainbow is the most familiar example.
But the rainbow or spectrum lacks the peculiar semi-transparency of the
auric colors, and also the constantly changing and dissolving body of
colors of the aura.

At this point, I wish to call your attention to a phase of the aura
which I purposely passed over in the preceding chapters. I allude to the
phase of the aura which presents the "pearly" appearance of the
opalescent body, which we have just noted. This appearance is manifested
neither by any of the mental or emotional states, nor is it the
prana-aura or vital force which I have described in a previous chapter.
It is the manifestation of what is known to occultists as "etheric
substance," and is a very interesting feature of the auric phenomena.

This etheric substance, which manifests this peculiar radiance in the
body of the aura, composes that which is called by some occultists "the
astral body," but this latter term is also employed in another sense,
and I prefer to use the term "etheric double" to indicate what some
others know as "the astral body." Etheric substance is much finer form
of substance than that which composes the physical body. It is really
matter in a very high degree of vibration--much higher than even the
ultra-gaseous matter of physical substance. It may be sensed,
ordinarily, only on the astral plane, which is its own particular plane
of activity.

The etheric double, composed of this etheric substance, is the exact
counterpart of its physical counterpart--the ordinary physical body of
the individual--although it is capable of great expansion or shrinking
in space. Like the physical body it radiates an aura, and this combining
with the other forms of the auric body, gives to it its peculiar pearly
appearance, which is the background of its opalescence previously noted.

The etheric double explains the phenomenon of spectral appearances or
ghosts, for it persists for a time after the death of the physical body,
and under some conditions becomes visible to the ordinary sight. It
sometimes is projected from the physical body, and at such times appears
as an apparition of the living, of which there are many cases recorded
by the societies investigating psychical subjects.

The etheric double, or astral body, is referred to here, however, merely
to explain the peculiar pearly tint of the background, or body, of the
aura, in and through which the mental and emotional auric colors play
and move. It may interest you, however, to know that this phase of aura
is always present around and about a "ghost" or dematerialized
disembodied soul, or "spirit" as common usage terms it.

The aura of the wide-awake person is, of course, far more active and
more deeply colored than is that of the person in reverie, dream, or
sleep. And, again the aura of the person manifesting a high degree of
mental activity, or strong feeling or passion, is still brighter and
deeper than the ordinary person performing his daily routine work. In
the state of anger, or love-passion, for instance, the aura is
violently disturbed, deep shades of color whirling and swirling in the
depths and surface of the auric body. Lightning-like flashes shoot forth
and great bodies of lurid smoky clouds fly on the surface. Looking into
the aura of a man wild with rage and passion, is like peering into
Inferno. The astral plane, in the region of a lynching mob, or other
body of persons filled with rage, becomes a frightful scene of auric
radiation.

A person filled with the emotion of pure love, fills his aura with the
most beautiful tints and shades of high rosy color, and to behold the
same is a pleasure fully appreciated by the occultist. A church filled
with persons of a high devotional ideality, is also a beautiful place,
by reason of the mingling of auric violet-blue vibrations of those
therein assembled. The atmosphere of a prison is most depressing and
presents a most unpleasant appearance to one possessing the astral
vision. Likewise the astral atmosphere of an abode of vice and passion,
becomes really physically nauseating to the occultist of high ideals and
taste. Such scenes on the astral plane are avoided by all true
occultists, except when the call of duty leads them to visit them to
give aid and help.

There are two distinct features connected with the auric coloring of
every person. The first is the coloring resulting from the more habitual
thoughts and feelings of the person--from his character, in fact; while
the second is the coloring resulting from the particular feelings, or
thoughts, manifested by him at that particular moment or time.

The color of the feeling of the moment soon disappears and fades away,
while the more habitual feeling, bound up with his character, causes its
corresponding color to abide more permanently, and thus to give a
decided hue to his general auric color appearance.

The trained occultist is, therefore, able to ascertain not only the
passing thoughts and feelings of a person, but also to determine
infallibly his general character, tendencies, past character and
actions, and general nature, simply from a careful examination and study
of the auric colors of the person in question.

As all occultists well know, every place, dwelling, business place,
church, courtroom--every village, city, country, nation--has its own
collective aura, known as "astral atmosphere," which is simply but a
combined reflection of the individual auras of the human units of which
its body of inhabitants is made up. These atmospheric vibrations are
plainly felt by many persons, and we are instinctively attracted or
repelled by reason thereof. But, to the developed occultists, these
places manifest the auric colors, in the combinations arising from the
nature of the mentalities of the persons dwelling in them.

Each place has its collective aura, just as each person has his
individual aura. The astral plane presents a wonderful scene of color by
reason of this and similar causes. The harmony of the color scheme, in
some cases, is marvellously beautiful; while the horrible aspect of
scenes resemble a nightmare vision of the worst kind.

It is easy to understand why some of the ancients who stumbled into
glimpses of the astral plane, while in dream-state or trance, reported
the vision of terrible hells of unquenchable fire, fiery lakes of
smoking brimstone, etc., for such ideas would naturally come to the mind
of the uninformed person who had peered into the astral plane in such
cases.

And, in the same way, the visions of heaven reported by the saints, and
others of high spirituality, are explainable on the theory that these
persons had sensed some of the beautiful scenes of the higher astral
planes, filled with the combined auric tints and hues of souls of high
development. The principle of auric colors holds good on all the many
planes of being and existence--high as well as low.

I merely hint at a great occult truth in making the above statements.
The thoughtful will be able to read between my lines. I have given you a
little key which will unlock the door of many mysteries, if you will but
use it intelligently.




CHAPTER VI.

THOUGHT FORMS.


That interesting phase of occult phenomena, known as "thought forms," is
so closely related to the general subject of the human aura that a
mention of one must naturally lead to the thought of the other.
Thought-forms are built up of the very material composing the aura, and
manifest all of the general characteristics thereof, even to the auric
colors. An understanding of the facts of the human aura is necessary for
a correct understanding of the nature of the thought-forms composed of
the same substance.

A "thought form" is a peculiar manifestation of mental activity on the
astral plane. It is more than a powerful disturbance in the body of the
human aura, although this is the place of its embodiment or birth in the
objective world. It is formed in the following manner: A person
manifests a strong desire, feeling or idea, which is naturally filled
with the dynamic force of his will. This sets up a series of strong
vibrations in the body of the aura, which gradually resolve themselves
into a strong whirling centre of thought-force involved in a mass of
strongly cohesive auric substance, and strongly charged with the power
of the prana of the person.

In some cases these thought forms survive in the auric body for some
little time, and then gradually fade away. In other cases they survive
and maintain an almost independent existence for some time, and exert a
strong influence upon other persons coming in the presence of the
person. Again, these thought forms may be so strongly charged with
prana, and so imbued with the mental force of the person, that they will
actually be thrown off and away from the aura itself, and travel in
space until they exhaust their initial energy--in the meantime exerting
an influence upon the psychic aura of other persons.

A thought-form is more than merely a strongly manifested thought--it
really is such a thought, but surrounded by a body of ethereal
substance, charged with prana, and even carrying with it the vibration
of the life energy of its creator. It is a child of the mind of its
creator, and acquires a portion of his life-essence, so to speak, which
abides with it for a longer or shorter time after its birth. In extreme
instances it becomes practically a semi-living elemental force, of
necessarily comparatively short life.

To those who find it difficult to understand how a thought-form can
persist after separation from the presence of the thinker, I would say
that the phenomena is similar to that of light traveling in space, long
after the star which originated it has been destroyed. Or, again, it is
like the vibrations of heat remaining in a room after the lamp or stove
causing it has been removed, or the fire in the grate having died out.
Or like the sound waves of the drum-beat persisting after the beat
itself has ceased. It is all a matter of the persistence of vibrations.

Thought forms differ greatly one from the other in the matter of shape
and general appearance. The most common and simple form is that of an
undulating wave, or series of tiny waves, resembling the circles caused
by the dropping of a pebble into a still pond. Another form is that of a
tiny rotating bit of cloud-like substance, sometimes whirling towards a
central point, like a whirlpool; and sometimes swirling away from the
central point like the familiar "pin-wheel" fireworks toy. Another form
is akin the ring of smoke projected from the coughing locomotive, or
the rounded lips of the cigar smoker, the movement in this kind being a
form of spiral rotation. Other thought forms have the appearance of
swiftly rotating balls of cloudy substance, often glowing with a faint
phosphorescence.

Sometimes the thought form will appear as a great slender jet, like
steam ejected from the spout of a tea-kettle, which is sometimes broken
up into a series of short, puffed-out jets, each following the jet
preceding it, and traveling in a straight line. Sometimes the thought
form shoots forth like a streak of dim light, almost resembling a beam
of light flashed from a mirror. Occasionally, it will twist its way
along like a long, slender corkscrew, or auger, boring into space.

In cases of thought-forms sent forth by explosive emotion, the thought
form will actually take the form of a bomb, which literally explodes
when it reaches the presence of the person toward whom it is aimed.
Every person has experienced this feeling of a thought bomb having been
exploded in his near vicinity, having been directed by a vigorous
personality. This form is frequently found in the thought forms sent out
by a strong, earnest, vigorous orator.

There are strong thought forms which seem to strive to push back the
other person, so correctly do they represent the idea and feeling back
of their manifestation. Others seem to strive to wind around the other
person, and to try to literally drag him toward the first person, this
form often accompanying strong appeal, persuasion, coaxing, etc., when
accompanied by strong desire. A particularly vigorous form of this kind
of thought form takes on the appearance of a nebulous octopus, with
long, winding, clinging tentacles, striving to wrap around the other
person, and to draw him toward the center.

The force of the feeling behind the manifestation of the thought form
will often travel a long distance from the sender--in fact, in cases of
great power of concentration, space seems to be no barrier to its
passage. In striking instances of thought transference, etc., it will be
found that thought forms play an important part.

The variety of shapes of thought forms is almost endless. Each
combination of thought and feeling creates its own form, and each
individual seems to have his own peculiarities in this respect. The
forms I have above described, however, will serve as typical cases to
illustrate the more common classes of appearances. The list, however,
might be indefinitely expanded from the experience of any experienced
occultist, and is not intended to be full by any means. All varieties of
geometrical forms are found among the thought forms, some of them being
of remarkable beauty.

In considering the subject of projected thought forms, moreover, it must
be remembered that they partake of, and manifest, the same colors as
does the aura itself, for they are composed of the same material and are
charged with the same energy. But, note this difference, that whereas
the aura is energized from the constant battery of the organism of the
individual, the thought form, on the contrary, has at its service only
the energy with which it was charged when it was thrown off--being a
storage battery, as it were, which in time expends all of its power and
then is powerless.

Every thought form bears the same color that it would possess if it had
been retained in the body of the aura itself. But, as a rule, the colors
are plainer, and less blended with others--this because each thought
form is the representation of a single definite feeling or thought, or
group of same, instead of being a body of widely differing mental
vibrations. Thus the thought form of anger will show its black and red,
with its characteristic flashes. The thought form of passion will show
forth its appropriate auric colors and general characteristics. The
thought form of high ideal love will show its beautiful form and
harmonious tinting, like a wonderful celestial flower from the garden of
some far off Paradise.

Many thought forms never leave the outer limits of the aura, while
others are projected to great distances. Some sputter out as they
travel, and are disintegrated, while others continue to glow like a
piece of heated iron, for many hours. Others persist for a long time,
with a faint phosphorescent glow. A careful study of what has been said
regarding the characteristics of the various feelings and emotions, as
manifested in the auric body, will give the student a very fair general
idea of what may be the appearance of any particular variety of thought
form, for a general principle runs through the entire series of auric
phenomena. An understanding of the fundamental principles will lead to
an understanding of any of the particular varieties of the manifestation
thereof.

Finally, remember this: A thought form is practically a bit of the
detached aura of a person, charged with a degree of his prana, and
energized with a degree of his life energy. So, in a limited sense, it
really is a projected portion of his personality.




CHAPTER VII.

PSYCHIC INFLUENCE OF COLORS.


In all of Nature's wonderful processes we find many evidences of that
great principle of Action and Reaction, which, like the forward and
backward swing of the pendulum, changes cause into effect, and effect
into cause, in a never ending series. We find this principle in effect
in the psychic relation of mental states and colors. That is to say,
that just as we find that certain mental and emotional states manifest
in vibrations causing particular auric astral colors, so do we find that
the presence of certain colors on the physical plane will have a decided
psychic effect upon the mental and emotional states of individuals
subject to their influence. And, as might be expected by the thoughtful
student, the particular astral colors manifested in the aura by the
presence of some particular mental or emotional state exactly correspond
with the particular physical colors which influence that particular
mental or emotional state.

Illustrating the statements in the preceding paragraph, I would say that
the continued presence of red will be apt to set up emotional
vibrations of anger, passion, physical love, etc., or, in a different
tint, the higher physical emotions. Blue, of the right tint, will tend
to cause feelings of spirituality, religious emotion, etc. Green is
conducive to feelings of relaxation, repose, quiet, etc. Black produces
the feeling of gloom and grief. And so on, each color tends to produce
emotional vibrations similar to those which manifest that particular
color in the astral aura of the person. It is a case of "give and take"
along the entire scale of color and emotions, according to the great
natural laws.

While the explanation of these facts is not known to the average person,
nevertheless nearly everyone recognizes the subtle effect of color and
avoids certain colors, while seeking certain others. There is not a
single living human being but who has experienced the sense of rest,
calm, repose, and calm inflow of strength, when in a room decorated in
quiet shades of green. Nature, herself, has given this particular shade
to the grass and leaves of trees and plants, so that the soothing effect
of the country scene is produced. The aura of a person experiencing
these feelings, and yielding to them, will manifest precisely the tint
or shade of green which is shown on the grass and leaves around him, so
true is this natural law of action and reaction.

The effect of scarlet upon animals, the bull for instance, is well
known--to use the familiar term, it causes one to "see red." The sight
of the color of blood is apt to arouse feelings of rage, or disgust, by
reason of the same law. The sight of the beautiful clear blue sky tends
to arouse feelings of reverence, awe or spirituality. One can never
think of this shade of blue arousing rage; or red arouse feelings of
spirituality.

It is a well known fact that in insane asylums, the use of red in
decorations must be avoided, while the proper shades of blue or green
are favored. On the other hand, the use of a proper red, in certain
cases, will tend to arouse vitality and physical strength in a patient.
It is not by mere chance that the life giving blood is a bright, rich
red color when it leaves the heart.

When one "feels blue" he does not have the impression of a bright or
soft blue--but he really is almost conscious of the presence of a dull
bluish gray. And the presence of such a color in one's surroundings,
tends to cause a feeling of depression. Everyone knows the effect of a
"gray day" in the Fall or Spring.

Again, who does not know the feeling of mental exaltation coming from
the sight of a day filled with golden sunshine, or from a golden sunset.
We find proofs of this law of Nature on all sides, every day of our
lives. It is an interesting subject, which will repay the student for
the expenditure of a little time and thought upon it.

Speaking of the general class characteristics of the three primary
groups of colors, all occultists, as well as many physiologists and
psychologists, are agreed on the following fundamental propositions,
viz.: that (1) Red is exciting to the mind and emotions; (2) Yellow is
inspiring and elevating, and intellectually stimulating; and (3) Blue is
cool, soothing, and calming. It is also universally conceded that the
right shades of green (combining the qualities of blue and yellow in
appropriate proportions) is the ideal color of rest and recuperation,
followed by a stimulation and new ambition. The reason for this may be
seen, when you consider the respective qualities of blue and yellow
which compose this color.

It is interesting to note that the science of medicine is now seriously
considering the use of colors in the treatment of disease, and the best
medical authorities investigating the subject are verifying the
teachings of the old occultists, regarding the influence of colors on
mental states and physical conditions.

Dr. Edwin Babbitt, a pioneer in this line in the Western world, gave the
general principles in a nutshell, when he laid down the following rule:
"There is a trianal series of graduations in the peculiar potencies of
colors, the center and climax of electrical action, which cools the
nerves, being in violet; the climax of electrical action, which is
soothing to the vascular system, being in blue; the climax of luminosity
being in yellow; and the climax of thermism or heat being in red. This
is not an imaginary division of qualities, but a real one, the flamelike
red color having a principle of warmth in itself; the blue and violet, a
principle of cold and electricity. Thus we have many styles of chromatic
action, including progression of hues, of lights and shades, of fineness
and coarseness, of electrical power, luminous power, thermal power,
etc."

Read the above statement of Dr. Babbitt, and then compare it with the
occult teaching regarding the astral colors, and you will perceive the
real basis of the science which the good doctor sought to establish, and
in which cause he did such excellent pioneer work. The result of his
work is now being elaborated by modern physicians in the great schools
of medicine, particularly on the Continent, in Europe--England and
America being somewhat behind the times in this work.

The advanced occultist also finds much satisfaction in the interest, on
the part of physicians and jurists, in the matter of the influence of
color upon the mental, moral and physical welfare of the public. The
effect of color upon morality is being noticed by workers for human
welfare, occupying important offices.

The American journals report the case of a judge in a large Western city
in that country, who insisted upon his courtroom being decorated in
light, cheerful tints, instead of in the old, gloomy, depressing shades
formerly employed. This judge wisely remarked that brightness led to
right thinking, and darkness to crooked thinking; also that his court,
being an uplift court, must have walls to correspond, and that it was
enough to turn any man into a criminal to be compelled to sit in a dark,
dismal courtroom, day after day.

This good judge, who must have had some acquaintance with the occult
teachings, is quoted as concluding as follows: "White, cream, light
yellow, and orange are the colors which are the sanest. I might add
light green, for that is the predominant color in Nature; black, brown
and deep red are incentives to crime--a man in anger sees red." Surely a
remarkable utterance from the bench!

The effect of color schemes upon the moral and mental welfare of persons
is being recognized in the direction of providing brighter color schemes
in schools, hospitals, reformatories, prisons, etc. The reports
naturally show the correctness of the underlying theory. The color of a
tiny flower has its effect upon even the most hardened prisoner; while
the minds of children in school are quickened by a touch of brightness
here and there in the room. It needs no argument to prove the beneficial
effect of the right kind of colors in the sickroom, or hospital ward.

The prevailing theories, and practice, regarding the employment of color
in therapeutics and human welfare work, are in the main correct. But, I
urge the study of the occult significance of color, as mentioned in this
book in connection with the human aura and its astral colors, as a sound
basis for an intelligent, thorough understanding of the real psychic
principles underlying the physical application of the methods referred
to. Go to the center of the subject, and then work outward--that is the
true rule of the occultist, which might well be followed by the
non-occult general public.




CHAPTER VIII.

AURIC MAGNETISM.


The phenomenon of human magnetism is too well recognized by the general
public, to require argument at this time. Let the scientists dispute
about it as much as they please, down in the heart of nearly all of the
plain people of the race is the conviction that there is such a thing.
The occultists, of course, are quite familiar with the wonderful
manifestations of this great natural force, and with its effect upon the
minds and bodies of members of the race, and can afford to smile at the
attempts of some of the narrow minds in the colleges to pooh-pooh the
matter.

But the average person is not familiar with the relation of this human
magnetism to the human aura. I think that the student should familiarize
himself with this fundamental relation, in order to reason correctly on
the subject of human magnetism. Here is the fundamental fact in a
nutshell: The human aura is the great storehouse, or reservoir, of human
magnetism, and is the source of all human magnetism that is projected by
the individual toward other individuals. Just how human magnetism is
generated, is, of course, a far deeper matter, but it is enough for our
purpose at this time to explain the fact of its storage and
transmission.

In cases of magnetic healing, etc., the matter is comparatively simple.
In such instances the healer by an effort of the will (sometimes
unconsciously applied) projects a supply of his pranic aura vibrations
into the body of his patient, by way of the nervous system of the
patient, and also by means of what may be called the induction of the
aura itself.

The mere presence of a person strongly charged with prana, is often
enough to cause an overflow into the aura of other persons, with a
resulting feeling of new strength and energy. By the use of the hands of
the healer, a heightened effect is produced, by reason of certain
properties inherent in the nervous system of both healer and patient.

There is even a flow of etheric substance from the aura of the healer to
that of the patient, in cases where the vitality of the latter is very
low. Many a healer has actually, and literally, pumped his life force
and etheric substance into the body of his patient, when the latter was
sinking into the weakness which precedes death, and has by so doing been
able to bring him back to life and strength. This is practically akin
to the transfusion of blood--except that it is on the psychic plane
instead of the physical.

But the work of the magnetic healer does not stop here, if he be well
informed regarding his science. The educated healer realizing the potent
effect of mental states upon physical conditions--of mental vibrations
upon the physical nerve centers and organs of the body--endeavors to
arouse the proper mental vibrations in the mind of his patient.
Ordinarily, he does this merely by holding in his mind the corresponding
desired mental state, and thus arousing similar vibrations in the mind
of the patient. This of itself is a powerful weapon of healing, and
constitutes the essence of mental healing as usually practiced. But
there is a possible improvement even upon this, as we shall see in a
moment.

The advanced occultist, realizing the law of action and reaction in the
matter of the auric colors, turns the same to account in healing work,
as follows: He not only holds in his mind the strong feeling and thought
which he wishes to transmit to the patient, but (fix this in your mind)
he also pictures in his imagination the particular kind of color which
corresponds with the feeling or thought in question.

A moment's thought will show you that by this course he practically
multiplies the effect. Not only do his own thought vibrations (1) set up
corresponding vibrations in the mind of the patient, by the laws of
thought transference, but (2) his thought of the certain colors will set
up corresponding vibrations not only (a) in his own aura, and thence (b)
to that of the patient, but will also (3) act directly upon the aura of
the patient and reproduce the colors there, which (4) in turn will
arouse corresponding vibrations in the mind of the patient, by the law
of reaction.

The above may sound a little complicated at first reading, but a little
analysis will show you that it is really quite a simple process, acting
strictly along the lines of Action and Reaction, which law has been
explained to you in preceding chapters of this book. The vibrations
rebound from mind to aura, and from aura to mind, in the patient,
something like a billiard ball flying from one side of the table to
another, or a tennis ball flying between the two racquets over the net.

The principle herein mentioned may be employed as well in what is called
"absent treatment" as in treatments where the patient is present. By
the laws of thought transference, not only the thought but also the
mental image of the appropriate astral color, is transmitted over space,
and then, impinging on the mind of the patient, is transmitted into
helpful and health-giving vibrations in his mind. The healer of any
school of mental or spiritual healing will find this plan very helpful
to him in giving absent as well as present treatments. I recommend it
from years of personal experience, as well as that of other advanced
occultists.

Of course the fact that the ordinary healer is not able to distinguish
the finer shades of astral color, by reason of his not having actually
perceived them manifested in the aura, renders his employment of this
method less efficacious than that of the developed and trained
occultist. But, nevertheless, he will find that, from the knowledge of
the auric or astral colors given in this little book, he will be able to
obtain quite satisfactory and marked results in his practice. The
following table, committed to memory, will be of help to him in the
matter of employing the mental image of the auric colors in his healing
work.


TABLE OF HEALING COLORS.

Nervous System--
  Cooling and soothing: Shades of violet, lavender, etc.
  Resting and invigorating effect: Grass greens.
  Inspiring and illuminating: Medium yellows, and orange.
  Stimulating and exciting: Reds (bright).

Blood and Organs--
  Cooling and soothing: Clear dark blues.
  Resting and invigorating: Grass greens.
  Inspiring and illuminating: Orange yellows.
  Stimulating and exciting: Bright reds.

The following additional suggestions will be found helpful to the
healer: In cases of impaired physical vitality; also chilliness, lack of
bodily warmth, etc., bright, warm reds are indicated. In cases of
feverishness, overheated blood, excessive blood pressure, inflammation,
etc., blue is indicated. Red has a tendency to produce renewed and more
active heart action; while violets and lavenders tend to slow down the
too rapid beating of the heart. A nervous, unstrung patient, may be
treated by bathing her, mentally, in a flood of violet or lavender
auric color; while a tired, used up, fatigued person may be invigorated
by flooding him with bright reds, followed by bright, rich yellows,
finishing the treatment with a steady flow of warm orange color.

To those who are sufficiently advanced in occult philosophy, I would say
that they should remember the significance of the Great White Light, and
accordingly conclude their treatment by an effort to indicate an
approach to that clear, pure white color in the aura--mentally, of
course. This will leave the patient in an inspired, exalted, illuminated
state of mind and soul, which will be of great benefit to him, and will
also have the effect of reinvigorating the healer by cosmic energy or
para-prana.

Everything that has been said in this chapter regarding the use of color
in magnetic treatments, is equally applicable to cases of self-healing,
or self-treatment. Let the patient follow the directions above given for
the healer, and then turn the healing current, or thought, inward--and
the result will be the same as if he were treating another. The
individual will soon find that certain colors fit his requirements
better than others, in which case let him follow such experience in
preference to general rules, for the intuition generally is the safest
guide in such cases. However, it will be found that the individual
experience will usually agree with the tables given above, with slight
personal variations.




CHAPTER IX.

DEVELOPING THE AURA.


When it is remembered that the aura of the individual affects and
influences other persons with whom he comes in contact--and is, in fact,
an important part of his personality--it will be seen that it is
important that the individual take pains to develop his aura in the
direction of desirable qualities, and to neutralize and weed out
undesirable ones. This becomes doubly true, when it is also remembered
that, according to the law of action and reaction, the auric vibrations
react upon the mind of the individual, thus intensifying and adding fuel
to the original mental states which called them forth. From any point of
view, it is seen to be an important part of self development and
character building, to develop the aura according to scientific occult
principles.

In this work of aura development, there is found to be two correlated
phases, namely: (1) the direct work of flooding the aura with the best
vibrations, by means of holding in the mind clear, distinct and repeated
mental pictures of desirable ideas and feelings; and (2) the added
effect of mental images of the colors corresponding to the ideas and
feelings which are deemed desirable and worthy of development.

The first of the above mentioned phases is probably far more familiar to
the average student, than is the second. This from the fact that the
average student is apt to be more or less familiar with the teachings of
the numerous schools or cults which agree in the axiom that "holding the
thought" tends to develop the mind of the individual along the
particular lines of such thought.

This is a correct psychological principle, for that matter, even when
those practicing it do not fully understand the underlying facts. Mental
faculties, like physical muscles, tend to develop by exercise and use,
and any faculty may be developed and cultivated in this way.

Another teaching of these same schools is that the character of the
thoughts so "held" by the individual, effects other persons with whom he
comes in contact, and, in a way attracts to him objective things,
persons, and circumstances in harmony with such thoughts. This also is
in accordance with the best occult teaching--from which, of course, it
was originally derived.

I heartily endorse the facts of these teachings, and pronounce them
fundamentally correct. And, in this connection, I may say that every
healer may apply his own methods PLUS this teaching regarding the aura,
and thus obtain greatly increased results.

By the faithful, persevering, holding in mind of certain ideas and
feelings, the individual may flood his aura with the vibrations and
colors of such ideas and feelings, and thus charge it with auric energy
and power. By so doing, he gains the benefit of the reaction upon his
own mind, and also secures the advantage of the effect thereof upon
other persons with whom he comes in contact. In this way he not only
builds up his individual character along desirable lines, but at the
same time develops a strong, positive, attractive "personality" which
affects others with whom he comes in contact.

I do not consider it necessary to go into details here regarding this
phase of "holding the thought," for, as I have said, the average student
is already familiar with the rules regarding the same. In a nutshell,
however, I will say that each individual is largely the result of the
thoughts he has manifested, and the feelings which he has harbored.
Therefore, the rule is to manifest and exercise the faculties you would
develop, and inhibit or refrain from manifesting the ones you would
restrain or control. Again, to restrain an undesirable faculty, develop
and exercise its opposite--kill out the negatives by developing the
positives. The mind produces thought; and yet, it tends to grow from the
particular portion of its own product which you may choose to feed to
it--for it not only creates thought, but also feeds upon it. So,
finally, let it produce the best kind of thought for you, and then throw
that back into the hopper, for it will use it to grind out more of the
same kind and grow strong in so doing. That is the whole thing in a
nutshell.

The second phase of aura development (as above classified), however, is
not likely to be familiar to the average student, for the reason that it
is not known outside of advanced occult circles, and very little has
been allowed to be taught regarding it. But, the very reticence
regarding it is a proof of its importance, and I strongly advise my
students to give to it the attention and practice that its importance
merits. The practice, thereof, however, is extremely simple, and the
principle of the practice, moreover, is based solely upon the facts of
the relation of color and mental states, as shown in the astral auric
colors, as fully explained in the preceding chapters of this book.

In order to intelligently practice the development of the aura by means
of flooding or charging it with the vibrations of psychic colors, it is
first necessary that the student be thoroughly familiar with the scale
of colors related to each set of mental states or emotional feelings.
This scale and its key is found in a number of places in the preceding
chapters.

The student should turn back the pages of this book, and then carefully
re-read and re-study every word which has been said about the relation
of mental states and auric colors. He should know the mental
correspondence of the shades of red, yellow, and blue, so thoroughly
that the thought of one will bring the idea of the other. He should be
able to think of the corresponding group of colors, the moment he thinks
of any particular mental state. He should be thoroughly familiar with
the physical, mental, and spiritual effect of any of the colors, and
should moreover, test himself, psychically, for the individual effects
of certain colors upon himself.

He should enter into this study with interest and earnestness, and then
by keeping his eyes and ears open, he will perceive interesting facts
concerning the subject on every side in his daily work and life. He will
perceive many proofs of the principle, and will soon amass a stock of
experiences illustrating each color and its corresponding mental state.
He will be richly repaid for the work of such study, which, in fact,
will soon grow to be more like pleasure than like work.

Having mastered this phase of the subject, the student should give
himself a thorough, honest, self-examination and mental analysis. He
should write down a chart of his strong points and his weak ones. He
should check off the traits which should be developed, and those which
should be restrained. He should determine whether he needs development
along physical, mental, and spiritual lines, and in what degree. Having
made this chart of himself, he should then apply the principles of
charging the aura with the color vibrations indicated by his self
diagnosis and prescription.

The last stage is quite simple, once one has acquired the general idea
back of it. It consists simply in forming as clear a mental image as
possible of the color or colors desired, and then projecting the
vibrations into the aura by the simple effort of the will. This does
not mean that one needs to clinch the fist or frown the brow, in
willing. Willing, in the occult sense, may be said to consist of a
COMMAND, leaving the rest to the mechanism of the will and mind. Take
away the obstacle of Doubt and Fear--then the Royal Command performs the
work of setting the will into operation. This, by the way, is an
important occult secret, of wide application--try to master its all
important significance.

The mental imaging of colors may be materially aided by concentration
upon physical material of the right color. By concentrating the
attention and vision upon a red flower, for instance; or upon a bit of
green leaf, in another instance; one may be able to form a clear,
positive mental image of that particular color. This accompanied by the
willing, and demand, that the vibrations of this color shall charge the
aura, will be found to accomplish the result. Have something around you
showing the desirable colors, and your attention will almost
instinctively take up the impression thereof, even though you may be
thinking of, or doing something else. Live as much as possible in the
idea and presence of the desirable color, and you will get the habit of
setting up the mental image and vibration thereof. A little practice
and experience will soon give you the idea, and enable you to get the
best results. Patience, perseverance, and sustained earnest
interest--that is the key of success.




CHAPTER X.

THE PROTECTIVE AURA.


Among the very oldest of the teachings of occultism, we find
instructions regarding the building up and maintenance of the protective
aura of the individual, whereby he renders himself immune to undesirable
physical, mental, psychic or spiritual influences. So important is this
teaching, that it is to be regretted that there has not been more said
on the subject by some of the writers of recent years. The trouble with
many of these recent writers is that they seem to wish to close their
eyes to the unpleasant facts of life, and to gaze only upon the pleasant
ones. But this is a mistake, for ignorance has never been a virtue, and
to shut one's eyes to unpleasant facts does not always result in
destroying them. I consider any teaching unfinished and inadequate which
does not include instruction along protective lines.

Physical auric protection consists in charging the aura with vital
magnetism and color, which will tend to ward off not only the physical
contagion of ill persons, but, what is often still more important, the
contagion of their mind and feelings.

The student who has really studied the preceding chapters will at once
realize that this protection is afforded by filling the aura with the
vibrations of health and physical strength, by means of the mental
imaging of the life-preserving reds, and the exercise of the mind in the
direction of thought of strength and power. These two things will tend
to greatly increase the resistive aura of anyone, and enable him to
throw off disease influences which affect others.

The aura of the successful physician and healer, in the presence of
disease, will invariably show the presence of the bright, positive red
in the aura, accompanied by the mental vibrations of strength, power and
confidence, and the absence of fear. This in connection with the Auric
Circle, which shall be described presently, will be of great value to
healers, physicians, nurses, etc., as well as to those who are brought
into intimate contact with sick persons.

Of practically the same degree of importance, is the charging of the
aura with the vibrations of mental protection, viz, the vibrations of
orange, yellow and similar colors. These are the colors of intellect,
you will remember, and when the aura is charged and flooded with them it
acts as a protection against the efforts of others to convince one
against his will, by sophistical arguments, plausible reasoning,
fallacious illustrations, etc. It gives to one a sort of mental
illumination, quickening the perceptive faculties, and brightening up
the reasoning and judging powers, and finally, giving a sharp edge to
the powers of repartee and answer.

If you will assume the right positive mental attitude, and will flood
your aura with the vibrations of the mental orange-yellow, the mental
efforts of other persons will rebound from your aura, or, to use another
figure of speech, will slip from it like water from the back of the
proverbial duck. It is well to carry the mental image of your head being
surrounded by a golden aura or halo, at such times--this will be found
especially efficacious as a protective helmet when you are assaulted by
the intellect or arguments of others.

And, again, there is a third form of protective aura, namely protection
of one's emotional nature--and this is highly important, when one
remembers how frequently we are moved to action by our emotions, rather
than by our intellect or reason. To guard one's emotions, is to guard
one's very inmost soul, so to speak. If we can protect our feeling and
emotional side, we will be able to use our reasoning powers and
intellect far more effectively, as all know by experience.

What color should we use in this form of auric protection? Can anyone be
in doubt here, if he has read the preceding chapters? What is the
emotional protective color?--why, blue, of course. Blue controls this
part of the mind or soul, and by raising ourselves into the vibrations
of positive blue, we leave behind us the lower emotions and feelings,
and are transported into the higher realms of the soul where these low
vibrations and influences cannot follow us. In the same way, the blue
colored aura will act as an armor to protect us from the contagion of
the low passions and feelings of others.

If you are subjected to evil influences, or contagion of those harboring
low emotions and desires, you will do well to acquire the art of
flooding your aura with the positive blue tints. Make a study of bright,
clear blues, and you will instinctively select the one best suited for
your needs. Nature gives us this instinctive knowledge, if we will but
seek for it, and then apply it when found. The aura of great moral
teachers, great priests and preachers, advanced occultists, in fact all
men of lofty ideals working among those lower on the moral scale, are
always found to be charged with a beautiful, clear blue, which acts as a
protection to them when they are unduly exposed to moral or emotional
contagion. Ignorance of the occult laws have caused the downfall of many
a great moral teacher, who could have protected himself in this way, in
times of strong attack of low vibrations, had he but known the truth.
The individual who knows this law, and who applies it, is rendered
absolutely immune from evil contagion on the emotional plane of being.


THE GREAT AURIC CIRCLE.

But no occult instruction on this subject would be complete without a
reference to the Great Auric Circle of Protection, which is a shelter to
the soul, mind, and body, against outside psychic influences, directed,
consciously or unconsciously against the individual. In these days of
wide spread though imperfect, knowledge of psychic phenomena, it is
especially important that one should be informed as to this great shield
of protection. Omitting all reference to the philosophy underlying it,
it may be said that this Auric Circle is formed by making the mental
image, accompanied by the demand of will, of the aura being surrounded
by a great band of PURE CLEAR WHITE LIGHT. A little perseverance will
enable you to create this on the astral plane, and, though (unless you
have the astral vision) you cannot see it actually, yet you will
actually FEEL its protective presence, so that you will know that it is
there guarding you.

This White Auric Circle will be an effective and infallible armor
against all forms of psychic attack or influence, no matter from whom it
may emanate, or whether directed consciously or unconsciously. It is a
perfect and absolute protection, and the knowledge of its protective
power should be sufficient to drive fear from the heart of all who have
dreaded psychic influence, "malicious animal magnetism" (so-called), or
anything else of the kind, by whatever name known. It is also a
protection against psychic vampirism, or draining of magnetic strength.

The Auric Circle is, of course, really egg-shaped, or oval, for it
fringes the aura as the shell cases the egg. See yourself, mentally, as
surrounded by this Great White Auric Circle of Protection, and let the
idea sink into your consciousness. Realize its power over the influences
from outside, and rejoice in the immunity it gives you.

The Auric Circle, however, will admit any outside impressions that you
really desire to come to you, while shutting out the others. That is,
with this exception, that if your inner soul recognizes that some of
these desired influences and impressions are apt to harm you (though
your reason and feeling know it not) then will such impressions be
denied admittance. For the White Light is the radiation of Spirit, which
is higher than ordinary mind, emotion, or body and is Master of All. And
its power, even though we can but imperfectly represent it even
mentally, is such that before its energy, and in its presence, in the
aura, all lower vibrations are neutralized and disintegrated.

The highest and deepest occult teaching is that the White Light must
never be used for purpose of attack or personal gain, but that it may
properly be used by anyone, at any time, to protect against outside
psychic influences against which the soul protests. It is the armor of
the soul, and may well be employed whenever or wherever the need
arises.

Throughout the pages of this little book have been scattered crumbs of
teaching other than those concerning the aura alone. Those for whom
these are intended will recognize and appropriate them--the others will
not see them, and will pass them by. One attracts his own to him. Much
seed must fall on waste places, in order that here and there a grain
will find lodgment in rich soil awaiting its coming. True occult
knowledge is practical power and strength. Beware of prostituting the
higher teachings for selfish ends and ignoble purposes. To guard and
preserve your own will is right; to seek to impose your will upon that
of another is wrong. Passive resistance is often the strongest form of
resistance--this is quite different from non-resistance.


THE END.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HUMAN AURA: ASTRAL COLORS AND THOUGHT FORMS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

