Online Distributed Proofreading Team (https://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 16599-h.htm or 16599-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/5/9/16599/16599-h/16599-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/5/9/16599/16599-h.zip)





SCHOOL, CHURCH, AND HOME GAMES

Compiled by

GEORGE O. DRAPER

Secretary for Health and Recreation
County Work Department of the
International Committee of
Young Men's Christian Associations

COMMUNITY RECREATION
Rural Edition

Association Press
New York: 347 Madison Avenue

1923






     DEDICATED TO MY FATHER

     HERBERT EDWARD DRAPER

     _whose happy contact with the folks of the country,
     through his duties as a County official, won for him
     their esteem; who found recreation in the open
     country, where the birds, the flowers, and all wild
     life were his friends and reflected their charm in the
     life he lived--simple, happy, friendly--true to
     himself, his family, his neighbors, and his God._




CONTENTS


PART I. GAMES FOR SCHOOLS

CHAPTER                                                      PAGE

     FOREWORD                                                 vii

  I. SCHOOL ROOM GAMES for Primary Pupils                       1

 II. SCHOOL ROOM GAMES for Intermediate Pupils                  8

III. SCHOOL ROOM GAMES for Advanced and High School Pupils     16

 IV. SCHOOL YARD GAMES for Primary Pupils                      24

  V. SCHOOL YARD GAMES for Intermediate Pupils                 27

 VI. SCHOOL YARD GAMES for Advanced and High School Pupils     37


PART II. SOCIABLE GAMES FOR HOME, CHURCH, CLUBS, ETC.

  I. GAMES FOR THE HOME                                        44

 II. ICE BREAKERS FOR SOCIABLES                                55

III. SOCIABLE GAMES FOR GROWN-UPS                              59

 IV. SOCIABLE GAMES FOR YOUNG PEOPLE                           67

  V. TRICK GAMES FOR SOCIABLES                                 73

 VI. STUNT ATHLETIC MEET                                       83

VII. COMPETITIVE STUNTS                                        88


PART III. OUTDOOR GAMES

  I. OUTDOOR GAMES FOR OLDER BOYS AND YOUNG MEN                94

 II. OUTDOOR GAMES FOR BOYS                                   103

III. GAMES OF STRENGTH                                        110


PART IV. GAMES FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS

  I. GAMES AT DINING TABLE                                    113

 II. A COUNTY FAIR PLAY FESTIVAL                              119

III. GAMES FOR A STORY PLAY HOUR                              123

 IV. AN INDOOR SPORTS FAIR                                    127

  V. RACING GAMES FOR PICNICS                                 132




FOREWORD


We should all be prospectors of happiness. There are those who discover
it in the solitudes of the mountains where freedom is breathed in the
air that touches the lofty peaks. Others find it in the depths of the
forest in the songs of the birds, of the brook, of the trees. Most of
us must find it in the daily walks of life where the seeking is
oft-times difficult. Nevertheless, there it is in the manufactured
glory of the city, in the voices of children, and in the hearts and
faces of men.

Happiness becomes a habit with some; with others it is a lost art. Some
radiate it; others dispel that which may exist. Happiness can be
produced by means of exercising certain emotions, by causing
experiences which allow instinctive expression; the song, the dance,
the game are examples.

     All enjoyed activity may be classified as play.
     Play is that which we do when free to do as we like.
     Play produces happiness.

Work is the highest form of play. The great artist is playing when his
imagination finds expression on the canvas in color. If he did not love
to paint he would never have become a great artist. The engineer is
playing when he produces the great bridge; the financier when he
masterfully organizes his capital.

The imagination of the child leads him into all kinds of adventure. He
becomes the engineer on the locomotive; he becomes the leader of the
circus band; he is a great hunter of terrible beasts; an Indian, a
cowboy, and a robber. In fact, he tries his hand at all those careers
which interest him, and we call it play, or may even call it nonsense.
In fact, some think play is but nonsense.

Play is the expression, the exercising of the imagination. Should the
child be denied the privilege of play, should its visions never find
expression, should its mental adventures fail to find adequate physical
experience, a great musician, a great engineer, a great statesman, or a
master of some great art may be sacrificed.

Play is not only essential to the child, but, as Joseph Lee says, play
_is_ the child. The natural environment of the child is a play
environment; if we are to lead the child or educate the child we have
first to enter into his environment and into fellowship with him
therein, and adapt our methods to that environment. The processes of
education which have taken to themselves those things which are natural
to children will meet deserved success. The schoolroom, the Sunday
school room, or home in which a play atmosphere is experienced, small
though this experience may be, is operating on a sound basis. Play is
nature's method of education. As a kitten in chasing the leaves in the
road is playing, it is also learning to catch the bird or the mouse
essential for the maintenance of life. So the child, by nature, learns
to live by play.

Activity is life. Directed activity means directed life. The body is
but the means of activity and is developed only in accord with the
activity demands of the individual. Character is but the trend of the
activities of an individual. So the activities are more the individual
than is the flesh and bone which we see.

If we recognize that in play the child is under the tutorship of
nature, we should seek to encourage rather than discourage the process.
By directing the play we are training for life--yes, more, we are
creating life.

As play creates in the child, it re-creates in the adult. Activity is
essential to growth. Having attained physical growth, the adult does
not demand as much physical activity as does the child and as years
increase the tendency toward physical activity decreases. There is real
danger in this becoming too meager to maintain efficiency, and we
recognize more and more the necessity for vacation periods when some of
the old spirit of play or of joyful activity may be indulged in and a
re-creation process be set up. This recreation is simply reawakened
activity, making for greater abundance of life.

The spirit of play and the spirit of youth travel hand in hand. If we
allow the spirit of play to depart from our life, we lose our grip upon
life itself. Every man and woman should cultivate and vigorously
maintain a play spirit. This might be done through some hobbies, games,
or art into which they can throw themselves with abandon for periods of
time, frequent, if brief. They should thoroughly enjoy the experience.
For the wealthy, to whom all things are possible, this may be hard to
find. To those of limited means and of little free time, opportunity is
more abundant. To them joy shines forth from even the so-called
commonplace things of life.

The joy on the faces of those who are playing games, the merry
laughter, the jest, the shouting, place this type of activity on a
pinnacle among those producing happiness.

This volume has been prepared, in order that the young and old may find
greater opportunity for joyful activity, and experience the good
fellowship, the kindly feeling, the exhilaration and life resulting
from playing games, and that those fundamental agencies of
civilization, the Church, the school, and the home, may be better
equipped to serve mankind and to add to the sum of human happiness.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This collection of games has been selected from material sent in to the
author, by Y.M.C.A. Physical Directors, playground directors, and
school and college athletic directors, to which has been added some
original material and games that have been seen by the author in his
travels about the country.




BIBLIOGRAPHY

The author would suggest the following books on games:

   GAMES FOR THE PLAYGROUND, HOME, SCHOOL AND GYMNASIUM, Jessie
     Bancroft, Macmillan Co., N.Y.

   GAMES FOR EVERYBODY, Hofmann, Dodge Publishing Co., N.Y.

   SOCIAL GAMES AND GROUP DANCES, Elsom and Trilling, J.B. Lippincott
     & Co., Philadelphia.

   ICEBREAKERS, Edna Geister, The Womans Press, N.Y.

   SOCIAL ACTIVITIES, Chesley, Association Press, N.Y.

   PLAY, Emmett D. Angell, Little, Brown & Co., Boston.

   HANDBOOK FOR PIONEERS, Association Press, N.Y.

   CAMP AND OUTING ACTIVITIES, Cheley and Baker, Association Press,
     N.Y.

   COMMUNITY RECREATION, Draper, Association Press, N.Y.




Part I

GAMES FOR SCHOOLS


CHAPTER I

SCHOOLROOM GAMES

For Primary Pupils


Cat and Mouse

One pupil is designated to play the role of cat, another that of mouse.
The mouse can escape the cat by sitting in the seat with some other
pupil. Thereupon that pupil becomes mouse. Should the cat tag a mouse
before it sits in a seat, the mouse becomes cat and the cat becomes
mouse, and the latter must get into a seat to avoid being tagged.


Aviation Meet

Three pupils constitute a team. Two are mechanicians, one the aviator.
Each team is to have a piece of string about 25 feet long, free from
knots. A small cornucopia of paper is placed upon each string. The
mechanicians hold the ends of the string while the aviator, at the
signal to go, blows the cornucopia along the string. The string must be
held level by the mechanicians. The aviator first succeeding in doing
this, wins for his team.


Button, Button

The pupils sit or stand in a circle with their hands in front of them,
palms together. The one who has been selected to be "It" takes a
position in the center of the circle, with his hands in a similar
position. A button is held between his hands. He goes around the circle
and places his hand over those of various individuals, dropping the
button into the hands of one. He continues about the circle, still
making the motions of dropping the button in the hands of others, so as
to deceive those making up the ring. After he has taken his place in
the center of the circle, those in the ring endeavor to guess into
whose hands he has dropped the button, the one succeeding in doing this
takes the button and continues the game.


Bee

Some object is determined upon for hiding, such as a coin, a button, a
thimble, etc. A pupil is sent from the room. During his absence the
object is hidden. Upon his return the children buzz vigorously when he
is near to the object sought and very faintly when he is some distance
away. The object is located by the intensity of the buzzing.


Hide in Sight

In this game all of the pupils except one are sent from the room. The
one left in the room hides a coin, or some similar object, somewhere in
plain sight. It must be visible without having to move any object. When
hidden, the rest of the pupils are called back and start the search.
When a pupil finds the coin, after attempting to mislead the others by
continuing his search in different quarters, he returns to his seat
without disclosing its whereabouts. As it is found by others, the group
of seekers will gradually diminish until there is but one left. When he
finds it, the coin is again hidden by the one first finding it.


Colors

A certain color is determined upon. Each pupil in turn must name some
object which is of that color. Failing to do this he goes to the foot
of the line, provided some one beyond him can think of any object of
that color. If no more objects can be thought of, a new color is
selected.


I See Red

One pupil is given the privilege of thinking of some object in the
room, of which he discloses the color to the rest of the pupils. For
example, if he sees a red apple he says, "I see red." Thereupon the
other pupils endeaver to guess what red object in the room is thought
of. The one succeeding, next selects the object to be guessed.


Hide the Clock

This is a good quiet game for the schoolroom. A loud ticking clock is
necessary for the game. All of the pupils are sent from the room. One
of their number is selected to hide the clock. The others, upon coming
back, try to locate it by its ticking. The one succeeding has the
privilege of next hiding the clock.


Poison Seat

The children all endeavor to shift seats at the clapping of the hands
of the teacher. Have one less seat than pupils, so that one may be left
without a seat. This can be arranged by placing a book on one seat and
calling this "Poison Seat." The child sitting on this seat is
"poisoned" and out of the game. Add a book to a seat after each change,
so as to eliminate one player each time. The one left after all have
been eliminated, wins the game. Should the teacher clap her hands twice
in succession, that is the signal for all of the pupils to return to
their own seats.


Aisle Hunt

Some object--a coin will do--is selected to be hidden. The children of
one of the aisles leave the room, the others determine upon a hiding
place and hide the coin in plain sight. Those out of the room are
called back and look for the hidden object. As soon as it is found, the
first one finding it goes to his seat and calls, "First." He is not to
call until he is actually in his seat. The second one to find it
returns to his seat and calls, "Second," and so on until it has been
found by all in the aisle. If there are six aisles in the room, the
occupants of the first six seats in the aisle seeking the hidden object
determine which aisle leaves the room next. For illustration,--if the
pupil in the second seat is the first one to find the object, then the
second aisle of the room will be the one to leave the room for the next
hunt. Likewise if the pupil of the third seat is the first to find the
object, the third aisle will be the one which next has the privilege of
enjoying the hunt. If there are more pupils in the aisle than there are
aisles in the room, the pupils in the last seats do not count.


New Orleans

The pupils of the room are divided into two groups. One side decides
upon some action it will represent, such as sawing wood, washing
clothes, etc., and thereupon represents the action. The other group has
five chances to guess what the first group is trying to represent.
Failing to do this, they must forfeit one of their players to the
second group and the same side again represents an action.

When a group presents an action to the others, the following dialogue
takes place:

  First Group: Here we come.
  Second Group: Where from?
  First Group: New Orleans.
  Second Group: What's your trade?
  First Group: Lemonade.
  Second Group: How is it made?

The first group then represents the action.


Birds Fly

This is an attention game. The teacher stands before the class and
instructs them that if she mentions some bird or object which flies and
raises her arms sideward, imitating the flapping of the wings of a
bird, the pupils are to follow her example. But if she mentions some
animal or some object which does not fly, she may raise her arms
sideward and upward, imitating the flying position, but the pupils are
not to follow her example. If they are caught doing so, they must take
their seats. For example,--the teacher says, "Owls fly". Thereupon she
and all the children raise their arms sideward and upward. She says,
"Bats fly" and raises her arms. She next says, "Lions fly" and raises
her arms, thereupon the pupils are supposed to keep their arms at their
sides.


Music Rush

A march is played on the piano and the children march from their seats
in single file around the room. As soon as the music stops, all rush to
get into their seats. The last one in, must remain in his seat during
the second trial. If there is no piano in the room, drumming on the top
of a desk will do as well.


Change Seat Relay

The teacher claps her hands. This is the signal for all to shift one
seat back. The one in the rear seat runs forward and sits in the front
seat. The first aisle to become properly seated wins one point. Again
the hands are clapped and the pupils shift one seat back, and the one
then at the rear runs forward and takes the front seat and so the game
continues until all have run forward from the back seat to the front.
The aisle scoring the largest number of points wins.


Charlie over the Water

This is an old game and is always popular. The children form a ring,
joining hands. One is selected to be "It" and takes his place in the
center. Those in the ring then dance around, singing,

    "Charlie, over the water,
    Charlie, over the sea,
    Charlie, catch a blackbird,
    But can't catch me."

Having completed these lines, they all assume a stooping position
before "Charlie," who is "It," can tag them. If he succeeds in tagging
one, that one takes his place in the circle and the game continues.


Tap Relay

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. All bend their heads
forward, placing their faces in the palms of their hands on the top of
the desk. At the signal to go, given by the teacher, the one in the
last seat in each aisle sits up, claps his hands and taps the back of
the one in front of him, which is the signal for the one in front to
sit up, clap, and tap the one next in front of him, and so the tap is
passed until it reaches the one in the front seat of the aisle, who,
upon being tapped, stands up, clapping his hands above his head. The
first to stand and clap hands above head wins the race.


Rat-a-tat Race

Similar to the preceding race with the exception that upon the signal
to go the one in the back seat knocks with the knuckles of his right
hand on the top of the desk a "rat-tat, rat-tat-tat," as in a drum
beat, and then taps with the knuckles the back of the one next in front
of him, who repeats the performance, tapping off the one in front, and
so on. The race ends when the individual in the front seat of an aisle
taps the "rat-tat, rat-tat-tat" and stands up.


Bowing Race

A book is handed to the pupil in the last seat of each aisle. At the
signal to go the pupils holding the book step into the aisle at the
right hand side of their desks, holding the books on the tops of their
heads with both hands, and make a bow. Then returning to their seats,
hit the book on the top of the desk and pass it on to the next one in
front, who repeats the performance, as does every one else in the
aisle. The one in the front seat of the aisle finishes the race by
bowing with the book upon his head, then running forward, and placing
the book upon the teacher's desk.


Spin Around Race

A boy is selected from each aisle to take his place at least six feet
in front of the aisle. Upon the signal to go, the last boy in each
aisle runs forward to the right of his desk and links his left arm in
the right arm of the boy standing in front of his aisle, and in this
position spins around twice, returning to his seat, and tagging off the
boy next in front of him, who repeats the performance. The last boy in
the aisle to spin around ends the race when he has returned to a
sitting position in his seat.




CHAPTER II

SCHOOLROOM GAMES

For Intermediate Pupils


Initial Tag

A pupil who is "It" is sent to the board. He writes thereupon the
initial of some other pupil in the room. That pupil is to try to tag
"It" before he can return to his seat. If successful, he becomes "It"
and continues the game by writing some one else's initial on the board.


Magic Music

One pupil is sent from the room. Thereupon the remaining pupils hide
some object agreed upon. The pupil sent from the room is recalled. The
teacher or one of the pupils plays the piano loudly when the seeker
approaches the hidden article and softly when some distance from it.
The seeker determines the location by the volume of the music.


Hunt the Rattler

All of the players in the room are blindfolded, except one, who is
given a tin can in which is placed a loose pebble. He is known as the
"rattler." The blindfolded players attempt to locate and tag the
rattler by the rattle. The one successful takes the place of the
rattler.


Sticker

The pupils stand in a circle in the center of which is "It"
blindfolded, holding in his hand a blunt stick about 12 or 15 inches
long. Those in the circle dance around two or three times, so that the
blindfolded player may not know their position. At the command "Stand,"
given by the one blindfolded, all must stand still. Thereupon, by
feeling with his stick, "It" tries to discern an individual in the
ring. "It" is forbidden to use his hands, in trying to discover who the
individual is. If he succeeds in guessing, the individual guessed must
take his place. Otherwise he proceeds to some other individual in the
circle whom he tries to identify.


Name Race

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. A slip is handed to the one
in the first seat in each row. At the signal to go, he writes his full
name thereupon and passes it immediately to the one next behind him,
who writes his name and passes it on. When the one in the last seat in
the row has added his name to the slip, he rushes forward and places
the slip upon the teacher's desk. The aisle first succeeding in
accomplishing this task, wins.


Frogs in Sea

One pupil sits in tailor fashion in the center of the playing space.
The others try to tease him by approaching as closely as they dare,
calling him "Frog in the sea, Can't catch me." If the frog succeeds in
tagging any of the other players, that player must take his place. The
frog is not allowed to change from his sitting position in his effort
to tag the other players.


Corner Spry

The pupils in the room are divided into four equal teams. Each team is
assigned to a different corner. A leader stands in front of each team
with a bean bag, cap, or ball. At the signal to start the leader tosses
to and receives from each member of his team in turn the bean bag.
Having received the bag from the last one in his line, he takes his
place at the foot of the line, and the one at the head of the line
becomes leader and proceeds to toss the ball to each member as did the
preceding leader. The group, in which all have served as leaders and
which successfully completes the game first, wins.


Flag Race

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. Flags are given to the
pupils in each front seat. On the signal to go, each pupil holding a
flag steps out on the right hand side of the seat, runs around the
front of his own aisle, back on the left hand side, around the rear
seat, returning to his own seat up the right hand aisle, and hands the
flag on to the one next behind him, who continues the race. When all
the pupils in the aisle have circled their row of seats with the flag,
the last one, instead of returning to his seat, runs forward and holds
the flag above his head in front of his aisle. The one first succeeding
in reaching the front, wins the race.

In this race it is often better to run two aisles at a time and thus
avoid the possibility of pupils bumping into each other in their
attempt to race through the aisles. In this way the various winners can
race against each other, making an interesting contest.


Seat Vaulting Tag

A pupil is selected to be "It." He attempts to tag any other pupil in
the same aisle in which he stands. The pupils avoid being tagged by
vaulting over the seats. No one is allowed to run around either end.
"It" cannot reach across the desk in his effort to tag another. He must
be in the same aisle or tag as one is vaulting a seat. A pupil becomes
"It" as soon as tagged.


Jerusalem, Jericho, Jemima

This is a simple game of attention. The three words in the title are
near enough alike to require close attention on the part of the pupil
to distinguish between them and to act accordingly. Have the pupils
turn in their seats facing the aisle. If the teacher says "Jerusalem",
the pupils stand. If she says, "Jericho", they raise their arms
momentarily forward and upward. If she says, "Jemima", they sit down.
Any child making a mistake sits in her seat and faces to the front.


Compass

An attention game. The pupils stand in the aisle beside their seats. In
starting the game, the teacher asks them to face to the north, then to
the south, then to the east, and to the west, so that they have the
directions fixed in their minds. She then proceeds to tell a story or
to make statements such as the following, "I came from the north." At
the mention of the word "north" all the pupils must turn and face
towards the north. "But since I have arrived in the south,"--at the
mention of the word "south" they all turn and face the south, etc. If
the teacher should say "wind," the pupils imitate the whistling of the
wind; if "whirlwind" is mentioned, all must spin about on their heels a
complete turn. Failing to do any of the required turns, the pupil takes
his seat.


Geography

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. Those in the front seats
are Number 1, those next behind them, Number 2, and so on back. The
teacher calls some number. The pupils having that number race to the
board and write thereupon the name of some river, returning to their
seats. The first one back wins one point for his team. The game
continues until all the numbers have been called, the team having the
most points wins.


Spelling Words

Have the pupils in aisle 1 face those in aisle 2, those in aisle 3 face
4, those in aisle 5 face 6. Appoint a captain for each aisle. The
captain of one team starts spelling a word containing more than three
letters. The captain of the team facing his, adds the second letter,
not knowing what word the captain of the other team had in mind. The
second man of the first team adds a third letter; the second man of the
second team adds a fourth, each team trying to avoid completing the
word. The team completing the word loses one point to the other team.
For example, the first man of team A says "g," the first man of team B
says "o," thinking of "gold." The second man on team A says "o,"
thinking of "goose." The second man on team B can only think of "good"
and contributes "d," ending the word. Team A thereupon scores a point.
The third man of team A continues the game by starting another word.
When the ends of the aisles are reached the word, if uncompleted, is
passed to the head of the line and continued.

If there are four aisles in the room, there will be two groups playing
at the same time; six aisles, three groups; eight aisles, four groups.
The captains of opposing teams keep a record of the score.


Rhymes

This game stimulates quick thinking. Some one is selected by the
teacher to start the game, and thereupon gives some word to which the
first pupil in the aisle must give a rhyming word before the former can
count ten. Failing to do this, the leader continues and gives a word to
the second one in the aisle. The rhyming words are to be given before
the leader has completed his count of ten. Then the one succeeding in
giving the word replaces the leader.


Clapping Song

A pupil is selected by the teacher to clap the rhythm of some familiar
air. The rest of the children in the room endeavor to guess the song
clapped. The pupil succeeding in doing this is given an opportunity to
clap another song.


Indian Trail

A pupil is blindfolded and placed in the front of the room. Other
pupils, one or two at a time, are given the opportunity to stealthily
approach the one blindfolded, in an endeavor to take some object, from
before his feet, such as a flower pot and saucer, or a tin can with a
loose pebble in it, without being detected by the one blindfolded. If a
pupil succeeds in taking back the object to his seat without having
been heard, he wins a point for his aisle. Where two pupils are sent
forward at the same time, two similar objects must be placed at the
foot of the one blindfolded. The aisle scoring the largest number of
points in this way wins the game.


Number Relay

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. They are numbered,
beginning with the one in the first seat. The teacher describes some
mathematical problem she desires done and calls certain numbers. All
the pupils having those numbers rush to the board and compute the
problem. The first back to his seat wins a point for his team, the
aisle gaining the largest number of points wins the game.


Multiplication Race

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. The teacher decides on a
multiplication table which is to be placed upon the board. A piece of
chalk is handed to the first pupil in each aisle. At the signal to go
Number 1 goes to the board and writes the first example in the
multiplication table thereupon. Returning to his seat, he hands the
chalk to the one next behind him, who puts the next step in the
multiplication table on the board, and so the race continues until the
one in the last seat has returned to his seat, after adding his part to
the table. The one first back to his seat wins for his aisle.


History Race

Similar to the preceding, with the exception that the pupils are
requested to write upon the board the name of some historical
personage or some historical event, date, etc.


Poem Race

The pupils having learned some poem may use it in a game in the
following way:

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. At the signal to go the
last pupil in each aisle stands up and recites the first line of the
poem, returns to his seat and taps the one next in front of him, who
stands up and repeats the second line of the poem, sits down and taps
off the third pupil, who repeats the third line, and so the game
continues. If the poem has not been completed after the one in the
front seat has said his line, he taps the one next behind him, and that
one is supposed to give the next line and so on back. The aisle first
completing a poem wins the race.

If the poem be a very small one, words of the poem instead of lines may
be used. If it be a long one, verses instead of lines may be used.


Last Man

This is a good active game thoroughly enjoyed by the children. The
teacher selects one pupil to be "It," and another to be chased. The one
chased can stand at the rear of any aisle and say, "Last man."
Thereupon the front pupil in that aisle is subject to being tagged by
"It" and leaves his seat. All the other pupils in that aisle advance
one seat and the first man chased sits down in the last seat in the
aisle. "It" tries to tag the man who left the front seat before he can
go to the rear of any of the aisles. Should he succeed in doing so, he
can immediately be tagged back if he does not hurry to the rear of some
aisle and say "Last man."

(Caution: Should any child appear fatigued when "It," substitute
another child in his place).


Change Seats

This is a good relaxation game. The teacher says, "Change seats left."
Thereupon all the pupils shift to the seats to their left. The children
who are in the last aisle on the left must run around the room and
occupy the vacant seats on the right hand side. Should the teacher say,
"Change seats right," the reverse of the proceeding is necessary. The
teacher can also say, "Change seats front," or "Change seats rear," and
the pupils are expected to obey the commands. Those left without seats
must run to the other end of the room and take any seat found vacant
there.


Relay Run Around

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. The pupil in the last seat
in each row, upon the signal to go, steps out in the right hand aisle,
runs forward around the front of his row of seats, back on the left
hand side, circling the rear seat, and sits down, touching off the next
pupil in front of him, who repeats the performance. The aisle first
accomplishing the run, wins.




CHAPTER III

SCHOOLROOM GAMES

For Advanced and High School Pupils


Geography

The group is divided into two equal teams. A leader is chosen for each.
The leader of Team A begins the game by giving the name of a country
beginning with the letter "A" (Austria). The leader of Team B gives
another country beginning with "A". The second member of Team A,
another; the second member of Team B, another; until one of the teams
cannot think of any more countries beginning with "A". That team last
thinking of a country wins one point. The other members of the team can
help their team mate, whose turn it is, by suggesting other countries.
The member of the team failing to name a country beginning with "A",
starts with the letter "B" and the game continues, until one team has
won ten points. The names of rivers, mountains, states, cities, etc.,
can be substituted for the names of countries.


Seeing and Remembering

Fifteen or twenty articles are placed upon a table under a sheet, in
front of the pupils. The sheet is removed for a space of 10 seconds and
the pupils are given a good chance to study the articles on the table.
After the sheet has again covered the articles, each pupil is requested
to write as many of the articles as can be remembered, on a sheet of
paper. The one remembering the largest number wins.


Definitions

The teacher selects some word from the dictionary, which is written
upon the blackboard. Each pupil then writes the definition of that word
on a slip of paper. After this is done, the teacher compares the
definition with that in the dictionary. The one giving the definition
nearest like that in the dictionary wins, and gives the next word to be
defined.


Jumbled Words

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. Each pupil in the aisle is
given a number. The one in each front seat is Number 1, the one behind
him Number 2, and so on back. The teacher has prepared a different
sentence for each aisle with just as many words in it as there are
pupils in the aisle. One of these slips is handed to Number 1 of each
team. Number 1 takes the first word of the sentence as his word, Number
2 the second, Number 3 the third, and so on. When the last one in the
aisle has learned the last word in the sentence, the slips are returned
to the teacher. Competition can be added to this phase of the game by
seeing which aisle can return the slip to the teacher first.

When the slips have all been turned in, the teacher calls any number.
Thereupon the pupils in each aisle having that number, go to the
blackboard and write distinctly their word from the sentence. For
example, the teacher calls Number 3. Number 3 of aisle 1 had the word
"money"; Number 3 of aisle 2 "can," etc.

Next the teacher calls Number 5. All the Number 5's go to the
blackboard and write their words directly after those written by their
previous team mate. When all the numbers have been called there is a
jumbled sentence on the board for each aisle. The pupils of the various
aisles then try to guess what the sentences of the other aisles are.
Each one guessed, counts 5 points.


Descriptive Adjectives

An historical personage is selected, such as Columbus, George
Washington, etc. The first pupil called upon must describe the subject
with a descriptive adjective beginning with "A". The second, third, and
fourth, etc., adding to this description by using adjectives beginning
with the letter "A". This continues until the adjectives beginning with
the letter "A" have been exhausted. Then the letter "B" is used and the
game continues. It is well to change the subject after every fourth or
fifth letter. This is a good game for adding to the vocabulary of the
pupil. A little fun can be had by using, instead of an historical
subject, one of the pupils of the room for description.


Store

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. The one in the front seat
in each aisle is Number 1, the one behind him, Number 2, etc.

The teacher has a number of cards upon each of which appears a letter
of the alphabet. The teacher holds up one of these letters so that it
can be distinctly seen by the pupils. Number 1 of each aisle must name
some article sold in a grocery store, beginning with the letter held up
by the teacher. (For example,--the teacher holds up the letter "F";
Number 1 of the second aisle calls, "Flour"). The pupil first naming an
article of that letter is given the card containing the letter. The
next card held up, the number 2's of each team are to name the article,
and likewise the winner to be awarded the card. The aisle having the
most cards at the end of the game wins.

The letters can be written on the blackboard if the cards are not
available for the game and points awarded to each winner. The game can
also be used with birds, animals, and other subjects in place of
articles sold in a store. This is a good game to stimulate quick
thinking.


Distinguishing Sounds

This game is good training for the ear. Various noises, such as the
shaking of a pebble in a tin can, in a wooden box, in a pasteboard box,
in a large envelope; knocking on wood, on tin, on coin (as silver
dollar), on stone, on brass, on lead,--are made. The pupils are allowed
to guess just what the noise is caused by.


Laugh

This is a good relaxing game and one in which the practice of self
control is a factor. An open handkerchief is tossed into the air. While
it is in the air the pupils are to laugh as heartily as they can, but
the instant the handkerchief touches the floor, all laughing is to
stop.


Guessing Dimensions

The ability to measure with the eye is well worth cultivating. Each
pupil is to guess the distance between various points indicated on the
blackboard, the height of a door, the width and the height of a school
desk, the height of the schoolroom, the thickness of a book, etc. Each
of the guesses is written on a slip of paper. The pupil with the best
guesses wins.


Mysterious Articles

An article is concealed under a cloth on the table. Each pupil is given
an opportunity to feel the article through the cloth and guess what it
is, educating the sense of touch.


Distinguishing by Smell

Various articles invisible to the eye, with distinctive odors, such as
vinegar, rose, mustard, vanilla, ginger, clove, tea, coffee, chocolate,
soap, etc., are placed before the pupil. The one able to distinguish
the largest number of articles by the smell, wins the game.


Art Gallery

Pictures of a number of famous paintings by the masters are placed on
exhibition. The pupil guessing the largest number of masters and
titles, of the various pictures, wins.


Drawing Animals

The teacher whispers in the ear of each pupil the name of some animal,
whereupon the pupil proceeds to draw that animal, each pupil being
given the name of a different animal. Drawings are made and put on
exhibition. All try to guess as many as possible of the animals
represented in the drawings. The drawing securing the largest number of
correct guesses wins for the artist.


Historical Pictures

A long sheet of paper is given to each pupil, with instructions to draw
thereupon a picture representing some historical event. After
completing the drawing, each paper is passed about the room. Each pupil
writes underneath the picture what he thinks the picture represents.
His subject is folded under, so that the next pupil to receive the
picture cannot see what his guess has been. At the end of the game, the
picture having the largest number of correct guesses wins.


Train of Thoughts

A word is suggested by the teacher. This is written at the top of a
sheet of paper by each pupil. The pupil then writes beneath that word
various thoughts that are suggested to him by the word. For instance,
the word suggested by the teacher is "aeroplane". Pupil A has suggested
to him by the word "aeroplane", humming. He writes that on his list.
Humming suggests bees. Bees suggest honey; honey, clover, clover
summer, summer swimming hole, etc. When all of the pupils have written
fifteen or twenty thoughts which have suggested themselves to them,
each is called upon to read his train of thoughts to the rest of the
class.


Bowknot Relay

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. A piece of string is given
to each pupil in the front seat. At a signal to start each pupil with
the string runs forward and ties it in a bowknot on some article placed
in front of each aisle. After tying the bow, he returns to his seat and
touches the one in the seat next behind him. Thereupon the second
member of the team runs, unties the bowknot, returns with the string;
and hands it to the third, who runs forward, and ties it in a bowknot,
as did the first, and returning touches off the fourth, etc. The aisle
in which each pupil has accomplished the required task first, wins the
race.


Cooking Race

This is a good game for the class in domestic science. The pupils of
each aisle constitute a team. A piece of chalk is handed to the one in
each front seat. At the signal to go, the chalk is passed back until it
reaches the one in the last seat in the row. Every one in the aisle
must have handled the chalk in passing it back. Upon receiving it, the
last one in the row runs forward to the board and writes thereupon an
ingredient necessary in the making of cake. Returning, the chalk is
handed to the one in the front seat and again passed back until it gets
to the one in the next to the last seat, who rushes to the board and
writes another ingredient necessary in cake making. And so the race
continues. When the last pupil at the board, namely the one from the
front seat, has written upon the board and returned to her seat, the
race is ended. The race is won by the aisle first completing this task.


Spelling Game

The group, if numbering 40 or more pupils, is divided into two teams.
The contestants of each team are given a different letter of the
alphabet. The teacher gives a word. Thereupon the pupils in both teams
whose letter occurs in the word named, run one to the front and one to
the rear of the room, as assigned by the teacher, and take their places
in the order in which their letter occurs in the word. When the pupils
have taken their proper position, they call out the letters they
represent, spelling the word. The group first accomplishing this, wins
one point for their team. If the letter occurs twice in the same word,
that pupil representing that letter takes his place where the letter
first occurs in the word and shifts to the second position, so as to
help complete the word.

If the group be too small for two alphabets the game can be played by
having but one and seeing which of the various words given is formed in
the quickest time by the single group.


Grammar Race

The pupils of each aisle constitute a team. A piece of chalk is given
to the one in each front seat. At the signal to go, the one with the
chalk rushes to the board and writes the first word of a sentence on
the board and returns to his seat, passing the chalk on to the second
one, who writes the second word for a sentence. The third writes the
third, and so on until a complete sentence has been written upon the
board. The one in the last seat must complete the sentence and return
to his seat, ending the race.

Twenty-five points is awarded the team finishing first; twenty-five
points to each team with correct spelling; twenty-five points for the
team with the best writing; twenty-five points for the best composition
of the sentence.


Schoolroom Tag

A three foot circle is made with a piece of chalk in the front of the
room. Each pupil in the room is given a different number. The teacher
selects one to be "It," who must stand at least ten feet from the
circle and be touching a side wall. "It" calls a number. The pupil
whose number is called tries to run through the circle in the front of
the room and get back to his seat without being tagged by "It". The one
who is "It" must run through the circle before he can tag the one whose
number he called. If the pupil is tagged he becomes "It".


Directions

An attention game. Taking for granted that the pupils have a general
knowledge of the directions of various towns or cities in their state
or the surrounding states, the following game can be played.

All are requested to stand in the aisle beside their seats. The teacher
then proceeds to make statements or tell some story, mentioning the
names of various cities and towns. At the mention of these the pupils
face in the direction in which said cities or towns are located.
Failing to turn correctly when a city is mentioned the pupil is
required to take his seat.




CHAPTER IV

SCHOOLYARD GAMES

For Primary Pupils


Chase the Rabbit

The group kneels in a circle with their hands on each other's
shoulders. The one selected to be rabbit runs around the circle and
tags some individual. Thereupon that individual must get upon his feet
and run to the left around the circle. The rabbit runs to the right
around the circle. The rabbit must tag the one who is running around in
the opposite direction, and then both endeavor to get back to the hole
left in the circle. The one failing to do this becomes the rabbit for
the next play.


Steps

One of the group is selected to be "It". He stands with his back to the
group and counts five, at the end of which he turns rapidly around. If
he sees any of the group moving, that one seen must go back to the
starting line. While the one "It" is counting, it is the object of the
group to progress toward him as rapidly as possible.


Statues

This game is similar to the game "Steps," above described, excepting
that the players standing behind "It" assume the poses of statues. "It"
upon turning around endeavors to detect some movement on the part of
the statues, in which case that player takes the place of "It".


Progression

The players stand behind a line. Each in turn must cover the space
between said line and another line twenty yards distant by a manner of
progress different from that used by any of the previous players. For
example, the first one called upon to cover the intervening space
between the lines walks, the second one runs, the third hops, the
fourth crawls, the fifth walks backward, etc., and so on until all of
the players have reached the far line. This game taxes the ingenuity of
the last players to be called upon, as they have to initiate new
methods of progress.


Squirrel in Trees

Players stand in groups of three--two facing one another with hands
joined to form hollow trees, and the third within the tree hollow to
represent the squirrel. There is also one odd squirrel outside the
tree. The teacher or leader claps her hands, when all squirrels must
run for other trees, and the odd squirrel tries to secure a tree, the
one left out being the odd squirrel the next time. Players' positions
may be reversed frequently to give all an equal chance to be squirrels.


Shadow Tag

This game is similar to ordinary tag, with the exception that "It"
endeavors to touch or step on the shadow of one of the players.
Succeeding in doing this, that player becomes "It".


Handkerchief Tag

A player is selected to be "It". A knotted handkerchief is given to the
rest of the players. "It" can only tag the player holding the
handkerchief in his hands. The players endeavor to get rid of the
handkerchief by throwing it from one to another. Should the
handkerchief fall upon the ground, there is no one for "It" to tag
until it has been picked up by one of the players.


Puss in Corner

The players are distributed about the playing area, and given goals,
such as trees, fence and building corners, etc. One player is selected
to be "It". The other players endeavor to change places. "It" can
either tag one of the players who is off his corner, on goal, or step
into the goal vacated by one of the players. In the first case, the
player tagged becomes "It"; in the second, the player left without a
goal becomes "It".


Back to Back

This is a tag game in which "It" may tag anyone who is not back to back
with one other player.


Peggy in Ring

A blindfolded player takes his place in the center of the group which
has joined hands, forming a ring. The ring begins to dance around in a
circle until "Peggy", who is blindfolded in the centre, pounds three
times with a stick upon the ground or floor. This is the signal for
everyone to stand still. "Peggy" then holds out the stick to some one
in the circle. The one nearest to it must grasp the end. "Peggy" then
asks the one at the other end three questions. The questions may be
answered by grunts or groans and "Peggy" endeavors to guess who is thus
answering the questions. Succeeding, the one questioned takes "Peggy's"
place in the center of the circle and the game proceeds.




CHAPTER V

SCHOOLYARD GAMES

For Intermediate Pupils


Link Race

The group is divided into two teams, and a leader appointed for each. A
large square is marked upon the ground and the opposing teams line up
upon opposite sides of the square behind their leader, each locking his
arms about the waist of the man in front of him. At a signal to go both
groups endeavor to tag the rear end of the group in front of them by
running about the square, keeping on the lines. Should a group succeed
in tagging the rear of the line in front, but it is found that their
own line is broken through the effort, it does not count. But the
broken line can be tagged by the rear of the line and it will count. So
it is up to that part of the line which has broken loose at the rear to
catch up with the rest of its team.


Maze Tag

All but two of the players stand in parallel lines or ranks, one behind
the other, with ample space between each player and each two ranks. All
the players in each rank clasp hands in a long line. This will leave
aisles between the ranks and through these a runner and chaser make
their way.

The sport of the game consists in sudden changes in the direction of
the aisles, brought about by one player who is chosen as leader. He
stands aside, giving the commands, "Right face!" or "Left face!" at his
discretion. When one of these commands is heard, all of the players
standing in the ranks drop hands, face in the direction indicated and
quickly clasp hands with the players who are then their neighbors on
the right and left. This brings about a change of direction in the
aisles and therefore necessitates a change of direction in the course
of the two who are running.

[Illustration: _Maze Tag_]

The success of the game depends largely upon the judgment of the leader
in giving the commands, "Right (or left) face!" These should be given
quickly and repeatedly, the leader often choosing a moment when the
pursuer seems just about to touch his victim, when the sudden
obstruction put in his way by the change in the position of the ranks
makes necessary a sudden change of direction on his part. The play
continues until the chaser catches his victim, or until the time limit
has expired. In either case two new players are then chosen from the
ranks to take the places of the first runners.

It is a foul to break through the ranks or to tag across the clasped
hands.


Turtle Tag

One player is selected to be "It" and chases the rest. In order to
avoid being tagged, a player may lie upon his back with both feet and
hands off the ground.


Roly Poly

This game must be played in groups, not larger than 12. Holes are dug
in the ground with the heels of the shoe. These holes are placed about
6 inches apart in a line. They should be about 3 inches in diameter and
at least one inch deep. A line is drawn 6 feet from the first hole. The
one who is "It" must stand behind this line and roll a soft ball so
that it will drop into one of the holes. If he misses, he continues to
roll until he succeeds. If he succeeds, the one, into whose hole the
ball rolls, runs forward, picks it up and endeavors to hit any other
player from the position in which he picked up the ball. The rest may
run in their effort to get away. Should he miss, a goose egg--(a small
stone)--is placed in his hole. Should he succeed in hitting a player, a
goose egg is placed in the hole of that player. The one to whom is
awarded the goose egg is the next to roll the ball from the dead line
in the endeavor to get it into a hole. Any player getting three goose
eggs has to run the gauntlet, which is the name given to running
between two lines of players while they slap at his back. The faster he
runs the lighter the slaps. No player is allowed to hit from the front.


Antony Over

A group is divided into two teams, A and B. The game is played around a
small building, such as a small school house or wood shed, around
which there is free running space. To team A is given a soft ball, such
as a tennis or yarn ball. The ball is thrown over the building to team
B. If it is caught by one of the players of team B, the whole team
slips around the building, all going in the same direction, and trying
to hit with the ball some one on team A before they can get around to
the opposite side of the building. Team A tries to escape being hit by
dodging and running around the building to the opposite side. If a
player is hit, he goes to B side. The teams keep their new places and B
throws the ball over to A. If the ball is not caught, it is thrown back
and forth over the building until caught. The team which first hits all
of its opponents wins, or a time limit may be agreed upon and the team
having the greatest number of players at the end of that time, wins.


Snake and Bird

Two lines are drawn in the schoolyard about fifty feet apart. The group
is divided into two teams. The one team links hands and takes a
position between the two lines, and the leader calls, "Birds run". The
other team, which is lined up behind one of the lines, endeavors to run
across the space between the two lines without being caught by the
snake, which endeavors to circle around as many of the second team as
it can. A record is kept of the number of boys caught. Then the other
team becomes snake and endeavors to coil around as many of the
opponents, when they attempt to cross the space between the lines, as
possible.


In and Out

The group grasp hands, forming a circle. Two individuals are selected,
one to be "It", and the other to be chased. These two are placed on
opposite sides of the circle. Then "It" endeavors to tag the other. The
one chased may go in and out under the hands of those forming the
circle, cut through or run around the circle and "It" has to follow
the same course in the pursuit. When "It" succeeds in tagging his
partner, two other players take their places.


Fox and Rabbit

The group link hands and form a circle. Two players are selected, one
to be "It" and the other to be chased, as in the preceding game. In
this game, however, it is not necessary that the fox follow the same
course the rabbit pursues, in his endeavor to tag him, but both can go
in and out of the circle at will. The players in the circle endeavor to
assist the rabbit and impede the fox in his chase, as much as possible.
When the fox has caught the rabbit, two other players are selected to
take their places.


Chicken Market

One player is selected to be a buyer, another to be the market man. The
rest of the players are to be chickens. They stoop down in a row,
clasping their hands under their knees. The buyer inquires of the
market man, "Have you chickens for sale?" The market man says, "Yes,
plenty of them". Thereupon the buyer goes along the line and examines
the chickens. He finds one too tough, one too fat, etc., until at last
he comes to one which suits his fancy, and he so informs the market
man. He takes one arm and the market man takes the other and between
them they swing the chicken back and forth. If the chicken maintains
the grasp of its hands beneath its knees, it is accepted by the buyer
and is led off to the home of the buyer, marked upon the ground. The
game continues until all the chickens are sold.


Chickidy Hand

The player who is selected to be "It" interlocks the fingers of his
hands and holds them against a post, which is known as the goal. The
other players fold their hands in the same way and place them against
the post. To start the game, "It" counts ten, whereupon the players
leave the goal and "It" endeavors to tag one of them. The hands must be
kept folded until tagged. The one tagged joins hands with "It" and
continues with him in an effort to tag others. The players endeavor to
keep from being tagged by the line and try to break through the line.
Succeeding in this, the individual towards the head of the line, next
to the break, drops out of the game. Those in the line cannot tag a
player who has rushed in and succeeded in breaking the line until the
line reforms.


Pass Ball

The group form a circle and are counted off in 2's. The Number 1's are
given a ball or some other object easily tossed, at one side of the
circle and the Number 2's a like object on the other side of the
circle. Then 1 competes against 2 in an endeavor, by passing the object
around the circle, to have it overtake that passed by the other team.
When the object passed by one team has overtaken and passed that of the
other, it counts one point and the game starts over, with the objects
on opposite sides of the circle.


Poison

The group forms a circle, linking hands. In the center of the circle is
placed on end a short log about a foot long. (A tall bottle may be used
in place of the log). By it is lying a soft playground baseball or a
yarn ball. The circle begins to rotate around the log, the object being
to keep from knocking the club over, on the one hand, but to force some
one else in the circle to knock it over. The instant it falls, the
circle dissolves and all the players except the one who knocks over the
club run, while he picks up the ball and throws it at the running
players. If he succeeds in hitting some one, the one hit is out of the
game. If he fails, he is out. So the game continues until but two
players are left.


Fox Trail

[Illustration]

A large circle is drawn upon the ground. This should measure from 30 to
40 feet in radius. Another circle is drawn within this first circle and
should have a radius 10 feet less than the first. Eight or 10 spokes
are drawn from the center to the circumference. Where these spokes
intercept the outer circle a small circle is drawn. These small circles
are known as "dens". A player is placed in each one of these dens.
Another player is known as the hunter and stands at the hub of the
wheel. The players in the dens are known as foxes. There is to be one
more fox than den. This odd fox can stand anywhere else on the rim,
where he tries to get a den whenever he can. The object of the game is
that the foxes run from den to den without being caught by the hunter.
The method of running, however, is restricted. Both foxes and hunter
are obliged to keep to the trails running only on the lines of the
diagram. It is considered poor play to run from den to den on the outer
rim, as there is practically no risk in this. Foxes may run in any
direction on the trail, on the spokes or on either of the rims. They
may not turn back, however, when they have started on a given trail,
until they have run across to the intersection of another line. If the
hunter succeeds in tagging a fox, the two exchange places, the fox
becoming the hunter. This is a good game to play in the snow marking
the trails in the snow.


Weavers Race

A group forms a circle which is counted off by 2's. The Number 1's in
the circle constitute team A, and the Number 2's team B. Two captains
stand side by side in the circle. Each holds a small stick. At a signal
to go both start racing in opposite directions around the circle, going
to the rear of the first player, to the front of the second, to the
rear of the third, etc., weaving their way in and out. When they meet
at the further side of the circle they must join hands and spin around
once in the circle before continuing to weave their way back and forth
from the point in the circle from which they left. Thereupon number 1
of A team tags the next player on his team in the direction in which he
ran. Number 1 of B team tags the next one on his team who starts in the
direction in which the first ran. The race continues until everyone in
the team has completed his run around the circle in the required way.


Circle Chase

The group forms a circle and counts off by 4's. The leader takes his
place in the center of the circle. He calls any number from 1 to 4, and
all of the men holding that number step back and run around the outside
of the circle to the right, endeavoring to tag the man who is running
just ahead of him. The leader blows a whistle, which is the signal for
the men to return to their original places in the circle, with the
exception of those who have been tagged out. The latter are supposed to
take a position within the circle. The leader next calls another number
and they proceed as did the first. As the game continues, the circle
grows smaller. The individual wins who succeeds in tagging out all
those of his number.


Reuben and Rachel

The group forms a circle, joining hands. One of the players is
blindfolded and placed in the center of the circle. All the rest in the
ring dance around him until he points at some one. That one enters the
circle and the blind man calls out, "Rachel". The other must answer,
"Here, Reuben", and move about in the circle so as to escape being
tagged by Reuben. Every time Reuben calls out, "Rachel", she must
reply, "Here, Reuben", and so it goes on until she is caught. Reuben
must guess who she is and if he guesses correctly Rachel is blindfolded
and the game goes on as before. If not, the same individual continues
as Reuben and he points out a new Rachel to come into the circle.


Channel Tag

The group forms a circle, faces to the right and assumes a stride
position. The one selected to be "It" takes his place in the center of
the circle. The others pass a ball or bean bag either backward or
forward between their legs. The one in the center tries to capture the
ball or bag. If he succeeds, the one last touching it must take his
place in the center of the circle. Every one must touch the ball or bag
when it passes by them, either forward or backward.


Soak 'em

A sock stuffed with straw is used in this game. A circle is drawn upon
the ground. The group is divided into two teams. One team takes its
place in the center of the circle, the other lines up around the
circumference. Those on the outside of the ring endeavor, without
stepping over the line, to throw and hit those within. Succeeding, the
one hit must lie upon the ground within the ring. The others endeavor
to avoid being hit by dodging here and there. When all of the first
team in the ring have been hit, they take their position outside of the
ring and throw at their opponents. The team succeeding in hitting all
of the opponents in the _quickest_ time, wins.


The Dummy

One of the group, known as the "dummy", must take a position 30 feet in
front of a line and stands with his back to the rest of the group. A
soft ball is thrown at him and he endeavors to guess who hit him. If he
succeeds, that one must take his place.


Oriental Tag

Similar to ordinary tag, except that the one "It" cannot tag any one
who has his forehead to the ground.


Ball Tag

The one who is "It" is armed with a soft ball. He attempts to tag
another by means of hitting him with the ball. The one who is hit
becomes "It".


Couple Tag

Similar to ordinary tag, except that the group is arranged in couples.
Couples must lock arms. The couple which is "It" endeavors to tag some
other couple. If either of the men making up the "It" couple succeeds
in tagging either man of another couple, that group is "It".




CHAPTER VI

SCHOOLYARD GAMES

For Advanced and High School Pupils


Dresden Tag

The group forms a circle with at least three feet space between each
individual in the circle. One individual is selected to be "It",
another to be chased. Those in the circle are to place their hands upon
their knees and assume a stooping position, as for leap frog. "It"
endeavors to tag the individual he is to chase before said individual
can leap over the back of any one forming the circle. Should he leap
over the back of some one, the one over whose back he jumped is then
subject to being tagged by "It". Should "It" tag the one chased, then
"It" must leap over some one's back to escape from being tagged. After
leaping over a back, the individual who made the leap takes the
position of the one who left that place in the circle.


Fox and Geese

One player is chosen to be fox, another to be gander. The remaining
players all stand in single file behind the gander, each with his hands
upon the shoulders of the one next in front. The gander tries to
protect his flock of geese from being caught by the fox and to do this
stretches out his arms and dodges around in any way he sees fit to
circumvent the efforts of the fox. Only the last goose in the line may
be tagged, unless the line be very long, then the last five or ten
players may be tagged, as decided beforehand. It will be seen that the
geese all may co-operate with the gander by doubling and redoubling
their line to prevent the fox from tagging the last goose. Should the
fox tag the last goose or one of the last five or ten, if that be
permissible, that goose becomes fox and the fox becomes gander.


Plug the Hole

The players form in a circle with their legs in a stride position,
their toes touching those of the next player. The one who is "It" takes
his place in the centre of the circle. A partner to "It" takes his
place on the outside of the circle. "It" is given a salt bag stuffed
with saw dust or an old basketball cover stuffed with rags or some
similar object. "It" endeavors to throw the stuffed bag between the
legs of any of the players making up the circle. The players in the
circle must keep their hands upon their knees until they see the bag
coming towards them. They can then intercept it with their hands but
are not allowed to move their feet. Should "It" succeed in throwing the
bag between the legs of any player, his partner on the outside may
capture it and endeavor to throw it back into the circle by the same
method by which it came out, while the one between whose legs the bag
was thrown takes "It's" place. Should "It's" partner on the outside
succeed in throwing the ball into the circle between the legs of any
player, that player takes the partner's place on the outside.


Partner Swat Tag

Form a circle in pairs, partners linking arms together. Two stuffed
clubs (made by stuffing stockings with waste or rags), are placed in
the hands of one of the couples selected to be "It". This couple runs
about the circle and hands the clubs to another set of partners in the
circle. Thereupon the others, receiving the clubs, chase the couple at
their right around the circle, beating them with the clubs until they
have reached their original place in the circle. The couple holding the
clubs then go around the circle and hand the clubs to another couple,
who proceed to chase the others at their right and so the game
continues.


Freight Train Tag

The boys are divided into groups of three's. Each three line up, one
behind the other, with their arms locked around the waist of the man in
front. The first man in the group is the engine, and the last man the
caboose. One man is selected to be "It", another to be chased. In order
to avoid being tagged by "It", the man chased endeavors to hitch on the
rear of a freight train by locking his arms around the caboose.
Thereupon the engine, or the man at the front of the train, is subject
to being tagged by "It" until he can hitch on to some other train.
Those individuals making up a train endeavor to keep any one from
hitching on to their caboose. "It", having tagged another, is subject
to being tagged back immediately, provided he has not hitched on the
rear of some train.


Roll Ball

The players form in a circle, grasping the hands of their neighbors.
The one selected to be "It" takes his place in the center and is given
a basketball or a stuffed sack, which he endeavors to kick outside of
the ring. The players in the circle endeavor to prevent same by
interfering with their legs. Should "It" succeed in kicking the ball
outside the circle, the player between whose legs it went or to whose
right it went, must take "It's" place.


Take Away

The group is divided into two teams. One team is given a ball or some
other object which can be easily caught. The object of the game is to
keep the ball away from the opponents as long as possible. Should the
opponents capture the ball, they in turn endeavor to pass it among
themselves, keeping it away from the other team.


Red, White and Blue

Two lines are marked upon the ground, about fifteen feet apart. The
group is divided into three equal teams; one team is known as the red,
the other the blue, and the third the white. The blue team takes its
position between the two lines, with the red team beyond one line and
the white beyond the other. A ball or some other soft object easily
thrown is given to the red team. Any member of that team may try to hit
a member of the blue team, with the ball, without stepping over the
line. Should he succeed, it counts one point for the red. Should he
miss and the ball go across to where the white team is stationed, any
member of the white team endeavors to hit one of the blue and scores a
point if successful. Should the ball fail to return to either the red
or the white team, a member of either of those teams may run into the
blue territory to recover it, but must return or toss the ball back to
his team beyond the line before it is again in play. The playing time
of the game is divided into thirds. The reds change places with the
blues in the second third, and the whites with the reds in the last
third. Only the team between the lines is subject to being thrown at.
The team having the most hits to its record at the end of the game,
wins.


Pin Ball

This game is played with the same rules as basketball, except that in
place of the baskets a 6 foot circle is drawn in the center of each end
of the playing space, and in the center of each circle a short flat end
log about 14 inches long and 3 inches in diameter stands upon its end.
Seven players constitute a team. A pin guard is placed within each
circle, with the pin and he is the only one that is allowed to step
inside the circle. The object of the game is to knock down the
opponent's pin by hitting it with the ball. It is a foul to carry the
ball or to hold an opponent. Where basketball rules are known to the
players, use the same rules for this game. In case of a foul, a 15 foot
line measured from the pin in the circle is used as a free throw line.
In a free throw the guard is not allowed to interfere with the ball
hitting the pin. A stuffed sack can be used in place of a ball in this
game.


Kick Ball

An inflated ball about the size of a basketball is best for this game,
but a bean bag can be used. The group is divided into two teams. One
team is at the bat and the other in the field, arranged as in regular
baseball with the exception that there is a short stop on both sides of
the pitcher. The home base is marked upon the ground in form of a
rectangle 4 feet long and 3 feet wide. The ball is tossed with an
underhand toss, so that it passes over the base not higher than the
level of the knee of the batter. Three strikes and four balls are
allowed, as in baseball. Three men out retire a side. The principal
difference is that the batter kicks the ball and may be put out by
being hit with the ball when running between bases.


Hand Baseball

This game is like regular baseball, with the exception that a tennis
ball or soft rubber ball is used for a ball and the hand is used for a
bat. The pitcher throws the ball so that it bounds just in front of the
batter. If on the bound it passes over the home plate above the knees
and below the shoulders of the batter, it constitutes a strike. The
home plate is marked upon the ground and is 2 feet square. The batter
hits the ball with the open palm of his hand and runs bases, as in
regular baseball. Four balls and 3 strikes count as in regular games.


Last Couple Out

This is an old Swedish game and one which can still be played and
thoroughly enjoyed. The players are arranged in double file. One player
is selected to be "It" and takes a position about 10 feet in front of
the file, with his back to it. He calls, "Last couple out". Thereupon
the last two in the double file run forward, one on either side of the
line and endeavor to join hands in front of "It", without being tagged.
"It" cannot look behind or start to chase until the last couple are on
a line with him. The couple are allowed to circle as far out from the
double line as they wish in their endeavor to avoid "It", and may join
hands in any position, so long as they are in front of "It's" original
position. Should "It" tag one of them before they have had an
opportunity of joining hands, the one tagged becomes "It", and the one
who was "It" unites with the extra player at the head of the double
column. Otherwise "It" remains "It".


Spanish Fly

This is an old leap frog game. One player is chosen to be "down". The
others follow the leader in taking frog leaps over the back of the one
downed. At the first leap the leader says, "Spanish fly". All the
others must repeat those words upon taking their leap. At his second
leap, the leader says, "Handlings", and squeezes his fingers into the
back of "Down". The others must do as he did. The leader next says,
"Knucklings" and doubles his knuckles up on the back of "Down" in
leaping over. The next command is "Spurrings", and the leader hits
"Down" with the heel of his right foot in making the leap. The next
command is "Dump the apple cart", and the leader grasps the clothes of
the boy in going over and endeavors to pull him forward. The next is
"Hats on deck", and the leader places his hat on the back of the boy as
he passes over him. The next boy after the leader places his hat upon
that of the leader and so on until all of the boys have their hats on
the back. The next command is "Hats off deck", and the last boy to
place his hat upon the back is the first to leap over, endeavoring to
pick his hat off without knocking any of the others off. Should any of
those following the leader fail in accomplishing the trick they are
supposed to do, they become "Down" and the boy who was downed becomes
the leader.


Tony Says

This is a good game to follow formal gymnastic exercises, maintaining
the same formation. The players are lined up in open order upon the
playing space. The leader asks for a number of exercises for the arms
and legs. The players execute these upon command provided the words
"Tony says" precede the command. For example, Tony says "Attention";
Tony says "Raise arms to side horizontal"; Tony says "Arms down." If
the leader fails to say "Tony says" before the command, the players are
not to execute the command. Should a player execute the command at the
time when he is not supposed to, he is required to run to a given point
behind the leader and return to his original place. This is required of
every player making a mistake.




Part II

SOCIABLE GAMES FOR THE HOME, CHURCH, CLUB, ETC.


CHAPTER I

GAMES FOR THE HOME


These games have been selected for the use of small family groups. In
many of them parents and children will find an opportunity for
entertainment during the long winter evenings in the home.


Twenty Questions

This is a quiet, entertaining and instructive game. One member of the
family is given the privilege of thinking of some specific object
anywhere in the universe. The others endeavor to guess what that object
is and are only allowed to ask twenty questions in doing so. The one
who thinks of the object to be guessed, only answers the questions
asked by yes or no. It is exceptional when the object is not guessed,
no matter how difficult it may be, before the twenty questions have
been asked. Example,--the King of Belgium is selected by the player.
The first question asked by another player is, "Is it in the animal
kingdom?" This question is answered by "Yes".

  Second question: "Is it in a menagerie?"
  Answer: "No."
  Third question: "Is it a man?"
  Answer: "Yes."
  Fourth question: "Is it an historical character?"
  Answer: "Yes."
  Fifth question: "Is he an American?"
  Answer: "No."

And so the questions and answers continue. Any one has the privilege of
asking a question at any time. The one who is thinking of the subject
keeps a record of the number of questions asked. If any one has guessed
within twenty questions, he has the opportunity of thinking of the new
object to be guessed.


You Know Me

One of the group is given the privilege of starting the game by
assuming he is some well known character, and makes the statement, "I
am the man who invented the lightning rod". The others of the group
endeavor to guess who he is. The one first guessing Benjamin Franklin
is given the opportunity of continuing the game by assuming he is some
other prominent character.


Come-She-Come

One member of the group is given the opportunity to select some object
in plain sight in the room, to be guessed by the others. That
individual says, "Come she come". Another individual says, "What does
she come by?" The first individual answers, "By the letter----", and
gives the first letter of the name of the object he has selected to be
guessed. The others thereupon endeavor to guess what that object is.
The one succeeding determines the next object to be guessed.


Hide the Thimble

All of the group leave the room, except one, who hides somewhere about
the room a thimble. The others are then called back and endeavor to
find it. If the thimble is hidden in a very difficult place, the one
who hid it can inform the searchers if they are "warm" or "cold";
"warm" indicating that they are near, "cold" that they are not seeking
in the right place.


Tit Tat Too

A diagram similar to the illustration (Fig. 1) is drawn on a sheet of
paper. Two players only can participate. The first player marks a cross
in any of the spaces between the lines; the next player makes a circle
in any other space. The object of the game is to have one of the
players succeed in placing three of his marks in a straight line,
vertically, horizontally, or diagonally, upon the diagram. If neither
succeeds, a new diagram is drawn and the game continues. The player
making the crosses has won the game in (Fig. 2) as he has three crosses
in a line.

[Illustration:

     |   |       X | O |
  ---+---+---   ---+---+---
     |   |         | X | O
  ---+---+---   ---+---+---
     |   |         |   | X
    FIG. 1.       FIG. 2.
]


Last Match

Three piles of matches are placed upon the table. Each pile can contain
anywhere from ten to twenty matches. The object of the game is to make
your opponent pick up the last match, two players playing. Playing
proceeds by each player taking up from any one pile as many matches as
he wishes. He may take all in the pile if he so desires. Each takes
matches in turn, endeavoring to make it so that the opponent has to
take the last match left on the board.


Your House, My House

A piece of string about three feet long is tied to the end of a slender
stick of about the same length. A slip knot is tied in the end of the
string. A loop about two inches in diameter is made with the slip knot
on the top of the table. All of the players excepting the one holding
the stick then place the point of their index fingers on the table
within the loop. The one holding the stick, as a fish pole says, "Your
house" or "My house". If he says "My house", he jerks the stick
endeavoring to capture the forefinger of any of the players. He does
not jerk the stick when he says "Your house". He endeavors to fool the
others by saying abruptly, "Your house", several times before saying
"My house" and pulling the string. The player avoiding being caught
next takes the stick.


Catechism of States

  Q.--Which is the best State for fresh pork?
  A.--New ham, sure.

  Q.--Which is the best for an early summer hotel?
  A.--May inn.

  Q.--In which should surgeons dwell?
  A.--Connect-a-cut.

  Q.--In which should laundrymen prosper?
  A.--Washing done.

  Q.--In which do impudent people dwell?
  A.--Can sass.

  Q.--Which is the best for deer-hunting?
  A.--Collar a doe.

  Q.--Which is the best for locksmiths?
  A.--New brass key.

  Q.--In which would you look for a morning attire?
  A.--Day coat, eh!

  Q.--In which is one likely to fail in getting a drink?
  A.--Miss-a-sip.

  Q.--In which can you find a red letter?
  A.--Florid A.

  Q.--In which does the hustle make one sick?
  A.--Ill o' noise.

  Q.--In which is one likely to use his farming implements?
  A.--I'd a hoe.

  Q.--In which can one acquire an estate by marriage?
  A.--Mary land.

  Q.--In which is one letter of the alphabet taller than the others?
  A.--O higher.

  Q.--In which are bodies of land surrounded by water given a ride?
  A.--Rhode Island.

  Q.--Which is called to your mind by holding two $5 bills?
  A.--Tenn I see.

  Q.--Which would a woman rather have if she can't get a new sealskin
      sack?
  A.--New Jersey.

  Q.--Which does the farmer's wife mention when she asks you to partake
      of apple sauce?
  A.--Take sass.--_Capper's Weekly (Topeka)._


Step by Step

A bean bag or soft ball is needed for this game. All of the group
excepting one who is selected to be leader sit on the bottom step of
the stairs. The leader tosses the ball to the one at the right end of
the line and receives it back. He tosses it to the second and third.
Should any of the players miss catching the ball, all the other players
move up one step, except the one missing; he remains on the first step.
The leader then continues passing until all have been served; he then
starts again at right of line. He passes the ball last to the one on
the lower steps. Should any of the players on any step miss the ball,
all the other players advance one step. The ones who advance from the
lower step take a position at the right of the one who missed the ball
on the step above. Should the leader miss the ball at any time, the one
at the right on the highest step takes his place. The game continues
until the top of the stairs is reached by one or more players. If more
than one player reaches the top step then the progress continues down
the stairs, a step for each miss by any of the players. When one player
holds the most advanced step alone, the game starts over with that
player as leader.


Spin the Platter

All of the players in the room are given a number. A tin plate is spun
in the centre of the room by one of the players who calls some number.
The one whose number is called endeavors to catch the plate before it
has stopped spinning. If successful, he calls another number after
again spinning the platter. Should the player fail to catch the platter
before it has stopped spinning, a forfeit is demanded. All the players
having forfeits are demanded to pay their forfeits by performing some
stunt suggested by one of the group selected to determine the penalty.


Board and Nail Puzzle

[Illustration:

        . . .
        . . .
  . . . . . . . . .
  . . . . o . . . .
  . . . . . . . . .
        . . .
        . . .
]


A rectangular board 2 inches broad and 3 inches long has holes bored
into it in the design herewith illustrated. Nails are stuck loosely in
all of these holes, excepting the centre one. The puzzle is to jump all
of the nails off the board so that only one nail is left, and that in
the centre-hole on the board. The nails are jumped off in the same
manner that men are jumped in the game of checkers. Jumping is allowed
either forward, backward, or sideward, but not diagonally.


Spinning for 20

A wooden top is made by sawing off the end of a large spool and
sticking a match or small stick through the hole in the centre. Four
concentric circles are drawn upon a sheet of paper which should be
about twelve inches square. Inside of the smallest circle, which should
have a diameter of 2 inches, the number 20 is placed. The next circle
outside of this one, having a diameter 2 inches greater, should be
numbered 15, the next circle numbered 10, and the next 5.

The players spin the top in turn. Should it cease spinning so that the
point of the pin lies within the centre circle, a score of 20 is made.
Should it fall outside of the last circle, no score is made. The player
first gaining 100 points wins the game.


Red Triangle Ring Toss

[Illustration]

A triangle is drawn upon a board and nails are driven in, as indicated
in the accompanying diagram. Six rubber Mason jar rings are used. The
triangle is hung on the wall at a height equal to the height of the
shoulders of the intended players. The players stand from ten to
fifteen feet distant from the triangle and attempt to toss the rings
over the projecting nails. Each nail is numbered according to the
diagram. Each player tosses six rings at a turn. Any number of players
can play. The player first securing a total of 25 points wins the game.


Floor Baseball

(_Game invented by T.A. Coates_)

A diagram is marked with chalk on the floor, as per accompanying
diagram. Round wooden disks six inches in diameter, one inch thick at
the centre tapering to a quarter of an inch at the circumference, in
the form of a discus, are used. Rubber quoits may be used instead of
disks, if available.

A player "up to bat" slides disks from a line thirty feet away from the
baseball diamond until he has four balls, three strikes, or has earned
one or more bases. If the disk, upon being slid forward, lies so that
any part of it lies over any line, it constitutes one ball for the
batter. If it should lie in the space marked "Strike", it constitutes a
strike and the batter has one ball and one strike. The next slide, the
disk lies in the space marked "1". This means that he places his disk
on first base and the next player on his side comes to bat. The second
player continues sliding the disks until he has made a base or is put
out. Should he make a base, the player of the first disk is advanced
one base. Should he make more than one base hit, the player on the base
advances as many bases as the batter has made. The side continues at
bat until three men are out. Thereupon, the other team comes to bat.

Should the disk land in "Sacrifice", base hit, home run, or should the
one at bat gain first by four balls, the man or men on base or bases
advance. Any man or men reaching home constitutes a run for that team.
Should the disk land three times within the space marked "Strike"
during the time at bat, the batsman is declared "out".

[Illustration: Floor Baseball]

Two players can play this game as well as nine, each taking as many
slides of the disk as is necessary to reach a base or get out. Then the
other player does the same until the team has three out.

Blocks or stones can indicate the position of players on bases if only
one disk is used in the game.


Chic-a-dee

This is a good game to be played in the loft of a barn. One player is
blindfolded and sits on the floor with legs folded under him, Chinese
fashion. The other players creep up and say "Chic-a-dee" as near his
ear as possible. He tries to hit said player before he can get beyond
his reach, using a salt bag stuffed with leaves, or some type of padded
stick. Should he succeed, the one he hits is blindfolded and the game
continues.


Captain Kidd's Gold

This is a good game in which all the members of a family may find
pleasure. It develops one's power of observation and memory. A small
coin is hidden somewhere about the yard or in the woods, wherever the
game may be played, by one of the players. All of the other players
must be either blindfolded or placed in a position where they cannot
see the player who is hiding the coin.

The player having hidden the coin returns to the group and describes
just how they are to find same. For illustration:--he gives the
following description of the course to follow. "Walk twenty paces in a
direct line towards the apple tree at the far end of the garden. There
you will find a small stone upon a larger one. Under the small stone
you will find an arrow scratched upon the larger one. Follow the
directions of this arrow fifteen paces. Then turn sharply to the left,
go ten paces, and underneath a stone will be found Captain Kidd's
Gold." The players may ask him to repeat the directions once. After
repeating, however, they must follow the direction without further
questioning. The one successful in finding the coin next hides the
same.

This game can be made simple enough for small children to enjoy or
difficult enough to prove a problem for adults.




CHAPTER II

ICE BREAKERS FOR SOCIABLES


Bird Hunt

Names of different birds are written on small slips of paper and pinned
upon the backs of all the guests. A small card and a pencil are given
to each guest and they are instructed to go on a bird hunt. They
proceed to try to read the names on the backs of twenty other players.
The one first succeeding in getting the names of twenty birds wins the
game. Each player endeavors to avoid having the slip on his own back
read as he endeavors to read those on the backs of the others.


My Month

Twelve placards with the name of a month of the year on each are posted
about the room, and the players are instructed to gather around that
placard bearing the name of the month in which they were born. Then
each group in turn is called upon to select some activity typical for
that month and to act it out. The others endeavor to guess the month by
the activity represented.


Poison Circle

The group marches in couples around the room while a march is being
played intermittedly on some instrument. Small rugs are placed in the
path of the marchers or circles are drawn on the floor, through which
the marchers must pass. If any couple is left on a rug or within a
circle when the music stops playing, that couple drops out of the
march. All march forward again when the music starts and try to avoid
being caught on a rug or in a circle. The last couple in wins.


Shoe Hunt

Advertisements of shoes are cut out and the illustrations of pairs of
shoes are halved. These are hidden around the room. The individual
finding the largest number of pairs of shoes wins. Players are allowed
to trade with each other in order to complete their pairs.


Matching Advertisements

Advertisements are cut from magazines and each advertisement is divided
by irregular cuts into two halves. One half is placed in the pile to be
distributed among the men; the other half to be distributed among the
ladies. These halved advertisements are distributed among the guests
and the men seek their partners by finding the other half of the
magazine advertisement matching their own.


Matching Proverbs

Familiar proverbs are divided into groups of three or four words. These
are distributed among the guests. There should be at least two words,
and preferably more, on each slip. Each individual then seeks to find
those others holding the words which complete his proverb.

Example--The proverb, "A stitch in time saves nine", is chosen. On one
sheet of paper is put "A stitch"; on another "in time"; and on another
"saves nine".

When the individuals necessary to make the complete proverb have
gathered together, they represent their proverb by pantomime to the
others.


Mixing March

The group, arranged in couples, forms a circle with the ladies on the
inside facing their partners. When the music starts playing, the
partners separate, both going to the right about the circle. This means
that the ladies go in one direction and the men in the other. When the
music again stops, the men will be opposite new partners and these
partners must face each other and converse on some subject suggested by
the leader. When the music again starts the conversation ends and both
groups again continue their march in opposite directions and so the
game continues. It is suggested, if the group be large and not well
acquainted, that each time a new partner is faced for conversation,
hands are shaken and names and places of residence given.


Musical Medley

This game is similar to the game entitled "Matching Proverbs", except
that different lines of songs are distributed among the guests present
and each seeks to find the individuals holding the lines necessary to
complete his song. When all are located they get together and practice
their song in preparation to sing it to the rest of the group or act it
in pantomime.


Puzzled Words

Words are written out on slips of paper and then cut into single
letters. Each letter going to make up a word is given the same number.

For example, in the word "battle", number each letter of "Battle" No.
1. All of the number 1's are told to get together, discover what their
word is and when their number is called, act it out for the group to
guess.


Trip Around the World

Various articles are distributed around the room, each representative
of some country. For illustration, a package of tea, representing
China; a shamrock, representing Ireland; a maple leaf, representing
Canada.

A slip of paper and a pencil are given to each member of the group, who
endeavors to guess what country each article suggests.


Bean Penalty

Each guest, upon entering the room, is given ten beans and instructed
to ask questions of each other. Should a question be answered by either
yes or no, the individual so answering must surrender a bean to the one
asking the question. At the end of the playing period, the individual
having the largest number of beans is the winner.




CHAPTER III

SOCIABLE GAMES FOR GROWN-UPS


Biographic Cartoons

Each individual is given a cardboard 12×15 inches, an old magazine,
containing numerous ads, a pair of scissors, and is instructed to write
the biography of his right hand neighbor, using the advertisements cut
from the papers to illustrate the same. In writing the biography as few
words should be used as possible. The biographical sketch should be
placed upon the cardboard. Mucilage should be available for the purpose
of sticking on the illustrations, and pens and pencils for the
necessary writing. Some award can be given to the one making the best
biography.


Illustrated Songs

Each member of the group is given a sheet of paper and a pencil and is
instructed to draw thereupon a picture or pictures illustrating the
title of some song. (Illustration: One individual decides to illustrate
the title of "Home, Sweet Home". He proceeds to draw the picture of a
house, a sugar bowl, and another picture of a house.)

When sufficient time has been allowed for all to complete their
illustrations, they are numbered and placed on exhibition. Each member
of the group endeavors to guess as many of the illustrations as he can,
placing his guess after the number of the illustration. The
illustration which is guessed correctly by the largest number, wins for
its artist.


Smiles

The group forms in couples and marches around the room. They are then
subdivided into from four to eight smaller groups. These are stationed
in various parts of the room and the ladies are lined up facing the
men. They try in every conceivable way to make the men smile or laugh.
Any one who does so must take a place in the ladies' line. After a few
minutes of this, every man in the ladies' line must pay a forfeit, and
the men must endeavor to cause the ladies to laugh.


Tea Pot

One member of the group is selected to be "It" and leaves the room. The
others decide upon some object or word which "It" is to guess. "It" is
called back into the room and each member of the group is to make a
sentence including the name of the object to be guessed, using in the
sentence the word "Tea Pot" as a substitute for the name of the object.

Illustration--The object determined upon by the group is the piano
stool. The first member of the group says, "By turning the 'tea pot' it
grows higher".

As soon as "It" guesses the correct object the one whose sentence
disclosed what the object was, becomes "It".


Muddled Words

The group is divided into two teams. Each individual is given a slip of
paper and takes the name of some animal, bird, or fish, and muddles up
the letters so as to make it difficult to recognize the name.

Illustration--g fold chin, for goldfinch.

Any member of the opposing team has the opportunity to guess what the
name is. The time it takes for the opposing team to guess is recorded.
Any member of the opposing team who has correctly guessed the muddled
word can give a muddled word for the first team to guess. The team
which succeeds in guessing the muddled word in the shortest time wins
one point. The team having the most points at the end wins the game.


Who Are They?

Photographs of prominent individuals are numbered and placed on
exhibition about the room, with the wrong title beneath them. Each
member of the group is given a card and pencil. He goes around the room
and writes upon his card the proper name of each individual with the
number which is on that individual's photograph. The individual making
the largest number of correct guesses wins. Photos of men like Lincoln,
Lloyd George, Robert E. Lee, Obregon, etc., should be used for this
game.


Who Is It?

A sheet is hung up in a doorway. The group is divided into two teams.
One group goes behind the sheet. A small hole is cut in the sheet. The
members of the group behind the sheet take turns in sticking their
noses through the hole in the sheet. The group on the inside attempts
to guess whose nose protrudes through the sheet in the order in which
they are exhibited. One member of the group behind the sheet keeps a
record of the order in which individuals of that group display their
noses, so that this can be checked up with the guesses of the other
team. After all the noses have been displayed the group returns to its
place in the room and listens to the guesses.

Then the other group goes out and they display their noses. The group
making the largest number of correct guesses wins.

A modification of this game is made by showing the eye through the hole
in the sheet instead of the nose, and the group in front of the sheet
endeavors to guess whose eye it is.


Trades

The men are lined up on one side of the room. To each is given three or
four buttons, a needle and thread, and a piece of cloth. They race to
see which can sew the buttons in a straight line on the piece of
cloth, securely, in the quickest time.

The women are lined up on the opposite side of the room before a plank.
To each is given a hammer and six or eight nails. They race to see who
first can drive the nails into the plank without bending them over.


Rooster

Ten or twenty are as many as can well play this game. The group is
arranged in seats around the room. The leader starts the game by
saying, "My father had a rooster". His left hand neighbor says, "A
what?" The leader answers, "A rooster". The left hand neighbor then
turns to his left hand neighbor and says, "My father had a rooster",
and that neighbor says, "A what?", and his answer is "A rooster". This
question is asked of each left hand neighbor until it has travelled
around the room. When it becomes the leader's turn, he again says, "My
father had a rooster", and his left hand neighbor says, "A what?". He
answers, "A rooster". The left hand neighbor says, "Could he crow?" And
the leader answers, "Crow he could". This dialogue is passed on around
the room, each repeating the exact words of the leader to his left hand
neighbor.

When it again becomes the leader's turn, he repeats the dialogue
previously used and his left hand neighbor inquires, "How could he
crow?" And the leader replies, "Cock-a-doodle-do", imitating a rooster.
This is passed around the room. No one is supposed to laugh during the
whole game. Whoever does may either pay a forfeit or is out of the
game. It is well to have a player who knows the game sit next to the
leader, so that it may start correctly.


Poor Pussy

The group is arranged in a circle around the room. One player is
selected to be "Pussy" and takes his place in the centre of the group.
He takes a position on all fours before each member of the group, in
turn saying "Meow". Thereupon the one before whom he is kneeling must
stroke the back of his head and say, "Poor pussy". Pussy meows three
times and in return for each meow has the back of his head stroked and
is addressed, "Poor pussy". Should the one patting pussy laugh during
the performance, he must take pussy's place.


Gossiping

The group is arranged in a circle around the room. The leader whispers
some information to his left hand neighbor, remembering the exact
sentence or sentences. His left hand neighbor is expected to whisper
the same information to the next left hand neighbor and so it is passed
around the circle until it is returned to the leader. The leader then
tells what the original sentence was, and tells what it is after
passing from ear to ear about the group.


Analogues

A member of the group thinks of some object, and without disclosing to
the other members of the group what he is thinking about, he addresses
in turn all of the others, asking, "What is my thought like?" The first
one addressed, without having any idea as to what the leader has in
mind, says, "Like a star". The second in answer to his question, says,
"Like a book", and so every one is given an opportunity to state what
they think his thought is like. Then the leader tells the group the
thing he had in mind, which, we will say for illustration, was a
fountain pen. He then asks the one who suggested that it was like a
star why his fountain pen was like a star. Thereupon that one must give
some reason why he thought it was like a star and replies, "Your
fountain pen is like a star because it can enlighten the world". The
next one says, "The fountain pen is like a book because it has the
possibility of conveying thoughts", and so every one in the group must
give the why of his previous answer. This demands quick thinking and
initiative on the part of the players.


Ghost

The group sits in a circle about the room. The leader starts the game
by giving a letter of the alphabet. The one at his left adds a letter
to the first with the view of making a word. The third adds another
letter and so the game continues.

Illustration--The leader gives the letter "a". The one at his left,
thinking of the word "adds" adds "d". The third one, thinking of the
word "advertisement", adds "v". The fourth, thinking of the word
"adversity" adds "e", and so the word continues to grow.

If one finishes the word or completes a word without realizing it, that
one is given the title of "Half-ghost". Anyone speaking to the
Half-ghost, becomes a Half-ghost. Should a half-ghost chance to finish
another word when it again becomes his turn to add a letter to the
spelling of a word, then the Half-ghost becomes a Full-ghost and is out
of the game. Any one speaking to a Full-ghost becomes a Full-ghost.
Full-ghosts and Half-ghosts naturally endeavor to get as many others
into their class as possible, so between thinking of letters to
complete the word in turn and avoiding becoming ghosts, the group is
kept in a very difficult frame of mind. The game continues until there
are no players who have failed to qualify as Half-ghosts or
Full-ghosts.


Charades

Five of the group are selected to act out a charade. These five act out
a word in pantomime. While they are doing this a second group of five
is selected and prepares to act out another word, immediately following
the presentation by the first group. The audience is given three
minutes to guess each charade. Should it succeed in doing this, then
the members of the group each choose a substitute for themselves, thus
making a third group of five. While this last group is preparing a
charade, the second group is putting on its pantomime, and so the game
continues. If the audience fails to guess the word within the required
time, then the same group is given an opportunity to act another word.
Good charade words are as follows:

Aëroplane               Air-oh-plane
Antarctic               Aunt-ark-tick
Buccaneer               Buck-can-ear
Charlatan               Char-lay-tan
Falcon                  Fall-con
Handicap                Hand-eye-cap
Handkerchief            Hand-cur-chief
Microscope              My-crow-scope
Automobile              Ought-oh-mob-eel
Pilgrimage              Pill-grim-age
Sausage                 Saw-sage
Stiletto                Still-let-toe
Bandage                 Band-age
Stationary              Station-airy
Feline                  Fee-line
Rainbow                 Reign-beau
Bookworm                Book-worm
Handsome                Hand-some
Penitent                Pen-eye-tent
Cribbage                Crib-age
Broomstick              Broom-stick
Infancy                 In-fan-sea
Hornpipe                Horn-pipe
Eyelash                 I-lash
Forswear                Four-swear
Masquerade              Mass-cur-aid
Melancholy              Melon-collie
Pantry                  Pan-tree
Tennessee               Ten-I-see
Antidote                Aunt-I-dote
Definite                Deaf-in-ate


Knight of the Cracker

The ladies are lined up on one side of the room. Each is provided with
a cracker. The men are lined up on the opposite side. At the signal to
go the men rush forward and try to secure a cracker from one of the
ladies. They then return to their original line and devour the cracker.
Having succeeded in doing this, they return and whistle a tune which
must be recognized by the lady.


Match Boxing

Competitors are divided into equal teams and the teams are arranged in
parallel lines. The outside cover of a small safety match box is given
to the first man on each team. He slips this over the end of his nose
and holds his hands behind his back with the box on his nose. All other
players must hold their hands behind their backs.

At the signal to start the players having the box on the end of the
nose transfer the same to the nose of their neighbor without the use of
their hands. The box is passed in this way to the far end of the lines
and back. Should it fall upon the floor it is picked up by the one from
whose nose it fell, placed on his own nose again, and the game
continues as before.




CHAPTER IV

SOCIABLE GAMES FOR YOUNG PEOPLE


What Animal?

The leader whispers the name of a different animal or object to each
individual. When called upon each must try to represent the noise or
action of the animal or object. The rest of the group guess what is
represented and write the same on a slip of paper. The one guessing the
most wins.


Rhyming Verbs

Half of the group leaves the room while the others decide upon a verb.
The group which left the room is then called back and tries to guess
the verb from the clues which are given by those who determined the
verb. These clues are given in the form of sentences containing words
rhyming with the verb. Should the group which is to guess think they
have found the right verb, they retire from the room without stating it
and returning act out the verb. If they have been successful in
guessing the verb, then the other group is given an opportunity to
guess a verb in the same manner.


Fruit Basket

The group is seated in a circle and counted off in 4's. The number 1's
are given the name of oranges, number 2's lemons, number 3's bananas,
number 4's apples. One of the individuals is selected to be "It". He
takes his place in the centre of the group and one chair is taken out
of the circle, leaving one less chair than there are players. "It"
then calls the name of two fruits, for example, oranges and lemons.
Thereupon all of the oranges must exchange places with all of the
lemons and "It" endeavors to capture one of the seats. Succeeding, the
one left without a seat is "It" and calls two other kinds of fruit.
These two must change places and "It" endeavors to capture a seat.
Should "It" say "Fruit basket", instead of naming two fruits, all must
change seats.


Exchange

The group is arranged in seats around the room. "It" takes a place in
the centre. All of the players are given a different number. "It" is
blindfolded. The game is started by "It" calling two numbers. Thereupon
the numbers called must change seats. "It" tries to either tag one of
the players seeking to change seats or occupy one of the vacant seats,
in which case the one without a chair becomes "It".


Barnyard Chorus

Each player in the group is given some barnyard noise to represent. The
leader takes his place in the centre of the room. If he holds up his
left hand, all is quiet; if he holds up his right hand, they all
imitate their various noises in concert. Should one of the players make
a noise while the leader is holding up his left hand, that player must
stand up before his chair and imitate the noise he has been given to
imitate, until some member of the group can guess what the noise is
supposed to represent.


Donkey Solo

This is a good game to follow immediately after the Barnyard Chorus.
The leader announces that he is to whisper to each member of the group
the name of some animal that is to be imitated by that member in chorus
with the others. He then goes about and whispers in the ear of every
member of the group that he is to keep perfectly quiet, excepting to
one individual to whom he suggests that he is to imitate the braying of
a donkey. He then takes his position in the centre of the group and
instructs the players to give as much volume to their imitation as
possible. He gives the signal to start. Naturally, all are quiet except
the poor donkey who brays his solo, to the amusement of the other
members of the group.


Shifting Seats

The group is seated in a circle. There is one more chair than there are
players. One individual is selected to be "It" and takes his place in
the centre of the room. "It" gives the command to shift right.
Thereupon, the one at the left of the vacant chair moves into the
vacant chair, leaving his own chair vacant. The one at the left of his
chair, moves into that, each one trying to get into the vacant chair to
the right before "It" can succeed in touching him. "It" can give the
command "Shift left" at any time, which means that they must move into
the vacant chair to the left. Should "It" succeed in sitting in an
empty chair, the one who should have occupied that chair becomes "It".


Guess the Sound

The group is arranged in a circle. The one selected to be "It" is
blindfolded and takes a position in the centre of the circle. After the
blindfolded player has been spun around a few times so that he does not
know his location, he is given a wand or short stick. He holds this
stick out in front of one member of the group. That member must grasp
the end of the stick. Then "It" names some animal which the player on
the other end of the stick must imitate by some sound. Thereupon, the
blindfolded player tries to guess who has hold of the other end of the
stick. Succeeding, the player guessed is blindfolded.


Rapid Transit

The players form in a circle. To each is given some article to be
passed. These articles should vary in size anywhere from a peanut to a
flat iron. The game starts by the leader commanding them to pass to the
right. He then passes his article on to his right hand neighbor and
receives in turn from his left hand neighbor the article coming to him.
The passing continues until the leader gives the command "Change". Then
the articles are passed in the opposite direction. Should a player drop
one of the articles to be passed or should any one of the players have
in his possession more than two articles at one time, that individual
drops out of the game, taking one article with him. The game continues
until but one is left in the circle. The passing can be complicated, if
so desired, by having one or two of the articles passed in the opposite
direction.


Feather Tag

The group sits in a circle in the centre of the room, holding a large
sheet stretched tightly between them. A fluffy feather is placed in the
centre of the sheet. One of the group who is "It" endeavors by running
about, to catch the feather. Those sitting around the edge of the sheet
keep the feather from "It" by blowing it beyond "It's" reach. Should
"It" capture the feather, the one sitting at the edge of the sheet
nearest to the feather becomes "It".


Birds

All the players sit in a circle. Each is given the name of a bird. The
keeper takes a position in the centre of the room and begins to tell a
story about birds. When a bird's name is mentioned, that bird must
stand up and turn around once in front of his chair. Failing to do
this, he must pay a forfeit. When the keeper utters the word "migrate"
in his story, all of the birds must change seats and he tries to get
one of the seats. Succeeding, the one left without a seat, continues
the bird story. Otherwise the first keeper continues his story.


Simple Simon's Silly Smile

The group is arranged in chairs around the room. The one who is
selected to be "It" goes from one to another asking questions. All
questions must be answered by "Simple Simon's Silly Smile", without
laughing. Should the one questioned laugh, he must take the place of
the one who is "It".


Wink

Chairs are arranged around the room in a circle, with the boys standing
behind each chair. There should be one more chair than there are girls
in the group. The boy standing behind the empty chair winks at one of
the girls who endeavors to get to the vacant chair before the boy in
whose chair she is sitting can tag her. If she succeeds, the boy behind
the chair last vacated continues the game by winking at another girl.


Hush

The group sits in a circle in a room which is semi-dark. The leader
goes around inside of the circle and slips a button in the hands of one
of the players. He does this after making an offer to do it to several
others, so as to disguise where he finally deposits the button. All
then have a turn to guess in whose hands the button lies. The one who
guesses right becomes the leader, and the leader becomes a ghost. The
game then continues as before. The ghost asks questions of any of the
players, and they are not supposed to answer any question asked them
except by the leader. Should they do so, they also become ghosts. As
the ghosts multiply the game becomes more difficult. The game continues
until but two are left of the circle.


Jack's Alive

The group sits in a circle in the room. A lighted splinter is handed to
one of the group in the circle. It is then passed around the circle,
still lighted. Should the flame become extinguished, the one in whose
hand the splinter rests at that time must pay a forfeit. The forfeit
sometimes demanded is that a mustache be made on the upper lip of that
individual with the charred end of the splinter.

In passing the splinter the player must say Jack's Alive; failing to do
this the splinter is returned to him and should it become extinguished
before he can say this, it counts against him.


Going to Jerusalem

The chairs are arranged in a circle in the center of the room, with the
seats away from the center. There should be one less chair than there
are participants in the game. The participants form a line around the
outside of the chairs and march forward around the chairs, while the
piano, phonograph, or some other musical instrument is being played.
The instant the music stops each player tries to sit in a chair. The
one failing to get a chair drops out of the game. A chair is taken from
the circle and the group starts marching again with the music. When the
music stops they seek chairs as before, the one failing to secure one
dropping out. A chair is taken out of the circle after each scramble
and so the group diminishes until all are eliminated except one, who is
crowned King of Jerusalem. If the group be large more than one chair
can be eliminated at a time.




CHAPTER V

TRICK GAMES FOR SOCIABLES


Hindoo Blind Reading

Slips of paper are given to all of the guests and they are instructed
to write thereupon a brief sentence of three or four words and to
carefully fold the paper. These messages are then collected, and the
Hindoo Mystic proceeds to amaze his auditors by rubbing the messages,
still folded, one after another across his forehead and telling what is
written on the folded paper.

The Trick--The message reader has an accomplice who is instructed to
acknowledge that he wrote the first note read by the mystic, no matter
what that note may be. The mystic makes up in his mind a brief sentence
after rubbing the first slip of paper on his head. This sentence is
acknowledged by the accomplice. The mystic, after having the note
acknowledged, opens it apparently to corroborate his reading, but in
reality he is reading the note written by someone else. Upon rubbing
the next slip of paper across his forehead, he announces the contents
of the note last read, which naturally is acknowledged with wonderment
on the part of the individual who wrote it. He then apparently looks at
this slip of paper, but in reality he looks at the paper which he next
intends to read.


Mental Telepathy

The group is told that if enough people think hard enough about one
object they can communicate the thought to a person who knows nothing
about it. One or two "unwise" persons are asked to leave the room and
nothing is decided upon. But the group is told that when each "unwise"
person comes in in turn, the second thing that is named must be
admitted to be the right object. Great disappointment should be shown
at his failure to get the right object the first time and he should be
heartily congratulated on his success the second time. This continues
until he realizes that he is duped.


The Paper Artist

A sheet of newspaper or any other kind of paper can be used for this
game. The accomplice is sent from the room. The one performing the
trick then holds the paper in front of the face of one of the
individuals in the room. Returning to his seat, the accomplice is
called into the room and handed the sheet of paper. The accomplice then
studies the paper carefully and announces to the group whose photograph
he sees thereupon.

The Trick--The one who takes the impression of the individual assumes
the same sitting position that the individual photographed has assumed,
thus portraying to the one who left the room whose photograph is on the
blank paper.


Magic Answers

An accomplice is sent from the room. Those remaining in the room
determine upon some object, this object to be recognized by the
accomplice. When the object has been selected, the accomplice is called
back. The one who is to deal with the accomplice asks if several
objects in the room are the thing which has been suggested. The
accomplice answers, "No," but answers correctly when the object
selected is mentioned.

The Trick--The one asking the questions of the accomplice names some
black object immediately preceding the object which is the correct one,
thus giving the clue.


Clairvoyant

The one who plays this trick must have an accomplice. The accomplice is
sent from the room. It is announced that the accomplice will name the
person pointed to. The demonstrator points at an individual and the
accomplice on the outside of the room gives the name of the individual
pointed at.

The Trick--The accomplice knows that the one last speaking before he
left the room will be the one pointed at by the demonstrator. In
pointing at an individual, the one doing the pointing asks of the
accomplice, "Does the spirit move?" The one on the outside answers, if
he knows who is being pointed at, "It does." The first speaker then
says, "Whom am I pointing at?" The accomplice then gives the
individual's name.


Scissors Crossed

A simple catch game. The group is seated in a circle. It is best to
have two of the company know how to play the game. One of these hands a
closed pair of scissors to the other, who takes it and says, "I
received these scissors uncrossed and give them crossed" (opening the
scissors as he says, "and give them crossed"). He passes them to the
player on his left, who should say, "I received these scissors crossed
and give them crossed"--(if they are left open; if closed,
"uncrossed"). If the players do not know the game, they will cross and
uncross the scissors in an attempt to pass them correctly. Each one is
given a turn and the game continues until some bright player notices
that the scissors are called "crossed" when they are open and
"uncrossed" when they are closed, and that the player who started the
game crossed his feet if the scissors were crossed and, if not, his
feet were uncrossed. Thus, the object of the game is to change the
words and the position of the feet in accordance with the position of
the scissors.


Knights of the Sacred Whistle

One or two of the group are informed that they are to be initiated
into the Order of the Knights of the Sacred Whistle. They are shown a
whistle and told that to become a member they must find this whistle.
It is then pretended that the whistle is handed to one of the members
of the party. An apron is hung around the shoulders of the victim and
the whistle is attached to the back of the apron on a piece of string.
The trick is for some of the players to blow the whistle behind the
person's back, immediately dropping it and when he turns the person on
the other side will blow. As all are standing in a circle, with the
person who is being initiated in the centre, he is kept guessing for
some time before he finds out where the whistle is located.


Hay Stack

Chairs are piled to a considerable height in the centre of the room and
the person to be initiated is instructed to take off his shoes and jump
over them. The leader insists that this is possible, but the
uninitiated remonstrates, "It can't be done." The catch is that the
individual is supposed to jump over his shoes instead of the chairs.


Boots Without Shoes

The leader asks one of the players to say as he directs and then asks
him to say, "Boots without shoes." The player immediately says, "Boots
without shoes." The leader says, "That is not correct," and goes to the
next. The next one also says, "Boots without shoes," and so do most of
the other members of the group, until one bright individual,
discovering the trick, simply says, "Boots," which is the correct
answer.


Newspaper Touch

Two individuals are instructed to stand upon a sheet of newspaper, so
as not to be able to touch each other. This seems impossible and the
individuals taking their places upon the paper endeavor to maneuver in
impossible positions, but find they still can touch each other. The
trick is to spread the newspaper over the sill of a door. One
individual stands on one side of the closed door upon the newspaper,
while the other takes his position on the other side of the door.


Coin and Card Snap

A card is balanced upon the end of the middle finger of the left hand,
flat side down. A quarter or some small coin is placed upon the card,
directly over the end of the finger. The trick is to snap the card from
under the coin so that the coin will remain on the end of the finger.


Blind Blow

A lighted candle is placed upon a table. The players are blindfolded in
turn, spun around, and instructed to blow out the candle. The time of
each player is recorded and the one succeeding in blowing out the
candle in the quickest time wins the game.


Tricks with Matches

Six matches are given to an individual and he is requested to make with
them four equilateral triangles.

The Trick--Three matches are laid upon the table, forming an
equilateral triangle. The other three are held above the three on the
table in the form of a pyramid, with the triangle on the table as a
base.

[Illustration]

Twelve matches are placed upon the table as herewith illustrated. Then
those trying to accomplish the trick are instructed to illustrate what
matches are made of by moving two matches.

The Trick--It is natural that the ones trying to solve the trick
endeavor to make the word "wood" out of the combination of forms, but
by taking the top match off the first square, a "v" can be made by
adding it to the third figure. By taking the right hand side off the
first square, the letter "e" can be made by adding it to the last
figure, spelling the word "love."


Pigs in Pen

A farmer has six pigs and five pens. He desires to place the pigs in
the pens so that there will be an odd number of pigs in each pen. How
can he accomplish this?

The Trick--He places a pen within a pen. Then he places a pig in each
of the other pens, and two pigs in the one which encloses the pen, and
another pig in the enclosed pen.


Number Trick

How can four be made out of three 3's?

3-3/3


Penny Wise

The players are provided with a bright new penny, a piece of paper and
a pencil. On the paper have been written the following requirements,
each player being expected to write the answers, the one having the
largest number of correct answers, winning the game:

  Find on the penny the name of a song.
  (Ans. America.)

  A privilege.
  (Ans. Liberty.)

  A part of Indian corn.
  (Ans. Ear.)

  A part of a hill.
  (Ans. Brow.)

  Something denoting self.
  (Ans. I (Eye).)

  Part of a door.
  (Ans. Lock (of hair).)

  A weapon of war.
  (Ans. Arrow.)

  An act of protection.
  (Ans. Shield.)

  A gallant.
  (Ans. Beau (Bow).)

  A punishment.
  (Ans. Stripes.)

  Part of a plant.
  (Ans. Leaf.)

  A piece of jewelry.
  (Ans. Ring.)

  A nut.
  (Ans. Acorn.)

  A musical term.
  (Ans. Bar.)

  An occupation.
  (Ans. Milling.)

  A foreign fruit.
  (Ans. Date.)

  Trimming for a hat.
  (Ans. Feather.)

  What ships sail on.
  (Ans. Sea.)

  A perfume.
  (Ans. Scent (cent).)

  A religious edifice.
  (Ans. Temple.)

  A messenger.
  (Ans. One sent (One cent).)

  A method of voting.
  (Ans. Ayes and noes (Eyes and nose).)

  A Chinese beverage.
  (Ans. Tea (T).)

  A gaudy flower.
  (Ans. Tulips (Two lips).)

  Comfort.
  (Ans. Ease (e e).)

  A small animal.
  (Ans. Hare (Hair).)

  A term of marriage.
  (Ans. United State.)

  An ancient honor.
  (Ans. Wreath.)

  One of the first families.
  (Ans. Indian.)


Reading Temples

The group is told that thoughts can be transmitted through the temples.
The demonstrator of the game has to have an accomplice knowing the
trick, who leaves the room. The others decide upon a number, not
greater than ten. The accomplice is called back into the room, and by
placing his hands upon the temples of the demonstrator after having
requested every one to concentrate their thoughts upon the number
selected, he tells what the number is.

The Trick--He is told the number by the demonstrator, who clinches and
relaxes his jaw, which gives a movement of the temple which can be felt
by the accomplice.


Aeroplane Ride

The player selected to take the ride is sent from the room and
blindfolded. A strong board is held a few inches from the floor by
several of the players. The blindfolded player is then called back into
the room and invited to step into the aeroplane and is aided in
stepping upon the board. His hands are placed upon the shoulders of two
other players for support. As soon as the individual has stepped upon
the board, it is raised a few inches and the two individuals upon whose
shoulders rest his hands slowly and together bend their knees, so as to
lower their shoulders, giving the impression to the rider that he has
been lifted some distance from the floor.

The rider is then told to jump down, but not to fear, as mattresses
have been placed upon the floor, so that he is in no danger of injury.
The fear of jumping from so great a height as the blindfolded aviator
has been caused to feel he has attained, and the surprise of striking
the floor in so short a distance after the jump, are very amusing.


Egg Smash

Several players of the group are blindfolded and take a kneeling
position upon the floor. Each is given a fake egg and is told to knock
it upon the floor to summon the good spirit. They do this very
carefully the first time, thinking they have an egg. The eggs are taken
away and the group waits to see if a spirit appears. As it does not
appear, the eggs are again handed to the players. This time they are
not so careful in hitting the eggs down upon the floor, their first
experience telling them they are fake. Again the eggs are taken from
them and the spirit waited for. Failing to appear the second time, the
eggs are returned to the blindfolded individuals for the third time,
but this time instead of fake, they are the real article, much to the
surprise and grief of those who break them vigorously upon the floor.


Musical Notes

This trick is easily played where a group is sitting around a bare
wooden table. The player knowing the trick, pricks the prongs of a fork
with his finger nails, causing it to vibrate as a tuning fork. He then
makes his audience think that he pulls music from the nose of another
player by reaching with his free hand and touching the nose of said
player, and to the surprise of his auditors, music is heard.

The Trick--The instant the one who plays the trick touches the nose, he
unobserved allows the end of the fork to come in contact with the hard
surface of the table. The vibration of the fork is inaudible until its
end comes in contact with the table.


Siam Club

Players are invited to join the Siam Club, for which certain rites and
ceremonies are necessary. Those to be initiated into the club then
kneel in a circle in the centre of the room and after bowing forward so
that their foreheads touch the floor, they repeat after the leader the
following sacred secret words, which they are instructed not to
disclose to anyone else, under any conditions: "O whattagoo Siam." They
repeat this over and over again until they begin to realize that they
are saying, "Oh, what a goose I am."


Divesting

The trick is to remove the vest of one of the players while he is still
wearing his coat. To accomplish the trick one must stand in front of
the subject, unbutton the vest, loosening the buckles on the strap
behind. Next he runs his left hand under the coat, raises the lower end
of the back of the vest, while with his right hand he grasps the end of
the vest around the neck of the person, who is instructed to hold his
arms high above his head. The back of the vest may then be pulled over
the head of the subject. One of the lower ends of the vest is then
pushed down the coat sleeve. The operator then runs his hand up the
coat sleeve and pulls the vest down the sleeve until the arm hole is
free from the subject's hand. The vest is then drawn back up the sleeve
and pulled through the sleeve and over the hand of the other arm. It
can then easily be removed either by pulling down or up the sleeve.




CHAPTER VI

STUNT ATHLETIC MEET


Standing Broad Jump

The group is divided into competing teams. Each team lines up behind
the starting line. Each is instructed to see how many feet he can have
credited to him in this event. The first player on each team is then
instructed to heel the starting line with his right foot and to place
his left foot immediately in front of and in line with his right foot,
so that the heel touches the toe. The second player on each team then
places his right foot in front of and in line with and against the
advance foot of Number 1, and places his left foot in front of his
right. All of the players take this position. The team having the
longest feet wins the game by measuring the greatest distance in front
of the starting line.


Standing High Jump

Doughnuts are suspended by means of a string, so that one hangs about
eight inches above the head of each contestant. The one first
succeeding in eating his doughnut without the use of his hands, wins
the event.


Bawl Game

Competitors are lined up and directed to bawl. The one doing this the
best, in the judgment of the judges, wins.


Peanut Relay

A bowl full of peanuts is placed before each competitor. An empty bowl
is placed at some distance opposite each. Each competitor is given a
table knife. At the signal to go, keeping his left hand behind his
back, he takes one or more peanuts on the flat of his knife from the
full bowl and deposits it or them in the empty bowl. He returns for
more peanuts. He is not allowed to use his free hand in helping the
peanuts on to the knife, or keeping them thereupon. The player first
succeeding in transferring the peanuts wins the event.


Shot Put

Competitors endeavor to throw a handkerchief unknotted from a given
line for distance.


Lucky

A number of bags are suspended in such a way as to hang four feet above
the heads of the competitors. One bag contains candy; one contains
flour; another peanuts; another water, etc. An individual is
blindfolded, given a short stick and headed in the direction of the
bags. He then endeavors to strike one of the bags. Succeeding in
knocking the bag of candy, that shall be his prize; likewise the
peanuts, flour, or water.


Peanut Throw

Each contestant is given an equal number of peanuts. The one succeeding
in dropping the largest number of peanuts into the mouth of a jug,
wins. The peanuts must be dropped from a distance equal to the height
of the shoulders.


Head Toss

A salt bag is filled with sand. Competitors heel a given line and place
the bag of sand upon the back of their necks and without the use of the
hands, endeavor to throw the bag as far back into the line as possible.


Duel Tug of War

Two opponents are given a piece of rope about three feet long. Each
takes a position on the opposite side of a line drawn upon the floor.
One tries to pull the other across the line by means of the rope. If
successful in drawing the opponent so that both feet are on his side of
the line, that player wins.


Discus Throw

Contestants are given some object like a quoit, a block of wood, etc. A
small circle about eighteen inches in diameter is drawn upon the
ground. The contestant places the object to be thrown between his feet
and endeavors to throw it forward from the circle as great a distance
as possible. Both feet must work together in making the throw and
neither can touch the ground outside of the circle.


Ring the Bell

In the centre of a hoop eighteen inches in diameter--(an ordinary
barrel hoop)--is hung a bell. The hoop is suspended from the ceiling or
a door, so that it will be five feet above the floor. The group is
divided into two teams. One team lines up on one side, one on the
other. Each is given two bean bags. The first player on each team
endeavors to throw his two bean bags through the hoop without ringing
the bell. Succeeding or failing, he takes his place at the rear of the
line and the next player repeats his performance. The players on the
opposing team are expected to recover and to use the bags thrown
through the hoop by the opponents, for their throw. A point is scored
for the team by each player successfully tossing a bean bag through the
hoop without ringing the bell.


Chair Tilting

Opponents are placed upon chairs and must stand thereon upon one foot.
Each is armed with a long pole, the end of which is padded with a wad
of cloth. The object is to dislodge the opponent from the chair.
Dropping the pole or putting the foot down counts the same as being
forced from the chair.

As soon as one member of a team has been dislodged, another may take
his place and the game continues until all of one team have been
eliminated.


Hammer Throw

An inflated paper bag tied on the end of a yard of string is used as
the hammer for this event. Each contestant by swinging the bag from the
end of the string tries to throw it as great a distance as possible.


Twenty Yard Dash

Contestants carry an egg to the distance line and return with a spoon
held at full arm's length from the body.


Running Broad Grin

Have each competitor grin as broadly as possible. The judges measure
the grins with a tape measure.


Light Weight Race

Contestants carry a lighted candle in one hand and a glass or bowl brim
full of water in the other. If the water is spilled over or the candle
blows out, the contestant is out of the race.


Javelin Throw

Contestants endeavor to throw a short stick through a rolling hoop.


One Mile Run

Contestants are required to add a column of figures, the total of which
will be 5280.


Long Glum

The player who can keep from smiling the longest in spite of the jeers
and efforts to make him laugh, on the part of the others, wins.


Turtle Race

Contestants lie flat upon their backs and throw an object over their
heads with their two feet, for distance.


Elimination Race

An equal number of chalk marks are made upon the floor in front of each
contestant. A damp rag is then handed to each, and at the signal to go
they are to run to and rub off the chalk mark on the floor. After
erasing each mark, they must return to the starting line. When the last
mark has been erased and the contestant crosses the starting line, the
race ends.




CHAPTER VII

COMPETITIVE STUNTS

Suitable for Sociables and Entertainers


These stunts may be used as a means of amusement at social functions.
In order to avoid calling for volunteers to come forward to participate
in the various stunts, cards may be distributed among those who are
expected to take part in the stunt program. On these cards are numbers
or letters. The one who has prepared the program has determined
beforehand how many participants he wants in each stunt. If, in the
first stunt, he desires six participants, he will have prepared six
letter A's to be distributed. If, for the second stunt, he desires two
participants, he will have prepared two letter B's. Then when he is
ready to put on his program he calls for all the individuals holding
the letter A, etc. If there are certain individuals whom he is
particularly anxious to have take part in certain stunts, he can
instruct the distributor of the letters to this effect.


Brick Relay

Have four contestants to a team and as many teams as there is space
for. Two lines are drawn upon the floor about ten yards apart. Two
members from each team line up opposite to and facing each other,
behind each line. Two brick bats are placed upon the starting line in
front of each team. At the signal to go, the first contestant on each
team stands on the two brick bats. Bending forward he grasps the front
end of each brick with his hands. Shifting his weight to one foot, he
slides the other foot forward, drawing the brick bat with it by means
of his hands. He then shifts his weight to that foot and draws the
other foot forward with the brick bat and in this way proceeds to the
far line, behind which he turns the bricks over to the second member of
his team who races back in the opposite direction by the same method of
progress. The third member takes the bricks from the second and covers
the intervening space between the lines, and when the fourth member,
following the example of his team, has crossed the starting line, the
race ends.


Chair-i-ot Race

Competitors stand on the starting line. Two chairs are given to each.
They place the chairs behind the starting line, side by side, with the
backs of the chairs forward, and stand upon the seats of the chairs. At
the signal to go they grasp the backs of the chairs with their hands
and shifting the weight from one foot to the other, slide the chairs
forward until the distance line has been crossed.


Chair Stubbing

Each contestant sits upon a chair with his legs straddling the back and
his toes on the bottom side round. Keeping his feet off the floor, he
advances the chair forward by jerking it with his body until it has
crossed the distance line.

This race can be made a relay by having four men on the team, two men
placed behind each line.


Aviation Meet

Each team is made up of two mechanicians and four aviators. The two
mechanicians hold stretched between them a piece of string upon which
have been placed two funnels of paper made in the form of cornucopias,
point to point. The first aviator on each team, at the signal to go,
blows the cornucopia across the string from one mechanician to the
other; the second blows it back across; the third blows it in the same
direction as the first and the fourth ends the race by blowing it in
the same direction that the second aviator blew it, until it touches
the hands of the mechanician.

Equal pieces of string should be used, a loop having been tied in each
end through which the mechanicians may slip their fingers for the
purpose of holding the string. Mechanicians must keep the string level
at all times.


Feather Blowing Relay

Four contestants constitute a team. A feather is placed on the starting
line and is blown by the first member of each team to the distance
line. Then the second member of the team blows it back to the starting
line and after the third contestant has completed his blow, the fourth
blows it back across the finish line.


Balloon Race

An inflated rubber balloon and a palm leaf fan must be provided for
each team. Four players constitute a team. A balloon is placed on the
starting line before each team and a fan handed to the first
competitor. At the signal to go the balloon is blown forward by means
of the fan across the distance line, blown back by the second player,
forward again by the third and back across the finish line by the
fourth. The team first succeeding wins the honors.


Lobster Race

Each competitor gets down on the starting line on all fours and at the
signal to go travels backward on all fours to the distance line and
returns.


Prune Tug of War

Prunes are tied in the middle of a piece of string, three yards long.
Opponents are placed opposite each other, each with an end of the
string in his mouth. At the signal to go they are to chew the string
towards the prune. The one first reaching the prune may eat his prize.


Whistle Race

Contestants take a deep breath and whistle. The one who can whistle
longest on one breath, wins.


Cracker Relay

Six players to a team. The players on each team sit in a row. Four
crackers are given to each player. The one on the rear of each team
starts the race by standing up and eating the crackers. When he has
eaten all four crackers and is able to whistle, his whistle is the
signal for the man next in front of him to stand up and eat his
crackers, while the first man resumes his seat. So each in turn eats
four crackers. When the last, or front man on each team is able to
whistle after devouring his crackers, the race ends.


Blindfold Obstacles

Obstacles, such as vases of flowers, china ware, chairs, etc., are
placed in four or more long rows. Each contestant is given a row and is
requested to try distances before being blindfolded. They then are all
blindfolded, placed at the starting point, and told to race down
through the line of obstacles without touching anything. In the
meantime the objects have been removed.


Candle Roll Over

Four players are chosen for each team. Two are lined up in front of the
starting line and two opposite on the distance line. One of the players
on the starting line is given a lighted candle. A mat is placed half
way between the starting and the distance lines. At the signal to start
the player holding the candle advances to the mat, executes a forward
roll on the mat, holding the candle in his hand. Should the candle go
out during the roll, he must go back to the starting line and start
over after lighting the candle. When he has succeeded in making the
roll without extinguishing the candle, he proceeds to the distance line
where he passes on the lighted candle to the second member of his
team. This one returns to the starting line, rolling on the mat as did
his predecessor. Should the candle in his hand become extinguished, he
must go back to the line from which he started, light his candle and
start over. This continues until all four men have covered the required
distance, each having rolled over without having extinguished the
candle.


Boat Race

Two players constitute a team in this race. One of the players on each
team sits upon the floor. His knees are raised so as to allow his feet
to rest flat upon the floor. The other member of the team then sits
upon his teammate's feet, facing him, and places his feet and legs in a
similar position to that of his teammate, so that each may sit upon the
other's feet. They then place their hands upon each other's shoulders.

To race in this position, Number 1, the player whose back is in the
direction to be traveled, leans well forward so that his weight is well
on his own feet. This makes it possible for his teammate, Number 2, to
slide his feet forward along the floor, carrying Number 1 backward upon
them. Number 2 then leans forward so that his weight is well on his own
feet, which allows Number 1 to draw his feet towards him and Number 2
slides forward with them. By swaying backward and forward in this way,
the two members of the team, by alternating the sliding of their feet,
progress across the floor to the distance line. Upon reaching the same,
they reverse their direction without turning around. The race ends when
they have crossed the starting line.


Necktie Race

Two players constitute a team. Each team may stand opposite each other
at different ends of the room. At the signal to go Number 1 runs
forward to Number 2, who must wear a four-in-hand necktie. Number 1
unties Number 2's necktie, takes it off his neck and reties it in a
four-in-hand knot. Number 1 then runs back to his former position with
Number 2 following him. When behind the starting line Number 2 starts
to untie Number 1's necktie, takes it from his neck, replaces it and
ties it in a four-in-hand knot. When he has accomplished this, he races
back to his original position. The first team accomplishing this, wins
the game.




Part III

OUTDOOR GAMES


CHAPTER I

OUTDOOR GAMES FOR OLDER BOYS AND YOUNG MEN


Push Cross Line

Three parallel lines are marked upon the ground about six feet apart.
The group is divided into two teams. Each team lines up behind one of
the outside lines, facing the opponents. At the signal to start, both
groups rush forward and endeavor to push their opponents back over
their own base line. Should they succeed in pushing the opponent so
that both of his feet are behind the base line, that opponent is out of
the game and retires to a position behind his own base line. At the end
of thirty seconds the team having pushed the greatest number of
opponents back across their own base line, wins.


Fortress

This game is similar to the preceding game. Three parallel lines are
made around a hollow square not less than 25 to 40 feet in dimensions.
This square is known as the fortress. A small space is marked off in
the centre of the fortress for a prison. Two captains are selected.
These two choose the members of their own teams, in turn. One team is
known as the defenders, the other as the attackers. The defending party
takes a position within the fortress and the attacking party is
scattered around the outside of the fort. Both are under the command of
their captains.

The attacking party may charge the fort as a group or may use any
tactics the captain may decide upon. He may feign an attack on one side
to draw the defenders' attention, while his principal attack may be
directed towards another point of the fortress. The methods of
engagement are as follows:

Opponents endeavor to push, pull, or carry each other across the guard
line. The defending players seek to force as many of the attacking
players in across the inside line as possible. Succeeding in this, such
players as have been drawn beyond the inside line are prisoners and
must take their place in the prison. The attacking party seeks to force
as many of the defenders beyond the outside line as possible.
Succeeding in this, all those so forced are placed in a small area,
which constitutes the prison of the attacking army. The captain should
seek to direct the strong against the strong as much as possible in
personal combat. The captains may exchange prisoners if they so desire.

The battle is won by either party making prisoners of all the
opponents, or it may be won by the besiegers, if one of their number
enters unattacked the prison within the fortress. Should the player
accomplish this, he shouts, "Hole's won," whereupon the defenders must
yield the fortress and the two armies change places, the defenders
becoming the attackers, and vice versa. If an old fence is used for one
side of the fortress, the other guard line should be drawn five feet
inside of the fence line.

The attacking captain may withdraw his forces at any time for rest or
consultation. Either captain may use a flag of truce for similar
purposes. Under such conditions they arrange for an exchange of
prisoners, etc.


Forcing the City Gates

This is an old Chinese game. Two captains are selected, who in turn
choose all the other players. The two teams are first formed in two
lines, facing each other and about ten feet apart, with the players
grasping hands. Each line represents a city gate. The captain should
arrange the players so that the weakest may be between two strong
players.

The play begins when the captain of one of the teams sends forward one
of his men. This man can make three attempts to break through the
opponent's city gate. He can do this, either by breaking the grasp of
two of the players or by dodging underneath their arms or between their
legs. Should he succeed in doing this, he takes back to reinforce his
own line the two players who are responsible for his getting through.
Should he fail, he enlists his efforts with those of his opponents by
joining their line. The game is won when one team has succeeded in
taking over all of the opponents.


Hare and Hound

This is an old game which is always popular. Two or three players are
designated as hares. Each is given a large bag filled with paper torn
into small bits. The hares are allowed a few minutes' start ahead of
the rest of the players, who are known as hounds. The hounds follow the
hares by means of the torn bits of paper scattered on the ground, in an
effort to overtake them.

When the hares have used up all of their paper they hide their three
bags near the end of the trail and race back from that point to the
place from which the run started. When the hounds have discovered the
bags, they also race back to the starting place. The game is won by the
first player reaching said place.


Human Targets

An old flour or salt bag stuffed with straw or cloth may be used for
this game. One player is selected to be the target. The others endeavor
to hit the target by throwing the bag. The target may run or dodge in
any way he desires, but the one who holds the bag cannot advance
towards him in making his throw. If he is not near enough to hit the
target, he can throw the bag to some other player who is nearer. When
the target has been hit, the leader selects some one else to act as
target.


Sling the Sack

Either a good sized sack well stuffed with rags or straw, or a small
cloth sack filled with sand, may be used for this game. The game can be
played on a level stretch of road or in a good sized field. The group
is divided into two equal teams. A starting line is marked near the
center of the playing space. A player from each team takes a position
behind this starting line and in turn, with his left foot on the
starting line and with his shoulders at right angles to it, slings the
sack with his right arm straight at the elbow, over his head as far as
possible. A left-handed player may reverse this position. The spot
where the sack hits the ground is marked. The player from the opposing
team stands in the same position at the starting line, as did the first
player, and makes his throw in the same direction, and his throw is
marked. These two throws are made in order to measure what constitutes
a good throw of the sack. A line is drawn parallel to the starting line
at the point where the farther of the two preliminary throws landed.
The starting line and this other line are now known as goal lines. A
centre line is drawn parallel to the goal lines and half way between
them. A coin is flipped up between the two captains for the choice of
goals.

The captain who wins the toss can choose either the first throw or the
goal he desires to have. When this is determined, each team scatters
about on the territory in the vicinity of its own goal line, and the
captain of the team which has the first throw designates which player
on his team he desires to sling the sack first. This player (team A)
must take a position with his advanced foot on the goal line and sling
the sack with a straight arm over his head towards the opponent's goal
line. The opponents (team B) endeavor to catch the sack before it
touches the ground. Succeeding, the one catching the sack advances
three paces and from that position slings the sack over his head
towards team A's goal line. Team A players endeavor to catch the sack
and if successful, that player succeeding advances three paces towards
team B's goal line and slings the sack as before. Should any member of
the team fail to catch the sack when it is thrown into their territory,
the player first touching the sack in an effort to catch it, or the
player nearest to where the sack lands, must make the sling from the
point behind where the sack is picked up from the ground. The players
may move anywhere about in their territory. The captain should endeavor
to place them in a position so as to cover as much space as possible.
Side boundaries can be used if desired, in which case the team supposed
to receive the sack which gets out of bounds may advance three paces
whether the sack is caught or not, from the point in line with where it
first hits the ground.

A score is made each time the one member of a team catches the sack
with both his feet on the opponent's side of the centre line. In making
the catch, should he step back with one or both feet on or across the
centre line, or be driven back by the impetus of the sack, it shall not
constitute a point. After each point is made, goals are changed, the
losing team puts the ball into play. The team having the largest score
at the end of thirty minutes wins.


Game of Goose

A good sized level field should be used for this game. Two gander
poles, five feet high, are erected, one at each end of the field, each
having two forks at the top, opposite each other. Stout tree crotches
may be used. The goose is made from a stout cloth bag, such as a ham
cover, stuffed, leaving the ends which can be easily grasped. Midway
between the gander poles a large circle is marked upon the ground, its
size being determined by the number playing. Mark a circle six feet in
diameter around each gander pole to designate the safety limit.

The group is divided into two equal teams. These two teams are arranged
with their men placed alternately around the circle in the centre of
the field. The gander man stands in the centre of the circle with the
goose in his hand. At a given signal he swings around and tosses the
goose in the air to be received in the arms of some lucky player, who
immediately dashes off with it towards his goal. The opponent players
endeavor to intercept him and get the goose away from him. When the man
carrying the goose is in danger of losing it, he tosses it to some one
on his own side, if he can, and the player catching it runs towards his
goal. If the second player cannot succeed in making his goal or gander
post, he tosses it on to some other member on his team. The player who
succeeds in getting both feet inside of the safety circle around the
gander pole must not be molested, unless he lets the goose fall to the
ground in his attempt to hang it in one of the crotches of the gander
pole, in which case he or his team mates may recover it or any one of
the opposing team may seize the bird and dash away with it towards his
own pole. There must be no scrimmage over the possession of the bird,
for as soon as an opponent gets hold of the goose, the player holding
the latter must let go his hold. One must not trip an opponent or
interfere by body, arm, or leg contact without forfeiting one "honk."
Three honks count one goose (or goal) for the opposite side.


Clock Games

The group forms a large circle. If it be a large group, the circle is
counted off into 6's or 8's, if small into 4's. If they be counted into
6's each group of six constitutes a team. Number 1 in each case is to
act as captain. If it be desired to elect captains, the man elected
takes Number 1's place in the group. The captain wears a sash or some
other distinguishing mark. In this formation a number of competitive
races can be used.

Illustration--The group numbers sixty individuals. It is counted off
into 6's. That means that we have ten teams of six men each making up
the circle and ready to compete. The leader takes a position in the
centre of the circle. The following five games may be played with the
teams arranged in clock formation:


Walking Race

See clock games above.

At the signal to go, the number 6 man steps out of his place in the
circle and walks to the right around the circle, until he gets back to
the point in the circle he left, and tags off the Number 5 man on his
team, and this man walks around the circle. This means that all the
Number 5 men from all the different teams are walking around the
outside of the circle in a race, at the same time. Numbers 4, 3, and 2
follow in turn after 5. Number 2, after completing the circle, tags off
Number 1, the captain of the team, wearing a sash. The captain walks
about the circle until he gets to the hole in the circle which he left,
enters through the hole, bringing his sash to the leader, who stands in
the centre of the ring. The first sash to reach the leader decides the
winner of the race.

A running race can be substituted for the walking race and various
modifications used, such as backward walking, hopping, frog leap, etc.


Chariot Race

See clock games above.

Similar to the preceding walking race, except that instead of running
around the ring singly, the competitors go in pairs, as follows:

At the signal to go Number 6 locks his left arm in the right arm of
Number 5, and the two of them so linked together proceed around the
circle. Having completed the circle, Number 6 takes his original
place, while Number 5 links arms with Number 4 and the two travel
around the circle. Then 4 links with 3, 3 with 2, and the race ends
when 2 and 1 have completed the distance around the circle and have
brought their sash to the leader in the centre.


Flathead Race

See clock games above.

Similar to the preceding. A small block of wood or flat stone is given
to Number 6 on each team. At the signal to go he places the block on
the head of Number 5 and follows Number 5, who walks around the ring.
Number 5 must keep his hands upon his hips. Should the block of wood
fall from the head of Number 5, he must stand still until it has been
replaced by Number 6. The two continue walking around the circle until
they reach the point which they left. Then Number 6 takes his place in
the circle and Number 5 takes the block from his own head and places it
on the head of Number 4, and follows 4 around the ring to replace the
block should it fall off. The race ends when Number 1, followed by
Number 2, has completed the distance around the circle, still balancing
the block of wood on his head, and presents himself to the leader in
the centre.


Spin Around Race

See clock games above.

Similar to the preceding race, except that each captain takes a
position about four feet outside of the circle near his own team. At
the signal to go, Number 6 steps out of his position in the circle and
runs to his own captain, linking his right arm in the right arm of the
captain, who spins him around twice. He then runs around the circle and
returns to his original place in the circle, and tags off 5, who
repeats the performance of 6. When 2 has completed his round of the
circle, he tags off his captain. The captain must run, without spinning
around, clear around the circle on the outside, and enter through the
point of the circle he originally held, and tag the leader in the
middle.


Leap Frog Race

See clock games above.

Similar to the preceding. In this race, Number 2 will take the place of
the captain outside of the ring. At the signal to go, Number 6 leaves
the ring and proceeds around the circle, leaping with frog leaps over
the backs of the Number 2 men from each team. Returning to his original
position, he tags off Number 5. Number 1's turn will come after that of
Number 3, and when Number 1 has completed the circle, leaping over the
backs of all Number 2 men, he tags off the Number 2 of his own team.
The latter runs about the circle once, enters the circle at the point
where he originally stood and tags the leader in the centre.


Riding the Snail

A group is divided into two equal teams. These two teams line up in
parallel lines about six feet apart, back to back. A safety line is
drawn at each end of the field about twenty-five yards from where the
teams line up. One team is designated as the "head" team; the other as
the "tail" team. The leader tosses a coin. If the coin falls with head
up, he calls "heads." Thereupon tails run across their safety line
while heads endeavor to tag them before they succeed. Succeeding in
doing this the man tagged has to carry the tagger upon his back to the
original place of line-up and the coin is again flipped. Should it fall
with tail up, tails chase heads to the safety line at the other end of
the playing space.




CHAPTER II

OUTDOOR GAMES FOR BOYS


Treasure Hunt

This game is a very adaptable one and can be run in a great number of
different ways. It can be as simple or as complex as any leader may
desire.

A mysterious letter may be read to the group or a letter in code posted
where the group can see it. The contents of this letter will direct any
one to a place where he will find detailed information as to the exact
location of a buried treasure. By following instructions or working out
the code, a boy will discover a second letter in hiding, or a time
limit may be allowed to find letter number 3. At the end of that time
the information contained in the second letter may be given to the
entire group, so that all may hunt for letter number 3. This method
keeps everybody in the game. As many letters may be hidden as desired,
using the treasure as the last. This game can be used to teach
observation, trailing and tracking. Letters using identification of
trees, flowers, marks on trees, birds' nests, etc., may be used. Map
and chart reading make the game more difficult. Letters may be written
in Morse and Continental codes, or easy codes may be made.

A good book on trees or flowers, a small ax, or any useful article may
be the hidden treasure.


Hide and Seek

One boy is chosen to be "IT." He blinds his eyes while the others hide.
He counts 100 by 5's, then says, "Ready or not, you must be caught." He
then endeavors to find the hidden players. Succeeding he must tag the
goal and call the name of the player observed. Should he, in seeking a
player, pass the spot where one is hidden, that player can race in to
the goal and say, "In free." The one who is "It," however, can tag that
player or the goal. When all the players have been discovered, the one
first discovered or caught by "It" must blind his eyes for the next
game. One who succeeds in getting "In free" is not subject to being
"It" in the next hide.


Look Out for the Bear

All of the players hide their eyes, except one, who is the Bear. He
hides. When sufficient time has been given for him to find a hiding
place, the others seek him. When a player finds the bear he calls out,
"Look out for the bear." Thereupon all of the players race back to the
home base. The bear endeavors to tag as many of the players before they
can reach the home base, as he can. All of the players tagged become
bears and hide in the next round of the game, which is the same as the
first. All of the bears try to tag as many as possible before they
return to the home base. The game continues until the last seeker is
caught. He has the privilege of being the bear for the next game.


Still-a-Feet

This is a simple tag game. The player selected to be "It" starts the
game by saying, "One, two, three, Still-a-feet, One, two, three,
Still-a-feet, One, two, three, Still-a-feet, One, two, three; no more
moving of the feet, feet, feet." While "It" is saying this, the players
can endeavor to get as far away from him as they desire, but when he
has completed the statement, they cannot move their feet. Should he see
one of the players moving his feet, he may chase that player until
captured. Thereupon, that player helps him chase any of the others. A
player cannot be tagged until one of the "Its" has seen a movement of
his feet. The first player caught is "It" for the next game. "It" does
not need to chase the first player whose feet he sees moving unless he
so desires. He may chase any one of the players whose feet he has seen
move.


Hang Tag

This is a good game to play around a barn or in a grove where there are
low limbs. A player is selected to be "It." He may tag any player who
is not hanging with feet clear of the ground. The player tagged
immediately becomes "It" and may tag back the one who tagged him after
that individual has taken five steps.


Fox in Hole

Any number of players may participate in this game. The playing area
should not be too large. A four foot circle is marked upon the ground
as a base. One player is selected to be the Fox. While the fox is on
the base he may stand on two feet, but when he leaves the base to catch
any of the other players he must hop on one foot. Should a player
become tagged, he becomes the fox, and the other players may slap him
on the back until he is safe on the base. Should the fox put the other
foot down, he must return to the base, and every player may slap him on
the back until he succeeds in doing this, but no player can block his
path to the base.


Fence Tag

This is a simple active game which can be played where there is a low
fence or bar, over which the players may easily climb or vault. A
player is selected to be "It". He takes his place on the opposite side
of the fence from the other players and must climb or vault over and
endeavor to tag someone who fails to get over the fence in time. "It"
cannot tag anyone whose feet are off the ground, in an effort to get
over the fence. Neither can he tag anyone who is standing on the other
side of the fence from him. This is a very active game, as it keeps the
players leaping back and forth over the fence in an effort to avoid
being tagged. A player tagged immediately becomes "It". He cannot tag
back the one who tagged him, until after that one has a fair chance to
get on the other side of the fence.


Body Guard

A small space is marked off at one end of the ground as a base or goal.
One player is chosen to be the chief, an important personage requiring
two body guards. The game starts with these three players in the goal
and the balance of the players at large. The three come forth, and the
two players who act as body guards clasp each other by the hand, and
preceding the chief as a shield, endeavor to prevent the other players
at large from tagging the chief. The chief himself may avoid being
tagged by moving around the guards. Whenever a guard succeeds in
tagging a player, the chief and his guards return home, whereupon the
player tagged changes places with the man who tagged him. Any player
succeeding in tagging the chief becomes the chief.


Sardines

One of the players in the group hides, while the other players seek to
find him. Should a player succeed, he endeavors to get into the hiding
place unobserved by the others and hides with the first player. As the
game continues, and other players succeed in finding the hiding place,
the number of hiding players continues to increase until they are
packed in like sardines, hence the name. It is difficult for them,
crowded together, in this way, to keep from disclosing the hiding place
to the remaining players. The game continues until the last player has
discovered the hiding place. The first one to make the discovery hides
in the next round.

This is a good game to be played around a farm house where there are a
number of hiding places, or in the woods where there are trees,
boulders and ravines.


Shinny

This is a good game for boys and girls. It has furnished amusement for
many generations of children. Each player must secure a stick about
2-1/2 feet long. An alder stick with a small bend at one end furnishes
an ideal implement for this game. An old baseball or where this is not
procurable, a tin can or a block of wood, may be used. The players are
divided into two teams. Two stones, placed about five feet apart at
each end of the playing space, serve as goals. The playing space should
be about 30 to 50 yards in length. A level stretch of road can be used,
or an open field. The game starts by each team taking a position
anywhere in the half of the field nearest the goal they are defending.

The ball is placed in the centre of the playing space. Two opposing
players, known as centres, take a position on opposite sides of the
ball, within a distance of two feet of it, with the end of their clubs
on the ground. The process of putting the ball into play is called
"facing off". In facing off, the two centres raise their clubs from the
ground and hit them together above the ball. They do this three times
and after hitting them above the ball for the third time, they are
allowed to hit at the ball, endeavoring to knock it towards their own
players or towards the opponent's goal. The game is now on and each
player endeavors to knock the ball, by means of his club, towards and
through the opponent's goal. Swinging the club higher than the shoulder
is barred. Should the ball be knocked outside of the playing space, it
is brought back in and faced off by any two opposing players at a point
well within the playing space, opposite to where it went out of bounds.

A goal counts one point and after each goal the ball is faced off in
the centre. Goals should be changed in the middle of the game, so that
no team may have an advantage over the other because of location of
goals.


One Step Off and All the Way Across

Two goal lines about fifteen yards apart are marked upon the playing
space. This game can be played on the road, using the opposite curb
stones as goal lines. A player is selected to be "It" and takes his
place between the goal lines. He starts the game by saying, "One step
off and all the way across". Thereupon, all the players who may be
behind either goal line, upon stepping over the goal line, must run
across the space between the goal lines towards the opposite goal. "It"
endeavors to tag the players as they run between the goal lines. Each
player tagged, helps "It" in tagging the others. After the game starts
the players may run back and forth between the goal lines at will. The
game continues until all the players are tagged. The first player
tagged becomes "It" for the next game.


Wheel Away

This game is similar to the preceding game except the players must be
behind the same goal line, and the one who is "It" says, "Wheel away",
which is the signal for all of the players to run across the space to
the other goal. Those tagged by "It" in their effort to do this, help
him to tag the other players. All of the players are expected to run
immediately upon hearing "Wheel away". Otherwise "It" may cross the
goal line and tag them. The one first "It" is the one to say "Wheel
away" each time, until all of the players have been caught. The one
first caught is "It" for the next game.


Bombardment

This is a game enjoyed by boys. It is necessary to have half a dozen
soft yarn balls or indoor baseballs or bean bags for this game. A large
number of players can participate. A playing space is marked off on the
ground with a line drawn through the centre. The group is divided into
two equal teams. The teams take positions on opposite sides of the
center line. The balls are divided equally between the two teams. At
the signal to start the balls are thrown at such opponents as may hold
one of the balls. The players may move around in their playing space,
but are not allowed to step over the centre line. Any player can
recover a ball, but so long as he holds the ball in his hands, he is
the target for the fire of the opponents. Each time a player, holding a
ball, is hit by an opponent, he drops out of the game. The team first
retiring all of the opponents wins.


Bombardment No. 2

This game is similar to the preceding, except that each player must
secure a stick not over two feet long, which can be stuck loosely into
the ground in a vertical position. A 2×4 block of wood, about 8 inches
long, with a flat end which can be balanced upon the ground, can be
used in place of the stick if desired. Each player sticks his stick up
near the back end of his playing space. They must be at least three
feet distant from any boundary line and from each other. Each player
takes a position in front of his stick. The object of the game is to
knock over the opponents' sticks. Should a player knock over his own
stick accidentally, or that of any player on his side, it counts as
though it were knocked over by the opponent. When a player's stick is
knocked over, that player is dead and takes his stick and leaves the
game. The side first succeeding in knocking over all of their
opponents' sticks wins the game. The players are not allowed to step
over the centre line.




CHAPTER III

GAMES OF STRENGTH


Taking the Heights

This is a good rough and tumble game for boys. A bank, a low platform,
a pile of dirt or some elevated position is necessary. The object of
the game is for the players to strive to get upon the bank and maintain
their position thereupon to the exclusion of all other players.
Hitting, kicking, or the grasping of clothing is barred.


Wrestle Tug of War

Opponents are so arranged on opposite sides of a line marked upon the
ground that those of equal size and strength are facing each other.
Each player puts his right hand on the back of his opponent's neck and
his left hand on his opponent's right elbow. Each tries to pull the
other over the mark. At the end of the pull, the side having the most
players on its side of the line wins the game.


Referee's Hold

Opponents take the same position as in the preceding event, but instead
of attempting to pull across the line, each endeavors to make the other
move one or both feet. The best two out of three are used to determine
the winner.


Finger Wrestling

Opponents are arranged as in the preceding game on opposite sides of a
line. Holding their hands well above their heads, opposing players
grasp each other's hands, interlacing fingers, and each endeavors to
bend the opponent's wrist backward. Succeeding in this, the vanquished
drop out of the game.


One Leg Tug of War

Opponents are arranged as in the preceding game on opposite sides of a
line. They turn their backs towards each other and standing upon their
right foot, raise their left leg to the rear and hook the foot in that
of the opponent. Each endeavors to pull his opponent across the line in
this position.


Hog Tie

Two players of equal strength are each given a piece of quarter-inch
rope or a strap. Each endeavors to tie together the other's ankles.


Cumberland Wrestling

Players face each other and take a waist hold, arms around opponent's
waist, and stand close up. At the signal to "go" each player tries to
lift his opponent off his feet. No throwing is allowed. Three tries are
permitted.


Greco-Roman Wrestling

Opponents face each other and may take any legitimate wrestling hold in
their effort to secure a fall from the other. Should any part of the
body other than the feet touch the ground, it constitutes a fall.


Shoulder and Arm Push

Opponents face each other with a line marked upon the ground between
them and place their right hand on the other's left shoulder and their
left hand on the opponent's upper right arm. In this position they
endeavor to push the opponent back from the centre line, so as to get
on the opponent's side of the line.

A modification of the preceding may be made by allowing the use of but
one hand--the right placed against the opponent's chest, with the left
held behind the back.


Squatting Tug

Opposing players sit upon the ground facing each other, with the soles
of their feet flat against each other's. They then bend forward without
bending the knees any more than necessary and grasp the opponent's
hand. In this position they endeavor to lift the opponent from the
sitting position on the ground.


Neck Tug of War

Opponents interlace their fingers behind each other's necks and
endeavor in this position to pull the other across a center line.


Hand Tug of War

Opponents grasp each other's hands and each endeavors to pull the other
across a center line.


Cane Wrestling

Opponents are given a stick, like a broomstick, which is grasped with
both hands. Each endeavors to break the grasp of the other upon the
stick.




Part IV

GAMES FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS


CHAPTER I

GAMES AT THE DINING TABLE

Banquet Games


Oysterette Race

Those sitting on one side of the table constitute team "A", those
opposite them, team "B". The two captains should be sitting opposite
each other. At one end of the table place a dish containing ten to
twenty oysterette crackers, in front of the men on the opposite end of
each line from the captain, and an empty dish in front of every other
man. The opponents having the dish of crackers in front of them are
given a spoon, and at the signal to "go" they pass the crackers by
means of the spoon from their dish to that of the next on their team.
When the last cracker has been transferred, the spoon is handed to the
next man on the team, who repeats the performance of the first. (Dishes
cannot be moved from their original position). The team first
succeeding in getting the crackers to the dish of the captain wins.


Passing the Drink

Teams are arranged as in No. 1. A glass of water is given to the man at
one end of the table. The glass should be filled to the brim. With the
signal to "go" it is passed to the far end of the table and
immediately returned. The glass which returns first to the one who
started the passing determines the winner, provided that the glass has
as much or more water in it at the finish than the opponents' glass. If
the winning team has less water in it, the result is a tie game.


Rat-a-Tat-Tat

Teams arranged as in previous games. A plate or glass must be placed in
front of each contestant. Two spoons are handed to contestants at the
head of each line. At the signal to "go" the opponents beat on the
plate rat-tat-rat-tat-tat, as a drum beats. He then passes it on to the
next. Rat-tat-rat-tat-tat is passed on to the far end of the line and
back. When the one who started the race has beaten his last
rat-tat-rat-tat-tat, he stands up holding both spoons above his head.


Earth, Air, Fire and Water

Teams are arranged as in previous games. A member of team "A" is given
an object, which can be conveniently passed or tossed across the table.
The game starts by his passing the object to any member of the opposing
team. In passing the object, he says one of the four words: "Earth,
air, fire or water." If the word "earth" is used, he must name some
animal; if the word "air" is used, the one receiving the object must
name some bird; if the word "water" is used, he must name some fish,
and keep quiet if the word "fire" is used. If the word used requires an
answer, the one to whom the object is passed must give the name before
the one who has passed the object can count ten. Failing to do this,
one point is scored by team "A". The one on team "B" to whom the object
was passed, passes same back to any member of team "A" and says any of
the four words.

Note.--If the word "Air" is used, the opponent must name some bird,
such as robin, thrush, etc. If "water" is used, shad, salmon, etc. If
"earth" is used, lion, cow, etc.


Around the Chair

The teams are arranged as in previous games. The opponents at the head
of the line are handed an orange. At the signal to "go" they must stand
up, push their chair back from the table and run around the chair
twice, return to the table, sit down and pass the orange to the next
one in line, who repeats the performance of the first. The race ends
when the last one in the line has circled the chair twice, sat down and
held the orange above his head.


Jenkins Up

Divide the company into two sides. One division sits around the table
on one side, the other on the opposite side. The members of the
division "A" put their hands under the table and a small coin, dime or
quarter, is passed from one to the other. When division "B" thinks they
have had enough time, the captain calls out, "Jenkins up!" and the
players of "A" hold up their closed hands; and when "Jenkins down!" is
called, they must place their open hands, palm down, on the table. The
players of "B" must guess under which palm the coin is. Every player
may guess, but only the captain is to be obeyed when he orders an
opponent to lift a hand. If a player can succeed in finding the
whereabouts of the coin by causing an opponent to raise his hand, it is
legitimate. The object is to have the hand containing the coin remain
on the table last. Every hand left with the palm on the table when the
hand hiding the coin is lifted, counts a point for the team holding the
coin. The teams alternate the guessing.


Malaga Grapes

One who knows the game takes a spoon in his right hand, then taking it
in his left hand, he passes it to the one sitting at his left, saying,
"Malaga grapes are very fine grapes, the best to be had in the market".
He tells his neighbor to do the same. The spoon is thus passed from
one to the other, each telling the same grape story. If anyone passes
the spoon with the right hand, which is the natural thing to do, a
forfeit can be claimed. The trick must not be told until it has gone
around a table once or twice.


Table Football

An egg is blown and the shell used as the football. Two captains are
selected, each choosing his side. Teams take places on the opposite
sides of the table and endeavor to blow the egg shell over a goal line
which is made two inches from and parallel to their opponents' side of
the table. After each goal the egg is placed in the centre of the table
and the blowing begins with the sound of a whistle. No player can leave
his place, and the "football" must be moved entirely by blowing. If the
table be long, more than one egg may be used.


Spearing Peanuts

A number of peanuts are placed in the centre of the table. Each guest
is armed with a hat pin. A few of the peanuts have black spots marked
upon their end. These peanuts count 5 points. All other peanuts count 1
point. The player succeeding in scoring the highest number wins. The
pin must be stuck into the shell. Showing the nut is not allowed.


String Winding Race

Those seated at one side of the table compete against those on the
opposite side. A ball of string is given to the two players sitting
opposite each other at one end of the table. At the signal to go the
two players maintaining their hold on the loose end of the string pass
the ball to the players next to them. Each player must hold the string
in one hand and pass the ball on, unwinding it, as it progresses to the
next player. When the ball has reached the last player he immediately
starts rewinding the ball. When he has wound up his share, he passes it
back to the next, who continues the winding. By the time the ball has
returned to the player at the head of the table, it must be entirely
wound. The team first succeeding in accomplishing this, wins the race.
The string must be wound upon the ball and not snarled.


Name Writing Race

The teams are arranged on opposite sides of the table. A long slip of
paper and a pencil are handed to two players sitting opposite at the
head of the table. At the signal to "go" the two players holding the
paper write their last names upon it and pass the slip on to the next
player on their side. The second player on each team must write the
first name of the preceding player in its proper place on the slip and
write his own last name directly under that of the preceding player and
then pass the slip on to the third player, and so it continues until it
reaches the last player. He follows the example of the other players,
leaving space for his first name. The slips are then passed back to the
head of the table where the first name of the last man must be written
down by the player at the head of the table. When this is done they
stand and hold the paper above their heads. The team first succeeding
in this wins. Each player must give to the player next following him
his first name. The last player on each team will have to shout his
name, so that the one at the head of the table may be able to fill it
in before ending the race.


Candle and Plate Race

The teams are arranged on opposite sides of a table. The two players at
the head of the table are given a plate and a candle and a box of
safety matches. At the signal to "go" the candle is placed on its end
on the plate and lighted by the first player. The candle is then
balanced upon the plate, as it is passed to the next player, who
receives the plate endeavoring to maintain the balance of the candle.
Should the candle fall over, the player in whose hand the plate rests
must place the plate down upon the table, again stand the candle on its
end and pass it on to the next player. Should the flame on the candle
become extinguished, the player, in whose possession it is, must place
the plate down upon the table, and using the box of safety matches
which is on the plate, relight the candle. In this way the candle is
passed to the far end of the table and back. The team first succeeding
in accomplishing this task wins.

This can be made more difficult by requiring each player to keep one
hand in his lap during the passing, balancing and lighting of the
candle. In lighting, the next neighbor on the team may hold the box of
matches while his teammate strikes the match necessary to relight the
candle.




CHAPTER II

A COUNTY FAIR PLAY FESTIVAL


Play programs with everybody in the games, old and young, large and
small, are replacing the fakers and chance-men in some of our County
Fairs. Instead of a lot of disgusted individuals with empty purses
winding their way on the long home trail we want to hear the laughter
of the family group, still exhilarated as a result of a pleasant
afternoon spent in happy, healthful recreation.

Everybody loves to play but few will admit it. In fact a great many do
not realize that it is true. In order to get everybody in the game, it
may be necessary to use unusual methods. A heterogeneous group can be
led into the play program unconsciously if the leader uses the proper
approach; and before old Deacon Hasbrook knows it, he and his good
wife, neither of whom have played in nigh on to thirty-five years, will
be laughing and frisking about with the rest in a way that you would
have said impossible if you had known this sedate dignitary for the
past twenty-five years.


The Grand March

Here is one way that it can be done. While the band is playing a lively
march at one end of the field which is to be used for the games, have
the leaders, who have been previously instructed, get all of the folks
lined up in couples around the field for a grand march. A couple
trained for the occasion leads the march when everybody is in line,
marching about the circumference of the field. The leaders start their
fancy marching. At one end they turn and march down the center of the
field to the far end where the couples separate, the ladies going to
the left and the gentlemen to the right. They reunite at the other end
of the field. The march continues with numerous variations such as
change of formation from double to formation of fours, marching
diagonally across the field, crossing at the middle, etc. The march
should end with the group arranged in couples around the circumference
of the field with the ladies nearest the center. Have both groups face
the center and have the ladies take one step forward and the men take
one step backward.


The Games for All

One American flag on a short stick is handed to the leaders of both
lines, that is, the leading lady and the leading gentleman, and at the
signal to start the flags are passed about the circle (over the head),
the ladies competing against the gentlemen to see which can pass the
flag from hand to hand all the way around the circle in the quickest
time. The race ends when the flag returns to the leader, who waves the
same above his head, indicating the close of the race.

If the group is less than 100 in number, the following game can be
played:

A ball of string is handed to the leader of each team. Upon the signal
to start, the leaders, holding the end of the string, pass the ball to
the next one on the team, who passes it to his neighbor, unrolling it
as it goes, and so on from hand to hand, each one on the team keeping
hold of the string with his right hand. There should be string enough
in the ball to reach all the way round the circle. The ball diminishes
as it is passed along. When the ball reaches the last one in the circle
he starts rewinding the string upon the ball, passes it back to the
next one, who winds on the slack, and so the ball is passed, each one
winding until the ball returns to the captain. Each team will try to
get the ball properly wound back into the captain's hands first. No one
can leave his regular position in the line during the race. If the ball
has been properly wound, it will be possible to throw the same
twenty-five feet to the judges, who take a position within the circle
and about this distance in front of the captain. The first one to get
the ball into the hands of the judge, by means of this throw, wins the
race.

In the next race five or six flags of the Allies are passed about the
circle in the same way. The flags are stuck in the ground in front of
the leaders. Upon the signal to start, the leaders pick up the first
flag and start it on its way, then immediately pick up the second and
start it about the circle and so on until all of the flags are in
motion. The American flag should be passed last. When all of the flags
have been returned to the leaders they run to the center of the ring.
The first one to stick the American flag up in the receptacle there
placed to receive it wins the race. (Careful instruction should be
given that the flags in being passed about the circle must be handed
from one individual to the next so that every individual passes the
flag. Throwing is not allowed.)

See chapter on Racing Games for picnic for other suggestions.

Following these passing games the group can be broken up into smaller
circles, each under the direction of a leader who has been previously
instructed in the type of game he is to give to his group. The
activities of the smaller groups are to be arranged according to the
age of the participants.

In dividing a group into smaller groups according to age, the leader
should first have all children under twelve years of age step forward.
These should be placed in the charge of group leaders. Next all the
boys and girls from twelve to eighteen should be asked to step forward
and next all those young men and women who can participate in active
games. When this last group has been called forward, those remaining
will form the fourth group.

It is difficult for one leader to handle more than fifteen individuals.
If any of the groups contain more than this number, they should be
subdivided, with a leader placed in charge of each subdivision. Try as
far as possible to have the two sexes equally divided in each group.
The games should be carefully selected in advance and the various
leaders should have been trained for their task. No active play program
for large groups should be planned for a longer period than one hour
and then frequent rest periods allowed for adults.

Games which will be found adaptable for the various groups contained in
this volume are suggested below:

   For the children under twelve--Schoolyard Games for Primary and
     Intermediate Pupils.

   For those from twelve to eighteen--Schoolyard Games for Advanced
     Pupils.

   For the young men and women--Outdoor Games for the Older Boys and
     Young Men.

   For the middle-aged--a selection of games from chapter on "Games
     for Picnics, and Social Games for Adults".




CHAPTER III

GAMES FOR A STORY PLAY HOUR

The Story--"Paul Revere"


Following the reading of Longfellow's poem the listeners are given the
opportunity to give expression to their imagination in the following
games,--


"The Red Coats"

Divide the group into two equal teams. One team is called the farmers,
the other the red coats. A goal is marked off on the ground in the form
of a hollow square large enough to contain all the members of one of
the teams.

All of the red coats take a position inside of the goal with eyes
closed while the farmers hide. After sufficient time has been given to
the farmers to hide, the red coats are released and each seeks to
discover a farmer. Upon being discovered the hiding farmer must remain
in his hiding place until tagged by the red coat then they both race
back to the goal. The first one to cross the goal line becomes a farmer
and the other a red coat in the next hiding. After returning to the
goal both farmer and red coat must remain therein until all of the
farmers have been discovered. If the last red coats find it difficult
to locate the hiding farmers they can call to their assistance such
other red coats as they may need, in which case the red coat first
discovering the farmer points him out to that red coat who enlisted his
help, thereupon said red coat tags the farmer and races with him to the
goal.

After all of the farmers have been discovered those who are to be
farmers in the next round hide and the game goes on as before.

In case two red coats discover the same farmer the one first tagging
him shall count and shall race with him for the goal. In case the red
coat discovers more than one farmer he may choose the one he wishes to
tag, but he is not to disclose the other to another red coat.


"Yankee Doodle Tag"

The group is divided into two equal teams. Two lines are marked upon
the playing space parallel to each other and about 20 yards apart.
These lines should be long enough to allow all of the expected number
of players to form line upon, shoulder to shoulder. Each team lines up
on a goal line facing in the same direction, Team A facing the center
of the playing space, Team B facing away from the center.

Team A marches forward whistling "Yankee Doodle" maintaining a straight
line until a leader who takes a position near the center of one side of
the playing space raises a hand above his head. This is a signal for
team A to stop whistling, break ranks and run back to their goal line.

Team B, whose backs are toward the advancing column, upon hearing the
whistling stops, turns about and chases after team A, trying to tag as
many of them as possible before they get back to their goal line. Every
member of team A who is tagged becomes a member of team B.

Team B next marches forward whistling as did A, while A waits on their
goal line until the whistling stops, thereupon they turn about and
chase B. The game continues in this way. At the end the team having the
most players is declared the winner.

Note--the leader giving the signal for the whistling to stop should
take a position where the signal cannot be seen by the team waiting to
chase the whistlers.


"Paul Revere Race"

The group is divided into teams of from 8 to 15 each. These teams are
placed on the field in parallel columns of file with a distance of 10
feet between each team. The players on each team are then arranged in
the line at a distance of from 10 to 20 feet apart. The lightest member
of each team is selected as the rider for that team and takes his
position behind the player at the back end of his line.

At the signal to start he leaps upon the back of the last man who
carries him forward to the next man of his team in front of him in the
line, and the rider must change from the back of the first steed to the
back of the second without touching the ground. The second steed
carries him to the third, and he is passed on from steed to steed until
he reaches the last steed at the end of the column who carries him
across a finish line. The first Paul Revere to cross the line wins the
game for his team.


"The Midnight Ride"--Quiet Games

Two teams of equal numbers are chosen and arranged in two lines facing
each other. If the game is played in-doors place the teams on opposite
sides of the room. A pad of paper and a pencil is given to the two
players at the head of each line. The leader then reads a number of
lines from Longfellow's poem "The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere",
requesting that all of the players endeavor to remember as much of the
poem as possible. When a sufficient number of lines have been read the
player at the head of each team, at a signal to start, writes the first
word of the poem on the sheet and passes it along to the next player in
line who writes the second word. And so it is passed until it reaches
the end of the line. If a player does not remember the right word he
writes his surname in place of the word and passes it on to the next
player who either fills in the proper word or writes in the surname.

The team which passes the pad to the other end of the line first wins,
provided that every one has either written a word from the poem or a
name thereupon, and scores 5 points. The team having the fewest names
written into the poem also scores 5 points (an error counts the same as
a name). In case of a tie, the score race is repeated.

MODIFICATION.--Read several verses and require the paper to be passed
up the lines and back as many times as are necessary to write down all
of the verses read, using the same method used in the other race. The
team first getting all of the verses written, wins. Those who cannot
add the right word to the verse must write their surname in every time
the paper passes them. Forfeits can be required from them whose names
appear above a certain number of times on a sheet. If the group is very
large increase the number of teams.

The above games are supposed to be played after the reading of
Longfellow's poem--"The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere".




CHAPTER IV

AN INDOOR SPORTS FAIR


They are still talking about the Indoors Sports Fair that the Welfare
League of Ashton gave last spring, and ranking it as the best thing the
town ever did to raise money for their united welfare funds.

When the doors were opened on the first night it was not surprising to
see a crowd all ready to push in and enjoy the sports prepared for
them. No admission was charged, but each sport, exhibit and event had
its price plainly marked in black on a bright blue sign at the
entrance.

That first evening it seemed as if the golf course was patronized as
freely as any of the sports. It took up one large corner of the hall,
where a miniature nine-hole course had been laid out on dark blue
denim. The "holes" were marked out with rings of white paint, and there
were a few hazards of sandbags and a very low brick wall. For the most
part it was a putting game, a putter being handed to the player after
he had paid his admission to the "caddie" at the turnstile gate.

They say the boys had the time of their lives at the baseball diamond,
and some of their fathers too, to judge from the receipts. Back on a
large piece of canvas Bill Simons had "dashed in" with cold water
paints a baseball diamond, with trees in the background and bleachers
on each side, all in a queer perspective which didn't hurt the game
any. In the curtain Bill had cut holes just a little larger than a
baseball, so that throwing the ball through these holes was not any
bush-league business. On the diamond he had marked under the holes,
First Base, Second Base, Third Base, and Home Run at the plate. Back
of the plate were two holes quite close together, one marked Strike and
the other Ball. Two holes in the outfield and two "over the fence" were
also arranged in pairs to make pitching difficult. Regular baseballs
were sold, four shots for a nickel. The ruling of the game was simple:
Three strikes out, four balls a chance to try first base, or one of the
"over the fence" holes for a home run; after first base, second and
third had to be hit successively before a home run could be scored, and
to make it harder there was a "grounder" hole near third base which put
one out of the game; balls which merely struck the curtain were counted
as fouls, four fouls being out. Back of the curtain Bill had hung an
old mattress against which the balls bounded to the floor. This was
covered with a black cloth to make the holes in the diamond visible.


Seeing the Old Home Town

Down the line next to the baseball diamond came the bowling alley,
where everyone who was not a fan or a golf fiend was taking a hand at
the sport. This alley was laid on a long board table, and the game
played with tenpins and small wooden balls. Six balls for a nickel they
sold here, and because the sport needed something to speed it up a bit
they linked it with the food table next door. The best cooks in town
presided over this. You paid your money for your tenpin balls, and
proceeded to run up a score by counting the numbers on the pins you
knocked down; the pins were set far apart to make it difficult. Then
you took your score to the food table, where certain numbers of points
brought you a glass of jelly, a can of mince-meat, a box of cookies, or
a jar of mayonnaise. That bowling alley certainly did appeal to the
women!

And if there was ever a more successful grab bag for the children than
the quoits game, the Ashton Welfare Committee wants to hear about it.
They called it a Good Luck booth for it had a horseshoe-shaped opening
with a row of numbered pegs across the back. The kiddies bought the
quoits, little wooden horseshoes cut from cigar-box wood, and tossed
them over a peg. The number of the peg corresponded to a numbered tag
which was handed out to be redeemed at the parcel-post window near the
aërial mail plane.

This aviator, by the way, was an official of the Cupid Airline, so he
advertised on his aëroplane, which was painted on a large curtain with
a hole cut out where the seat would be, and the wheel of an electric
fan poked through at the front and set going for a propeller. His mail
bag hung over the side of the car inside of which he stood in aviation
uniform, and for ten cents you could get your fortune in a small white
envelope out of the mail bag if you were a man, or in a pink envelope
if you were a girl.

But say, for a real scream, you had to take a sight-seeing trip in the
auto! It was worth twice the toll. Dottie Earle had charge of it, and
she made one of the funniest guides you ever heard. "This way, ladies
and gentlemen," she would shout through her megaphone; "get your
tickets for a tour of the city in the most magnificently equipped
sight-seeing autos that ever ran on three wheels and one cylinder! Only
twenty-five cents, two bits a ride! See the birthplace of Ashton's
mayor, the history of Ashton's past, its chief industries," and so on.

When her tourists assembled in front of her machine, which was a real
car, at least the front half of one, an old relic which the garage had
just about decided to scrap, its latter half hidden behind a dark
curtain, Dottie led them back of the curtain where the sights of Ashton
were hidden. In another black curtain were a series of holes not any
larger than a quarter, and behind each was one of the sights, a cradle,
a picture of the town dump, a scrubbing brush and a large pen-knife for
the sights already mentioned. For the Home Team she had a snapshot of
the Warren twins, for the competitor of the Herald, a telephone, and so
on with eight other "hits" on town topics and characters. So many
guffaws and squeals of laughter came from behind the curtain that they
had to call in a "traffic cop" to keep the crowd outside quiet.

The "traffic cops," by the way, were boy scouts. They had dark blue
costumes of cheap drill, trimmed with white braid, and wore white
cotton gloves and shiny badges. They really did have power invested in
them by the committee to preserve order and keep the crowds moving. At
one point they were allowed to stand with a semaphore and hold up the
crowd, not allowing anyone to pass who could not show a certain number
of tags from the various booths. This tag system was to insure that all
would play fair, for there was so much fun just watching other folks
spend money that the tightwads might never have taken their hands out
of their pockets or opened their purses.


A Racket Around the Candy Booth

Mrs. Peterson, who sells the best bread in town, had charge of the cake
archery. You bought arrows for this, three for ten cents, but you could
not shoot until a dollar's worth of arrows had been sold. Then you took
your turn at the bow and arrow. The arrow which hit nearest the
bull's-eye got the cake, of course, and it was some cake, if it
happened to be one of Abbie Southerland's angel foods.

The Girls' Club had drawn the candy table for their share of the fair,
and a pretty booth they made of it, using all the tennis nets they
could beg, borrow or steal to drape it with and putting up all the
candy in ten-cent packages wrapped in white waxed paper to look like
tennis balls. Someone got funny and asked why there was such a racket
around the candy booth!

The fair lasted three days. What with changing the attractions, keeping
fresh food on the refreshment tables, making special attractions for
children in the afternoons after school by offering prizes for sports
events like sack races, obstacle races, and so on, getting up interest
in golf tournaments and baseball series, the place was kept packed
from three in the afternoon until midnight.

In The Ladies' Home Journal, Jan., 1921. Published with the permission
of the author, Claire Wallis, and The Ladies' Home Journal.




CHAPTER V

RACING GAMES FOR PICNICS


In these games participants are divided into a number of equal teams.
Each team is lined up in single file behind a base line. A distance
line parallel to the base line and about ten yards from it is indicated
on the field.


Egg and Spoon Race

A basket of eggs, apples, potatoes or stones is placed in front of each
team and a spoon given to the first member of each team. Empty baskets
are placed on the distance line opposite the position of each team. At
the signal to go the first player on each team, keeping the left hand
behind the back, takes one egg from the basket by means of the spoon
and carries it on the spoon to the basket from the distance line.
Returning to the base line the spoon is handed to the second member of
the team who repeats the performance of the first. The game continues
until the last player on each team, after carrying the egg forward,
returns across the base line. The team first succeeding wins.

Should a player drop an egg, he must gather up as much of the egg as
possible and carry it to the far basket and there deposit it before
returning with the spoon to the next member of his team.


Pea Shelling Race

A basket containing peas and an empty dish are placed on the distance
line opposite each team. There should be at least six peas contained in
each basket for every player on the team. At the signal to go the
first player on each team runs forward, shells his peas into the dish
and lays the six empty pods in a straight line behind the dish.
Accomplishing this, he returns and tags off the next player on the team
who repeats the performance of the first. The team first succeeding in
shelling all of the peas and having each player's pods lined up in a
straight line, wins.


Needle Threading Race

An individual holding a needle and a short piece of thread is on the
distance line opposite each team. At the signal to go, the first player
on each team runs forward, takes the needle and thread, threads the
needle, hands it back to the individual and returns and tags off the
next player on the team. The individual holding the needle unthreads
it, ready for the next player to repeat the performance of the first.
When the last player crosses the starting line after threading the
needle the race ends.


Button Sewing

As many buttons as there are players on each team are placed on the
distance line opposite each team, a strip of cloth, a needle, and as
many short lengths of thread as there are players. At the signal to go,
the first member of each team runs forward, threads the needle with one
of the pieces of thread, sews a button on the strip of cloth, using up
all of the thread in his piece. He leaves the needle stuck in the cloth
at the distance line and returns and tags off the next player, who
repeats the performance of the first, as do all other team members.


Rope Skipping Relay

A piece of rope is necessary for each team. At the signal to go, the
first member of each team skips rope forward to the distance line. From
the distance line he runs back and hands the rope to the next one on
the team, who repeats the performance of the first. Each player must
skip the rope at least six times in each direction. The last member of
the team, after skipping the rope forward to the distance line, returns
across the base line, ending the event.


Rope Skipping Contest

A piece of rope is needed for each team. At the signal to go, the first
individual skips rope ten times, in place, hands the rope back to the
next individual who skips ten times, and so the rope is passed on until
it gets to the last one in the line, who skips twenty times and passes
the rope back to the one next in front of him in the line. The rope is
passed until it gets to the first member of the team, each one skipping
ten times upon receiving it. When the one in the front of the line has
skipped ten times, he ends the race by running forward across the
distance line.


Dizzy Izzy

A cane or stick is given to the first player on each team. Upon the
signal to go he places the end of the stick upon the ground, holding
the stick in a vertical position, and places the centre of his forehead
on the upper end of the stick. In this position, he circles around the
stick three times and then runs forward to the distance line and
returns, handing the stick to the next player on his team behind the
base line. The second player places his forehead upon the stick and
repeats the performance of the first, as does every other player on the
team. The last man ends the race by crossing the base line.


Caterpillar Race

The players on each team sit upon the ground in single file, with the
head of each team behind the base line. The knees are bent so that the
feet are near the hips. Each player reaches back with his two hands and
grasps the ankles of the player next behind him. At the signal to go,
the entire column moves forward, endeavoring to keep from breaking the
column by any one losing his grip on the ankles of the next member of
the team, behind. The caterpillar creeps forward across the distance
line and returns. When the rear end of the column crosses the base
line, the race is completed, provided the column is unbroken.


Potato Race

Two peach baskets and two potatoes, stones or blocks of wood for each
contestant are needed for each team. One basket is placed before each
team on the base line and one directly opposite on the distance line.
The potatoes are placed in the basket on the base line. The first
player takes a position on the right hand side of the basket behind the
base line, with a potato in his hand. At the signal to start, he runs
around the basket on the distance line, dropping his potato therein. He
returns, running around the basket on the base line, picks up the
second potato, which he carries and drops into the far basket, as he
circles it. He then returns and tags off the next player on the team,
who, after being tagged, picks up the first potato and carries it to
the far basket, returning for his second. Each player in turn carries
two potatoes, one at a time. Both baskets must be circled in carrying
the potatoes forward. The player is not allowed to touch the basket in
running around it. If his potato fails to go into the basket, he must
pick it up and put it in before he goes for his second potato or
touches off the next runner. The last player on each team ends the race
by crossing the base line after having properly deposited his two
potatoes in the far basket.


Apple Race*

A strawberry basket full of small apples is handed to the first member
of each team. At the signal to go the basket full of apples is passed
back over the heads of the players until it reaches the last player in
the column. The last player, upon receiving the basket full of apples,
runs forward on the right hand side of his line to the distance line,
where an empty basket has been placed. He pours the apples from his
full basket into the empty basket, leaving the basket which is now
empty on the distance line. He returns with the full basket to the
front of the column and starts passing the basket full of apples back
over his head. When it reaches the individual who is then at the rear
of the column, he runs forward, repeating the performance of the first.
The race ends when the last man on the team to run returns across the
base line after having changed the apples on the distance line.


Apple Race No. 2*

A basket full of apples and an empty basket are placed upon the
distance line opposite each team. At the signal to go the first man on
the team runs forward, empties the apples from the full basket into the
empty basket. Should he spill any, he must pick them up. All of the
apples must be in the basket before he leaves them. He leaves the empty
and full baskets on the distance line and returns, tags off the next
member on his team and takes his place at the rear of the line. When
all members of the team have done this and the last member crosses the
base line, the race ends.


Apple Race No. 3*

Peach baskets containing an equal number of apples (fifteen makes a
good number) are placed at the front of each team. An empty basket is
placed at the rear of the column. At the signal to go the first man on
the team picks the apples out of the full basket, one at a time and
passes them to the rear as rapidly as possible. Every man in the line
must receive and pass back every apple. The last man in the column
deposits the apples in the empty basket as rapidly as he receives them.

When the last apple has been passed back, the man in front of the
column passes back the empty basket. When the empty basket reaches the
last man in the column, he picks up the full basket, places the empty
one in its place and runs to the front of the column with the full
basket, places it in front of him on the ground and starts passing the
apples back, one at a time, as before. The race continues until the
last man on the team runs forward and places his full basket of apples
on the distance line in front of his team.

Judges should count the apples to see that there are as many in the
basket as the team started with, before rendering a decision as to the
winner of the race.


Apple Race No. 4*

A peach basket is placed opposite each team and ten feet beyond the
distance line. The first member of each team is handed a good sized
apple. At the signal to go he runs forward to the distance line, and
standing behind the same, endeavors to toss the apple into the basket.
Failing to do this, he may run forward and recover the apple, but must
return to the distance line in his endeavor to toss the apple into the
basket. When he has succeeded in tossing the apple into the basket, he
picks the apple out of the basket and runs back, handing it to the next
member on the team, who does the same as he did. The race continues
until the last member of the team has properly tossed the apple into
the basket, recovered it and has run across the base line.

* Stones may be used in place of apples in these races.


Apple Toss

A basket containing four apples is placed on the ground in front of
each team. An empty basket is placed on the distance line opposite each
team. The first player on each team takes a position beside the empty
basket on the distance line. At the signal to go the second player on
the team, who stands by the basket containing the apples, picks up the
apples, one at a time, and tosses them to the first player who stands
on the distance line. The first player, upon catching the apples, drops
them into the empty basket until he has received all four. He then
carries the full basket back and places it on the ground in front of
his team, while the player who tossed the apples to him runs forward to
the distance line with the empty basket. The third player on the team
then picks up the apples, one at a time, and tosses them to the second
player, who is now beside the empty basket on the distance line, while
the first player takes his position at the rear of the line.

The race continues in this way until it becomes the turn of the first
player to toss the apples forward. After having tossed the four apples,
he picks up his empty basket and runs with it across the distance line,
ending the race.

No player can have more than one apple in his hand at a time and the
player tossing the apples forward must stand behind the base line and
cannot pick up the basket to run forward with it until he has gotten
rid of the fourth apple.


Roll Over Relay

At the signal to go, the first player on each team runs towards the
distance line. Somewhere between the base line and the distance line,
he must take a forward roll upon the ground. He then runs across the
distance line and back, tagging off the next player, who repeats his
performance.


Spin Around Relay

One member of each team takes a position on the distance line, opposite
to and facing his team. At the signal to go the first man on each team
runs forward, locks his right arm in the right arm of the man on the
distance line and in this position spins twice around, using the man on
the distance line as a pivot. Completing his second spin, he remains on
the distance line while the man who was there returns and tags off the
next member of his team, who repeats the performance. The race ends
when the last man to spin around the pivot crosses the base line.

This race can be modified by having two or even three individuals
distributed at equal distances between the base and the distance line
to spin around, instead of one.


Chair Relay

A chair is placed on the distance line opposite each team, with the
back of the chair towards the team. Boxes may be used instead of chairs
in this race. At the signal to go the first player on each team runs
forward, sits in the chair, lifting both feet clear of the ground, then
running around the chair, returns and tags off the next player, who
does the same.

Where folding chairs are available, the chair can be folded and left
upon the ground on the distance line. Then each contestant is required
to open the chair, sit upon it, then fold it, lay it upon the ground
and return to tag off the next player.


Chair Passing Race

A box can be used instead of a chair in this event. All of the players
are asked to face to the right. A chair is given to the man at the
right hand end of the line to sit upon. All of the others remain
standing. At the signal to go, he picks up the chair, and passes it to
his left hand neighbor who receives it and passes it on to his left
hand neighbor and so the chair is passed until it gets to the player at
the left end of the line. He, upon receiving it, places it upon the
ground and sits upon it, lifting both feet from the ground. Then,
picking up the chair, he runs to the rear of his line until he gets to
the other end. There again he sits upon the chair, raising both feet
from the ground, and then starts passing it to the left. So when every
man in the line has run to the right with the chair in turn, the last
man ends the race when he sits upon it at the right hand end of the
line.


Chair Sitting Race

A box can be used for this event instead of a chair. If a chair is
used, it is well to have a very sturdy one. This race starts with the
players in the same position as in the preceding race, the player on
the right hand end of the line sitting upon the chair. At the signal to
go, he picks up the chair, passing it in front of him to the neighbor
on his left, who, after sitting upon the chair and lifting both feet
from the ground, passes it in front of him to the next player to the
left and so the chair is passed towards the left hand end of the line,
each player in turn sitting upon it and then passing it in front of him
to the next player on the left. The race ends when the man on the far
left end of the line sits upon the chair with his feet off the ground.


Squash Race

One crook-neck summer squash, a short stick, a piece of twine and a
strawberry basket are needed for each team in this race. The strawberry
basket, containing the squash with its neck projecting over the edge,
is placed on the distance line. A slip noose is made in one end of the
twine. The other end is tied to the end of the stick. This fish pole
arrangement of twine and stick is handed to the first man on each team.
At the signal to go he runs forward to the distance line and proceeds
to fish for the squash in the basket by slipping the noose of string
over its neck. He is not allowed to touch the string or squash with his
hand in his effort to do this. He must use his stick as a fish pole.
When he has succeeded in capturing the squash, he picks up the basket
and carries the squash swinging from the end of his fish pole to the
next player on his team. The second player, upon receiving the squash,
the fish pole, and the basket, runs forward, slipping the noose off the
squash. He places the squash in the basket on the distance line and
proceeds to fish for it as did the preceding player. Each player does
this in turn.


Poison Club

Small logs of stove length, flat on one end, are lined up between the
base and distance lines in front of each team. There should be at least
five of these for each team and they should not be placed more than
three feet apart, set on their flat end in a straight line.

At the signal to go the first member of each team hops forward across
the distance line, hopping to the right of the first club, to the left
of the second, to the right of the third and so on in and out until he
has cleared all the clubs. He then completes the distance, hopping to
the distance line. From there he may run back and tag off the next
member on his team. Should he knock over any of the clubs, he must stop
and set it up without touching more than one foot to the ground, before
he can proceed to the next club. The race ends when the last individual
runs across the base line.


Club Change

Two small circles are drawn on the base line opposite each team. Three
short logs similar to those in the preceding game are balanced on end
in the right hand circle opposite each team. At the signal to go the
first player runs forward, picks up the logs, one at a time, and
changes them to the empty circle. When he has changed all three logs,
he can then return and tag off the next player on his team. The second
player runs forward and proceeds to change the three logs back to their
original circle. So each player changes the three logs from the full to
the empty circle. When the last player, after having accomplished this,
crosses the base line, the race ends.


Fan and Bag Race

A small paper bag well inflated with air, and a palm leaf fan are given
to the first player on each team. The bag is placed on the base line in
front of the team. At the signal to go, the first player proceeds to
blow the bag forward by means of the fan, until it has crossed the
distance line. He then picks up the bag, returns, places it on the base
line in front of the next player to whom he hands the fan. The second
player repeats the performance. The race ends when the last player
blows the bag across the distance line.


Quadruped Race

The first two players on each team stand back to back behind the base
line, with the first player facing the distance line. The two lock arms
behind them. At the signal to go the first player bends forward,
lifting the second player so that his feet are clear of the ground and
carries him forward on his back in this position. When he has crossed
the distance line, he lowers the player upon his back, without changing
their relative position and that player, upon getting his feet upon the
ground, bends forward, lifting the first player upon his back, and runs
back with him in this position across the base line.

When the first couple has crossed the base line, the second couple on
each team proceeds with the race, copying the first.


Centipede Race

The players of each team lock their arms around the waist of the player
next in front of them and race in this compact position across the
distance line, turning around without breaking their formation, and end
the race when the last man on the team crosses the base line.


Blind Chariot Race

Several teams can be used in this race. The distance line is pointed
out before blindfolding each team. Each team is made up of two horses
and a driver. All three are blindfolded, facing in the same direction.
The horses' inside arms are locked together. The driver takes hold of
the outside arms. Each team is turned around three times and at a
signal, race to the goal.


Hoop Race

A wooden hoop is placed on the distance line opposite each team. At the
signal to go the first player rushes forward and picks up the hoop and
passes it down over his head, body, and legs, steps out of it, while it
is lying on the ground. He then steps back into it, and lifts it up,
passing it over his entire body, legs, trunk and head. When he has
lifted it over his head, he places it on the distance line and runs
back to tag off the next player, who repeats the performance of the
first as do all the others in turn.


Rainy Day Race

The players on the team are grouped in pairs. Each team is given an
umbrella, two raincoats, one pair of gloves and one pair of rubbers.
This equipment is placed in a pile upon the ground in front of each
team. At the signal to go the first couple on each team go to the pile
of clothes; one puts on one glove, one the other; they do the same with
the rubbers; each puts on a raincoat and opening the umbrella link arms
and run to the distance line and back removing the rubbers, gloves,
coat and closing the umbrella. They then tag off the next couple who
repeat the performance of the first. This continues until the last
couple crosses the base line ending the race.




INDEX

GAMES FOR SCHOOLS


SCHOOLROOM GAMES

_For Primary Pupils_

Aisle Hunt                              3
Aviation Meet                           1
Birds Fly                               4
Bee                                     2
Bowing Race                             6
Button, Button                          1
Cat and Mouse                           1
Change Seat Relay                       5
Charlie Over the Water                  5
Colors                                  2
Hide in Sight                           2
Hide the Clock                          3
I See Red                               3
Music Rush                              5
New Orleans                             4
Poison Seat                             3
Rat-a-tat Race                          6
Spin Around Race                        7
Tap Relay                               6

_For Intermediate Pupils_

Compass                                11
Corner Spry                             9
Change Seats                           14
Clapping Song                          12
Flag Race                              10
Frogs in Sea                            9
Geography                              11
History Race                           13
Hunt the Rattler                        8
Indian Trail                           12
Initial Tag                             8
Jerusalem, Jericho, Jemima             10
Last Man                               14
Magic Music                             8
Multiplication Race                    13
Name Race                               9
Number Relay                           13
Poem Race                              14
Relay Run Around                       15
Rhymes                                 12
Seat Vaulting Tag                      10
Spelling Words                         11
Sticker                                 8

_For Advanced and High School Pupils_

Art Gallery                            19
Bowknot Relay                          20
Cooking Race                           21
Definitions                            16
Descriptive Adjectives                 17
Directions                             23
Distinguishing by Smell                19
Distinguishing Sounds                  18
Drawing Animals                        20
Geography                              16
Grammar Race                           22
Guessing Dimensions                    19
Historical Pictures                    20
Jumbled Words                          17
Laugh                                  19
Mysterious Articles                    19
Schoolroom Tag                         22
Seeing and Remembering                 16
Spelling Game                          21
Store                                  18
Train of Thoughts                      20


SCHOOLYARD GAMES

_For Primary Pupils_

Back to Back                           26
Chase the Rabbit                       24
Handkerchief Tag                       25
Peggy in Ring                          26
Progression                            25
Puss in Corner                         26
Shadow Tag                             25
Squirrel in Trees                      25
Statues                                24
Steps                                  24

_For Intermediate Pupils_

Antony Over                            29
Ball Tag                               36
Channel Tag                            35
Chicken Market                         31
Chickidy Hand                          31
Circle Chase                           34
Couple Tag                             36
Fox and Rabbit                         31
Fox Trail                              33
In and Out                             30
Link Race                              27
Maze Tag                               27
Oriental Tag                           36
Pass Ball                              32
Poison                                 32
Reuben and Rachel                      35
Roly Poly                              29
Snake and Bird                         30
Soak 'Em                               35
The Dummy                              36
Turtle Tag                             29
Weavers Race                           34

_For Advanced and High School Pupils_

Dresden Tag                            37
Fox and Geese                          37
Freight Train Tag                      39
Hand Baseball                          41
Kick Ball                              41
Last Couple Out                        41
Partner Swat Tag                       38
Pin Ball                               40
Plug the Hole                          38
Red, White and Blue                    39
Roll Ball                              39
Spanish Fly                            42
Take Away                              39
Tony Says                              43


SOCIABLE GAMES FOR THE HOME, CHURCH, ETC.

_For the Home:_

Board and Nail Puzzle                  49
Captain Kidd's Gold                    53
Catechism of States                    47
Chic-a-dee                             53
Come-She-Come                          45
Floor Baseball                         51
Hide the Thimble                       45
Last Match                             46
Red Triangle Ring Toss                 50
Spinning for 20                        49
Spin the Platter                       48
Step by Step                           48
Tit Tat Too                            45
Twenty Questions                       44
You Know Me                            45
Your House, My House                   46


ICE BREAKERS FOR SOCIABLES:

Bean Penalty                           57
Bird Hunt                              55
Matching Advertisements                56
Matching Proverbs                      56
Mixing March                           56
Musical Medley                         57
My Month                               55
Poison Circle                          55
Puzzled Words                          57
Shoe Hunt                              56
Trip Around the World                  57


SOCIAL GAMES FOR GROWN-UPS

Analogues                              63
Biographic Cartoons                    59
Charades                               64
Ghost                                  64
Gossiping                              63
Illustrated Songs                      59
Knight of the Cracker                  65
Match Boxing                           66
Muddled Words                          60
Poor Pussy                             62
Rooster                                62
Smiles                                 59
Tea Pot                                60
Trades                                 61
Who Are They?                          61
Who Is It?                             61


SOCIABLE GAMES FOR YOUNG PEOPLE

Barnyard Chorus                        68
Birds                                  70
Donkey Solo                            68
Exchange                               68
Feather Tag                            70
Fruit Basket                           67
Going to Jerusalem                     72
Guess the Sound                        69
Hush                                   71
Jack's Alive                           71
Rapid Transit                          69
Rhyming Verbs                          67
Shifting Seats                         69
Simple Simon's Silly Smile             71
What Animal?                           67
Wink                                   71


TRICK GAMES FOR SOCIABLES

Aeroplane Ride                         80
Blind Blow                             77
Boots Without Shoes                    76
Clairvoyant                            75
Coin and Card Snap                     77
Divesting                              82
Egg Smash                              81
Hay Stack                              76
Hindoo Blind Reading                   73
Knights of the Sacred Whistle          75
Magic Answers                          74
Mental Telepathy                       73
Musical Notes                          81
Newspaper Touch                        76
Number Trick                           78
Penny Wise                             78
Pigs in Pen                            78
Reading Temples                        80
Scissors Crossed                       75
Siam Club                              82
The Paper Artist                       74
Tricks with Matches                    77


STUNT ATHLETIC MEET

Bawl Game                              83
Chair Tilting                          85
Discus Throw                           85
Duel Tug of War                        84
Elimination Race                       87
Hammer Throw                           86
Head Toss                              84
Javelin Throw                          86
Light Weight Race                      86
Long Glum                              86
Lucky                                  84
One Mile Run                           86
Peanut Relay                           83
Peanut Throw                           84
Ring the Bell                          85
Running Broad Grin                     86
Shot Put                               84
Standing Broad Jump                    83
Standing High Jump                     83
Turtle Race                            86
Twenty Yard Dash                       86


COMPETITIVE STUNTS

Aviation Meet                          89
Balloon Race                           90
Blindfold Obstacles                    91
Boat Race                              92
Brick Relay                            88
Candle Roll Over                       91
Chair Stubbing                         89
Chair-i-ot Race                        89
Cracker Relay                          91
Feather Blowing Relay                  90
Lobster Race                           90
Necktie Race                           92
Prune Tag of War                       90
Whistle Race                           91


OUTDOOR GAMES

FOR OLDER BOYS AND YOUNG MEN

Chariot Race                          100
Clock Games                            99
Flathead Race                         101
Forcing the City Gates                 95
Fortress                               94
Game of Goose                          98
Hare and Hound                         96
Human Targets                          96
Leap Frog Race                        102
Push Cross Line                        94
Riding the Snail                      102
Sling the Sack                         97
Spin Around Race                      101
Walking Race                          100


FOR BOYS

Body Guard                            106
Bombardment                           108
Bombardment No. 2                     109
Fence Tag                             105
Fox in Hole                           105
Hang Tag                              105
Hide and Seek                         103
Look Out for the Bear                 104
One Step Off and All the Way Across   108
Sardines                              106
Shinny                                107
Still-a-Feet                          104
Treasure Hunt                         103
Wheel Away                            108


GAMES OF STRENGTH

Cane Wrestling                        112
Cumberland Wrestling                  111
Finger Wrestling                      110
Greco-Roman Wrestling                 111
Hand Tug of War                       112
Hog Tie                               111
Neck Tug of War                       112
One Leg Tug of War                    111
Referee's Hold                        110
Shoulder and Arm Push                 111
Squatting Tug                         112
Taking the Heights                    110
Wrestle Tug of War                    110


GAMES FOR SPECIAL OCCASIONS

AT THE DINING TABLE

Around the Chair                      115
Candle and Plate Race                 117
Earth, Air, Fire and Water            114
Jenkins Up                            115
Malaga Grapes                         115
Name Writing Race                     117
Oysterette Race                       113
Passing the Drink                     113
Rat-a-tat-tat                         114
Spearing Peanuts                      116
String Winding Race                   116
Table Football                        116


A COUNTY FAIR PLAY FESTIVAL

The Games for All                     120
The Grand March                       119


GAMES FOR A STORY PLAY HOUR

Paul Revere Race                      125
The Midnight Ride                     125
The Red Coats                         123
Yankee Doodle Tag                     124


AN INDOOR SPORTS FAIR

A Racket Around the Candy Booth       130
Seeing the Old Home Town              128


RACING GAMES FOR PICNICS

Apple Race                            135
Apple Race No. 2                      136
Apple Race No. 3                      136
Apple Race No. 4                      137
Apple Toss                            137
Blind Chariot Race                    142
Button Sewing                         133
Caterpillar Race                      134
Centipede Race                        142
Chair Passing Race                    139
Chair Relay                           139
Chair Sitting Race                    140
Club Change                           141
Dizzy Izzy                            134
Egg and Spoon Race                    132
Fan and Bag Race                      142
Hoop Race                             143
Needle Threading Race                 133
Pea Shelling Race                     132
Poison Club                           141
Potato Race                           135
Quadruped Race                        142
Rainy Day Race                        143
Roll Over Relay                       138
Rope Skipping Contest                 134
Rope Skipping Relay                   133
Spin Around Relay                     138
Squash Race                           140




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCHOOL, CHURCH, AND HOME GAMES ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

