


Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 28769-h.htm or 28769-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/28769/28769-h/28769-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/28769/28769-h.zip)





TED MARSH ON AN IMPORTANT MISSION

by

ELMER SHERWOOD

Author of "Ted Marsh, the Boy Scout", "Buffalo Bill's Boyhood",
"Buffalo Bill and the Pony Express", etc., etc.

Illustrations by Alice Carsey







[Illustration: HE SPRANG AT TED AND BARKED HIS DELIGHT]



Whitman Publishing Co.




CONTENTS

    I. Ted Decides to Accept                                        11
   II. Plans Are Made to Meet Ted                                   24
  III. Ted Arrives in Chicago                                       33
   IV. Ted Meets Strong                                             39
    V. Setting a Trap                                               47
   VI. Strong Seems Checkmated                                      57
  VII. The Dictaphone at Work                                       68
 VIII. Winckel Calls a Halt                                         80
   IX. At Ottawa                                                    87
    X. Ted Receives a Reward                                        94
   XI. Ted Goes Back                                               101
  XII. The Marshes Reunited                                        108




ILLUSTRATIONS

 HE SPRANG AT TED AND BARKED HIS DELIGHT                             4
 CAUTIOUSLY HE PROWLED ABOUT                                        13
 TED FREES THE PRISONERS                                            78




TED MARSH ON AN IMPORTANT MISSION

CHAPTER I

TED DECIDES TO ACCEPT


"Ted, oh Ted."

The speaker's hail was not altogether unexpected. The boy called Ted
turned about and met Captain Wilson half way.

The familiar figure of the boy proves to be Ted Marsh who had come out
to Western Canada with his friends, John Dean and Mrs. Dean. After a
number of months on the Double X Ranch, months which the boy had found
both exhilarating and tremendously to his liking, he had been sent to
Wayland Academy. To those of us who have read Ted Marsh the Boy Scout,
the following facts are familiar. A brief resume, however, is set
forth herewith for those readers who are new so that they can safely
gather the threads of our story.

Ted Marsh, a likeable newsboy, living in Chicago, makes the
acquaintance of John Dean, a Canadian rancher. Ted takes him to the
Settlement to which he belongs. Dean's interest in the boy grows. Then
as the boy begins to show the man the Chicago that he knows, there is
the startling clamor of fire engines and all the evidence of a nearby
fire. It is in the tenement in which Ted lives. The boy cannot be held
back. He rushes into the building to try to save his mother.
Fortunately, his mother has already left the burning building. The boy
is caught within and only makes his escape by jumping from the window
on high into the firemen's waiting net below.

After a stay in the hospital John Dean and his wife take the boy West
with the consent of his mother who unselfishly lets him go because
opportunity, so she feels, is there. Ted's father had left home just
before Ted was born.

[Illustration: CAUTIOUSLY HE PROWLED ABOUT]

Strong interest centers around the doings of Ted and his new-found
friends both at the ranch and at the academy. Adventures are many. The
boy is found to be cool in emergencies. He has qualities which bring
respect and liking. The end of the story finds him suggested for an
important mission to Chicago--and his youth is considered of great
advantage by the gentlemen who wish to send him. The opening of the
present story finds Captain Wilson hailing Ted, ready to broach the
subject and find out if the boy is willing or unwilling to undertake
the mission:

The boy saluted. He stood at attention while the captain studied him
for a few moments.

"Ted, boy, I come to you on very important business. Not as Scout to
Scout, but as man to man. For you can safely refuse to do this--it
will not count against you as Scout. Did Mr. Dean see you?"

"Yes sir," the boy replied. "He told me that in all probability you
would wish to see me in reference to an important matter. And he told
me that when you did ask me, I was to be sure to decide with no other
thought than that of either wanting or not wanting to do it. He
doesn't want my friendship for him or for anyone else to influence
me."

"That's exactly it, Ted. What we are going to ask you to do, you must,
first, want to do, second, feel that you can do, third, be sure it is
in line with any convictions you may have. Now, I suppose you are even
more anxious to know what it is all about?"

The boy nodded his assent but waited for the other to continue.

"Whatever we are going to tell you or which you may gather you do
under pledge of secrecy. And now let us go to meet Major Church. While
we are on our way, bear with me for a few minutes while I go into all
this for you.

"Germany, we all feel, is getting ready to make war. Most people
cannot realize it, but we have fairly good proof gathered both in
London and in Ottawa that it is so. We also know that over in the
States a big army of so-called German Americans but who are Germans in
reality, men who have never severed their allegiance to the
Fatherland, are getting ready, preparing to invade Canada. They are
also to have the help of many Irishmen who hate England.

"The reason for this conference is to get Canada to also prepare. The
Germans are working quietly, secretly. We cannot get the evidence to
show what they are doing although we have tried. Here in Canada, they
simply will not believe, and cite the fact that Germany has repeatedly
declared its friendship as the best kind of proof of our being all
wrong.

"Is all this too complex for you, my boy?" Captain Wilson interrupted
his discourse with the sudden thought that he was not making it clear
to his listener.

"I understand you, Captain Wilson," the boy answered. So the captain
continued.

"We think we have found out one source through which we can get
information. We must, however, proceed with great caution. Nothing
would please the Germans more than to show us up and give surface
proof of their good will and good intentions. Incidently, they would
give a lot to make those of us who are watching, the laughing stock of
Canada and the United States. That is why we must be very careful. We
must try to get Washington to see the truth not through any suspicion
they may have but by actual, obvious, undeniable evidence. If we can
furnish such proof the Government at Washington will find good reason
for watching these German-Americans.

"It is for us to get the proof. Once we get that we will not have to
worry as to trouble from the other side of the border.

"I suppose," the captain concluded as they entered the building and
made their way to the room in which Major Church was waiting, "you
know who some of the men at this conference are. Besides Mr. Dean and
myself, Major Smith, our chief, is an ex-army officer. Colonel Graham
is Syd Graham's father. Mr. Smythe comes from Toronto; he is in the
employ of the Government. Well, here we are."

They entered a small room. Major Church put aside some papers on
which he had been engaged.

Captain Wilson introduced Ted.

"I have heard of you, young man," was the major's greeting. "You are a
credit to the school, I find. And we have called you before us because
of qualities we find you possess.

"I don't know how much you do know, lad, but war with Germany is near.
Germans masquerading as German-Americans are planning an attempt
against Canada and they intend to carry out that attempt just before
the immediate declaration of war. We believe that the meetings of the
prime movers are held in Milwaukee, possibly in Chicago. It is
important for us to know their plans."

"We perhaps could decide on anyone of several men but it occurred to
us that to send one so young as you are would in itself lull any
suspicions they may have. They will not connect you with our work,
which is in itself half the battle. But, of course, it would not do to
send any one who, though young, is not also endowed with a fair amount
of good common sense and discretion."

Ted listened. Nothing that the Major said escaped him. He realized
the weight of the speaker's words.

"I understand that you have lived in Chicago. That is correct, is it
not?"

"Yes sir," Ted replied.

"Well, it will help in case the point to cover is Chicago. With your
knowledge of Chicago very little time would be lost."

"In the main," the Major continued, "it is mostly a question of being
alert--eyes, ears and mind."

"Captain Wilson," the Major turned. "Is Mr. Smythe obtaining the
necessary information, do you know?"

"Yes, we will soon know," was the reply, "who is the operative in that
district and whether Chicago or Milwaukee is the point to cover. Mr.
Smythe is waiting for the answer."

Major Church gave Ted an account of how their secret service men
worked and how information was obtained.

"Despite the fact that we have all these men, I feel sure that you
will be able to get the information we desire more readily than any of
our men. In a way, you will be a temporary secret service man."

He carefully outlined his reasons for believing that Ted might be
successful in getting information.

"My boy, Canada is not your country. There is no call for you to do
it. You may wish to remain neutral and we do not want you to go unless
you wish to, heart and soul. But should you go, successful or
unsuccessful, you will be rendering us a great service."

"I want to go," Ted answered very quietly. "Canada is second only to
my loyalty for my own country."

Major Church and Captain Wilson gave Ted a hand-clasp which showed
their feelings.

"You are true blue, my lad," said Major Church. "We will have
information as to location from Mr. Smythe very soon. You can
understand the need of secrecy when our wires are coded. By the way,
Wilson," he turned to the captain, "you have an instructor in German
here, have you not?"

"We have," was the reply.

"Better watch him a bit. My theory is that all of these Germans will
bear watching."

Three hours later Captain Wilson and Ted joined Mr. Smythe, Mr. Dean,
Colonel Graham and Major Church. Mr. Smythe presented the following
wire:

    "Smythe,
        "Wayland.
    "Ekal stroper On. 2 ecalp Ees H."

"As you know, gentlemen, they have used the simplest code because the
information would only be information for us. It is the reversal of
the letters of a word. Let us see:

    "Lake Reports No. 2 place. See H.

"H is Strong. No. 2 is Chicago. Strong is our chief operative there.
Ted will have to see him to get his information and also such help as
he may need. But one thing we know--their headquarters just now are at
Chicago."

"I am glad of it," said Ted. "Since Chicago is my home town, I can do
things there and may be successful."

"Suppose," said John Dean, "you start tomorrow, Ted. You see, speed is
the thing. That will give you a chance to see your mother and sister,
too."

"I need hardly say," said the major, "that even your mother had best
not know about this, unless it should be actually necessary. Secrecy
is imperative."

"I knew that, sir," Ted replied.

"One thing more," Major Church added, and he spoke to the men in the
room. "No matter who asks about Ted, he has gone home to see his
mother; someone is not well, let us say. The slightest hint or
suspicion as to the purpose of his trip would frustrate it. Will you,
Mr. Smythe, telegraph to Toronto, and tell the chief just what has
been done?"

Mr. Smythe nodded his head.

Ted went out first. As he closed the door, another door far down the
hall opened, a head came out, a very German head--the head of Mr.
Pfeffer, instructor in that language. Quietly and quickly it was
withdrawn. Ted did not observe this; if he had, it probably would not
have had any meaning for him. Mr. Pfeffer was a very curious
gentleman, he would have given much to know the purpose of the
meeting; even now, he was debating with himself whether he should do
some innocent questioning of Ted. He decided against it.

Just before retiring, Captain Wilson came into Ted's room.

"It seems silly to distrust Pfeffer, Lucky, still when you get to a
station, say Winnipeg, I would telegraph your mother that you are
coming. If any questions should be asked of her, she should say that
she knows you are coming. See? It is best to be safe and to guard
against everything."

Early morn saw Ted on the train. It was announced to those who made
inquiries that Ted had been called home. Mr. Pfeffer received the
information with private wonder and doubt.

He took occasion to stroll down to the telegraph office later that
same day.

"Hello, Peter," he said to the operator.

Peter turned around to see if anyone was about, then brought out a
copy of the coded telegram.

"Easy code, professor--what does it mean?" His copy already had
translated the words properly.

"It may mean nothing or it may mean everything. The boy is going to
Chicago--perhaps Chicago is No. 2--perhaps not. Peter, you had better
send a telegram. Better be sure, eh?"

"Why would they be sending a child and for what?" Peter was
incredulous.

"Did the boy send a telegram?" Mr. Pfeffer asked. "I had better see
them all."

But there was none that had been sent that morning to Chicago.

A long wire, also in code, went forward from Mr. Pfeffer to Chicago.
Then that worthy strolled back to the Academy.




CHAPTER II

PLANS ARE MADE TO MEET TED


In a room in one of the West Side streets of Chicago, in an
old-fashioned office building, which also rented rooms to lodges and
societies, eight men were engaged in earnest conversation.

"You are wrong, O'Reilly," said one of them. "England will not dare
come into it. There are men in England who would want the country to
war against my land. But the powers that be, and the people, too, will
be against it."

"I hate England, Berman," said O'Reilly. "There are Irishmen who are
willing to lick the hand that has beaten them and has held them in
subjection, but they are not true sons of Erin. I am against England,
but I do not despise the English as you Germans do. Once they are
aroused, mark my words, slow as they may be at the start, they will
be a mighty force." His eyes flashed. "Many people call me a traitor,
but Ireland, not England, is my country, and all Irishmen should be
against the country that holds it slave.

"But to business, gentlemen. Will you, Mr. Schmidt, explain the call
for this meeting?"

"That I will," answered he who had been addressed. "There are two
things for us to take up--the less important first. I have a telegram
from our good friend Pfeffer up in Wayland, in Alberta, Canada, where
he is doing our work, but is presumably a German instructor. Ah, here
it is--"

He drew out the coded wire that Pfeffer had sent. "I have figured out
the code and it reads as follows:

"'Ference eld erecon urday h atch h oysat ed w arsh b adian t cific M
eftcan erepa en l am h alledsev ome y c ther h pect b emo ssus n h ay
i ee o trong w haps s as s persper ay h eekpa formation m atchin s
w.'

"'Conference held here Saturday. Watch boy Ted Marsh, Canadian
Pacific, left here seven A. M. Sunday. Called home by mother. Suspect
he is on way to see Strong. Perhaps he has papers, may seek
information. Watch.'"[A]

There was a discussion as to the telegram. "Who is Strong?" asked
O'Reilly.

"He is the chief operative--secret service man--stationed in Chicago
by the Government at Ottawa. We have him watched. We have even
instructions out that if he becomes dangerous he will disappear very
suddenly."

"That is bad business," said a little man named Heinrich.

"Bad business nothing!" answered Schmidt. "No one must stand in the
forward way. Germany first, last, forever. What is Strong, what are
you, what am I--poof, nothing! But Germany--ah--" the speaker's eyes
gleamed.

"It will give those who are suspicious ground for proof that their
suspicions are more than suspicions," answered Heinrich.

"Let us not wander from the point, gentlemen," another man
interrupted. "As I gather from the telegram, this boy may be coming to
see Strong. Now, we must first make sure of that fact, then find out
what it is he is coming for and stop him in his attempt, if it
concerns us."

"O'Reilly," asked Mr. Winckel, a man with spectacles which carried
thick lenses, "can you or one of your friends, perhaps, meet the boy
and pose as this man Strong? Schmidt, you or Feldman had better go to
Milwaukee and try to place the boy and get such information as you
can. But do not let him suspect you."

"I'll go," said Schmidt.

"When is he due?" asked Mr. Winckel.

"Why, I should think it would be some time tonight," answered Schmidt.
"I'll look and make sure."

"Find out his home address," added Winckel. "Telegraph it to us and
one of us will hurry up and find out if his mother really expects him.
How about your part, O'Reilly?"

"I'll see to it," answered the Irishman.

"That is finished now. Oh, yes, one more thing, Schmidt, better have
Strong watched even more closely. What is the other business?" It
could be seen that Mr. Winckel was the moving spirit.

"Tomorrow, eight o'clock, here--the chief will come from Washington.
When Captain Knabe comes, he will tell us just when the day will be.
It is very soon, very soon; the long wait is over. Then, too, he will
tell us what we shall do. You will all be here? Now we shall go to our
work."

They broke up. They were very thorough, each man had his work assigned
and would see it carried through.

We shall turn to John Strong, who early that morning had been slipped
a memorandum in code by the waitress serving breakfast to him,
announcing that Ted was to come and to meet him. Also, Ted's home
address.

John Strong was a clean-cut Canadian, hair graying at the temples. No
one knew better than he how carefully he was watched. That he was able
to be as useful to his government as he was, showed his ability.

He decided at once that he would not meet Ted. That would show one
thing--the important thing to those who would want to know. How could
he get to the boy's mother without being observed?

To the girl who waited on him he whispered that he wanted her to
arrange for two cars to wait at the main entrance of the Hotel La
Salle at ten o'clock.

He strolled out and immediately felt himself shadowed. He reached the
hotel, looked at the register very carefully, as if there was
something there he wanted to see, then turned to the cigar-stand.
Turning around, he saw another man looking just as carefully at that
register. He smiled. Now he knew one of those who were watching him.
He pulled out some memorandum slips from his pocket and made some
notations. As if by accident he left one of the slips on the case,
lighted his cigar, bought a newspaper, and sat down and lounged.

Another man came to the cigar counter, also bought some cigars, picked
up some matches, and with it the slip of paper.

So there were two.

At five minutes past the hour Strong strolled to the door, made a
frantic dash for the machine, which seemed very slow to start. A
moment later two men entered the machine immediately next, gave the
driver instructions to follow the first machine, which by now had
dashed off.

The first car went south. You may remember that Mrs. Marsh lived
north. The second car followed. The occupants could never suspect the
innocent appearing chauffeur of that second car, as he swore and raved
at the policeman who had ordered him to stop to let the east and west
traffic go by at the side street. The frantic men inside were assured
that he would make up the lost time; that he knew the number of the
car he was following. But he never found that car. He became very
stupid, although always pleasant.

John Strong reached the home of Mrs. Marsh, certain that he had eluded
the pursuit.

"Mrs. Marsh, I believe?" he asked as she opened the door.

"I am Mrs. Marsh," she answered.

"I am a friend of some friends of Ted. The main reason for his coming
down to Chicago is to see me, although I am sure he will think that
seeing you will count for even more than that."

"Did you get word from him?" further asked Strong.

"Yes, I got a telegram. It said he was coming to see you, but that I
was to let anyone else who might ask think that he was coming because
I sent for him. I do not understand."

Very carefully Strong explained it all to Mrs. Marsh.

"It is important that these people should not suspect that he is
coming to see me, only that he is coming home, nothing more. It may
even be, that one of them will be here to see you, some time today.
They surely will if they find out anything about his coming, and where
you live. I will say this, that I feel I am speaking for Mr. Dean when
I say it will be a great service to him and to his country."

"I shall be glad to do anything for Mr. Dean. You can count on me. I
think I understand and perhaps will be able to help. Perhaps, too, my
daughter, Helen, even more so."

"Will you have your daughter come and see me right after supper. The
train comes in at 9:10 tonight, and she will meet you afterward at the
station. She will go there from my office. Possibly, as you say, she
can help."

He left Mrs. Marsh, confident that she understood and that she had the
ability and willingness to carry her part through.

 [A] Readers will find it interesting to study out the simplicity
     of this code. There is special pleasure in their working it out
     for themselves. It is simple and unweaves itself once you have
     the key. For those who do not wish to decipher the code, they can
     use the following method. The first syllable of any word of more
     than one syllable is attached to the third word following. Of one
     syllable words the first letter is found by itself after the
     second word. In no case is a single letter considered a word.




CHAPTER III

TED ARRIVES IN CHICAGO


Between the hours of seven and nine that night many things were
happening. Helen had gone down to see Strong. A man, who may have been
a Dane or a German, boarded Ted's train at Milwaukee, and O'Reilly was
preparing to meet that same train, as was John Strong. At home Mrs.
Marsh was leaving to meet the train. We shall follow the man who
boarded the train. He entered one of the Pullmans, but no boy seemed
to be there; another one, and there were two boys, but both seemed to
be with parents.

But he was successful in the third car. It was Ted he saw and as he
sat down very near him he pulled out a Danish newspaper and started to
read.

Pretty soon he looked up. He seemed a very pleasant man. He spoke to a
man in the seat in front of him, then he turned to Ted. "Have you
come from far?" he asked innocently.

"Yes, sir," answered Ted, "from Wayland."

"So," observed the man. "Do you live in Chicago or in Wayland?" He
added, "I live in Milwaukee, but I go twice, sometimes three times a
month to Chicago. My daughter lives there."

"In Chicago," answered Ted. Truth to tell, he was very glad to talk,
the trip had been a long one.

"Where do you live, what part?" asked his new acquaintance.

"Over north, 11416 Wells street." Ted saw no reason why he should not
tell this harmless stranger where he lived. Although he had no
suspicion of him, he had made up his mind that such questions he would
answer, no matter who asked them.

For he realized that the one way to arouse curiosity was to appear
secretive.

"My daughter lives up that way, too," the man said. He seemed quite
interested in the idea of making conversation.

"I will leave you for a minute." The train was slowing up for Racine.
His telegram was all ready except for the address. He rushed into the
ticket office, added the address and had it sent collect, and had
plenty of time to board the train.

"I wonder why," thought Ted, "he should have to run into that
station." Ted's suspicions were somewhat aroused. He decided to appear
as if he had not taken note of the actions of his acquaintance.

Schmidt had underestimated the ability of the boy. He was so young, he
thought, there was no necessity for special care.

Then, too, he was so very affable, so very simple. To his questions as
to who would meet him Ted answered that he thought no one would, the
time he was coming was a little uncertain, he added.

"No one is to meet me, either. Perhaps we can both go up home
together, eh?"

"Sure," replied the boy, "that would be fine."

Ted fancied by now that the man was a German. But, then, he had that
Danish newspaper. Maybe he was not.

"What do you do at your place--Wayland, I think you said?"

"I go to the Academy there. I belong to the Scouts--it is military and
academic." The boy was quite young and quite simple, Schmidt decided.

"Ah, that military business is bad, very bad. There will never be war
anymore."

Ted wondered if the man really believed it. He could not make up his
mind. So they talked. The man grew less and less interested. He had
made up his mind that the boy was really going to see his mother. Of
course, that would be proven when they found out how much the mother
knew about it and if she would meet the boy. Probably all this time
had been wasted, but Schmidt had no regrets. After all, eternal
vigilance was the watchword.

An hour later the train came into the station.

Ted, who had been quite tired, no longer felt any weariness. Here was
Chicago, here was home.

As he stepped away from the train, his mother and sister ran forward.
Two men watched him from close by--one motioned to the other.
O'Reilly went forward.

"My boy, are you looking for Mr. Strong?"

Helen interrupted: "Looking for Mr. Who? Why, of course he's not--he's
my brother--I guess you are mistaken. Come, Ted, we are going home
first."

Ted did not question his sister; he knew there was method in her
outburst. He added:

"Sorry, sir."

"I'm so glad you came, Ted. How I hoped you would!" his mother said.

O'Reilly turned doubtfully, as the other man beckoned him away.

"Time lost," said Schmidt. "Let them go. No harm done. I pumped the
boy on the way; he had no secret, apparently. He is but a child."

"I was scared by that girl," replied O'Reilly musingly. "My, she's a
Tartar. All right, then, I'm tired and I'm going home. Good-night."

"Good-night, my friend--see you tomorrow." Schmidt watched him go.

"Say, sis, I did have to meet a Mr. Strong." Ted spoke in a low
voice.

"I know it, Ted, but that man was not he. When we get away somewhere
I'll tell you something about it."

"Let's go home. I'm crazy to be back here and it certainly feels
fine."




CHAPTER IV

TED MEETS STRONG


There were many eager questions on the way home. The mother listened
with great pride to Ted's account, even though he had told many of the
same things in his letters.

Ted painted a great picture of his new home and it made Mrs. Marsh
very happy for his sake, even though she wished a little longingly
that both Helen and she could be a part of this wonderful and happy
life.

Helen must have been thinking the same thing, for she spoke out:

"I wish mother and I could go out there. If there were only something
I could do there. My work here is interesting, but I would gladly give
it up for such an opportunity."

"It's all right, sis," replied Ted. "It won't be long before you will
both be out there. I wouldn't want to stay myself if I did not feel
sure of that." They had reached their "L" station by now and home was
only a matter of a few moments.

"I guess you are tired, Ted. But I think I had better tell you what
Mr. Strong wants you to do." Then Helen told him of her going down to
see Mr. Strong, how the latter had reason to believe that there was to
be a meeting of the Germans the very next night. He wanted to see Ted,
who was to go to a certain number on Adams Street at eight the next
morning. She gave him the number of the room. Ted was to wait until
such time as Strong came. He might be late, for often there was
difficulty in getting there unobserved. He would mention the word Dean
and Helen for identification, should it be necessary.

Ted went to bed and slept the sleep of the just and the weary.

That next morning the newspapers printed in large headlines the
ultimatum that Austria had put up to Servia. They speculated on the
possibilities of war. To Ted--refreshed and no longer weary, reading
the newspaper as he made his way downtown--it brought a feeling that
he was in some way involved. It made him feel quite important; it
increased his respect for the men who had sent him to Chicago. It was
big work these men were doing; he was having a share in it. He left
the elevated station with some time on his hand. It seemed so long
since he had been down here in the heart of Chicago. It came to Ted
that it would always hold a warm spot in his affections. After all, it
was here he had spent his childhood; it was to the knockabouts
received here that he owed much. If only he could be successful, if
only he could obtain the necessary information and be able to deliver
the message to John Strong. Without knowing very much about it all, he
realized that the things for him to do were important parts of it all.
A little uncertainly, because the subject was a little too much for
him, and he was still a very young boy, he speculated on why nations
should go to war.

"Hello, Ted," someone greeted him. It was Spot, the fellow with whom
he had had that fight at the beginning of this story.

"Hello, Spot," Ted greeted him cordially. He was glad to renew old
acquaintances. "How's business?"

"Fine," answered Spot. "Lots of news, lots of papers sold. What are
you here for? Thought you went 'way out West?"

"I'm just paying a visit," laughed Ted. "Seeing friends." They talked
for a few minutes.

"See you again, Spot. Is this your regular stand?"

"Sure is," replied Spot, as he turned to a customer.

Ted went on his way. Very soon he reached the building on Adams street
to which Helen had directed him. He turned in and when he came to the
seventh floor he entered Room 701.

He accosted the man who looked up from a desk with:

"Want a boy?"

"Well, perhaps." He sounded very English. "What is your name?"

"Theodore Marsh," replied the owner of that name.

The man's manner changed on the instant. Ted liked him then. "Come in,
Ted. Mr. Strong is expected any minute, but of course he may not come
for a while. We have just moved in here. We have to move quite often,
for those Germans certainly are shrewd. Quick, too, and they keep us
on the jump."

He turned to work on an intricate little machine which had a long coil
of wire, very thin, much thinner than a telephone wire.

"Do you know what this is?" Ted did not know.

"A dictaphone. We will have use for it. I am getting it ready for
tonight."

Ted had heard of a dictaphone, but he had not yet learned its
usefulness. He was to find out that night how wonderfully useful it
could be, how much danger the use of it would avoid.

It was almost two hours before a man entered. When he saw Ted he said,
with a smile:

"Hello, my boy. I guess you and I have met both Dean and Helen,
haven't we? Let us go into this room."

Ted delivered the papers he had brought for Strong. Strong took them
eagerly and just as eagerly Ted gave them up. He heaved a sigh of
relief at getting rid of them.

"This paper alone," Strong picked up one of the papers from his desk,
where he had placed them, "if trouble should come, would prove to the
United States Government what the Germans are doing in the States and
just how it affects Canada. Without this it would be disagreeable to
be found doing some of the things we find ourselves compelled to do. I
see, also, that this letter says that I may count on your help. We
will need it, I am sure.

"Tonight, the Germans are to hold a meeting. The purpose and decision
reached there we must know at all costs. We must go down there, you
and Walker and I. Walker is the man in the office. He has the
necessary knowledge to place a dictaphone or tap a telephone wire.
Also, he, another man named Bronson, and I have already made
arrangements for placing that dictaphone at the Germans'
meeting-place."

He turned to Walker. "Are you ready?"

"In about five minutes," replied Walker, with a grin.

While they were waiting Strong suddenly thought of something.

"As I understand--am I right?--you were a newsboy up to a year ago?"

"Yes, sir, I was," answered Ted.

"Good. Do you think you could manage to fix yourself up as one and
meet us in front of the Auditorium?"

"I think I can," replied the boy, after a moment's thought.

"All right, I'll give you forty-five minutes," Strong said, as he
turned to Walker, who was now ready.

Quickly, Ted located Spot.

"I'll tell you what I'll do, Spot," he confided to the news merchant.
"I'll give you two dollars and my clothes for your clothes and papers.
I want you to have a share in my good fortune and I also want to sell
papers for awhile."

Spot grinned delight. "You mean it, Ted?"

"Sure. Where can we change?"

"Any place will suit me. But I'll show you a place. That's easy."

A place was very easily located. Spot had managed to wash his hands
and face, while Ted's had not yet gotten to the color they should be.
They had exchanged everything from shoes to hats.

"Where are you going now, Spot?" asked Ted.

"I beg your pardon," replied Spot. "My name is Mr. James Sullivan. I
would have you address your betters properly, boy." He never cracked a
smile as he walked off, but Ted laughed uproariously.

A little later two men came out of the Auditorium.

"Paper, sir, papers?"

"No," answered one of them. The other took a second look at the
newsboy and laughed. "He certainly fooled you, Strong. It's Ted."

"Good work, Ted," Strong said, with appreciation.

"Slip into that automobile while we stand in front of it." They walked
toward it. "Now, quick." The machine was off to the German
meeting-place.




CHAPTER V

SETTING A TRAP


The automobile came to a stop two blocks from the German
meeting-place.

As the three walked toward it, a beggar stopped Strong. The latter
gave him some coins. Ted, who was watching, saw a paper pass between
the two. It was so quickly done that he was not even sure of it. He
made no comment, as he knew that Strong would mention it, if he
thought it necessary.

"The room is on the third floor," Strong said. "There is someone in it
now. That beggar has just been up there; he has been watching the
house all morning, so that he could keep me in touch.

"Suppose, Ted, you go up and sell your papers. Go to every office.
When you reach Room 318, size it up as well as you can. See what you
can of 316 and 320 also."

"All our work and our preparations have been from 418," Walker added.
"Our friends are there."

"Yes," Strong said, "take a look in there, even though you will meet
Bronson a little later."

A boy tried to sell his papers in the many offices. He canvassed each
floor and in due time reached the fourth. He came to Room 418 and saw
a sign on the glass reading as follows:

                           TERENCE McMAHON
                     INSURANCE AGENT AND ADJUSTER
                     MAIN OFFICE--OLIVER BUILDING

                       Russell Bronson, Br. Mgr.

He entered. "Want a paper?" he asked one of the men.

The man took one. Ted glanced about and then went out. He had some
idea of the room. He noticed that three other doors seemed to belong
to the same office, Rooms 422, 420 and 416.

He soon reached the third floor. He went through the same routine,
just as carefully and matter-of-factedly, as he had done on the other
floors. When he reached 320 he found the door locked and a hand
pointing to 318 as the entrance. On the glass of that door he saw a
sign which read:

                          NOVELTIES AND TOYS
                            A. CHRISTENSEN

Ted opened the door. A man was inside, his feet perched upon a desk
and he was reading a German newspaper.

"Paper, sir?" Ted asked him.

"No," was the answer. He did not even glance up.

"I have a Staats-Zeitung and a Wochen-Blatt," coaxed Ted. All this
time he was taking stock of the room.

"A Wochen-Blatt? I'll take one," the man became interested. He offered
a half dollar to Ted.

"I haven't the change, but I will get it for you." Ted was fighting
for time, so that he could form impressions.

"And run away with my money?" the man sneered. "Not on your life. I'll
wait until later."

"You can hold all my papers. I'll come back."

The man grudgingly gave the boy the money. At the corner store Ted
found his two friends; the automobile had long since left.

"Good work," Strong commented, after hearing Ted. "Now, how can we get
that fellow out of the building for half an hour?"

"When I suggested going out for the change," volunteered Ted, "he
didn't want to trust me and said: 'I'll wait until later.' Perhaps he
intends going out."

"Well, here is one way to coax him to go a little sooner. A German
wants what he wants when he wants it, and he never stops wanting it
until he gets it. When you go back, Ted, insist on being paid twice as
much as the paper sells for. He probably will not pay it. He will
consider it a holdup. But he will want that paper and it may hurry his
departure. It is almost lunch-time anyway.

"Walker, you go to all the news-stands within three square blocks and
also any stores you may see that sell newspapers and buy up any
Wochen-Blatts they have. That ought to keep our friend busy trying to
get what he wants and so give us more time. We will all meet in Room
418. I'll steal up while you two are wrangling over your high-handed
outrage, Ted. Walker can come any time. There is small chance that he
will be recognized. You see," Strong added, his eyes smiling, "that's
the value of having the ordinary face Walker has. He looks like
seventy-five million other folks, so no one would notice him."

Ted rushed back to the office. "Everybody is poor around here or else
they don't want to make change. My, what trouble." He was counting out
the change and he now placed but forty cents on the man's desk.

The man picked up the money and for a moment it looked as if he would
not count it, but he did.

"Hey, boy, another nickel! You're short here."

"No, I'm not. I took a nickel for all the trouble I had in making
change." Ted felt mean and he knew his argument was a poor one, but he
was doing it for a purpose.

"Five cents, or I don't want the paper." He made a threatening motion
toward Ted.

Ted laughed at him. He threw the dime on the desk, picked up his paper
and backed out of the door. The man was muttering fiercely in
German.

Out on the street our hero watched from a nearby door. It was just
mid-day and people were hurrying for their lunch. But it was at least
twenty minutes before he saw his man walk out of the building. He
watched him and saw him stop at one, then at another stand and try to
obtain the desired paper. He was not successful and Ted saw him stroll
further down the street.

Two minutes later Ted was in Room 418. Walker joined them almost at
the same time.

Ted was introduced to the man to whom he had sold a paper a little
earlier and then the party got down to business.

"Walker, jump down and try the door," said Strong. "Here is the key."

But a new problem presented itself when Walker reported back that the
key would not fit the lock and Strong, incredulous, had proven the
truth of it for himself.

"Phew!" whistled Strong. "They must have changed the lock. They
figured the old one was too easy for anyone who had a mind to enter.
Come on, Walker, we'll try the window."

But they found no way of entering through the window. It was securely
fastened. Walker, with one foot on the edge of the fire-escape and the
other on the ledge of the next room's window and holding himself
secure with one hand, attempted to open that window also, but found it
just as securely locked.

"There is still one way before we think of any rough stuff," said
Strong. With the other three he went down to the third floor.

"Here, Ted, get on my shoulders and try the fanlight. Let's pray that
it opens."

It opened so very easily that they all laughed. But they found that
neither Walker, Strong nor Bronson could get through. But Ted could.

"Well," said Bronson, "I reckon it's up to the boy, isn't it?"

"It certainly is," said Strong.

Walker now very quickly, yet very clearly explained the workings and
the manipulations of the dictaphone. Ted listened carefully as he was
told how the wires should be laid and connected.

"You see, Ted," Walker continued, "the whole thing is already
prepared. We knew how little time we would have when the time did
come, so we did everything we could beforehand. You will find a place
for these wires on the wall behind the steam-pipes. The floor moulding
running along the window wall will move if you remove the screws--four
of them. Then count off the sixteenth floor board--you work it this
way," Walker showed Ted how, "and it will pry loose. It is all very
simple and should take no more than twenty minutes. It would take me
ten.

"The floor-board has a little groove into which the wires will fit.
You will find that where this board ends is another piece of moulding
which will most surprisingly give way to your magic fingers, and the
screwdriver, as did the moulding at the other end. On the big cabinet
that is there, try that corner of it nearest you and against the wall,
and there you will find that your wires will fit snugly. Your hands
are small and can get in there, back of the cabinet. You just can't go
wrong. On top of the cabinet see that the mouthpiece or, rather, the
listener, is propped up so that it faces the table. If you have any
doubts call out--we will be here. You will also find that it will not
be seen, for the cabinet is high."

"Be careful, Ted, about leaving things just as they were. It all will
fit back snugly. Be twice as careful as you are quick," Strong warned
him.

"I shall be up here, Bronson will be one flight below, and the beggar
is watching in the street. Walker will be up above passing the wires
down to you."

More than fifteen minutes had already been consumed. Strong had warned
Ted to open the window of Room 420 and, should a warning come, hide in
that room. A rope would be passed down for him from the window above.

Ted got to work at once. He found it even more simple than Walker had
told him. In fifteen or twenty minutes he called out. "I think I am
through." He took another look about. He had carefully seen to
everything and there was no sign of any disturbance.

"Wait a minute," said Strong. There was a pause. Then he heard Strong
speaking to him again, "Say something right out, not too loud, just
ordinary conversation."

"Want to buy a paper? News, Post, American, Staats-Zeitung?" said Ted
to the empty air.

There was another pause, then he heard Walker say to Strong, "It's
fine and distinct, old man."

Ted took another look about. He lifted himself on the door-knob and
then eager hands helped him out. Walker ran down the fire escape to
take a look around the room and Strong hoisted himself up on the knob
and also looked about. Ted's work had been thorough and neither of
them made any criticisms.

"Well, that's something of a relief," said Walker. Ted closed the
fanlight.

"Nothing to do until tonight," and Walker grinned.

"Let's eat," said Strong. "Coming with us, Bronson?"

"Certainly," was the answer.




CHAPTER VI

STRONG SEEMS CHECKMATED


Ted was too excited to eat.

"Better eat, lad," said Walker. "We do not know when we will get
another chance today. If no one else seemed to be following his
advice, he himself considered it good enough to heed. He was eating
enough for two.

"I imagine it is going to be risky business tonight," Bronson
remarked. "I wish I could be with you."

"It's either going to be that, or it is going to be very simple,"
Strong answered.

"That is the trouble with all adventure, these days," Walker
complained. "It's always so very simple."

"I consider this extremely interesting and exciting," replied Strong.
"It is like a tremendous game of chess with enough elements of danger
added to suit the most exacting. Don't imagine that we shall not be in
danger every second tonight. These Germans are cold-blooded. If we
should happen to be in their way, should they find out how much we
actually know, we can say good-bye; the sun would rise tomorrow, but
we might not."

He turned to Ted. "Well, lad, are you afraid?"

"I'm going to stick, of course," was the reply.

"Well, comrades, here is the plan. The keys you see here, one for each
of us, are for Room 420. We shall separate. At six-thirty we must all
plan to be in that room. No noise must be made when you come; no sound
must be made while you are there."

"We had better make sure we do all our sneezing outside, eh?" Every
one laughed with Walker.

"It will be your last sneeze, if it's inside," Strong laughingly
warned him. "The least sound, a scraping chair, would be heard. Stay
in Room 420; the fire escape makes 418 dangerous, if anyone should be
curious and decide to come up and look into that room. Of course,
there will be no lights turned on.

"Should any of us fail to get there, he who does must make every
effort to get the import of the conversation."

"Can I do anything, before I leave for New York tonight?" asked
Bronson.

"No, I guess not. Get your room into shape for us. Put the chairs
where we cannot stumble over them. How long will you be gone?"

"I don't know. These Germans certainly keep us busy. Some of our
optimists are turning pessimists, now that Austria is declaring war
against Servia. They are beginning to think that perhaps there is
something in this war-talk. I have to go to them and tell them just
how much there really is in it. I had much rather stay--wish I
could."

"I know that, Bronson, and there is no one I would rather have. But
perhaps you will be of better service there. I shall code Wright the
information we get tonight, if we get it. They will have it at the New
York office."

Strong and Walker returned to the Adams street office; Ted went home.
He was glad of the chance to see more of his mother; Helen, he knew,
would not be home. Ted was very fond of his pretty, efficient sister,
and proud of her rapid rise at the store.

He found his mother there when he reached home. He explained the
reason for his wearing the newsboy's clothes.

Ted spent a quiet, comfortable afternoon with her. Many things they
still had to talk about and the mother realized how much it was the
desire of Ted to have her and Helen come out to that great West, a
land where contentment and opportunity, at least, were more likely to
be found than in this place, in which she had lived so many years.

                  *       *       *       *       *

About three o'clock, only a half hour after he had been at Adams
street, Strong was called to the telephone. He had been busy at a
report, the call was unexpected and could only come from his secretary
or from Ted, the only two besides Walker who knew of this new
location.

It proved to be his secretary.

"A messenger boy came here a little while ago with a message for you,"
she said.

"Read it."

"'A meeting is to be held at W.'s house. If you will come, can get
you in. 4:30!' It is signed 'J.'," she added.

There was a pause. She continued: "It looks as if it comes from Jones.
It is his writing, beyond doubt, but he signed his initial instead of
his number."

"I'll come right over," Strong answered, and his voice sounded
perplexed.

Charles Jones was an operative, employed as a butler by the Winckel
household. He had so often given proof of profound stupidity in
everything except his duties in the household that Herr Winckel would
have laughed at any suspicion of his being anything else but a butler.
Herr Winckel was so fond of saying and repeating that the man had a
butler mind it could never grasp anything outside of that.

In reality, Jones was shrewd, keen, able to obtain information without
creating suspicion. He had been one of Strong's best men and the
latter felt he could count on him.

Could it be a trap, he wondered?

Strong was uncertain as to what he should do. To miss this meeting,
which perhaps was important; to go there, on the other hand, and
endanger the chances of his getting to that night meeting?

"I wish I knew what to do, Walker." Together they went over the phases
of it as they walked down to the office.

"I'd go," advised Walker. "You say that the boy could do his part. If
they do want you out of the way, should this be a trap, they will hold
us until morning; they would not dare hold us any longer. And, if they
do, they will not feel the need for carefulness and the boy will thus
have a better chance. It works well both ways."

When they came to the office, Strong read the message again.

"We'll go, Walker," he decided. "Dress up. Be sure not to carry any
papers."

Two men came out of one of the inner offices a few minutes later. They
would have been taken anywhere for two English servants; they might
have been valets, footmen, even butlers. Each one looked the other
over critically, but the disguise was thorough.

At fifteen minutes past the hour they reached the Winckel house,
knocked at the servants' entrance. The maid answered and they asked
for Mr. Jones. They appeared to be very superior, upper-class
servants. Very English, too. She escorted them in and then opened a
door for them to enter. They passed through. As they did, each one of
them was pounced upon. They struggled against the sickening smell of
the chloroform held tightly against their noses. Then they knew
nothing more for a while.

An hour later they awoke with a feeling of nausea and the smell of
chloroform all about them. They found themselves tied hand and foot
and unable to move. From all appearances they seemed to be in the
cellar of the house.

"Are you there, chief?" asked Walker, in a sick and very low voice.

"Yes, I'm here; going to stay awhile, I guess."

"I wonder what happened? Suppose they got on to----?"

"They are probably gloating somewhere within earshot," Strong warned
him in a whisper. "They certainly have us out of the way for the time
being," he added, ruefully.

"Well, there's nothing to do; we're caught," Walker said, in his
ordinary voice. Then, in a voice so low Strong could barely hear him,
he inquired, "Are you pretty well tied? Can you do anything?"

"Can't even move," was the answer.

"Same here," Walker said dejectedly. "They made a good job."

At five o'clock Ted left home for downtown. He stopped off to buy some
of the late editions of the newspapers and proceeded to the
meeting-place. He made his rounds through several buildings and at
last reached that particular one.

There was no one watching, however. With Strong out of the way the
Germans felt quite secure.

At five-thirty he had already let himself into Room 420 and was
preparing to make himself comfortable. He picked up the dictaphone
every few minutes, but for a long time heard nothing. Things seemed
quiet and he began to wonder where Strong and Walker were, what was
delaying them. His heart was going at a great rate because of the
forced quiet and the excited state of his mind.

Things would depend on him if the two men did not come. Would he be
able to carry out the plans?

"I can only do my best," the boy said to himself. And there was a
strong determination to make that best count.

It was now half past seven. He lifted the dictaphone oftener. Very
soon he heard voices, very indistinct, but as he listened they became
clearer and clearer. Then he began making out the words and the sense
of the conversation.

"Yes," said one voice. "We found out that this man Jones, who was
Winckel's butler, was one of their men. He dropped a card which young
Winckel found. That was enough to warrant his being watched, although
we did nothing for several days except to see that he got no further
information.

"Today, at the point of a gun, we forced him to write a note to Strong
telling him that there was to be a meeting at Winckel's house at
four-thirty and that he could get him in. Strong with another man
came. We trapped them, bound them and they are now in the cellar out
of harm's way."

Ted welcomed the information. At least he knew just what to expect.

"It's almost time for our friends to be here, isn't it? What time is
Captain Knabe coming?" said a voice.

"At about fifteen minutes after eight. He is coming with Winckel."

"Say, Schmidt, it was a good piece of business to get Strong out of
the way. He is too dangerous and resourceful to suit us." This from
O'Reilly.

"He has been a nuisance, hasn't he?" answered Schmidt. "Hello,
friends," he said to some new-comers. "I have just been telling
O'Reilly about our little affair this afternoon."

There was the sound of a number of voices and of some laughing. Then
more men came into the room, there was the scraping of chairs as men
seated themselves.

Then there was quiet as two men entered. Greetings were exchanged and
Ted realized that the two were Winckel and Captain Knabe.

As Captain Knabe was introduced to some of the men, Ted wrote the
names down.

"Let us get down to business, friends," said one, who seemed to be the
chairman. "Captain Knabe has come here from Washington, his time just
now is important. Even more important is the need for immediate
action. Captain Knabe, gentlemen."




CHAPTER VII

THE DICTAPHONE AT WORK


"I understand," said Captain Knabe, "that some of the Irish gentlemen
present do not understand German, and so, while I can do so much
better in my native tongue, I shall talk in English."

"How lucky," thought Ted.

"Well, gentlemen, I have good news for you--war is to be declared the
day after tomorrow."

There was the sound of moving, falling chairs, of men getting to their
feet. Then a whispered toast--a whisper that was almost loud because
of the number of voices--"Der Tag."

"You, in America, who have never given up your allegiance to the
supreme nation, nor to the emperor, must do your share. Although war
is to be declared the day after tomorrow, it will be a matter of a
few more days before we are at war with England; possibly it will be
more than a week. I understand you are ready."

Another voice spoke. "We are prepared. We will announce picnics at
certain places; it is for you to tell us the locations."

"I am ready to tell you that now," replied the captain. "Concentrate
on your picnic grounds near Detroit for the taking of Windsor. Herr
Winckel has the plans. I have given him three sets--Windsor, Toronto,
Winnipeg. He also has the charts which show how to move and what
railroads to occupy. Our friends in Canada are to see that there are
available cars, engines and even motors. Of course, all of you will
know just what picnic grounds are to be selected, so we need waste no
time on that."

"How many men have you, Herr Winckel?" Captain Knabe wanted to know.

"Will you tell us, Schoen?" Herr Winckel asked.

"Approximately, armed and ready for the call, one hundred and
twenty-five thousand men. There are also forty thousand Irishmen.
O'Reilly has them equally prepared and ready. Pfeffer reports thirty
thousand men in Canada, eager for the call. They are so stationed that
we can throw one hundred and fifty thousand men on Windsor and Toronto
or such other points as are within one half day's ordinary travel. For
Montreal we would need eighteen hours' additional notice. For Quebec
we would need thirty. We figure that thirty thousand men will be
enough for Winnipeg, although we shall have more."

"The fool Englishmen," sneered a voice.

"Not such fools, Schmidt. Do not underestimate them." The voice was
Winckel's.

"Everything looks so easy," said another voice.

"Aye," said Captain Knabe, "we cannot help but win. But the Englishman
fights best with his back to the wall."

"You have your commands assigned, have you not?" the captain
inquired.

"We have," replied Schoen.

"Now, gentlemen, here is the thing of the utmost importance," Herr
Winckel spoke warningly. "The facts must not leak; they must not get
to the United States officials. That is so important that the whole
plan will have to be dropped if there is any suspicion as to a leak."

"I think a number of us will bear out what Winckel says," O'Reilly
spoke up. "For myself, and I think I speak for the other Irishmen here
present and also for the forty thousand against England, but against
the United States--never. Not one Irishman can be counted on if it
comes to a showdown against the U. S. A."

"Nor very many Germans," added Winckel.

"So be it," said Captain Knabe. "Shall we go over the ammunition
storehouses, those that are in Canada and those that are in this
country?"

Many of the places Ted could not make out, others he did. He realized
that this was valuable information. Names though they were, they were
clues and so might be important.

Much more was said by the many men and Ted stored up in his mind such
information as he thought would be useful. At half past ten all the
men had left and from what Ted heard he understood that Knabe,
Winckel, O'Reilly and Schoen were adjourning to some other place to
perfect plans.

Ted cautiously stretched himself. He was wary and still watchful.
Although his muscles were stiff and his bones ached, he had not dared
to move. When he was fairly certain that he could move, he indulged in
that luxury for at least five minutes. He had no trouble in leaving
the building. Once outside, he hastened to a telephone booth. He had
no intention of telephoning, but he did want to find out the address
of Winckel. A plan was in his mind.

He found two Winckels in the telephone. He decided that in all
likelihood it was the one on Michigan avenue, the other was somewhere
on the North Side.

When he came to the first cross street he saw a passing taxi and
hailed it. The driver had some suspicion as to the ability of his
customer to pay, for Ted was still in his newsboy's clothes. However,
Ted proved he had the necessary funds and satisfied the chauffeur.

Ted left the taxi two blocks before he reached the Winckel residence.
The inside of the house was almost, not quite dark. Stealthily the
boy investigated. He decided that any entrance would have to be made
from the rear or the side of the building. The rear windows to the
basement and the door he found were locked.

The boy studied the situation. He saw where he could enter through one
place, but it would mean that he would have to remove a window glass.
He decided against that. There was danger of being heard.

Though Ted was seeking an entrance he had not as yet made up his mind
to try to go to the rescue of his friends. To go into the building and
take chances? But then, after all, his information could be of use to
Strong only, for he held the many threads.

It would be folly to call the police, Strong would not care to have
the publicity, and then, too, the two men might not be there after
all.

He decided, come what may, he would go in. He felt fairly certain that
Winckel would not be in the house nor would he return for an hour or
more. Before making any further attempt to get inside, Ted went to a
nearby drug store. He obtained paper and stamped envelope and wrote
the following message to Strong's office, addressing it to Strong's
secretary, Miss Ford.

"Unless you hear from us in the early morning, you will find us
imprisoned in the cellar of Mr. Winckel's house. I am now trying to
get Mr. Strong and Mr. Walker out, but may not succeed.

"11:15 p.m.                                            Ted."

Having mailed the letter he hurried back to the house. Cautiously he
prowled about, trying to find a way into the basement. There was no
way.

At any ordinary time Ted would have said it was impossible to get up
on that ledge, but he managed it now. The house entrance was through a
wide door, but one had to go down three steps and it made the floor an
English basement. The floor above that was much higher than most
ground floors and yet lower than most second floors. Ted crept along
the narrow ledge holding on to such supports as were there. He reached
a big window and by careful manipulation and urging the boy managed to
force it open.

He crawled in. Spot's suit was very useful now, for it held matches.
Ted did not intend to use any unless he had to, but the building was
strange to him and the occasion for the use of them might arise. He
knew that he would have two floors to travel, the one to the basement
and the one to the cellar. He got down the one floor without mishap.
He was about to begin the exploration of that floor for the entrance
to the cellar, when he heard the key being inserted into the street
door.

His heart leaped within him. Two people entered, a man and woman. They
switched on a light. If these people had come thirty seconds earlier
he would have been caught coming down the stairs, Ted thought, as he
crouched behind the turn of the staircase.

"It was nice of you to see me home, Mr. Erkin," said the young lady.
"Will you be good enough to let the light burn, as some of the folks
are not in yet? Come and see me some time."

"Good-night, thank you, I will," the man answered and left.

The boy thought, "Well, I certainly should be called Lucky. Here I
wonder how to find an entrance to the cellar and they are kind enough
to turn on a light for me."

It was fairly easy for Ted to find his way now, but because of the
light he had to use even greater care.

The cellar seemed deserted, when he got there. It was pitch dark and
it took several minutes for him to grow accustomed to the extreme
darkness. Then he heard the faint murmur of voices.

Strong and Walker had slept fitfully and had been wide awake at
various times. Strong had again been awakened and was insisting that
Walker listen to him.

As Ted drew nearer, he heard Strong say, "I don't think, the way I
feel, I shall ever be able to move again. But if I knew that Ted was
just the least bit successful I could be forever content."

"The poor child--if he did anything at all," Walker answered, "it
would be wonderful. It's a man's job, what, then, could a boy do?"

As if in answer to the question, they heard a low voice call, "Mr.
Strong, Mr. Strong!"

"Who is that?" the startled voice of Strong demanded.

"It's me, Ted!" said that ungrammatical young man, a bit excitedly.

[Illustration: TED FREES THE PRISONERS]

"God bless you, boy. Is it really you? Have you a match?"

Ted struck one. Hurriedly he untied the two men, who were already
questioning him excitedly and to whom he whispered assurances.

As they turned the corner (having left the building without trouble)
Strong looked back. An auto passed north on Michigan avenue.

"That's Winckel's car," he said. "We weren't any too soon."

Ted told the two men of the night's adventures and they both listened
eagerly. Strong was laboring under great excitement as the boy went on
with his story. When Ted was through he placed his hand on Ted's
shoulder and said, quietly and very impressively, to him:

"I simply can't tell you the things I long to say. You're going to be
a man, my boy! This is a day's work of which you will always be
proud.

"Knowing what we know, we can go to sleep tonight, awake in the
morning with a plan as to just what we will do. I could almost cry
with contentment. This news you bring is what we have long striven to
learn, and along comes Ted Marsh--Lucky, the Boy Scout--and makes
Canada and England his very grateful and humble servants.

"There are several things we know we can do now," he added. "We had
best take a night to sleep it over."

"You are a wonder, Ted, my friend," added Walker.

"Come, let us go," said Strong.

"We are all weary. I hate to leave you. I'd like to celebrate, but I
guess we had better postpone it until tomorrow. See you at eight."




CHAPTER VIII

WINCKEL CALLS A HALT


There were glaring headlines in the newspapers the next morning. War
was on. People who had doubted all along, who could not believe it
possible, now had to believe. And, although England was as yet not
involved, no one was optimistic enough to imagine that she would stay
out of it.

Around newspaper offices, everywhere, excited, eager groups discussed
it all. Many a man heard the thrilling call of his native land and
many listened and made plans to return to either Germany, Russia,
England or France.

Yet neither in headlines nor in the ordinary run of news, was there
mention made of the events of our story. Silent, powerful forces were
at work to keep it quiet.

The automobile of Herr Winckel stopped before his house and from it
Schmidt, O'Reilly and the owner alighted. They made their way to the
cellar, a precaution as to the safekeeping of the prisoners. O'Reilly
and Schmidt were to be guests of Winckel for the night. Much work had
been planned for the morning.

"Quiet, aren't they?" said Schmidt, as Winckel started to turn on the
light.

"I guess they are asleep," remarked O'Reilly. The light glared. A
moment's hush. There were astonished and wondering exclamations. The
ropes which had held the prisoners tied, were strewn about, but the
prisoners were nowhere.

"What can it mean?" exclaimed Winckel, searching vainly for an
explanation.

Wild guesses were made by the three as to how the escape was made.

"Well," said Winckel after awhile, "never mind how they escaped, the
important thing is--how much have they found out of our plans." He
showed plainly how disturbed he was.

"How can they have found out about our plans? Pretty far fetched to
imagine that they could have obtained any information--the chances
are that they did not escape until late this evening."

O'Reilly interrupted Schmidt. "Is there any way in which we can find
out the last time someone in the house saw the prisoners?"

"Good idea," said Winckel. "We shall soon find out."

The household was awakened. Inquiries and investigation showed that
Lauer, a trusted employee of Winckel, had taken a last look at the
prisoners at about ten o'clock. He was certain of that; he had heard
their voices, although he could not make out what they spoke about.

There were sighs of relief from Schmidt and O'Reilly, who felt that
the situation was covered, but Winckel was more skeptical and less
canny.

"I will admit that they were here until ten o'clock and later. I will
even admit that they were not listening at the conference. But how was
their escape managed and why after ten? Did they have outside help and
how did the outside help know of their imprisonment here?

"Both of you gentlemen may be tired and may wish to retire. Please do
so, if you want to. I am going down to our meeting place to see what I
can see. A little late, I will admit, and it may not do us much good,
but there is always a chance. It is important for us to find out if we
have blundered, if our plans have been disclosed."

Both Schmidt and O'Reilly insisted on accompanying Winckel and the
three left the house in the next five minutes.

They reached the building in about twenty minutes. No policeman was
about to see them violate the speed laws on the way. An immediate and
careful search of the room was made, to see if anyone had been there
since they left and also for any clue as to the probable leak.

"Nothing seems wrong as far as I can see," O'Reilly started to say.
"Hello, what is this?" He had discovered the cleverly concealed wires
of the dictaphone. Winckel and Schmidt joined him on the instant. They
traced the wires and soon found out the whole layout.

"Mischief is certainly afoot," exclaimed Schmidt. The other men said
nothing, but studied the proposition.

"There still is a chance," said O'Reilly In an unconvincing manner--as
if he wanted to believe something his better sense did not permit him
to do, "that this outfit was not used since Strong and the other man
had been kept from it."

A sickening thought at the same instant came to Schmidt. "O'Reilly, we
talked about the prisoners, how we had trapped them, where they
were--and all the time someone was listening. That someone heard all
we had to say and then, after we were all through, he went up to
Winckel's house and rescued them."

Winckel said nothing for many minutes; he seemed lost in thought. The
other men waited for him to speak. Finally he did.

"We are a lot of dunces. We were so sure of ourselves, we felt we were
so wise. Pride goeth before a fall and we fell. We must give up our
plans. It is up to both of you to get busy, we still have time to keep
out of trouble. There is a ray of comfort in that, at least."

"I hate to think what Knabe and the others at the embassy will think,"
was the rueful comment of Schmidt.

"Don't let that bother you. This plan has failed, we must plan
again--when again we match wits, let us hope we shall be more careful
and consequently more successful. Come, enough of post mortems, let's
get busy."

It was a busy night for all of them. There were many men who had to be
seen and who in turn had to see others. It was, so they explained to
the others, a matter of life and death that all preparations cease at
once, as there would be close and careful watch kept. There was much
telephoning and telegraphing to the friends who were in other cities.

There can be nothing but thorough admiration for the effective,
capable way these men went about calling a halt to all activities.
Like a perfect, well oiled machine which slows down and then ceases
its movements, until there is something tremendously impressive in its
inaction and silence; like a well-drilled army which retreats
magnificently and in its very retreat almost gains a victory, so much
like all this, was the action and the work of these men at this time.
They were obeyed as only the Germans know how to obey. By morning,
there was no sign, no clue to their plans and activities. One thing
only remained to prove the danger to Canada that had been. Arsenals
and warehouses holding weapons and vehicles of war were found at the
places shown on the list that Ted had copied.

At Ottawa and a little later in London and in Washington, the
powers--the men at the helm--found out that what would in all
probability have been a successful invasion of Canada had been
checked. And they found out, too, just how and in what way it had been
done.




CHAPTER IX

AT OTTAWA


"Come in, both of you," Strong called from the inside office. Ted had
shown up at Strong's office early the next day. He found Strong at his
desk and he found afterwards that he had been there for more than two
hours. His secretary told Ted that he was telephoning long distance
and that Ted should wait. When the operative was through talking, he
came out and saw Ted.

"Sit down a few minutes, Ted, I shall be busy," he had said. He had
returned to his office and proceeded to do some further telephoning.
Walker had come in a little later and the two were busy going over the
evening's events when Strong called out as above.

"Well, Ted, I guess we are going to have war. At least we won the
first victory, or rather you did."

Ted fidgeted at the praise and grinned sheepishly.

"I wonder," said Walker, "if they have, found the dictaphone as yet."

"You can safely figure on the fact that they did. They started a
little investigation when they found that the birds had flown. But it
does not matter how much they know we know, now. It's a fight in the
open from now on. I'm thankful for that.

"I have already notified Ottawa, New York, and the different capitals
of the provinces. Washington also knows, our embassy has already
notified them as to the location of the arsenals. They are going to
issue orders from Ottawa to confiscate those in our own country at
once.

"Ottawa wanted all the facts and it got them. I expect to hear further
from them in the course of the day."

"I wonder," said Walker, "if our friends will be polite enough to
return my dictaphone. They should, it does not belong to them and they
probably know to whom, it does belong."

"You might go over and claim it," answered Strong.

"I think I will, just to see old Winckel's face."

Strong turned to Ted.

"Dear lad," he said, "what you did isn't the kind of thing that can
appear in the newspapers, but it is the kind about which history is
made. It is a big job you have accomplished. The men who sent you down
to us made no mistake in their judgment as to what you could do. Sir
Robert Wingate wanted to know all about you, I must have talked to him
for more than twenty minutes on the telephone.

"Walker and I go to Ottawa on a late train today. They want to see me,
to go fever details.

"Well, let's get busy with the last threads of what happened last
night--we have to put it down on black and white for future,
reference. When do you want to return to Wayland, Ted?"

"I should like to go by Saturday, if it can be arranged," answered
Ted.

"Well, I think it can be done. I shall return tomorrow night or early
the following morning. You will be free for these two days. Have a
good time; remember, we pay all your expenses--nothing is too good
for you. If you can, come down the day after tomorrow. I may have some
news for you."

"I shall be glad to come down," answered Ted, as he wondered at the
news to which Strong had reference.

They spent a half hour or more going over the events of the evening,
Strong's secretary taking notes. Then Ted left and returned home.

That afternoon he took his mother to the ball game and saw the Cubs
defeat the Giants. He tried to explain the game to his mother, who
pretended an interest and tried hard to understand. But she found her
truant fancy going elsewhere--it centered about this boy of hers, her
daughter and also about the husband who could not endure the
troubleous times, not because of the hardship to himself so much as
the hardship to her and the child.

Ted's interest was not divided, however, except in rare moments when
he would turn to his mother and accuse her of lack of interest. She
would flush guiltily and pretend that she was interested. She would
ask a question or two, but her very questions convicted her, showed
her inability to understand, and Ted gave it up as a hopeless job and
comforted himself in the belief that only men understood the game, it
was too deep for women, excepting one or two, who knew something.

As they rode home the boy and the mother discussed the improvement in
their condition.

"We will never have to worry any more, mother, not as long as I am
able," the boy said, with all of youth's surety and confidence.

Mrs. Marsh wiped an unbidden tear from her eye.

"I am very happy, dear. And yet, I would give so much if your father
was one of us. He was a fine man, but things were against him, too
much so."

Ted did not answer, he felt that nothing he could say would help.

After a long period of quiet, the boy spoke a little more quietly:
"Never mind, mother, you have Helen and me."

"I am happy in my riches," answered the mother proudly.

When they reached home, both of them began to get the supper ready so
that Helen would not have to wait. A brilliant idea came to Ted as
they prepared. "Mother," he said excitedly, "let's not eat at home
tonight. We are going to the theater, so let us have supper out."

At first the mother demurred, but she gave way--there was great
temptation in the unusual treat. When Helen came home and was told the
plan she was even more excited than they; it was so unusual an
adventure. You can readily believe that it was a happy party of three
that repaired to one of the many nice restaurants in the loop and
afterward to the theater. They did not reach home until late in the
night. On the way home they discussed what the news could be that
Strong would have for Ted.

The next day Ted spent at the Settlement, renewing old acquaintances.
Miss White, who had taken Mrs. Dean's place, was glad to see him and
gave him a hearty welcome. She was greatly interested in his story of
his year in the West and wanted to know all about Mrs. Dean. It was a
great day for Ted and the pleasantest of his stay in Chicago.

On his way home that night Ted began to wish for Wayland. He had not
realized how much the place meant to him until now, Syd Graham and the
rest of the boys seemed very dear, very desirable.

"I hope," he said to himself, "that nothing will keep me from going on
Saturday."




CHAPTER X

TED RECEIVES A REWARD


Sir Robert Wingate listened while John Strong told the story of the
plotting and counterplotting in Chicago. Many times he made
memorandums. He asked questions once or twice, but in the main he just
listened. When Strong finally completed his account, Sir Robert said:

"We took immediate action at our end and the results are more than
satisfying. Strong, I do not want you to think for a minute that the
importance of what you men have done is underestimated. The excitement
of the Great War, the necessity of secrecy as to what you have
accomplished--all these facts may give you an idea that we do not
consider your work as important as it is. We do, however. Now, as to
this boy, Theodore Marsh. He must be an unusual youngster with a good
head. He will bear watching."

"Unfortunately for us, he is American. Those are the kind of boys
Canada could use to advantage. Not only is he American, but loyally
so.

"Well, he shall have acknowledgment of his deed of service. Tell me,
is he from a family of wealth?"

Strong briefly gave Sir Robert an account of Ted's past. The latter
nodded his head understandingly.

"I think we will also give a more practical acknowledgment of the
value of his service. The Government, I am sure, will be glad to give
a reward of $1,000.00 to him. When you go back to Chicago, you will
give him a letter from me which will also hold a check for that
amount."

You would think that both Strong and Walker were the ones who were
receiving the money, they showed how glad they were.

Strong could not complete his work until late in the afternoon. Walker
and he boarded a train which brought them into Chicago about three
o'clock the next afternoon.

"This letter and the enclosure will be a great surprise to Ted, won't
it?" said Walker. "I certainly am glad of it; he surely deserves it."

"That he does, and I am just as glad. Let me manage the business of
letting him know about it."

When they reached the office, Ted had already been there. He had left,
saying that he would be back at two o'clock, when told that Strong
would not arrive until the afternoon.

Promptly at two Ted showed up. Strong saw him as he opened the door
and greeted him warmly.

"Hello, Ted; it's good to see you. We certainly shall miss you when
you go back to Wayland. But I guess you will be glad to be back, won't
you?"

"I certainly will. I am going by way of Big Gulch and shall stop off
at the ranch for a day or so."

"That's a splendid idea, isn't it?" commented Walker.

"Well, Ted, hear anything more from our friends, the enemy?" asked
Strong, laughingly.

"No, sir, but then I would not be the one to hear. I thought Mr.
Walker would, he was going to claim his property."

They all laughed.

"By Jove, I must do that; I have completely forgotten it," remarked
Walker.

"Well, Ted, they were very nice at Ottawa. I understand the Government
is going to honor you in some way for your service; they even spoke of
doing the same thing for both Walker and myself."

Strong gave Ted an outline of what had happened, but made no mention
of the letter from Sir Robert. Walker was tempted to remind him,
thinking that he had forgotten, but he remembered that Strong had said
he wished to handle that end himself.

"I suppose you will be busy packing and getting ready tomorrow. You
leave at four on Saturday afternoon? Come down and see us before you
go. When we need your services again, we'll have you come on."

Ted got up to go. As he opened the door, Strong called to him.

"I say, Ted, I almost forgot another thing which probably is not very
important. I have a letter for you; silly, not to have remembered."
And Strong smiled, while Walker laughed.

"For me?" said Ted wonderingly, as he took the letter. Then, as he
opened it, he saw the check. He looked at it a little dazed. He saw
his name as if in a haze--then he saw the amount.

"One thousand dollars--and for me?" He stammered the words, he was
almost stricken dumb.

"Yes, for you--to do with as you will. You certainly deserve it," said
Strong.

"Every bit of it," added Walker.

Ted had a feeling as if he wanted to cry. He did. Walker patted him on
the shoulder understandingly, while Strong looked out of the window
and pretended he did not see.

"There is a letter which you might be glad to read and which I think
will be almost as welcome as the money." Strong turned round and faced
him as he said this.

The boy opened the letter.

                                                  "August 2, 1914.

  "Master Theodore Marsh,
    "Chicago, Illinois.

  "Dear Theodore:

  "Mr. Strong has advised me as to the service you have done
  Canada. It has been a big service, one that Canada must
  remember. I want you to know that it does and will. You have
  shown a capacity for thinking, for doing the right thing at the
  right time. I think even better than both these things, though,
  has been the simple way in which you have carried out
  instructions when conditions were such as to put up to you the
  burden of necessary action. What would have been a remarkable
  accomplishment for a man is a tremendous accomplishment for a
  boy.

  "I regret the fact that you are not Canadian but am glad you are
  a loyal American. Your country is fortunate in having a boy of
  your kind. I hope you will have the future that your present
  action promises.

  "The enclosed, in a small way, signalizes a reward for your
  invaluable services.

  "I hope to have the pleasure of meeting you at some time, and I
  am,

                                    "Very sincerely yours,
                                               "Robert Wingate."

"That's a fine letter, isn't it?" said Ted, when he finished. He spoke
in a low voice--he did not trust his feelings.

"Yes, it's fine. Sir Robert is a great man. He does things in a big
way. But I think you want to go home now, so go."

And Ted did.




CHAPTER XI

TED GOES BACK


"But, Ted, it would be impossible for us to go on Saturday. I am not
so sure that we can go at all, it will require a lot of thinking."

Mrs. Marsh had heard the wonderful news and Ted's sudden plan for them
to go out to Big Gulch or Wayland. She was trying to show Ted how
impossible it was for them to do it and he was only just beginning to
acknowledge that perhaps Saturday would be too soon.

"Well, I tell you, mother. Maybe Saturday is too soon, but you will be
ready in two weeks--that is plenty of time. I know that Helen will be
able to do whatever she wants to do out there--and this money, after
we have repaid the Deans, will help to tide over the time until we are
settled. We shall hear what Helen says--and I shall speak to Mr. and
Mrs. Dean when I get out there."

Helen was told the news almost before she passed the doorstep. She was
astonished and glad and cried all in the same minute.

"How wonderful!" she finally managed to say.

Then she was told of Ted's plan. The boy had thought that she might
need convincing, but she agreed almost at once.

"I know I can obtain a position in my line of work out there. It is a
land of opportunity and we should grasp the chance to get out there."

All that remained was for Ted to get the opinion of the Deans.

Ted went down to say good-bye to Strong and Walker the next day. Both
men were very busy, but the three had lunch together and Ted promised
to write to both of them.

"You may have to write both of us at the front--we shall go off to the
war--that is, Walker will. It may be my bad luck to have to stay on
duty here, although I have asked to be relieved."

"Well, Ted," said Walker, "I shall see you at the train."

"And I will try to do so," added Strong.

The boy told both his friends of the plan to bring his mother and
sister out West. They agreed that it was a good plan.

His mother and sister, and Walker and Strong saw him depart. It was
just a year before that Ted had left, what a big year it had been.

Ted's thoughts turned to the ranch. He was eager to see Red Mack,
Smiles, Graham, Pop, and the Deans. He hoped it would be Red who would
meet him--and that he would bring his horse down so that they could go
back to the ranch on horseback. Of course, in all likelihood, it would
be the Packard that would come down for him, for the distance was long
and it would mean a lot of extra trouble for Red or anyone to lead his
horse down all the way. The trip to Big Gulch seemed long because of
the boy's eagerness to see his friends. He awakened very early on the
second morning when the train was due. When the train finally reached
the station, he eagerly looked out to see who was there. But he could
see no one until he stepped from the train.

There stood Red and next to him Pop. There were three horses and one
of them was his.

Glad greetings were exchanged.

"My, I'm glad you came for me on horseback. I hoped you would, but it
seemed too much to expect."

"Well, we figured you would like it. Glad you do."

They started off. As best he could, Ted told his story and both of the
men listened with different interest. When Ted came to that part where
it had practically been settled that his mother and Helen were to come
out, a queer look came into Pop's eyes which neither of them saw. The
older man rode behind most of the way after that.

"You should see Wolf, you would not know him," said Red.

"I guess he would not know me, either," answered Ted.

"He may be your dog, but I'm kind of attached to him myself," remarked
Red.

Some time in the afternoon they reached the ranch. Smiles was there
and so were the other men and they gave Ted a great welcome.

So did Wolf, who had grown wonderfully, and who, while he did not
look like any particular kind of dog, showed himself to have an
individuality, all his own. He sprang at Ted and barked his delight.
It made Ted feel good to have the dog remember him. It was queer to
see how the dog tried to pay attention to both Red and Ted, and it
made the men laugh at his double devotion.

Ted hurried to the house where Mrs. Dean was waiting for him. She
showed how glad she was to see him.

"Mr. Dean will be back a little later. He has been very busy."

Ted thought he would wait with his news until later and merely
mentioned some of the things that had happened.

"Ted, dear," said Mrs. Dean, "I want to tell you that we are going to
have a little stranger in this house, soon." Then Ted knew why he had
hesitated about blurting out his news--there was an even bigger event
to happen.

"I'm so glad," said he.

He stayed a little while only, as Mrs. Dean did not seem strong.

He saw Dean when he came home. To both of his friends he told his
news, what had been done, he showed Sir Robert's letter and then spoke
of his plan for his mother and sister.

"How wonderful," said Mrs. Dean, while John Dean looked tenderly at
her.

"I'm proud of you, Ted. I counted on you, but you did much more. I
heard from Strong, but I did not know what had been accomplished. As
to your mother and sister--they must come out here--the wonderful
thing is that Mrs. Dean will need your mother's help very soon and it
all seems to fit one thing into another. Helen will get a rest here;
she need not worry as to finding the right kind of opportunity. When
do you expect to write home?"

"At once," answered Ted.

"The sooner they come the better, although I suppose it will be every
bit of two weeks."

Ted started to leave his friends to rejoin Red and the rest. Dean
caught up with him about one hundred yards from the house.

"You know, Ted," he started without any preamble, "I feel as if my
country is calling me. I cannot think of going until the child is
born and Mrs. Dean is well. But I shall have to, hard as it may be.
That is one reason why I shall be glad to have your sister and your
mother here. They will be company for Mrs. Dean. She agrees with me
that I should go. She is the bravest, best woman in the world." He
stopped for a minute. "I shall see you later, as soon as Mrs. Dean
takes her rest. I want to know all about Chicago and what happened."

He returned to the house while Ted joined the men.

They were in the midst of a discussion of the war. Ted listened.
Smiles and several of the other men were leaving in three days--off
for the war. Red was not going--he was American. "I may go later, if
they need me," he said. There was to be a great shortage of men at the
ranch.

Dean had made Pop the new foreman to take Smiles' place. Pop was not
in the conversation, he was sitting by himself and he showed every
desire to be left alone. After a little while, he left the room.

It made the war very near and Ted felt very lonely to hear that these
friends of his were going off, some of them never to return.




CHAPTER XII

THE MARSHES REUNITED


Pop entered the house. He wanted advice and he wanted it bad. He knew
that ordinarily he would have gone to Mrs. Dean--a woman would help so
much at a time like this. But Dean met him in the hall.

"Hello, Pop--what's the trouble?" asked Dean.

"Hello, Jack. I can't say whether it's trouble or not. What I want is
advice. Maybe you can give it to me, although I figured Mrs. Dean
would be better."

"Tell me, I may be able to help." Dean was surprised at the agitation
of the older man.

Pop told his story. He did not keep any of the details from Dean. The
latter listened, his astonishment growing all the time.

"You see, Jack, it's this way. If they come here, my wife will see me.
She probably hates me. I cannot hope that she will understand. On the
other hand, I want so much to be with her, I am going to be foreman
and that means I can support her comfortably. But I probably would
make her miserable if I entered into her life again. What do you
say?"

"Let us ask Mrs. Dean. She will give you the right answer."

Mrs. Dean listened. There was no hesitation in her answer.

"Go to Chicago at once. You need not worry about how your wife will
take it, nor as to how she feels. I know. She understands better than
you can ever suppose. Jack, dear, whoever said that God did not weave
our lives? How closely our friends here have been interwoven with our
lives, how much we have been of service to each other.

"Go to Chicago on the first train," she finished.

"Yes, and we shall tell Ted. Bring them back with you," added Dean.

Pop left the house, much relieved. He was happy that his duty was
what his inclination was--what he craved to do. He joined the other
men.

Without giving any explanation he told Smiles he would have to be away
for about ten days and that he had already arranged for the same with
John Dean.

Early the next morning he was off. He asked Red to take him down. To
Red he explained the whole thing, that he was coming back with his
folks.

"I understand a whole lot of things now. How queerly you acted at
times. I guess I'll call you Marsh, now."

"Yes, and it's up to you to explain. I shall wire you before you do
so. If my wife should decide that she does not want me, I am not
coming back. If she decides she will forgive me, I will telegraph you
and you can let it out casually."

"I will be glad to do so," answered Red. "Is Jack going to tell Ted?"

"Yes, that's the plan."

"The boy will be glad. He likes you a lot. But, mostly glad, because
it will make his mother happy."

"I hope so much that it will," the older man answered.

We are not going into details as to the meeting between the Marshes.
We, who are acquainted with so much of their story, can imagine what
happened. Bill Marsh left home because he felt he could not hold his
head up nor his wife's respect. He had been very foolish, and it was
this foolishness, this false pride, even a lack of faith in the
understanding of his wife that had made him stay away. Who should have
known him better than his own wife? It was harder to make Helen
understand. She asked some searching questions, but in the end she
realized the fine manliness of her father.

The two, mother and daughter, marveled at the coincidence of the
father being at the same place as Ted.

"The world is a small place, isn't it?" said Mrs. Marsh.

It did not take very long for them to be ready to leave. Marsh helped
where he could and a week after he arrived they left for Big Gulch.
Red had paved the way, in accordance with their plan.

Ted was too surprised to make any comment when he heard the news. At
first he was furiously angry at his father. Boylike, he could not
forgive certain things which an older person could. It was Mrs. Dean,
even more than Red and John Dean, who made him see and understand.

Then the Marshes came to Big Gulch. Matters adjusted themselves. It
was a busy time for all. Smiles was off, smiling and glad. So were the
other men who were to go. Brave men, all of them, doing their duty as
they saw it. Pop took up his duties as foreman.

Then the child was born to the Deans. A girl, which seemed like a
squalling, ugly baby, much like any other baby, to Ted. But to say so
to the mother or to the father or to Mrs. Marsh or to Helen, would
have been a great, an awful insult.

The men came in to see the heir apparent. They seemed clumsy, uncouth,
sheepish creatures and all of them were glad to get away, including
Pop and Ted.

With the excitement subsiding, things began again to take a normal
aspect. Mrs. Dean began to sit up, the child began to look more like a
human being, it had been decided that Helen was to rest for a few
months and then continue her studies at the nearest preparatory
school, with the purpose of entering college. John Dean was to leave
for the front in two weeks.

Our story is almost complete. Ted received a great welcome at the
Academy. The boys had heard of what he had done, of his reward and the
letter he had received from Sir Robert Wingate. For one whole day his
coming made the Great War an even smaller event. Captain Wilson had
gone to Ottawa, he had been promoted to be a major. Some of the
instructors were gone and even one or two of the older students. Those
who were left spoke only of the time when they, too, could go and they
were bemoaning their misfortune in being young.

Ted heard from the folks at home. He heard from Helen and somehow he
got the impression that all she spoke about was Red and what a fine
man he was. A letter from Red made no mention of Helen, but he did say
that he was getting down to the serious business of thinking of the
future. Even as young as Ted was, he could guess that they had become
great friends and he was glad. His father wrote him that he had
placed his $1,000.00 in the bank for him, he having settled all the
debts and accounts himself. It was a fine letter and it removed what
resentment still remained with Ted against his father. His mother also
wrote, saying she was wonderfully happy and he got a short note from
John Dean before he left. He also heard from Walker, who told him he
was off for the war, but that Strong had to stay.

Syd Graham and Ted were inseparable. They did many things together and
the plans for the future each of the boys made included the other.
There was, of course, a great deal more of military training and many
times the boys at the Academy were called upon for some duty or
other.

So the days went. Ted received a fall vacation and he went home. There
was news from the front. Dean had been wounded, so the report came,
not seriously, but enough to disable him, and he was returning home.
He would always limp. In that awful charge when so many Canadians had
been wounded and killed, Smiles had lost his life. It made Ted very
sad to think that he would never see the happy, smiling ex-foreman
again. Helen was at school. Ted pumped Red Mack as to Helen and found
his suspicions confirmed. He teased Red unmercifully and it was one
time when Red was flustered. The Dean baby was a healthy, lusty
youngster of a few months.

Ted Marsh has his life before him. This story is but one incident of
his early life. But for later events we must look elsewhere.



                  *       *       *       *       *



THE FRIENDLY ANIMAL SERIES

A series of 9 books of friendly, likeable fun-loving animals, written
by well known authors of children's books. Each book 64 pages, with
lithograph cover in five colors and a number of full page
illustrations. Size 8-1/2 x 6-1/4--64 pages--each 15c.

Written by Elizabeth Billings Stuart Illustrations by Elsie M. Kroll

THE FAIRY AND THE BUNNY-TAIL

Bunny-Tail is a dear little Bunny, who is always finding something
that turns every-boy's trouble into happiness. The fairy JOY gives
him a magic password, which makes him quite safe in the company of any
of the forest animals or in the presence of hunters.

TRICKY MR. FOX

Tricky Mr. Fox is a sly animal, whose adventures lead him into many
pitfalls and mishaps. He becomes the captive of a little Indian boy
and later his adoring companion. Tricky Mr. Fox proves his devotion
and quick wits by saving the little boy's life when a fire threatens.

TEDDY BEAR, THE TOY MAKER

Brownie Bunny is a harum-scarum Bunny, full of mischief and merry
pranks. He lives with Teddy Bear and makes Teddy Bear's life
delightfully miserable until Bunny-Tail persuades him to become a
Boy Scout. After this transformation he performs many thrilling and
heroic deeds.




LUCKY, THE BOY SCOUT

By ELMER SHERWOOD

A Fascinating Story. Its Action Covers Chicago and the Far West of
Canada.

There comes the rumbling of the Big War. German plots are many. Ted's
share in following these plots, his life at the Double X Ranch and at
Wayland Academy, make this a book that will hold the absorbed
attention of the reader.

Those who are readers of the Lucky Series know that none of the books
are namby-pamby--there is in all of them the true strain of things
worthwhile. Honor, faith and courage hold their rightful place.

WHITMAN PUBLISHING COMPANY

RACINE




_Good Books for Boys and Girls_

THE CAMPFIRE GIRLS AND AUNT MADGE

THE CAMPFIRE GIRLS' WEEK-END PARTY

Delightful stories that are sure to be well liked. The titles would
indicate that they are purely girls' stories but boys will find them
equally interesting. Be sure to read them.




LUCKY, THE YOUNG NAVYMAN

By ELMER SHERWOOD

This book follows the story of Lucky, the Young Soldier.

It deals with Ted Marsh and his service to the American Navy. A book
complete in itself in which Mr. Sherwood has brought to play many of
the incidents of today.

Great things are happening every day. Ted's great fortune is to have a
big share in them.

A story as good as Lucky, the Boy Scout and Lucky, the Young Soldier.

WHITMAN PUBLISHING COMPANY

RACINE




THE FRIENDLY ANIMAL SERIES

LAMMIE AND MRS. FUSSY-CAT

"If you read this book written about me," said Lammie, "you will wish
there were a hundred books to the series the same as mine. Dear me!
that was a day! Read the book. You'll just laugh at the pictures.
Especially the one where I am riding the little wooden-legged squirrel
on my back."

LAMMIE WANTS TO LEARN

"Can you do tricks on a pumpkin, the way I can?" asked Lammie. "If you
don't believe I can do them, just look at the picture that Warner Carr
drew of me the day he caught me out in the garden. My, but I was
having a good time until I happened to take a big mouthful of
horseradish."

LAMMIE ON A FROLIC

"Doing tricks on a pumpkin is nothing compared to doing a buck-jump,"
said Lammie. "Just watch me," and he wheeled around on one toe and
then jumped straight up in the air, kicking out all four feet at once.
"Do you see that field over there? Well, that's where I go
every day to eat white clover and I have the best of times, too."




COMING!!

TED MARSH & THE ENEMY

TED MARSH--THE YOUNG VOLUNTEER

Two great books of present day events. Ted's coolness and daring stand
him in good stead and he proves of great value in the service of the
Government.

The Lowest Priced And Best Series Of Boys' Books




THE BUNNY-TAIL SERIES

by ELIZABETH BILLINGS STUART

With Full Page Illustrations in Color and in Black and White

  Winkie Bunny-Tail
  Brownie Bunny and Teddy Bear
  Mr. Rusty Fox
  Twinkle Squirrel and Muffle Face
  Fifteen Little Bunny-Tails

"Oh, mother," said little Goldi-locks one day as they were hurrying
through a big Department Store, "do please stop a minute and look at
these books."

"Which ones, my dear?" asked her mother.

"The Bunny-Tail Series, of course. All the children are reading them.
Even Teacher told us a story out of one of them the other day.
Couldn't you buy them for my birthday present?" coaxed the sweet
little girl. "Just see this picture where the Bunnies are all dressed
up and are having a dancing party!"

Just then a dainty clerk stepped up and smiled as she saw the
interested little girl.

"It's really wonderful," said she, addressing the mother, "how the
children love Mrs. Stuart's Bunny-Tail Books. We sell so many of them,
all the year 'round. I have read them all to my little nephew and he
just dotes on them."

Five Titles, Cloth, Size 8-3/4 x 6-1/2. Colored Jackets, 64 Pages.




ARABIAN NIGHTS STORIES

_Retold by ELIZABETH BILLINGS STUART_

With 4 Color and 8 Black and White Illustrations

by Elsie M. Kroll

"Tomorrow is Jack's birthday and I don't know what to buy him," said
Jill.

"Does he like books?" asked Phil.

"He reads all the time," answered Jill.

"Then why don't you buy him a nice book for his birthday?" asked Phil.

"I'd love to, but I have only thirty-five cents to spend, and I
couldn't get a nice enough book for that. He likes lots of
pictures--colored ones, too."

"I know the very book you want," said Phil, all excitement. "It's
called 'Arabian Nights Stories,' by Mrs. Stuart. You know her, don't
you? She's the one who wrote 'Winkie Bunny-Tail' and all the rest of
the Bunny-Tail Series."

"Goody, goody!" said Jill. "Just to think what a lovely birthday
present it will make, and for only thirty-five cents!"




THE FAMOUS ANIMAL STORIES

(For Children from Three to Ten Years of Age)

_"Never Have Animal Stories Made More Fascinating Reading"_

 Hazel Squirrel
 Tommy Turtle
 Happy Bunny
 Baby Pony
 Bobby Bear
 Famous Rover

This series is an innovation in the field of children's books. Six
wonderful animal stories written by Howard M. Famous, each beautifully
illustrated with a full-page colored frontispiece and a number of
full-page black and white illustrations.

Never have animal stories made more fascinating reading. The books are
the kind that will sell all the year round--the children will demand
them. Mr. Famous is at his very best in all these stories--and we
predict that the doings of his animal folks will become known
throughout the world.

Six Titles, Cloth, Size 7-1/4 x 5, Colored Jacket, 128 Pages.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TED MARSH ON AN IMPORTANT MISSION ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

