by Linda Cantoni.












THE

NURSERY


_A Monthly Magazine_

FOR YOUNGEST READERS.

VOLUME XXI.--No. 1.


          BOSTON:
          JOHN L. SHOREY, No. 36 BROMFIELD STREET,
          1877.




          Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1877, by

          JOHN L. SHOREY,

          In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington.

          FRANKLIN PRESS:
          RAND, AVERY, AND COMPANY,
          117 FRANKLIN STREET,
          BOSTON.




[Illustration: Contents.]


IN PROSE.

                                         PAGE
  Work and Play                             1
  Billy and Tom                             5
  The Wise Hare and her Pursuers            6
  Gentle Jessie and the Wasp                8
  Friends in Need                          10
  The Bear that put on Airs                14
  Drawing-Lesson                           17
  What you do, do well                     20
  In the Winter                            23
  A Letter to Minnie                       26
  The Hedgehog                             27
  The Little Scissors-Grinder              30


[Illustration]

IN VERSE.

                                        PAGE
  Bumble-Bee                               4
  Gretchen                                 9
  A Noonday Lullaby                       12
  A Squeak                                18
  My Little Sister                        25
  Little Black Monkey                     29
  The Old Year and New (_with music_)     32

[Illustration]




[Illustration: WORK AND PLAY.

VOL. XXI.--NO. 1.]




WORK AND PLAY.


"[Illustration: D]O you want your sidewalk shovelled?" This was the
question asked of Mr. Prim, as he sat reading his newspaper, one New
Year's morning. The question came through a servant who had just
answered the door-bell. Mr. Prim looked out of the window. The snow was
still falling. So he sent out word, "No shovelling wanted till the
storm's over," and went on with his reading.

By and by there was another ring at the door; and in a moment the
servant-girl came in, saying, "The snow-shovellers are here again, sir,
and they want to see you."

Mr. Prim stepped out into the entry, where he found two rough-looking
boys, both of whom greeted him at once with, "Wish you a happy new year!
Please, sir, it's done snowing now."

"That means," said Mr. Prim, "that you both want the job of clearing off
the sidewalk; but which am I to give it to?"

"Oh, sir!" said the bigger boy, "we are partners. I shovel, and Mike
sweeps."

"And what are your names?"

"Mine is Tom Murphy, and his is Mike Flynn."

"Then," said Mr. Prim, "the firm is 'Murphy & Flynn.'"

"That's it," said both boys with a grin.

"Well, Murphy & Flynn, I will employ you to do my shovelling to-day, and
I will give you fifty cents for the job; but I am very particular. You
must not leave a bit of snow anywhere about the steps or sidewalk."

"All right, sir," said the boys; and they went to work, while Mr. Prim
went back to his newspaper. He had not been reading many minutes, when a
loud shout in front of the house led him to look out of the window. The
picture shows what he saw.

There were the two boys, each mounted on one of the stone lions at the
head of the steps, and shouting at the top of his lungs in the
excitement of an imaginary race.

Mr. Prim was first astonished, then angry, then amused, at this
performance. He opened the window, and called out sharply, "Look here,
boys! do you call that work, or play?"

The boys jumped down, and began to ply their broom and shovel with great
vigor. But Murphy looked up roguishly, and said, "We were just polishing
off the lions, sir."

"Yes," said Mr. Prim, "and a paroxysm of fun got the better of you.
Well, it's excusable on New Year's Day. But, if the firm of Murphy &
Flynn expect to succeed in business, they must not mix so much play with
their work." And Mr. Prim shut the window.

"I say, Mike," said Tom, "what was it the old man said had got the
better of us?"

"That's more than I can tell," said Mike. "I can't remember such hard
words. But I know what he meant, and I guess he was about right."

                                                    UNCLE SAM.

[Illustration]




BUMBLE-BEE.


[Illustration]

          BUMBLE-BEE superbly dressed,
            In velvet, jet, and gold,
          Sailed along in eager quest,
            And hummed a ballad bold.

          Morning-Glory clinging tight
            To friendly spires of grass,
          Blushing in the early light,
            Looked out to see him pass.

          Nectar pure as crystal lay
            In her ruby cup;
          Bee was very glad to stay,
            Just to drink it up.

          "Fairest of the flowers," said he,
            "'Twas a precious boon;
          May you still a Glory be,
            Morning, night, and noon!"

          M. A. C.





[Illustration]




BILLY AND TOM.


WHEN I was a little boy, six or seven years old, my father had two white
horses, named Billy and Tom. Billy had one black foot, and a little dark
spot on his face; but Tom did not have a black hair on his whole body.

Billy was the old family horse, kind, gentle, and loving. Anybody could
catch him, or lead him, or drive him. He liked to be petted, and in
return seemed to take pride in being kind to all in the family.

Tom was a good horse too; but we had not owned him so long, and he did
not care much to have any one pet him.

Billy was a little lame; and though he worked everywhere on the farm,
and in drawing loads on the road, yet he was generally excused from
going with the carriage, except when it was necessary for some of us
children to drive.

One day my father went to the village with Tom, leaving Billy at home
alone, in a field near the house. He missed his old friend Tom. They had
worked together so much, that they had become great friends; and either
one was very lonesome without the other.

Billy ran about here and there, neighing loudly whenever another horse
appeared in sight upon the road, hoping that it might be his friend Tom
coming back.

At last I went out to comfort him. I patted his head and his neck, and
leading him by the mane to the fence, climbed first upon the fence, and
then upon his back.

He seemed pleased, and started in a gentle walk along the farm-road
leading down into the field, away from the house. When he had gone as
far as I wished to ride, I called out, "Whoa!"

But he was a wise old horse. Instead of stopping in the middle of the
road, where he then was, he turned out at one side, and stopped close by
the fence, for me to get off upon that; as much as to say, "A boy that
is not large enough to get upon my back without climbing a fence, is not
large enough to climb from my back to the ground."

          EDITH'S PAPA.

[Illustration]




THE WISE HARE AND HER PURSUERS.


A POOR little hare was one day closely pursued by a brace of greyhounds.
They were quite near her, when, seeing a gate, she ran for it. She got
through it easily; but the bars were too close together for the hounds
to get through, so they had to leap over the gate.

As they did so, the hare, seeing that they would be upon her the next
instant, turned around and ran again under the gate where she had just
before passed. The hounds, in their speed, could not turn at once.
Their headway took them on some distance; and then they had to wheel
about, and leap once more over the upper bar of the gate.

[Illustration]

Again the hare doubled, and returned by the way she had come; and thus
she went backward and forward, the dogs following till they were fairly
tired out, while the little hare, watching her chance, happily made her
escape.

Thus you see that wit and self-possession are sometimes more than a
match for superior strength and speed. If the little hare could not run
so fast as the greyhounds, she could outwit them, and they saw no way to
prevent it.

          UNCLE CHARLES.




[Illustration]




GENTLE JESSIE AND THE WASP.


THERE is a little girl in our village whom we call "Gentle Jessie;" for
she is so kind and gentle, that even the dumb animals and the insects
seem to find it out, and to trust her.

On a dry pleasant day, last autumn, I saw her seated on the grass. I
went up to tell her not to sit there; for it is not safe to sit on the
ground, even in dry weather.

As I drew near to Jessie from behind, I heard her talking. To whom could
she be talking? There was no one by her side; that is to say, no human
being. But soon I found she was talking to a wasp that was coming as if
to sting her.

"Wasp, wasp, go away, and come again another day," said she. But the
wasp did not heed her. It flew quite near to her face. Instead of
striking at the bold insect, she merely drew back a little out of its
way; for she thought, "Surely the wasp will not harm me, if I do not
harm it."

And she was right. It alighted near her for a moment, but did not sting
her; and gentle Jessie did not try to harm it. Then the wasp flew to the
flowers on her hat; but, not finding the food it wanted, at last it flew
away.

"Well done, Jessie," said I, lifting her from the ground, and giving her
a kiss.

          EMILY CARTER.




[Illustration]




GRETCHEN.


          GRETCHEN'S old; she's neat and good:
          See her coming from the wood!
          She bears fagots on her back,
          Lest her darlings fire may lack.

[Illustration]

          Here you see her far from town,
          With her darlings sitting down:
          Gretchen, Emma, Fritz, and Paul,--
          They are happy, happy all.

          M. A. C.




FRIENDS IN NEED.


ONCE a poor crippled sparrow fell to the ground, and fluttered about in
a vain attempt to regain a place of safety. Some of its mates gathered
around it, and seemed eager to help it; but they did not know what to
do. Their chirping drew together a good many of the sparrow tribe.

One thought this thing ought to be done, and another thought that. Some
tried to lift the helpless bird by catching its wings in their beaks;
but this failed, and such a chattering and scolding as took place!

"I told you that wasn't the way to do it."--"How stupid!"--"You should
have taken my advice." Perhaps such were the speeches which were uttered
in bird-language; for all the little creature seemed much excited.

[Illustration]

Presently two of the birds flew away, but soon came back with a twig six
or seven inches long and an eighth of an inch thick. This was dropped
before the poor little cripple, and at each end was picked up by a
sparrow, and held so that the lame bird was able to catch the middle of
the twig in its beak.

Then the crippled bird, with the aid of the other two, flew off, till
they came to the wall covered with ivy, where it had its home. There it
chirped to show how glad it was. All the other sparrows followed, as if
to share in the pleasure of the rescue. This is a true story.

          IDA FAY.




A NOONDAY LULLABY.


[Illustration]

            "TIC, tac! Tic, tac!"
          Says the clock on the wall:
          "Sleep now, my darling, for 'tis time, 'tis time;
          Soon I will wake you with my merry chime,--
            Tic, tac! Tic, tac!"

            "Purr-r-r! Purr-r-r!"
          Tabby sings on the sill:
          "Shut your eyes, deary, and sleep in a trice,
          Then I will stay here, and scare off the mice,--
            Purr-r-r! Purr-r-r!"

            "Coo-oo! Coo-oo!"
          Says the dove on the roof:
          "Go to sleep, pet, while I strut here and coo,
          As for my own pretty nestlings I do,--
            Coo-oo! Coo-oo!"

[Illustration]

            "Cut, cut, ca-dah-cut!"
          Cackles kind biddy-hen:
          "Listen, my little one: if you'll not weep,
          I'll lay an egg for you while you are asleep,--
            Cut, cut, ca-dah-cut!"

            "Moo-oo! Moo-oo!"
          Says the good moolly-cow:
          "Sleep, my wee man, and I'll make it fair,
          For I'll give you milk from bossy's own share,--
            Moo-oo! Moo-oo!"

            "Hum, hum! Buz, buz!"
          Drones the bee on the wing:
          "Fret not, my baby, but croon in your bed,
          I'll bring you honey to eat on your bread,--
            Hum, hum! Buz, buz!"

            "Hush-sh-sh! Hush-sh-sh!"
          Whisper leaves on the tree:
          "As through our shadow soft sunlight streams,
          See how the angels send smiles in his dreams!
            Hush-sh-sh! Hush-sh-sh!"

          M. A. C.

[Illustration]




THE BEAR THAT PUT ON AIRS.


THERE was once a bear that had been tamed and made to dance by a man who
beat him when he did not mind. This bear was called Dandy, and he had
been taught many queer tricks. He could shoulder a pole as if it were a
gun, and could balance it on his nose, or stand on his hind-legs and
hold it by his fore-paws behind his back.

He did all these things at his master's bidding because he stood in
great fear of his master's whip. His master made a show of him; and,
though Dandy did not like it, he was forced to submit.

[Illustration]

But one day, when he had been left alone, the chain, that held him by a
ring in his nose, got loose from the ring; and Dandy was soon a free
bear. Taking his pole, he made his way, as fast as he could, to a
mountain where the woods were high and thick.

Here he found a number of fellow-bears. Instead of treating them as
equals, he put on fine airs, told them what a rare life he had led among
men, how many nice tricks he had learned, and how much wiser he was than
all the bears that had ever lived.

For a time the other bears were simple enough to take him at his word.
They thought, because he said so, that he must be a very great bear
indeed. He never was at a loss when they asked him a question, never
would confess his ignorance, and so had to say much that was not true.

Dandy boasted so of the respect which men had paid him, that he made the
other bears think he was doing them a great honor by living with them.
He made them all wait on him. But at last a young bear, that had escaped
from a trap which some men had set for him, said to Dandy, "Is that ring
in your nose for ornament or for use?"

"For ornament, of course," said Dandy. "This ring was a gift from a man
who was once my partner. He was so fond of me, and so pleased with my
dancing, that he never tired of serving me. He brought me all my food.
In fact I had him at my beck and call."

"My friends," said the young bear, "he tells a fib. That ring was put in
his nose to be fastened to a chain. He was held a slave by the man who,
he says, treated him so finely. He was made to dance through fear of
being touched up with a red-hot iron. In short, he is what men call a
'humbug.'"

"Yes, he is a humbug," cried the others, though they did not know what
the word meant. "We will have no more of his fine airs."--"I never liked
him."--"Drive him off."--"Send him back to his dancing-master!"--"Kick
him!"--"Stone him!"--"Beat him!"--"We'll have no humbug here."

And so poor Dandy was driven out from the woods, and forced to get his
living by himself; while the knowing young bear that had exposed him,
looked on and laughed at his misfortune. If Dandy had not been so
boastful; if he had spoken the truth, and been modest,--he might have
been respected by his fellow-bears to the end of his days.

          ALFRED SELWYN.




[Illustration: DRAWING-LESSON BY HARRISON WEIR.

VOL. XXI.--NO. 1.]




A SQUEAK!


            I'M only a little brown mouse
            That lives in somebody's house,
          And in that same house there's a cat;
          But oh, ho! what care I for that?
              She sits in the sunshine,
                And licks her white paws,
              With one eye on me,
                And one on her claws.
              How she watches the crack
              Where she sees my brown back!
              But she'll never catch me!
              For oh, ho! don't you see
          That I'm just the smartest young mouse
          That lives anywhere in the house?

            I'm only a little brown mouse
            That lives in somebody's house,
          And in that same house there is Rover:
          He has chased me the whole house over.
          And there, too, is fat Baby Tim;
          But oh, ho! what care I for him?
              When he sprawls on the carpet,
                And bumps his pink nose,
              I scamper around him,
                And tickle his toes.
              How he kicks and he crows!
              For he knows, oh, he knows,
          That I'm only a little brown mouse
          That lives in his grandmother's house.




[Illustration]

              I'm only a little brown mouse
              That lives in somebody's house;
            And in that same house there's a clock,
            That says, "Tick-a-tock, tick-a-tock!"
              And I've not forgotten yet quite,
              How once, on a very still night,
              I was sitting just over the clock,
              When it gave such a terrible knock,
              With a whirring and whizzing,
              And buzzing and fizzing,
          That I tumbled headlong from my perch on the shelf,
          And, scampering wildly, I crowded myself
          Right under the door, through such a small crack,
          That I scraped all the hairs off the top of my back.

              Oh, I am the merriest mouse
              That lives anywhere in a house!
          I love toasted cheese, and I love crusts of bread,
          And bits of old paper to make a soft bed.
                Oh! I tell you it's nice
                To be one of the mice,
                And when the night comes,
                And the folks are abed,
                To rattle and race
                On the floor overhead.
          And, say, don't you wish _you_ could run up a wall
          As I do, every day, without getting a fall?
          And don't you wish _you_ were a mouse,
          Living in somebody's house?

          FLETA F.




WHAT YOU DO, DO WELL.


"WHY do you take such pains in cutting out these little figures?" asked
Winifred of her brother Ernest.

"I will tell you why, sister," replied Ernest. "I take pains because my
teacher tells me, that, if a thing is worth doing at all, it is worth
doing well."

"Did he mean that we should try to do well even in trifles?" asked
Winifred.

"Yes," answered Ernest, "because, as a great man once said, 'Perfection
is no trifle.'"

Winifred sat looking at her brother, as, handling a pair of scissors, he
carefully cut out figures of horses, dogs, pigs, and various other
animals.

Three years afterward she remembered this conversation; for it happened
at that time, that, her father having died, her widowed mother was left
almost destitute with a family of seven children to support.

[Illustration]

What should the poor woman do? At first she thought she would take in
washing, then that she would try to keep a little shop. While she was
hesitating, Mr. Mason, a brisk old gentleman, came to the door, and
asked, "Where is the boy who cuts these figures and faces in profile?"

One of his grandchildren had brought him home from school some specimens
of Ernest's skill; and Mr. Mason saw at once that they were the work of
a gifted and painstaking artist.

"You must mean my little Ernest," said the mother. "Poor little fellow!
He little dreams what is coming. I shall soon have to take him away from
school."

"Why so?" cried Mr. Mason. "Take him away from school? You shall do no
such a thing. I'll not allow it."

"We are destitute, sir, and I have no means of support," said the mother
with a sigh.

"No means of support! Nonsense! With a boy in the house who can cut
figures like that, do you say you have no means of support?" exclaimed
Mr. Mason. "Good woman, I will insure your boy good wages every week for
the next year, if you will let him come between school-hours, and cut
pictures under my direction."

The rest of my little story may soon be told. Ernest became the staff
and stay of his family. The little talent he had cultivated so carefully
and diligently was the means of giving him not only an honest
employment, but a liberal support. He rose to distinction; and his
productions were much sought after by all good judges of art.

          EMILY CARTER.

[Illustration: ST. CATHERINE'S ROCK, SOUTH WALES.]




IN THE WINTER.


[Illustration]

THERE are some nice apples in the cellar, and William is going down with
a light to get a dish full. He will pick out some that are as yellow as
gold, and some that are as red as a rose.

[Illustration]

This man is cutting a hole through the ice, so that the cows may drink.
The stream is all frozen over. When the thick ice is broken, they can
drink all they want. Walk up, old Brindle, and help yourself.

[Illustration]

Here are the fowls, and each stands on one leg. The ground is covered
with snow, and their toes are very cold. So they all hold their feet
under their feathers, to keep them warm.

[Illustration]

The old gray cat comes in the morning, and jumps up on the children's
bed. Then she creeps towards them, and rubs her soft fur on the little
boy's face, and wakes him up. She would like to say, "Good morning!" but
she only says, "Mew, mew!"

          W. O. C.




[Illustration]




MY LITTLE SISTER.

          GOOD folks who read "The Nursery," this is my little sister;
          The picture shows you truly how I caught her up, and kissed her:
          She is so sweet, so very sweet, that I am quite decided
          If you could see her as she is you would do just as I did.

          BROTHER CARLOS.




A LETTER TO MINNIE.


The following is an exact copy of a letter found in little Minnie's
stocking last Christmas:--


                                     SITTING ROOM, AT MAMMA'S DESK.

          MY DEAR LITTLE MINNIE.

          You must excuse my calling you by your pet name;
          but you see I'm so fond of all good children that
          I can't _Master_ and _Miss_ them, and they're all
          Tommie, and Johnnie, and Fannie, and Minnie, to
          me.

          Your stocking is so small that I can't put much of
          any thing into it: but if that piano, with the
          nice white cloth on it, isn't for presents, then
          I'm mistaken.

          I shall put yours there, and I hope I sha'n't
          crock that tablecloth; for your mamma wouldn't
          like to find my sooty marks all over it. Though I
          don't see how she could expect me to be clean when
          she has had a soft-coal fire burning in her grate
          all the evening, and that does make the chimney so
          black!

          If you will look at the picture of me in your new
          book (they call me St. Nicholas there), you'll see
          how fat I am; and how do you suppose I get down
          such a small place? I never could if I didn't love
          children so much, and if I hadn't done it for so
          many hundred years. But I began, you see, before I
          grew so fat; and so now I know the easiest way to
          do it.

          I hope you'll have all you wanted this year; but
          you all grow so fast, and have so many wants from
          year to year, that I sometimes fear that I sha'n't
          always be able to satisfy you. Still, as it's only
          the good little children that I visit, I fancy
          they will be pleased, whatever I bring.

          I must confess, though, that it isn't _all_
          guesswork. I know pretty well what my little folks
          want. But if you knew the amount of listening at
          doors and windows and registers, that I do to find
          out all these wants, you'd be astonished.

          And now, if I don't hurry off, you'll be waking
          up, and catch me here; besides, I've staid a deal
          longer than I ought, for I've lots to do before
          daylight. But, seeing your mamma's desk and
          writing-materials so handy, I really couldn't help
          sitting down to write you a letter.

          Tell your brother Walter, that as I brought him
          presents ten years before you came, he mustn't
          expect quite so many now; for he can have no idea
          how many little folks I have to provide for. And
          if my reindeers weren't the kindest, and
          strongest, and fleetest of creatures, we never
          could get through the amount of work we have to do
          "the night before Christmas."

          Wishing you, and your brother, and papa, and
          mamma, a "Merry Christmas," I remain, with a heart
          full of love, yours,

          SANTA CLAUS.






[Illustration]




THE HEDGEHOG.


THE hedgehog is a queer little animal with short limbs. It feeds mostly
on insects. It has its body covered with sharp spines instead of hairs,
and can roll itself up in a ball, and thus show an array of prickles
pointing in every direction.

Slow of foot, this little creature cannot flee from danger; but in the
sharp, hard, and tough prickles of its coat, it has a safeguard better
than the teeth and claws of the wildcat, or the fleetness of the hare.

The hedgehog has powerful muscles beneath the skin of the back; and by
the aid of these, on the slightest alarm, it rolls itself up so as to
have its head and legs hidden in the middle of the ball it thus makes of
itself.

Our dog Snip saw a hedgehog, the other day, for the first time. As soon
as it saw him, the little creature seemed to change from a live thing
into a ball. Snip did not know what to make of it. His curiosity was
much excited. He went up, and looked at it.

If the two could have spoken, I think this would have been their talk:--

_Snip._--"Of all the queer things I ever saw, you are the queerest. What
_are_ you anyhow?"

_Hedgehog._--"Suppose you put out your paw, and try."

_Snip._--"I don't like the look of those prickles."

_Hedgehog._--"Don't be a coward, Snip! Put your nose down, and feel of
my nice soft back."

Whether the cunning hedgehog really cheated him by any such remarks as
these, I cannot say. But Snip at last mustered courage enough to put his
nose down to the ball. Rash Snip! Up rose the bristles, and pricked him
so that he ran back to the house, howling and yelping as if he had been
shot.

Having put Snip to flight, the hedgehog quietly unrolled itself, thrust
out its queer little head with the long snout, and crept along on its
way rejoicing. As for Snip, I am quite sure he will never put his nose
to the back of a hedgehog again, as long as he lives.

          CHARLES SELWYN.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Little Black Monkey]


          LITTLE black monkey sat up in a tree;
          Little black monkey, he grinned at me;
          He put out his paw for a cocoanut,
          And he dropped it down on my occiput.

          The occiput is a part, you know,
          Of the head which does on my shoulders grow;
          And it's very unpleasant to have it hit,
          Especially when there's no hair on it.

          I took up my gun, and I said, "Now why,
          Little black monkey, should you not die?
          I'll hit you soon in a vital part,
          It may be your head, or it may be your heart."

          I steadied the gun, and I aimed it true:
          The trigger it snapped, and the bullet it flew;
          But just where it went to, I cannot tell,
          For I never _could_ see where that bullet fell.

          Little black monkey still sat in the tree,
          And placidly, wickedly, grinned at me:
          I took up my gun, and walked away,
          And postponed his death till another day.

          LAURA E. RICHARDS.




THE LITTLE SCISSORS-GRINDER.


WILLIE is a three-year-old darling. This summer he visited his aunt in
the city, and was very much interested in the curious sights and sounds
which abound there.

A few days after his return home, when his mamma sat on the piazza with
some friends, Willie marched up the gravel path with his little
wheelbarrow on his back.

He stopped at the foot of the steps, set his burden down, resting it
upon the handles, so that it stood upright. Then holding it with one
hand, and rolling the wheel with the other, he kept his foot rising and
falling, just as if he were at work with a genuine treadle. He looked
very sober, and said, "Please, madam, have you any scissors to sharpen?"

The ladies handed him several pairs, which he ground in the best style,
trying the edge with his finger, and at last passing them to the owner
with the request for ten cents.

[Illustration]

Mamma gave him a bit of paper, which he put into his pocket, returning
the change in the form of two leaves.

When he had finished his task, he shouldered the wheelbarrow, and was
saying "Good-afternoon," when one of the party ran after him, calling to
him to kiss her.

"Scissors-grinders don't kiss," he said; but the fun sparkled in his
bright black eye, and he burst into a hearty laugh, which must have been
a relief to the merry boy after being sober so long.

          MRS. G.




[Illustration]

[Illustration: Music]



THE OLD YEAR AND THE NEW.


          Words by MARIAN DOUGLAS.              Music by T. CRAMPTON.

          1. The north winds blow o'er drifts of snow.
          Out in the cold who goes from here?
          "Good-by! good-by!" loud voices cry;
          "Good-by!" returns the brave Old Year.
          But looking back what word leaves he?
          "Oh, you must all good children be!"

          2. A knock, a knock! 'tis twelve o'clock!
          This time of night, pray who comes here?
          Oh, now I see, 'tis he! 'tis he!
          All people know the glad New Year!
          What has he brought? and what says he?
          "Oh, you must all good children be!"




[Illustration: THE NURSERY PREMIUM-LIST.]




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.


[Illustration: T]HE publication of "The Nursery" was begun in 1867.
The work met a want which was then wholly unsupplied, and it was
at once received with a high degree of public favor. Since then
it has gone on increasing, from year to year, in circulation and in
reputation,--maintaining its supremacy over all imitators and
rivals,--and it now holds a firmly established place among first-class
American periodicals, and is admitted to be the _best magazine in the
world for the class of readers to whom it is addressed_.

Its articles, whether in prose or verse, are adapted with the greatest
care to the capacities of children, and are, with very rare exceptions,
wholly original.

Its illustrations, which are given with great profuseness, are engraved
in the highest style of art, and, in most cases, from designs made
expressly for "The Nursery," by the best American artists. Such as are
not original, are reproductions of the choicest pictures to be found in
the foreign juvenile periodicals.

A song set to music by a skilful composer, and specially adapted to
children's voices, is given in every number of the magazine.

Altogether, its pages furnish just such a variety as is best fitted to
the wants of children from infancy up to the age of twelve years. In
schools it is found to answer admirably as a first-Reader; and in remote
districts, where there are no schools, it takes the place of a teacher;
for thousands of children have been taught to read by "The Nursery"
alone.

A work which is at once so useful and so attractive, cannot fail to be
in demand in every family where there are young children. Its low price,
($1.60 a year, free of postage), places it within the reach of all
classes. We rely upon its merits alone to secure its circulation, and
send a sample copy by mail, for ten cents, to any person who wishes to
examine it. We do not _hire_ anybody to subscribe; but if any one
procures subscriptions for us, we are always ready to make a suitable
compensation.

With this view, we present the following list of Premiums. The articles
described are all of the best quality, and many of them such as are
wanted in every household. Besides offering them as premiums, we are
prepared to supply them for cash--sending them by mail or otherwise on
the most favorable terms. We therefore suggest to every person who
receives this pamphlet, that it would be well to preserve it carefully
for future reference.




EXPLANATIONS AND INSTRUCTIONS.


1. Previously to this date, (Sept. 1876), our offers of Premiums have
applied to _new_ subscriptions only. Hereafter, in awarding Premiums, we
shall make no distinction between new subscriptions and renewals.

2. Premiums are offered for _procuring_ subscriptions--not for
subscribing. But the applicant's own subscription or renewal, _when he
procures one or more other names to send with it_, will, of course, be
counted.

3. The full subscription price (one dollar and sixty cents) must be paid
for each name. No premium is given for subscriptions supplied at club
rates.

4. The money must always be sent, with the names, _direct to the
Publisher_. No premium is given for subscriptions sent through agents.
No name is entered on our books until the money is received.

5. Do not wait to make up your whole list before sending. Send the first
two names, _stating that they are to be placed to your credit for a
premium_, and add more as you get them.

6. Bear in mind that we do not give a premium or open an account for
less than _two_ subscriptions (one of which, however, may be your own);
but, _after the account is opened_, you may add one subscription at a
time if you choose--never omitting to state in your letter _that it is
to go to your credit for a premium_.

7. Write the name and address of each subscriber plainly, and =always
state whether a renewal or a new name=; and when you call for your
premium, be sure to give your own name and address so plainly that it
cannot be mistaken.

8. Date your letters carefully, and state in them always the exact
amount of money sent, and the form in which it is sent--whether in
Bank-bills, Check or Postal-order. _It is a good plan to keep a copy of
your letter._

9. If you do not receive the magazine promptly in response to your
remittance, or if you do not promptly receive any premium that you may
have ordered, notify us _immediately_, stating always the _date_ of your
previous letter. Wait a sufficient time for ordinary delays of the
mail--_but no longer_.




HOW TO REMIT.


1. If you are near a Money-order Post Office, remit always by a _Postal
Money-order_. Money can be sent in this way at very small expense, and
with absolute safety.

2. The next best mode of remittance is a check on a _Boston_, _New
York_, or _Philadelphia Bank_. All other checks subject us to expense in
collecting: to cover this, add fifteen cents.

3. Money may be sent by mail, in a letter carefully sealed and directed,
and prepaid by stamps. It is advisable always to have the letter
_registered_. Letters can be registered in any Post Office.

[Illustration: Right index] If, in making change, you find any
difficulty in procuring Postal currency, bear in mind that we will
accept _Postage-stamps_ as currency.

_All remittances are at the risk of the sender._ Direct to the
publisher,

                                 JOHN L. SHOREY.
                                    No. 36 Bromfield Street,
                                                 _BOSTON, MASS._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: OFFICE OF "THE NURSERY."]




PREMIUMS.

       *       *       *       *       *




SECTION I.

FOR TWO SUBSCRIBERS.

=Two subscriptions, with three dollars and twenty cents in payment
therefor, will entitle the sender to any book or other article described
in this section. All Premiums will be sent postpaid.=


BOOKS.

        =Half-Yearly Volumes of "The Nursery,"=--Two
          volumes a year have been issued since the
          commencement of the magazine in 1867, so there is
          now a large number to choose from. They are
          beautifully bound in cloth and gilt, and form, all
          together, a complete juvenile library. Price, per
          volume =$1.00=

        =The Beautiful Book.=--This is a collection of
          some of the best poems that have appeared in "The
          Nursery." It is an elegant volume of 128 pages,
          exquisitely illustrated. Price =.75=

        =The Easy Book.=--Prepared expressly for children
          just learning to read. In large Old English type,
          with a profusion of pictures and delightful
          object-lessons. 128 pages. Price =.75=

        =Oxford's Junior Speaker.=--A collection of
          exercises for declamation and recitation, with
          many dialogues never before published. Adapted to
          the young of both sexes. With numerous
          illustrations. 216 pages. Price =.90=

        =Simple Addition and Nursery Jingles.=--Contains
          Simple Addition and fifty-five Nursery Jingles,
          with twenty-two full-page, and four double-page
          illustrations in colors. Price =1.00=

        =Little Folks' Colored Picture Book.=--Contains
          thirty-six stories, with sixteen full-page
          illustrations in colors. Royal 8vo. Cloth.
          Price  =1.00=

        =Uncle John's Drolleries.=--Contains THE ARK
          ALPHABET, DASH'S HOLIDAY, MISS MOUSER'S TEA PARTY,
          and THE TEN LITTLE NIGGERS, with four double-page,
          eighteen full-page, and twelve half-page
          illustrations. Royal 8vo. Price =1.00=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.




LITTLE CLASSIC SERIES.


A series of exquisitely printed little volumes, in flexible binding and
red edges.

   =Any volume of "The Little Classics."= Price, per volume      =1.00=

This is a series of handy volumes, containing many of the choicest short
Stories, Sketches and Poems in English Literature. The following list
presents the contents of each volume, viz.:--


1.--EXILE.

  Ethan Brand                     _Hawthorne_
  The Swans of Lir                _Gerald Griffin_
  A Night in a Workhouse,         _Jas. Greenwood_
  The Outcasts of Poker Fiat,     _Bret Harte_
  The Man without a Country       _Hale_
  Flight of a Tartar Tribe        _DeQuincey_


2.--INTELLECT.

  The House and the Brain                     _Bulwer_
  L'Outre Mort                                _Harriet Prescott Spofford_
  The Fall of the House of Usher              _Poe_
  Chops, the Dwarf                            _Dickens_
  Wakefield                                   _Hawthorne_
  Murder considered as one of the Fine Arts   _DeQuincey_
  The Captain's Story,                        _Rebecca Harding Davis_


3.--TRAGEDY.

  The Murders in Rue Morgue                   _Poe_
  The Lauson Tragedy                          _DeForest_
  The Iron Shroud                             _Wm. Mudford_
  The Bell Tower                              _Herman Melville_
  The Kathayan Slave                          _Mrs. Judson_
  The Story of La Roche,                      _Henry Mackenzie_
  The Vision of Sudden Death                  _DeQuincey_


4.--LIFE.

  Rab and his Friends                         _Dr. John Brown_
  A Romance of Real Life                      _W. D. Howells_
  The Luck of Roaring Camp                    _Bret Harte_
  Jerry Jarvis's Wig                          _R. H. Barham_
  Beauty and the Beast                        _Willis_
  David Swan                                  _Hawthorne_
  Dreamthorp                                  _Alexander Smith_
  A Bachelor's Reverie                        _D. G. Mitchell_
  The Grammar of Life                         _B. F. Taylor_
  My Chateaux                                 _G. W. Curtis_
  Dream Children                              _Charles Lamb_
  The Man in the Reservoir                    _C. F. Hoffman_
  Westminster Abbey                           _Addison_
  The Puritans                                _Macaulay_
  Gettysburg                                  _Abraham Lincoln_


5.--LAUGHTER.

  A Christmas Carol                           _Dickens_
  The Haunted Crust                           _Katherine Saunders_
  A Dissertation upon Roast Pig               _Lamb_
  The Total Depravity of Inanimate Things     _Mrs. E. A. Walker_
  The Skeleton in the Closet                  _Hale_
  Sandy Wood's Sepulchre                      _Hugh Miller_
  A Visit to the Asylum for Decayed Punsters  _Holmes_
  Mr. Tibbot O'Leary the Curious,             _Gerald Griffin_
  Neal Malone                                 _William Carleton_


6.--LOVE.

  Love and Skates                     _Theodore Winthrop_
  The Maid of Malines                 _Bulwer_
  The Story of Ruth                   _From the Bible_
  The Rise of Iskander                _Disraeli_


7.--ROMANCE.

  Iris                              _Holmes_
  The Rosicrucian                   _Miss Mulock_
  The South Breaker,                _Harriet Prescott Spofford_
  The Snow Storm                    _Christopher North_
  The King of the Peak,             _Allan Cunningham_


8.--MYSTERY.

  The Ghost                         _W. D. O'Connor_
  The Four-Fifteen Express,         _Amelia B. Edwards_
  The Signal Man                    _Dickens_
  The Haunted Ship                  _Cunningham_
  A Raft that no Man Made,          _Robt. T. S. Lowell_
  The Invisible Princess,           _Francis O'Connor_
  The Advocate's Wedding Day,       _Catherine Crowe_
  The Birthmark                     _Hawthorne_


9.--COMEDY.

  Barney O'Reirdon, the Navigator        _Lover_
  Hadad-Ben-Ahab, the Traveller          _John Galt_
  Bluebeard's Ghost                      _Thackeray_
  The Picnic Party                       _Horace Smith_
  Father Tom and the Pope                _Samuel Ferguson_
  John Darbyshire                        _William Howitt_
  The Gridiron                           _Lover_
  The Box Tunnel                         _Reade_


10.--CHILDHOOD.

  A Dog of Flanders                      _Ouida_
  The King of the Golden River           _Ruskin_
  The Lady of Shalott                    _Miss Phelps_
  Marjorie Fleming                       _John Brown_
  Little Jakey                           _Mrs. S. H. DeKroyft_
  The Lost Child                         _Henry Kingsley_
  Goody Gracious! and the Forget-me-Not  _John Neal_
  A Faded Leaf of History,               _Rebecca Harding Davis_
  A Child's Dream of a Star              _Dickens_


11.--HEROISM.

  Little Briggs and I                    _Fitz-Hugh Ludlow_
  Ray                                    _Harriet Prescott Spofford_
  Three November Days                    _B. F. Taylor_
  The Forty-Seven Ronins                 _A. B. Mitford_
  A Chance Child                         _Isabella Mayo_
  A Leaf in the Storm                    _Ouida_


12.--FORTUNE.

  The Gold Bug                           _Poe_
  The Fairy Finder                       _Lover_
  Murad the Unlucky                      _Maria Edgeworth_
  The Children of the Public             _Hale_
  The Rival Dreamers                     _John Banim_
  The Three-fold Destiny                 _Hawthorne_


13.--NARRATIVE POEMS.

  The Deserted Village                   _Goldsmith_
  The Ancient Mariner                    _Coleridge_
  The Prisoner of Chillon                _Byron_
  Bingen on the Rhine                    _Mrs. Norton_
  O'Connor's Child                       _Campbell_
  Kilmeny                                _Hogg_
  The Dream of Eugene Aram               _Hood_
  Lady Barbara                           _Alexander Smith_
  The Sensitive Plant                    _Shelley_
  The Eve of St. Agnes                   _Keats_
  Paradise and the Peri                  _Moore_
  The Raven                              _Poe_
  The Skeleton in Armor                  _Longfellow_
  The Haunted House                      _Hood_
  The Writing on the Image               _Morris_
  Tam O'Shanter                          _Burns_
  The Forging of the Anchor              _Samuel Ferguson_
  Morte D'Arthur                         _Tennyson_
  Horatius                               _Macaulay_


14.--LYRICAL POEMS.

  Locksley Hall                          _Tennyson_
  My Lost Youth                          _Longfellow_
  Intimations of Immortality             _Wordsworth_
  Ode to Happiness                       _Lowell_
  L'Allegro and Il Penseroso             _Milton_
  Elegy in a Country Churchyard          _Gray_
  The Bridge of Sighs                    _Hood_
  The Problem                            _Emerson_
  The Passions                           _Collins_
  The Bonnets of Bonnie Dundee           _Scott_
  At Port Royal                          _Whittier_
  How they brought the Good News
      from Ghent to Aix                  _Browning_
  Ode on the Duke of Wellington         _Tennyson_
  Commemoration Ode                     _Lowell_
    And many other Poems.


15.--MINOR POEMS.

  The Chambered Nautilus                 _Holmes_
  The Children's Hour                    _Longfellow_
  The Courtin'                           _Lowell_
  Evelyn Hope                            _Browning_
  Highland Mary                          _Burns_
  Kubla Khan                             _Coleridge_
  My Child                               _Pierpont_
  My Psalm                               _Whittier_
  Oh? Why should the Spirit of Mortal
      be Proud? (President Lincoln's
      favourite Poem.)
  She was a Phantom of Delight           _Wordsworth_
  Thanatopsis                            _Bryant_
  The Three Fishers                      _Kingsley_
  Toujours Amour                         _Stedman_
  A Woman's Question                     _Adelaide Anne Proctor_
  Bugle Song                             _Tennyson_
  The Age of Wisdom                      _Thackeray_
  I Remember, I Remember                 _Hood_
  The Ivy Green                          _Dickens_
  A Lament                               _Shelley_
  Maid of Athens                         _Byron_
  Night and Death                        _Blanco White_
  The Old Man's Idyl                     _Richard Realf_
  A Petition to Time                     _Barry Cornwall_
  The Skylark                            _James Hogg_
  Philip, My King                        _Miss Mulock_
  Tom Bowling                            _Dibdin_
  Virtue                                 _George Herbert_
    And numerous other poems.


16.--AUTHORS.

Containing Brief Biographies of all the Authors from whose writings the
fifteen preceding volumes of "Little Classics" have been taken. With
complete Index.

  Sixteen volumes. 32mo. Tastefully bound. Price, per volume, $1.00

[Illustration: Holy Bible]

        =A neat English Bible=, with gilt clasp, and gilt
          edges. Price =$1.00=

        =Book of Common Prayer=, with gilt clasps and gilt
          edges. Price =1.00=

        =Whittier's Poetical Works.= Complete. Fully
          Illustrated. 8vo. Paper. Price =1.00=

        =Tennyson's Poetical Works.= Complete. Fully
          illustrated. 8vo. Paper. Price =1.00=

        =Longfellow's Poems.= Complete. Fully Illustrated.
          8vo. Paper =1.00=

          These inexpensive editions of the most popular
          living poets, are tasteful, excellently printed,
          and well illustrated.

=Diamond Editions of the following Poets.= Price, per volume =1.00=

          _BURNS._
          _HARTE._
          _LONGFELLOW._
          _LOWELL._
          _PROCTOR._
          _SAXE._
          _SCOTT._
          _TENNYSON._
          _WHITTIER._
          _LONGFELLOW'S CHRISTUS._
          _OWEN MEREDITH'S LUCILLE._

        =Dickens's Works.=--Any one of the popular
          Household Edition. Paper. 8vo. Price per
          vol. =1.00=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index]Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

        =Every Woman her own Flower Gardener.= By Daisy
          EYEBRIGHT (Mrs. S. O. Johnson). A delightful
          little Treatise on Out-door Gardening for
          Ladies--practical, timely, charmingly written.
          Contains valuable information about Pansies,
          Roses, Geraniums, Climbing Plants, Annuals,
          Perennials, Fuchsias, Ribbon Beds, &c. Printed in
          excellent taste. Bound in cloth. Price =$1.00=

[Illustration: Right index]=We will give as a Premium for two
Subscriptions, at 1.60 each, any book the price of which does not exceed
One Dollar. It may be selected from any publisher's catalogue.=

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES.

[Illustration: Building blocks]

        =Alphabet and Building Blocks.=--Containing Roman
          Alphabets--large and small letters--Numerals and
          Animals--Painted Blocks. Price =1.00=

        =Crandall's Alphabet-Blocks.=--RED, WHITE, and
          BLUE. Water-proof. All children are pleased with
          them. Price =1.00=

        =Combination Toy-Blocks;= IRREGULAR SHAPES.--These
          Blocks are made up of geometrical figures, cut
          with mathematical precision from fine maple wood.
          They are very instructive, and are often used in
          schools for drawing exercises and geometrical
          illustrations. They will make finished
          architectural designs, such as churches, forts,
          monuments, boats, &c.; also every letter of the
          alphabet. Mode of using simple and easy. Put up in
          cherry boxes with sliding covers, fine label, and
          illustrated book of directions. Price =1.00=

        =One Hundred Funny Fellows.=--LARGE SHOWY
          CUBES.--When matched together, make a hundred
          comical figures. Printed in colors. Price =1.00=

        =A Checker-Board and Checkers.= Price =1.00=

        =A Microscope.=--For examining insects, flowers,
          etc. Price =1.00=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index]Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

        =Ladies' Shawl Strap.=--With two long straps,
          handle, and bar. Price =1.00=

        =Child's Table Set.=--Consisting of Knife, Fork,
          and Spoon. Price =1.00=

        =A Pocket Compass.=--Accurate.--Watch pattern.
          Price =1.00=

        =Dissected Map Of the United States.=--Printed in
          colors, judiciously arranged so as to bring out
          prominently the different states. Price =1.00=

[Illustration: Checkered Game of Life]

          This game is so simple that any child who can read
          may learn to play it. It is not simply a game of
          chance, but in every move there is an opportunity
          for the exercise of the judgment. The accompanying
          cut represents the game board. Two, three, or four
          can play, and each player is represented by one
          counter, or man, which is entered at infancy, and
          by various means regulated by the throw of a
          tetotum, or die, passes through school, college,
          industry, success, perseverance, etc., to wealth
          or happy old age; or through idleness,
          intemperance, gambling, crime, etc., to disgrace,
          poverty, ruin, suicide, or prison. Price =1.00=

        =A small Rubber Pencil Case.=--Gold-tipped. Price
          Price =1.00=

        =A small Writing-Desk.=--Embossed cloth; made to
          contain paper, envelopes, etc. Price =1.00=

[Illustration: Tool holder]

        =A Patent Pocket Tool-Holder.=--It is made of hard
          Maple. In it are neatly packed 20 cast steel
          tools. It can be carried in the pocket, and yet
          the tools it contains are so many and so varied,
          and of such convenient size, as to make it almost
          a necessity to any boy or to any family.
          Price =1.00=

        =A Pocket Knife.=--Two blades. Nice English steel.
          Very neat. Price =1.00=

        =A nice Morocco Portmonnaie.=--Made of the best
          materials. New pattern. Price =1.00=

        =A Butter Knife.=--Silver-plated. Extra quality.
          Price =1.00=

        =A Sugar-Shell.=--Extra quality. Silver-plated. A
          handsome pattern. Price =1.00=

[Illustration: Plated pencil]

        =A Gold-Plated Pencil.=--Price =1.00=

        =A neat Portfolio.=--Beautifully embossed, well
          made, with four pockets, and blotting-paper, lock
          and key. Price =1.00=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

        =The Florence Steel Skate.=--The runners are of
          highly tempered steel castings. Metal sole and
          heel plates. Very strong and durable.

          Price =$1.00=

[Illustration: Send length of Boot when ordering.]


[Illustration: Sleeve buttons]

        =Sleeve Buttons.=--Best Gold Plate. New style.
          This size. Price =1.00=

[Illustration: Ladies cuff pins]

        =Ladies' Cuff Pins.=--Fine Gold Plate. New
          Pattern. This size. Price =1.00=

[Illustration: Forget me not]

        =Illuminated Silk-woven Book Marks.=--These new
          and beautiful productions of the Loom are the
          wonder and admiration of all who see them. Each
          design is woven in silk in beautiful colors. The
          engraving here given is a careful reproduction of
          one of them on a very small scale, and will give a
          faint outline of its beauty.

          From the large list of Mottoes and Designs, we
          have made the following selections, which we
          specially commend. For two subscribers select two
          of Series 1, or one of Series 2.


SERIES No. 1. Price 50 Cents Each.

                                           NO.
          The Busy Bee                      76
          Little Red Riding Hood            85
          For a Good Girl                   88
          Mistress Mary                     94
          To my Darling                     96
          The Lily                          68
          Compliments of the Season         70
          God is Good                       73
          A Blessing                        78
          To my dear Brother                79
          Unchanging Love                   82
          To my dear Sister                 83
          To my dear Father                 84
          To my dear Mother                 86
          To One I love                    101
          A Happy Christmas


SERIES No. 2. Price $1.00 Each.

                                           NO.
          Honor thy Father and Mother      161
          Remember the Sabbath Day         162
          The Lord's Prayer                163
          Blessed are the Merciful         164
          The Doxology                     167
          The Lord is my Shepherd          170
          A Happy New Year                 174
          Remember Me                      175
          Faith, Hope and Charity          180
          Hope, the Anchor of my Soul      252
          Remember now Thy Creator         257
          A Happy New Year                 260
          A Birthday Blessing              266
          Many Happy Returns of the Day    269
          I Love Thee                      278
          The Priceless Gem                288
          Unchanging Love                  289
          True Love                        293
          May our Hearts be United

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.




SECTION II.

FOR THREE SUBSCRIBERS.


=Three subscriptions, with four dollars and eighty cents in payment
therefor, will entitle the sender to any book or other article described
in this section. All Premiums will be sent postpaid.=


BOOKS.

        =Any Yearly Volume of "The Nursery."=--Beautifully
          bound in cloth. (The magazine began in 1867.)
          Price =$1.75=

        =Oxford's Senior Speaker.=--A collection of
          exercises in declamation and recitation, for
          advanced classes, comprising many dialogues and
          select pieces never before published. With ninety
          illustrations. Price =1.50=

        =Sargent's Original Dialogues.=--A collection for
          school and family reading and representation.
          Price =1.50=

        =An Elegant Edition of Shakspeare.=--Complete in
          one volume; full cloth, extra gilt and gilt edges.
          Price =1.50=

        =Any one of the Standard British Poets.=--In one
          volume; full cloth, extra gilt and gilt edges.
          Price =1.50=

        =Aunt Louisa's Little Treasure.=--Contains four
          stories--TIT, TINY, AND TITTENS, THREE GOOD
          FRIENDS, FOUR-FOOTED FRIENDS, and THREE LITTLE
          KITTENS. Twenty-four full-page illustrations in
          colors. 4to. Cloth, beveled edges, embossed in
          black and gold, with fine chromatic illustration
          mounted on cover. Price =1.50=

        =Good Old Stories.=--Contains--MOTHER HUBBARD,
          THREE BEARS, COCK ROBIN, and TOM THUMB.
          Twenty-four full-page illustrations in colors.
          4to. Cloth, beveled edges, embossed in black and
          gold, with fine chromatic illustration mounted on
          cover. Price =1.50=

        =Oft-Told Tales (New).=--Contains--ROBINSON
          CRUSOE, CHILDREN IN THE WOOD, HARE AND TORTOISE,
          and WORLD-WIDE FABLES. Twenty-four full-page
          illustrations in colors. 4to. Cloth, beveled
          edges, embossed in black and gold, with fine
          chromatic illustration mounted on cover.
          Price =$1.50=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale postpaid, at the prices named.

          =Sunnybank Stories.=--Compiled by Rev. Asa
          Bullard. Profusely illustrated. Bound in high
          colors. The whole set--six volumes in all--put up
          in a neat box. Price =1.50=

        =Aunt Louisa's Wee-Wee Stories.=--Comprises--COUNTRY
          ALPHABET, BABY, HEY DIDDLE DIDDLE, and MY MOTHER.
          Twenty-four full-page illustrations. 4to. Cloth,
          beveled edges, embossed in black and gold, with fine
          chromatic illustration on cover. Price =1.50=

        =Aunt Louisa's Child's Delight.=--Contains--RIP
          VAN WINKLE, YANKEE DOODLE, POCAHONTAS, and PUTNAM.
          Twenty-four full-page illustrations in colors.
          4to. Cloth, beveled edges, embossed in black and
          gold, with fine chromatic illustration mounted on
          cover. Price =1.50=

        =Aunt Louisa's Fairy Legends.=--Contains--PUSS N
          BOOTS, JACK AND THE BEAN STALK, WHITE CAT, and
          CINDERELLA. Twenty-four full-page illustrations in
          colors. 4to. Cloth, beveled edges, embossed in
          black and gold, with fine chromatic illustration
          mounted on cover. Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Window gardening]

        =Window Gardening.=--An elegant book, with 250
          fine engravings and 300 pages, containing a
          descriptive list of all plants suitable for window
          culture, directions for their treatment, and
          practical information about plants and flowers for
          the parlor, conservatory, wardian case, fernery or
          window garden. Tells all about bulbs for house
          culture, geraniums, hanging baskets, insects,
          plant decoration of apartments. The illustrations
          are unusually beautiful, and many of them perfect
          gems of exquisite beauty. Price =1.50=

        =Household Elegancies.=--A splendid new book on
          household art, devoted to a multitude of topics,
          interesting to ladies everywhere. Among the most
          popular subjects are transparencies on glass, leaf
          work, autumn leaves, wax work, painting, leather
          work, picture frames, brackets, wall pockets,
          work boxes and baskets, skeleton leaves, etc.
          Hundreds of exquisite illustrations decorate the
          pages, which are full to overflowing with hints
          and devices to every lady, how to ornament her
          home cheaply, tastefully and delightfully, with
          fancy articles of her own construction. By far the
          most popular and elegant gift-book of the year.
          Price =$1.50=

        =Ladies' Fancy Work.=--A companion volume to
          "Household Elegancies." It contains 300 pages, and
          is illustrated with over 350 fine engravings. It
          gives full instructions for making feather work,
          paper flowers, fire screens, shrines, rustic
          pictures, a charming series of designs for Easter
          crosses, straw ornaments, shell flowers and shell
          work, bead mosaic, designs in embroidery, and an
          immense number of designs of other fancy work to
          delight all lovers of household art and
          recreation. Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Silhouette]

        =Long Look House.=--With six full-page
          Silhouettes, by Miss HINDS, and several Outline
          Sketches by the author, 1 vol. 16mo. tinted paper
          =1.25=

        =Out Doors at Long Look.=--The second volume of
          the series contains four full page Silhouettes,
          designed by Miss HINDS, and three full-page wood
          cuts. Also eighteen emblematic Silhouettes at the
          head of the chapters. This volume introduces many
          new and exciting scenes, and is intensely
          interesting. 1 vol. 16mo. =1.25=

        =Autograph Albums.=--Beautiful Bindings =1.50=

        =Minnie and her Pets.=--Any _two_ of the
          following;  viz.:--
            Minnie's Pet Parrot.
            Minnie's Pet Cat.
            Minnie's Pet Dog.
            Minnie's Pet Pony.
            Minnie's Pet Lamb.
            Minnie's Pet Monkey.

          Price per volume      =.75=

        =Little Prudy Stories.=--By Sophie May. Any _two_
          of the following; viz.:
            Little Prudy.
            Little Prudy's Sister Susy.
            Little Prudy's Captain Horace.
            Little Prudy's Cousin Grace.
            Little Prudy's Story Book.
            Little Prudy's Dotty Dimple.

          Price per volume      =.75=

        =Little Prudy's Flyaway Series.=--Any _two_ of the
          following;  viz.:--
            Little Folks Astray.
            Prudy Keeping House.
            Aunt Madge's Story.
            Little Grandmother.
            Little Grandfather.
            Miss Thistledown.

          Price per volume      =.75=

        =Dickens's Works.=--Any volume of Harper's
          Household Edition. Illustrated. Cloth.
          Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Right index] =We will give as a Premium for Three
Subscriptions at $1.60 each, any book the price of which does not exceed
One Dollar and Fifty Cents. It may be selected from any publisher's
catalogue.=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.




MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES.

[Illustration: Toys]


        =Kindergarten Alphabet and Building
          Blocks.=--Containing alphabets, numerals, animals,
          &c. Price =$1.50=

        =The Little Object Teacher.=--Colored
          Illustrations. Price =1.50=

        =Crandall's Building-Blocks.=--Can be made into
          forms of almost endless variety. The blocks are
          put up in neat, strong boxes, and a large sheet
          giving various designs of buildings, etc.,
          accompanies each box. Price, =1.25=

[Illustration: Acrobats]

        =Crandall's Acrobats.=--Full of fun and frolic,
          and most brilliant in costume. These are among the
          most fascinating and ingenious toys ever invented.
          The number of figures which can be made with the
          pieces in a single box, is limited only by the
          ingenuity of the operator. Price =1.25=

        =Parlor Table Croquet.=--Eight mallets, two
          stakes, ten weighted wickets, belt and balls.
          Price =1.50=

        =A Heavily Plated Gold Pencil.=--Price =1.50=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

[Illustration: John Gilpin and his horse]

        =Crandall's John Gilpin.=--This beautiful and
          interesting toy is regarded by Mr. Crandall as the
          masterpiece of his inventions thus far for the
          little folks. It is made up of two figures, John
          Gilpin--whose highly colored dress is specially
          attractive to boys and girls--and his horse, which
          intelligent animal performs a very important part
          in the illustration of John Gilpin's famous ride.
          Price =$1.50=

        =A Beautiful Rubber Pencil=, with gold-plated
          tips. Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Fruit knife]

        =A Silver Fruit Knife and Nut-Pick.=--Price =1.50=

        =A New Terrestrial Globe.=--Beautifully printed in
          colors. Price. =1.50=

        =Fret or Jig Saw=, for fancy wood-carving. With 50
          designs, and saw-blades, impression-paper, &c.
          Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Flower-vase]

        =Silver-Plated Flower-Vase.=--New pattern. Elegant
          design. Price =1.50=

        =A Set of Drawing Instruments.=--Price =1.50=

        =A Set of Gold Bosom Studs.= Price =1.50=

        =A Neat Photograph Album.=--Leather covers, clasp,
          gilt edges and ornamented (No. 1). Price =1.50=

        =Fuller's Jig-Saw Attachment=, by the aid of which
          the use of the saw is greatly facilitated. (See
          cut on another page.) Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Squails]

        =American Squails.=--Ebonite enameled. This is the
          jolliest game ever invented. Played on a common
          dining table by any convenient number of persons.
          Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Writing desk]

        =A Beautiful Writing Desk=, with paper, envelopes,
          holder, pencil, &c. Price =1.50=

        =A Box of Stationery=--=Initial or
          Plain.=--Variety of tints. Paper and envelopes to
          match. Price, =1.50=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

[Illustration: Pocket stove]

        =The American Patent Pocket Stove.=--Invaluable in
          every nursery, sick room, and camp. This stove
          makes no smoke, no dirt, and causes no trouble.
          The fuel (alcohol) when poured into the stove,
          being held in absorption by the packing
          (asbestos), is perfectly harmless. It is lighted
          and extinguished instantly. The stove can be got
          ready for use in one minute. Among its uses are
          boiling eggs, coffee, milk, tea, water; heating
          medicine, children's and invalid's food; broiling
          meat, fish, and fowl. Saving coal, wood, gas, and
          thousands of steps. Price =$1.50=

[Illustration: Shawl pin]

        =Gold-Plated Shawl Pin.=--Very beautiful. Best
          Gold Plate. New Pattern. This size. Price =1.50=

        =A Telescope or Spy Glass= =1.50=

        =A Gold-Plated Bracelet.=--Very pretty =1.50=

        =A Travelling Hand-Bag.=--Ornaments, Lock and Key
          =1.50=

        =A Stereoscope.=--Black walnut. Price =1.50=

        =A Beautiful Morocco Wallet or Portmonnaie=, of
          the best manufacture. Price =1.50=

        =A Magnifying Glass.=--Frame of German silver,
          handle of black ebony, glass of the best quality.
          Price =1.50=

[Illustration: Magnifying glass]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.




SECTION III.

FOR FOUR SUBSCRIBERS.


=Four subscriptions, with six dollars and forty cents in payment
therefor, will entitle the sender to any book or other article described
in this section. All Premiums will be sent postpaid.=


BOOKS.

  =Longfellow's Poems.= 1 vol. Price        =$2.00=
  =Owen Meredith's Poems.= 1 vol. Price      =2.00=
  =Tennyson's Poems.= 1 vol. Price           =2.00=
  =Whittier's Poems.= 1 vol. Price           =2.00=
  =The Vest-Pocket Series.=--Any _four_ of the following volumes; viz.:--
    Vol. 1. Snow-Bound. By Whittier.
         2. Evangeline. By Longfellow.
         3. Power, Wealth, Illusions. By Emerson.
         4. Culture, Behavior, Beauty. By Emerson.
         5. The Courtship of Miles Standish. By Longfellow.
         6. Enoch Arden. By Tennyson.
         7. Nathaniel Hawthorne. By J. T. Fields.
         8. A Day's Pleasure. By W. D. Howells.
         9. The Vision of Sir Launfal. By Lowell.
        10. A Christmas Carol. By Dickens.
        11. Lady Geraldine's Courtship. By Mrs. Browning.
        12. The Deserted Village and The Traveller. By Goldsmith.
        13. Rab and his Friends and Marjorie Fleming. By Dr. John Brown.
        14. The Rime of the Ancient Mariner. By Coleridge.
        15. Barry Cornwall and his Friends. By J. T. Fields.
        16. The Eve of St. Agnes. By Keats.
    Price per volume      =.50=

          These miniature volumes are of the same general
          order with "Little Classics," which have proved so
          universally popular, but smaller every way, except
          in type. Their typographical beauty, fine paper,
          tasteful binding, dainty size, and, yet more, the
          sterling and popular character of their contents,
          have gained for them a general welcome.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale postpaid, at the prices named.

        =A Superb Pocket-Bible.=--With gilt rims, corners,
          and clasps.                              Price =$2.00=

        =Whittier's Songs of Three Centuries.= 1 vol.
                                                    Price =2.00=

        =Among My Books.=--Second Series. By James Russell
          Lowell. DANTE, SPENSER, WORDSWORTH, MILTON, KEATS.
                                                    Price =2.00=

        =Will Carleton's Farm Legends.=--With
          illustrations.                            Price =2.00=

        =Will Carleton's Farm Ballads.=--With
          illustrations.                            Price =2.00=

        =Little People of the Poets.=--A volume of
          favorite Child Poems.                     Price =2.00=

        =Æsop's Fables.=--With 114 Illustrations. 12mo.
          cloth.                                    Price =2.00=

        =Popular Nursery Tales and Rhymes.=--With 180
          Illustrations. Square 8vo. cloth.         Price =2.00=

        =Robinson Crusoe.=--With 300 beautiful
          Illustrations by Granville. 12mo. cloth.
                                                    Price =2.00=

        =Dictionary of Quotations= from the Greek, Latin,
          and Modern Languages, translated into English.
                                                     Price =2.00=

        =Wood's Natural History Picture Books.=--As
          follows:--
            MAMMALIA. With 180 illustrations. Fcap., 4to.,
                cloth.                               Price =2.00=
            BIRDS. With 240 illustrations. Fcap. 4to.,
                cloth.                               Price =2.00=
            REPTILES, FISHES, AND INSECTS. 240 illustrations.
                Fcap, 4to., cloth.                   Price =2.00=


        =Boys' and Girls' Illustrated Gift-Book.=--With
          200 fine Illustrations. Square 8vo. cloth.
                                                     Price =2.00=

        =Boys' Book of Trades.=--With 200 Illustrations.
          Square 8vo. cloth.                         Price =2.00=

        =Boys' Treasury of Sports and
          Pastimes.=--Profusely Illustrated. 12mo. cloth.
                                                     Price =2.00=

        =Child's Picture Story-Book.=--With 400
          Illustrations. Square 8vo. cloth.          Price =2.00=

        =The Student's History of Greece.=--A history of
          Greece, from the earliest times to the Roman
          Conquest. With supplementary chapters on the
          history of literature and art. By Wm. Smith, LL.D.
          Illustrations. 12mo, cloth.                Price =2.00=

        =The Student's History of Rome.=--A history of
          Rome, from the earliest times to the establishment
          of the empire, With chapters on the history of
          literature and art. By H. G. Liddell, D.D., Dean
          of Christ Church, Oxford. Illustrations, 12mo,
          cloth.                                     Price =2.00=

        =The Student's Gibbon.=--A history of the decline
          and fall of the Roman empire. By Edward Gibbon.
          Abridged. Incorporating the researches of recent
          commentators. By Wm. Smith, LL.D. Illustrations.
          12mo, cloth.                               Price =2.00=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

        =The Student's Hume.=--A history of England, from
          the earliest times to the Revolution in 1688. By
          David Hume. Abridged. Incorporating the
          corrections and researches of recent historians,
          and continuing down to the year 1858.
          Illustrations. 12mo, cloth.               Price =$2.00=

        =The Student's Strickland.=--Lives of the Queens
          of England, from the Roman Conquest. By Agnes
          Strickland. Abridged by the author. Revised and
          edited by Caroline G. Parker. Illustrations. 12mo,
          cloth.                                    Price, =2.00=

        =The Student's History of France.=--A history of
          France, from the earliest times to the
          establishment of the Second Empire in 1852. By
          Rev. W. H. Jervis, M.A. Illustrations. 12mo,
          cloth.                                     Price =2.00=

[Illustration: Right index] =We will give as a Premium for Four
Subscriptions at $1.60 each, any book the price of which does not exceed
Two Dollars. It may be selected from any publisher's catalogue.=

       *       *       *       *       *


MISCELLANEOUS ARTICLES.


[Illustration: Book]

        =An Elegant Photograph Album.=--Price =2.00=

[Illustration: Barometer and Thermometer]

        =What will the Weather be To-morrow?=--=Pool's
          Signal Service Barometer and Thermometer
          combined.= Fortells correctly any change in the
          weather, 12 to 24 hours in advance. Endorsed by
          the most eminent Professors and Scientific men as
          the best Weather indicator in the World. Warranted
          perfect and Reliable. Price =2.00=

[Illustration: Skate]

        =The Florence Bronze Skate.= It has the best
          combination of clamps and straps for fastening to
          the boot ever produced. The runners are of the
          best forged steel, and for durability and finish
          cannot be excelled.

          Send length of Boot when ordering.

          Price =2.00=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] =Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.=

[Illustration: Stereoscope]

        =A Stereoscope.=--With 6 views. Price, =$2.00=

        =Nursery Alphabet Spelling Blocks.=--This set
          contains twenty-eight flat blocks, three inches
          wide and five inches long. Put up in cherry boxes,
          sliding covers, and handsome varnished label.
          Price =2.00=

        =Rubber Foot-Ball.=--Price =1.75=

        =Six Silver Plated Tea-Spoons.=--Price =2.00=

        =A Gold Ring=--plain or engraved. Price =2.00=

        =A Silver Napkin Ring=--new and elegant design.
          Price =2.00=

        =Silver Fruit Knife and Nut Pick=--extra heavy.
          Price =2.00=

        =A Silver Cup=--heavily plated. A very desirable
          gift. Price =2.00=

        =A Gold Pen and Pen-Holder.=--Price =2.00=

[Illustration: Knife, fork and spoon]

        =Knife, Fork, and Spoon.=--Price =2.00=

        =Goody Two Shoes Spelling Blocks.=--These are flat
          blocks, one and three-quarter inches long and one
          and a quarter inch wide. Price. =2.00=

        =A Lady's Portmonnaie.=--Fine morocco, with
          trimmings and clasp. Price =2.00=

        =A Family Tool Chest.=--Price =2.00=

[Illustration: Pocket knife]

        =Pocket Knife.=--Three blades. Finest cutlery.
          Price =2.00=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.




SECTION IV.

FOR FIVE SUBSCRIBERS.


=Five subscriptions, with eight dollars in payment therefor, will
entitle the sender to any article described in this section. All
Premiums will be sent postpaid.=

        =Ladies' Scissors or Shears.=--Of the best steel,
          warranted durable. Price =2.50=

        =A neat Backgammon Board.=--With cups, dice, and
          checkers. Price =2.50=

        =A Globe.=--Six inches in diameter; beautifully
          colored; suitable for home and school. Price
        =2.50=

        =A Silver Fruit Knife.=--Pure silver; elegant
          design. Price =2.50=

[Illustration: Jig Saw]

        =Jig or Fret Saw, with Fuller's Patent
          Attachment.=--By the aid of Fuller's Attachment
          the little Jig or Fret Saw can be made to execute
          more satisfactory work with less labor and time
          and less breakage of saw-blades. It renders sawing
          very easy and simple. It will also produce,
          easily, the new work Marquetry, or inlaid work, of
          the finest description, which, without the aid of
          this attachment, would be impossible. It is very
          simple in construction, and durable, and affords
          both amusement and profit to old and young of both
          sexes. Price =2.50=

[Illustration: Mathematical instruments]

        =A Complete Set of Mathematical Instruments.=--In
          a rosewood box, with lock and key. Price =2.50=

        =A Gold-Plated Neck-Chain.=--Very handsome. New
          style. Price =2.50=

        =Six Tea-Spoons.=--Extra silver plated. =2.50=

        =Gold-Tipped Rubber Pencil.=--Beautiful pattern.
          Price =2.50=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.




SECTION V.


=Premiums may be selected from this section proportionate in value to the
number of Subscribers sent, viz.: For three subscriptions, articles
worth $1.50; for six subscriptions, articles worth $3.00; for eight
subscribers, articles worth $4.00--and so on.=

[Illustration: Jack Straws]

  =American Jack Straws.=--Two qualities. Price No. 1    =.60=
                                                No. 2    =.30=

[Illustration: Monarchs & Thrones]

          A new game of history. Very instructive. Price =.60=

        =Donnybrook Fair.=--A very amusing game, with more
          than thirty comic illustrations. Published in
          handsome style. Price =.50=

[Illustration: Toy cannon]

        =The Toy Cannon.=--The cannon is about eight
          inches long. Wooden balls and a set of nine pins
          accompany it. A very pretty toy =1.00=

        =Shakespeare Characters and Quotations.=--A game
          of standard character, adapted for any number of
          players, old or young =.50=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

        =The Harlequin Circle.=--An original, very
          entertaining, and instructive pastime, with a book
          giving 64 colored illustrations of the "Harlequin
          Circle." Put up in handsome box. Price =$ .50=

        =Game of Proverbs.=--First Series           =.25=
         ="=       ="=       Second Series          =.25=

[Illustration: Skate]

        =The Florence Spring Skate.=--Highly polished,
          forged steel runners, with blued steel plates and
          clamps. The Clamp and Strap Spring Skate is
          fastened to the foot by both clamps and straps.
          Send length of boot when ordering. Price =3.00=

        =Lyman's Chromo Blocks.=--Thoroughly waterproof.
          The pictures are brilliant and very beautiful

          No. 1.  6 Blocks 36 Chromos    =.60=
          No. 2.  9    "   54  "        =1.00=
          No. 3. 16    "   96  "        =1.50=

        =Carpenter's Manual.=--Instructs In the use of
          tools and the various operations of the trade. A
          very complete and explicit work =.50=

        =Painter's Manual.=--A complete practical guide to
          house and sign painting, graining, varnishing,
          polishing, kalsomining, papering, lettering,
          staining, gilding, glazing, silvering, analysis of
          colors, harmony, contrast, &c. =.50=


HOME COOK BOOKS.

        =Mrs. Chadwick's Home Cookery.=--Containing
          foreign and domestic tried receipts =.50=

        =Mrs. Knights' Tit-Bits=, or how to prepare a nice
          dish at a moderate expense =.75=

        =Mrs. Cornelius's Young Housekeeper's Friend= =1.50=

        =Marion Harland's Common Sense in the
          Household.=--A manual of Practical Housewifery
          =1.75=

[Illustration: Right index] Or any of the numerous Cook Books sent by
mail at Publisher's price.


       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

[Illustration: City]

        =The Game of Bible Characters and Events.--=Price =.50=

        =Bible Questions.=--A game =.25=

        ="Ye Hero of '76."--=The great Centennial toy.
          Price =.50=

        =Portrait Authors.=--A game =.50=

        =Avilude, or Game of Birds.=--Price, =.50=

        =Ferrilude, or Game of Beasts.= =.50=

        =Game of Letters.=--Price =.25=

        =Totem.=--A beautiful game. Price, =.25=

        =Anybody and Everybody.=--Price, =.25=

        =The Game of '76, or the Eagle and the
          Lion.=--Price =.50=

[Illustration: MODEL SHIP PUZZLE]

          From the use of which the names of the parts of a
          ship are readily learned. =1.25=

[Illustration: Shedler's Public School Globe.]

        =Globes.=--Three sizes, viz.:

          Three inches in diameter =1.00=
          Four    "    "           =1.50=
          Five    "    "           =2.50=

[Illustration: Silver napkin ring]

        =Silver Napkin Ring.=--New pattern; elegant designs.
          Price proportionate to weight.
          Medium   =3.00=
          Heavy    =4.00=
          Extra    =5.00=

        =Scholar's Companion.=--A hollow, round ruler,
          with rubber, sponge-holder, pen, and slate and
          lead pencil. Price, =.30=

        =Great Republic.=--A game. =1.25=

        =Two Hundred Object Puzzles,= =.50=

        =Webster's Dictionaries.=
          Unabridged Quarto Pictorial  =10.00=
          National Pictorial            =5.00=
          Counting-House                =3.50=
          Academic                      =2.20=
          High School                   =1.25=
          Common School                  =.95=
          Primary                        =.65=
          Pocket Tuck                   =1.00=

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Right index] Besides giving the above as premiums, we
offer them for sale, postpaid, at the prices named.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

The January edition of the Nursery had a table of contents for the first
six issues of the year. This table was divided to cover each specific
issue and the words "No. 1." were added to the title page.

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Premium Section, page 7, "Probl m" changed to "Problem" (The Problem)

Page 7, "D light" changed to "Delight" (She was a Phantom of Delight)

Page 10, word "of" inserted into text (of them on a very small)

Page 10, the last number is missing on both Series No. 1 and Series No.
2.

Page 15, "animals" changed to "animal" (which intelligent animal)








        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY, JANUARY 1877, VOLUME XXI, NO. 1 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

