







Transcriber's Notes: To show the original charm of this book, it was
transcribed exactly as printed. All spelling errors were retained.
The reader, if interested, may check this against the original images
which were included in the HTML edition of this text.

These retained errors include such things as "lawyer" for "layer,"
"maringue" for "meringue," varied spellings of "ramekin," and the
contributors names.




STEVENSON MEMORIAL

COOK BOOK


[Illustration]


          PUBLISHED BY

          Sarah Hackett Stevenson Memorial Lodging House Association
          ENDORSED BY THE CHICAGO ASSOCIATION COMMERCE
          SUBSCRIPTIONS INVESTIGATING COMMITTEE
          2412 Prairie Avenue
          CHICAGO




INDEX


                               Page
          APPETIZERS              7
          BEVERAGES             159
          BREAD                 107
          CAKES                 117
          CANDIES               181
          CHEESE DISHES         177
          COOKIES               131
          DESSERTS               83
          EGG DISHES            171
          FILLINGS AND ICINGS   127
          FISH                   23
          HOUSEHOLD HINTS       193
          MEATS AND FOWL         35
          PICKLES               141
          PIES                   77
          PRESERVES             149
          FROZEN DISHES          99
          PUDDINGS               89
          SALADS                 67
          SANDWICHES            165
          SAUCES                 51
          SHELL FISH             29
          SOUPS                  15
          TIME REQUIRED         192
          VEGETABLES             55
          WEIGHTS AND MEASURES  191

       *       *       *       *       *

          Copyright, 1919
          by
          Sarah Hackett Stevenson Memorial Lodging House Association




          DEDICATED
          --TO--
          SARAH HACKETT STEVENSON
          Whose life was devoted to Service for Humanity

Compiled by

MRS. WILLIAM D. HURLBUT


Assisted by

THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

          MRS. HERBERT D. SHELDON
              MRS. CARL S. JUNGE
                 MRS. A. DONALD CAMPBELL
                     MRS. SARAH A. GRAHAM
          MRS. A. C. ALLEN
              MRS. GEORGE K. SPOOR
                 MRS. WM. S. TASKER
                    MRS. WM. IRVING CLOCK
                       MRS. EDWARD D. GOTCHY


TRUSTEES

          HON. WM. B. MCKINLEY, M. C.
             HON. HENRY HORNER
                    Judge of Probate Court (Ex-officio)
                MRS. W. H. WINSLOW
                      President Chicago Woman's Club (Ex-officio)
                    MRS. GEORGE WATKINS
                        MRS. GEORGE S. BLAKESLEE
          MRS. THOMAS D. MCMICKEN
              MRS. EDWARD L. PHELPS
                  MRS. HERMANN VANDER PLOEG
                      MRS. A. C. ALLEN
                          MRS. HERBERT D. SHELDON




FOREWORD


During the year 1893 on the streets of Chicago were hundreds of women
who had been thrown out of employment. The genuine helplessness and
hopelessness of these women appealed strongly to the generous heart of a
wonderful woman, Dr. Sarah Hackett Stevenson, one time president of the
Chicago Woman's Club. She went before this club and stated that there
was no place in this great city where a woman without funds could find
shelter--a woman who would work if given an opportunity. She demanded in
the name of humanity that this, her club, do something at once to
relieve the situation.

Her plea had its effect, and money was subscribed for beginning work.
Other clubs responded to the call for help and contributed both
furnishings and funds. And what was called the Woman's Model Lodging
House was opened to the public.

No questions were asked of those who came for shelter--the past was not
the thing to be dealt with--only the present and future. A charge of 15
cents a night was made, and if they were without money work was given
them and they were paid for it--they, in turn, paying for their lodging.
It was the principle of the organization that the actual handling of
this money helped to preserve self-respect and that they might not feel
themselves objects of charity. This principle has held through the years
and no woman or child is turned from the door as long as there is a
place to rest.

Hon. William B. McKinley of Champaign, Ill., gave as a memorial to Dr.
Stevenson the present home at 2412 Prairie avenue, which will
accommodate sixty women and about fifty children. The organization has
become one of the strongest in the city--a delegated body of eighty-two
members who represent women's organizations of Cook County. For the last
few years the work has grown and broadened, until almost every trouble
and sorrow that can come to women and children is brought to this door.

The woman who is on the downward path of years, when it is so hard to
find employment, her little money gone, often weakened both mentally and
physically from lack of nourishment and worry--she might be any one's
mother--if not able to work for her lodging, is supplied from the loan
fund. Often she can return the small amount and she does not feel that
she has received charity, but that the hand of a friend has grasped
hers, and her faith in humanity is restored. The young girl who is alone
and without money is safe from the cheap rooming houses of the city. The
mother with her little family, who has been left, by desertion or death,
without the father's protection comes to this home and remains until she
can gather up the thread of existence once more. Often she is saved from
placing her children in institutions or giving them for adoption. An
average of 105 women and children are cared for in the Lodging House
each day.

As time brought the need of better facilities for the care of the
children, the generous friend of the Institution, Wm. B. McKinley, gave
the building at 2408 Prairie avenue for Nursery purposes. Here the
children are cared for during the day, while the mother is seeking
employment, or otherwise adjusting her affairs.

A limited number of neighborhood children are also cared for. A trained
nurse and kindergartner are employed. Twenty-four hour feedings for
bottle babies are furnished so that the little ones diet may not be
disturbed. In this department 60 children are given daily care. The
mother has charge of her family at night. Every effort is made by this
organization to keep the mother and her children together. We believe
that separation should be only after every other method has failed.

A visit to the Stevenson Memorial will interest you and you are most
welcome at all times.

                                       MRS. HERBERT D. SHELDON,
                                                       _President._




APPETIZERS

    "_Nor love thy life, nor hate, but while thou livest, live well._"


CHEESE TOAST CANAPE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Toast small squares or rounds of bread on one side; on the other side
grate cheese and set in oven until cheese is melted; add paprika.


CHEESE CANAPES

Mrs. E. S. Smith

Cut bread in quarter-inch slices. Spread lightly with French mustard.
Sprinkle with grated cheese and finely chopped olives. Brown slightly in
oven.


SARDINE AND EGG CANAPE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Toast small pieces of bread; cover with a paste made of sardines and a
little lemon juice, and top with the yolks of hard boiled egg put
through the ricer.


SARDINE CANAPE

Mrs. J. A. Kaerwer

Two cans small sardines; one teaspoonful catsup; one teaspoonful lemon
juice; a dash of tabasco sauce. Place slice of bread on leaf of lettuce
then lay two small sardines across with chopped eggs, and last add
catsup, lemon juice and tabasco sauce.


SARDINE CANAPE

Mrs. J. A. Kaerwer

Two cans of sardines boned; two tablespoonfuls chopped pickled beets;
mix thoroughly and spread on slices of bread; sprinkle chopped eggs over
same and serve.


SARDINE CANAPE

Mrs. A. D. Campbell

Mash sardines with silver fork, after removing tails and loose skin.
Cover with juice of one-half lemon. Spread on thin slices of bread, cut
either round or oblong. Cover with grated cheese and toast until cheese
melts. Serve hot.


SALMON AND TOMATO CANAPE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

On a small piece of toast put a paste of salmon, and on this a slice of
ripe tomato with mayonnaise.


LOBSTER CANAPE

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Chop one-half cup of lobster meat fine and mix thoroughly with the white
of two hard boiled eggs which has been pressed through a ricer. Season
with salt, pepper, one teaspoonful mustard and moisten with thick
mayonnaise. Saute circular pieces of bread until brown, then spread with
the mixture. Sprinkle over the top a thin layer of hard boiled yolks and
lobster pressed through the ricer.


CANAPES

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Dip edges of toast in egg, then in finely minced parsley or chervil;
spread with anchovy butter and garnish with cold boiled eggs, olives and
capers; or

On the same foundation use tartar sauce, boned anchovies curled around
edge and garnish with a stuffed olive or gherkin fan; a gherkin fan is
made by cutting it in thin slices, not quite through, and putting the
ends together; or

Cover toast with tomato slices, curl anchovy in center and season with
lemon, onion juice and paprika; or

Garnish with powdered egg yolk and diced whites; or

Spread toast with anchovy butter, cover with mayonnaise mixed with chili
sauce.


MUSHROOM CANAPE (Hot)

Miss Agnes Sieber

Cook fresh mushrooms in butter, place on rounds of toast, spread with
chervil or parsley butter; pipe a mound of beaten egg white, seasoned
with salt and pepper, on each mushroom and place in hot oven until
maringue is brown.


PRUNE AND BACON CANAPE (Hot)

Miss Agnes Sieber

Remove stones from large prunes and olives; stuff olives with capers and
bits of anchovy; put them in the prunes, wrap each prune with bacon and
tie with a thread. Place in hot oven until bacon is crisp, remove thread
and place on disks of toast spread with Parmesan butter.


TONGUE CANAPE

Mrs. F. A. Sieber

Spread toast with mustard cream, garnish with tiny strips of tongue, put
a lozenge of white meat of chicken in center, on this put a slice of
truffle, both marinated in French dressing.


CANAPE A LA VANDERBILT

Mrs. Paul Klein-exel.

Slice of tomatoes on lettuce; combination of crabmeat, celery and pearl
onions. Serve with oil mayonnaise.


TUNNYFISH CANAPE

Mrs. F. A. Sieber

Spread toast with horseradish butter, lay on strips of tunnyfish and
garnish with slices of gherkin.


TOMATO CANAPE

Elizabeth Jennings

Lightly toast circles of bread, cut out with biscuit cutter, one-half
inch thick. Cover each circle with a slice of tomato. Sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Cover tomato with layer of caviar, garnishing edge with
finely cut white of hard boiled egg. Instead of caviar, the tiny white
onions (bottled) or yolk of egg finely chopped may be substituted. Serve
on plate with fancy paper doily.


ANCHOVY PASTE CANAPE

Mrs. Paul Klein-exel.

Slice of toast, cut shape of tomato; spread with anchovy paste; topped
with tomato slice, and yellow American cheese, browned and melted in
oven. Toast only one side of bread.


SARDINOLA CANAPE

Mrs. Frederick T. Hoyt

Cut rounds of fresh bread and toast lightly in oven. Cover with
Sardinola paste, then sprinkle grated cheese over top, then brown
slightly and serve while hot.


CHICKEN, HAM OR TONGUE CANAPES

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Spread toast with mustard butter, cover with minced chicken and garnish
with olives, pickles, capers and pearl onions; or

Border edge of toast with minced tongue or ham, fill center with chicken
mixed with mayonnaise and garnish with minced truffles.


ANCHOVIES AND TOMATOES

Cover anchovies with lemon juice and paprika; in an hour or two place
them on tomato slices sprinkled with pulverized egg yolk and garnish
with the egg white cut in strips.


ARTICHOKE FONDS OR CELERY CUPS

Parboil six artichokes, or celery hearts cut in cups, in salted
acidulated water, cool and marinate in French dressing; fill cups with
diced or shredded mixed vegetables and top with mayonnaise; or

Coat the cups with aspic and fill with caviar.

Canned artichokes which are already cooked may be used.


CUCUMBER CROWNS

Cut peeled cucumbers into inch lengths, scoop out centers, leaving a
little at the bottom, fill with lobster or shrimp cream and garnish edge
with anchovies, mixed olives, capers or pimentoes; or

Fill with caviar mixed with lemon juice and garnish with pearl onions
and minced cress.


SHRIMPS AND EGGS

Cut hard boiled eggs in halves, remove yolks and fill with shredded
shrimps mixed with mayonnaise; garnish with powdered yolks and serve on
lettuce leaves.


EASTER APPETIZER

Mrs. A. J. Atwater

Hard boil as many eggs as you have services; peel and cut the whites to
represent baskets, carefully scoop out the yolks and fill the baskets
with caviar. Toast rounds of bread, cover with the yolks which have been
put through ricer, stand a basket in the center of each and serve with a
thin slice of lemon.


SWEETBREAD CANAPE

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Spread brown bread toast with creamed butter mixed with pate de foie
gras; cover with cooked sweetbreads mixed with cucumber, pepper, gras
and mayonnaise. Garnish with sweet red peppers.


CANAPE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Spread rounds of toast with liver sausage; garnish with yolks of hard
boiled egg put through ricer; in the center place a spoonful of minced
stuffed olives.


SARDINE CANAPE

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

Spread rounds of toast with mayonnaise; cover with a slice of tomato;
mince sardines with yolk of a hard boiled egg and finely chopped stuffed
olives; cover the tomato with this mixture and place a spoonful of
mayonnaise on top.


CRAB FLAKE CANAPE

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

Rounds of bread toasted on one side; spread untoasted side with a
mixture of butter and Parmesan cheese. To a small quantity of cream
sauce, add one cup crab flakes and heat. Put mounds of crab flakes on
the buttered toast and put under blaze long enough to brown slightly.


SAUSAGE AND OLIVE CANAPE

Mrs. P. D. Swigart

Toast rounds of bread on one side; spread the untoasted side with
mayonnaise, and on this lay a slice of summer sausage as thin as it can
be cut; top with minced olive and pimento in mayonnaise.


OLIVE AND NUT CANAPE

Mrs. H. Clay Calhoun

To one cup minced stuffed olives add one-half cup minced nut meats and
one-half cup oil mayonnaise; mix well and spread on toasted bread cut in
any shape you want. Garnish with a little mound of mayonnaise sprinkled
with paprika.


FRUIT COCKTAIL

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Shred some pineapple; add grape fruit pulp and seeded white grapes;
cover with hot sugar and water syrup and let stand until cold; flavor
with sherry and serve in cocktail glasses that have been chilled by
filling with ice an hour before time to serve.


FRUIT COCKTAIL

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Scoop out rounds of watermelon and cantaloupe, thoroughly chilled; put
in glasses, sprinkle with pulverized sugar and pour over each two
tablespoonfuls ice cold ginger ale. Garnish with cherry.


STRAWBERRY COCKTAIL

Mrs. H. W. Keil

Select large ripe berries, and if very sandy, wash them. Remove hulls
and cut them in halves lengthwise; fill glasses with berries and pour
over them a dressing made by mixing one cup of water and two
tablespoonfuls sugar, let boil three minutes; cool and add one-half cup
claret; let this dressing be ice cold when poured over the berries.
Serve.


CHERRY COCKTAIL

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

Select the big California cherries; take out the stones and insert in
their places walnut, almond or hazel nut meats. Half fill the glasses
with a cold syrup made of fruit juice and a little sugar.


ORANGE COCKTAIL

Mrs. H. F. Vehmeyer

Remove the skin from the orange sections, place in a chilled cocktail
glass and pour over a syrup made of sweetened orange juice and a little
sherry. Decorate with sugar coated mint sprays.


TOMATO COCKTAIL

Mrs. Magda West

Select uniform sized tomatoes; cut in halves lengthwise. In each glass
place a small, crisp leaf of head lettuce; put one-half of a tomato on
each and half fill the glass with cocktail sauce.


SHRIMP COCKTAIL

Mrs. A. M. Cameron

Boil green shrimp until tender, about twenty-five minutes. Peel and
break in halves, if large; dice celery and olives with the shrimp, mix
well and cover with a cocktail sauce.


SARDINE COCKTAIL

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Drain sardines from oil in box; remove skin, tail and bones; break into
small pieces; mince celery and mix with it; put in cocktail glass and
cover with sauce made of one-half cup catsup, juice of one lemon;
tablespoonful horseradish and a little salt.


CRABMEAT COCKTAIL

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Two tablespoonfuls crabmeat to each person. To one cup tomato catsup add
juice of one lemon, two tablespoonfuls grated horseradish thinned with
vinegar; a few drops of tabasco sauce and just before serving, a
tablespoonful cracked ice.


CRAB FLAKE COCKTAIL

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

To one cup of Japanese crab flakes mince one stalk of celery, one
teaspoonful capers and mix well. Fill green pepper cases with the
mixture and cover with two tablespoonfuls cocktail sauce.


CLAM COCKTAIL SAUCE

Three tablespoonfuls of tomato, or mushroom catsup; three tablespoonfuls
lemon juice; one tablespoonful horseradish; a few drops tabasco; salt
and paprika. Stir well and allow about two tablespoonfuls of the sauce
for each cocktail.


COCKTAIL SAUCE

Mix well four tablespoonfuls tomato catsup; one of vinegar; two of lemon
juice; one of grated horseradish; one of Worcestershire sauce; one
teaspoonful salt and a few drops of tabasco. Have very cold when poured
over cocktails.


COCKTAIL SAUCE

Mrs. W. L. Gregson

One tablespoonful freshly grated horseradish; one tablespoonful vinegar;
half a teaspoonful tabasco sauce; two tablespoonfuls lemon juice; one
tablespoonful chili sauce; half a teaspoonful Worcestershire sauce. Mix
and let stand on ice until ready to serve.


COCKTAIL SAUCE

Two tablespoonfuls each tomato catsup and sherry wine; one tablespoonful
lemon juice; a few drops tabasco sauce; half a teaspoonful minced chives
and a little salt. Have thoroughly chilled before pouring over cocktail.


COCKTAIL SAUCE

Rub a bowl with a clove of garlic; two tablespoonfuls tomato catsup; one
tablespoonful grated horseradish; one tablespoonful mushroom catsup; one
teaspoonful lemon juice; one teaspoonful finely chopped chives; a few
drops of tabasco sauce, salt and pepper.





SOUPS


                _All human history attests:
          That happiness for man--the hungry sinner--
          Since Eve ate apples--much depends on dinner._
                                          --BYRON.


CREAM OF ASPARAGUS

Mrs. K. T. Cary

Cook one bunch of asparagus twenty minutes, drain and reserve tops; add
two cups of stock and one slice of onion minced; boil thirty minutes.
Rub through sieve and thicken with two tablespoonfuls butter and two
tablespoonfuls of flour rubbed together. Add salt, pepper, two cups milk
and the tips.


CREAM OF BEAN SOUP

Mrs. E. D. Kenfield

Put one quart of milk to heat. While it is heating, put the cooked beans
through colander. Blend one tablespoonful butter with one of flour; pour
over this the hot milk. Season with salt and pepper, stir until smooth,
and then add the beans. Pea or asparagus soup can be made in the same
way.


CREAM OF CABBAGE

Cut up one small head of cabbage and boil until quite tender. Put it
through a colander, add one quart of milk, salt and pepper and thicken
with two tablespoonfuls each of butter and flour rubbed together.


CREAM OF CELERY

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Cut four heads celery into small pieces and boil it in three pints of
water with one-fourth pound of lean ham minced; simmer gently for an
hour. Strain through a sieve and return to the pan adding one quart of
milk, salt and pepper; thicken with two tablespoonfuls of butter and two
tablespoonfuls of flour rubbed to a paste. Serve with whipped cream on
top.


CREAM OF CORN

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Put one can of corn on to simmer with one pint of water and one small
onion sliced; cook thirty minutes. Strain, return to the pan, adding one
quart of milk, salt and pepper and thicken with two tablespoonfuls of
flour and butter. Serve hot with a spoonful of whipped cream on top.


CREAM OF LIMA BEANS

Mrs. A. J. Atwater

If dried beans are used, soak them over night; in the morning drain and
add three pints of cold water; cook until soft and run through a sieve.
Slice two onions and a carrot and cook in two tablespoonfuls of butter;
remove vegetables, add two tablespoonfuls flour, salt and pepper,
stirring until very smooth; add to this one cup of milk or cream and put
into the strained soup; reheat and add two tablespoonfuls more of butter
in small pieces.


CREAM OF MUSHROOM SOUP

Mrs. J. H. Harris

One-half pound of mushrooms, cleaned and chopped fine, add to four cups
of chicken broth, cook twenty minutes; thicken with two tablespoonfuls
butter and two of flour blended with one cup of boiling water. When the
boiling point is reached add one cup of cream and the well beaten yolks
of two eggs.


MUSHROOM SOUP

Mrs. Harry Freeman

One-half pound mushrooms, washed and peeled and chopped very fine; cover
with one pint of water and boil one-half hour slowly; one quart milk
scald in double boiler; season with one tablespoonful butter, salt and
pepper; add mushrooms and let come to a boil. Just before serving, add
finely chopped parsley. Thicken milk with one tablespoonful flour mixed
with cold water and put through a strainer.


CREAM OF RICE SOUP

Mrs. W. I. Clock

One cup rice; one large onion; one quart milk; one tablespoonful butter.
Boil rice in salted water until tender, press through sieve, and add
milk slowly, stirring constantly until all is well mixed, lastly add
butter and season to taste.


CREAM OF SPINACH

Wash and cook enough spinach to make a pint; chop it fine and put in a
pan with two tablespoonfuls of butter, one teaspoonful salt and a few
gratings of nutmeg; cook and stir it about ten minutes; add three pints
of soup stock, let it boil up and put it through a strainer. Set it on
the fire again and when at the boiling point remove and add one
tablespoonful of butter and one teaspoonful of sugar. Thicken with flour
mixed with milk or water.


CREAM OF TOMATO

Cook one quart of tomatoes with one slice onion, two teaspoonfuls sugar
and one-fourth teaspoonful soda about fifteen minutes; rub through a
sieve and set to one side. Scald one quart of milk and thicken with
flour diluted with cold water; be careful that the mixture is free from
lumps; cook from fifteen to twenty minutes; when ready to serve combine
the mixtures, add bits of butter, salt and pepper and a spoonful of
whipped cream on top.


CHOWDER

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One can of corn; one cupful of diced potatoes; one and one-half inch
cube of fat salt pork; one tablespoonful onion juice; four cupfuls of
scalded milk; two tablespoonfuls of butter; a teaspoonful of salt and a
teaspoonful of pepper. Cut pork into small bits and fry until nicely
browned; add onion juice and milk and potatoes, which have been boiled
in salted water until tender; corn, salt and pepper. Let all just come
to the boiling point. Put a few rolled crackers in each plate and pour
in chowder. Tomatoes may be added if liked.


CLAM SOUP

Chop fine 25 clams. Put over the fire the liquor that was drained from
them and a cup of water; add the chopped clams and boil half an hour;
season to taste with salt, pepper and butter; boil up again and add one
quart of milk, boiling hot, and two crackers which have been rolled
fine. Serve.


MOCK CHICKEN SOUP

L. E. Kennedy

Two tablespoonfuls flour; one and one-half pints beef stock; two
tablespoonfuls cream; one egg; butter size of an egg. Put butter and
flour in a saucepan, stir until smooth; add stock little by little; just
before taking from the fire add the cream and egg well beaten together.
Salt and pepper to taste.


COURT BOUILLON

Mrs. Robert Woods

Take six nice slices of red fish, roll them in flour, season with salt
and fry in hot lard, but not entirely done, simply brown on both sides,
and set aside. For the sauce, fry in hot lard a large onion chopped fine
and a spoonful of flour. When brown, stir in a wineglass of claret,
large spoonfuls of garlic and parsley chopped fine, three bay leaves, a
spray of thyme, a piece of strong red pepper and salt to taste. Lastly,
add your fried fish and cook slowly for an hour. Serve with toast bread.


TOMATO BOUILLON

Clara L. Scott

Four cups tomato; four stalks celery; one small onion; four cups water;
sugar, salt and pepper to taste; boil until celery is well done. Strain
and serve in cups with whipped cream.


VEGETABLE BOUILLON

Mrs. W. L. Gregson

Two tablespoonfuls of sugar; one carrot; one onion; one pint tomatoes;
three stalks celery (or salt spoon of celery seed); two whole cloves;
one salt spoon pepper; one bay leaf; blade of mace; one teaspoonful
salt; two quarts cold water; white of one egg; small piece of butter.
Burn sugar in kettle, add onion and brown; add carrot and celery, and
then cold water and other ingredients except butter and egg. Mix
thoroughly, boil, strain through two thicknesses of cheese-cloth, add
butter and serve.


JELLIED TOMATO BOUILLON

Mrs. P. J. Lanten

Put one quart of tomatoes in pan and simmer twenty minutes; add
one-third package of gelatine and stir until dissolved. Strain through a
fine sieve, season with salt, pepper and put in ice box to harden. Cut
in cubes in bouillon cups and serve with thin slices of lemon.


CREOLE GUMBO

Mrs. Robert Woods

Clean a nice young chicken, cut in pieces and fry in hot lard. Add a
large sliced onion, a spoonful of flour, two dozen boiled shrimps, two
dozen oysters and a few pieces of ham. Fry all together and when brown
add a quart and a half of water, and let boil for an hour. Season with
chopped parsley, salt and strong pepper. Just before removing and while
boiling, stir in quickly a teaspoonful of the powdered file. Take away
and pour in tureen. Serve hot with rice cooked dry.


CREOLE GUMBO No. 2

Mrs. Robert Woods

Cut an old fat chicken into small pieces, chop small four onions, place
the onions in five ounces of lard and let cook until well browned. Then
put in four spoonfuls of flour and let cook five minutes. Put in half
gallon good rich stock, add a can of tomatoes, can of okra, season with
salt, pepper and cayenne. Tie a small quantity of thyme, sweet bay
leaves and parsley in a bit of cloth. Then add twenty-four large
shrimps, half dozen hard shell crabs and twenty-four oysters. Let the
whole cook for two hours on slow fire. Serve with rice boiled dry for
each person.


BROWN SOUP

Mrs. Joseph T. Bowen

After boiling a soup bone thoroughly, add a can of tomatoes; strain and
put it on the stove again; brown flour enough to thicken it to the
consistence of cream; add a lemon or two (sliced very thin and boiled a
few minutes in water); one teaspoonful each of ground cloves; cinnamon
and allspice. Just before you wish to serve add the hard boiled yolk of
an egg for each person; chop the whites and put in the tureen.


SPLIT PEA SOUP

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Wash well a pint of split peas and cover with cold water, adding
one-third teaspoonful of soda; let them remain in this over night to
swell. In the morning put them in a kettle with a close fitting top;
pour over them three quarts of cold water, adding half a pound of lean
ham or bacon cut into slices or pieces; also a teaspoonful salt, a
little pepper and a stalk of celery cut fine. When the soup begins to
boil, skim the froth from the surface. Cook slowly from three to four
hours, stirring occasionally until the peas are all dissolved. Strain
through a colander and leave out meat. It should be quite thick. If not
rich enough, add a small piece of butter. Serve with small squares of
toasted bread cut up and added.


POTATO SOUP

Anna Moss

Peel and slice five medium sized potatoes, cook in boiling salted water;
when soft put through a strainer. Scald one quart of milk with one small
onion sliced, remove onion and add milk slowly to potatoes. Melt three
tablespoonfuls butter, add two tablespoonfuls of flour, one teaspoonful
salt, one-quarter spoonful celery salt and dash of white pepper and stir
until thoroughly mixed, add to the boiling soup; cook one minute, strain
and serve; sprinkle with chopped parsley.


MEAT JELLY

L. E. Kennedy

Two pounds of lean beef; one-half gallon cold water; six whole cloves;
one-half box gelatin soaked in one-half cupful of water for fifteen
minutes; six black pepper corns; one tablespoonful salt; two
tablespoonfuls sherry; the juice of one lemon. Cut the beef into the
water, add peppercorns, cloves and salt and let simmer slowly four
hours. Add the gelatin and strain; to this add lemon juice and pour into
a mold. When cold it will slice nicely.


RICE AND TOMATO SOUP

Boil to a pulp, in a quart of water, twelve ripe tomatoes which have
been peeled and cut up. Strain, place on stove and add two
tablespoonfuls butter rubbed into two tablespoonfuls of flour; add salt,
pepper and sugar to taste, onion juice and minced parsley. Cook ten
minutes and stir in one cup of cooked rice.


ONION SOUP

Mrs. E. P. Rowen

Slice and boil until tender eight medium sized onions; have a strong
soup stock ready; add the onions and season to taste. In each plate
place a piece of toast and grate Parmesan cheese over it, then slowly
add the soup the heat of which will melt the cheese. Serve.


OXTAIL SOUP

Mrs. H. J. Keil

One nice meaty oxtail; two medium sized carrots; two onions; one small
turnip; two-thirds teaspoonful Kitchen Bouquet; one bay leaf; four
peppercorns; two or three celery leaves; dash of pepper; salt to taste.
Wash and cover oxtail with water, add carrots cut in cubes. Cut onion
and turnip fine and put in a muslin bag with bay leaf, peppercorns and
celery leaves. This will leave only the carrot and meat in soup for
table. Bring to a boil and simmer for about four hours. Add pepper, salt
and Kitchen Bouquet and serve.


PEA PUREE

Mrs. H. P. E. Hafer

Boil one can of peas with a half a pound of salt pork until very soft.
Strain and squeeze through a colander. Add one pint of soup stock and
one-half pint of cream. Salt and pepper to taste. Serve with whipped
cream.


DUCHESS SOUP

One quart of milk; three slices of onion; one tablespoonful flour; one
tablespoonful butter; three tablespoonfuls grated cheese; two egg yolks
beaten; one teaspoonful Kitchen Bouquet. Simmer onion in butter, but do
not brown; add flour and milk and stir until smooth, then add the cheese
and Kitchen Bouquet. Just before taking up add the yolks of eggs. Whip
some cream and put one teaspoonful in each cup.


SATISFACTION SOUP

Alice Clock

One cup navy beans; four slices bacon; one No. 2 can of tomatoes; one
small onion; one level tablespoonful salt; one-fourth tablespoonful
black pepper. Soak navy beans over night, in morning put beans on to
boil with a pinch of soda in water. When they come to a boil, pour off
this water, return to stove, cover with clear water, add onion and
bacon, let boil until tender. When tender strain through sieve, being
sure to press all through, as far as possible. Next add the strained
tomatoes and seasoning and lastly, thin with cream or milk to
consistency desired.


SCOTCH BROTH

Mrs. C. A. Bowman

Cut mutton into small pieces and let it stew all day. Boil one-fourth
pint pearl barley in a little water until tender; strain it dry, chop
fine two large onions and turnips and put with the barley and meat into
a stew pan. Strain the broth into it, also the water from the barley and
let it boil one and a half hours and skim. Season with salt and
pepper.




FISH


          "_The fish called the flounder, perhaps you may know,
            Has one side for use and another for show;
            One side for the public, a delicate brown,
            And one that is white, which he always keeps down._"
                                                       --HOLMES.


FISH DELIGHT

Mrs. William Blanchard

Mix enough uncooked white fish or Halibut to make two cups; add half a
cup soft bread crumbs; three-fourths cup cream. Press through a
colander, season with salt, pepper, lemon juice, and a little
Worcestershire sauce. Fold in carefully beaten whites of the two eggs.
Turn into buttered molds and steam one hour. Serve hot with Hollandaise
sauce.


STEAMED HALIBUT, LOBSTER SAUCE

Mrs. W. R. McGhee

Butter a steamer and place a thick slice of Halibut steak on it; put
over hot water and cook until done. Remove to hot platter and pour over
it hot lobster sauce.

Lobster Sauce: Remove the meat from a fresh lobster, about one and
one-half pounds; make a rich cream sauce, add the lobster and pour over
Halibut.


BAKED HALIBUT

One thick slice of Halibut; one small onion; one tablespoonful butter;
one saltspoonful pepper; one teaspoonful Kitchen Bouquet; one level
teaspoonful salt; one-half cup water. Chop the onion and put in bottom
of baking pan. Put Halibut on top and dust with salt and pepper. Pour
over the water to which has been added the Kitchen Bouquet, and then add
the melted butter. Bake in rather quick oven until nicely browned.
Garnish with parsley and slices of lemon and pour over sauce left in
pan.


FISH SOUFFLE

Mrs. W. I. Clock

One cup baked fish; four eggs; one cup bread crumbs; one heaping
tablespoonful butter. Mix flaked fish and fresh bread or crumbs, place
in greased baking dish, pour over the beaten eggs and milk; the
seasoning should be added to the fish and bread crumbs before placing in
dish. Add the butter in small pieces over the top of the dish, before
placing in oven. Bake in hot oven thirty minutes.


FISH WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Mrs. Robert Woods

Bake a well selected fish in oven after seasoning with pepper and salt.
When done serve with sauce made as follows:

Pour a quantity of sweet oil in a saucepan. When hot, add two sliced
onions and when they are cooked, add flour and let onions brown in same.
Strain a can of tomatoes and add thereto a small glass of good wine, and
a box of mushrooms chopped fine. Let sauce cook, after adding a boquet
of thyme, sweet bay, cloves, green onions and garlic. Use red pepper
only; and pour over baked fish and serve.


CODFISH BALLS

Mrs. C. A. Jennings

One and one-half cupfuls of raw codfish picked up; three cupfuls of raw
potatoes, diced; one egg; butter size of a walnut; boil potatoes and
fish together until potatoes are soft. Mash, and add pepper and a dash
of salt, butter and unbeaten egg and beat until light and thoroughly
mixed. Shape roughly in a tablespoon and fry in smoking fat.


COD FISH BALLS

Belle Shaw

Half pint measure of raw potatoes, cut in small pieces; one-half pint
cod, picked to small pieces. Boil together until potatoes are tender;
pour off water and mash very fine; add one egg, one tablespoonful cream
and dash pepper. Form on a spoon and fry in hot lard. Lay on brown paper
to absorb grease. Serve with cream sauce if desired.

Sauce: One tablespoonful butter; one tablespoonful flour; cook but do
not brown. Add to this a pint boiling milk, a pinch salt, and a few
pieces of cod to flavor.


CODFISH PUFF

Mrs. Grant Beebe

Two cups shredded codfish; one cup milk; one tablespoonful flour for
thickening; three eggs. Put milk on stove to warm, then add thickening,
then codfish that has been soaked and drained, then the beaten yolks.
Lastly fold in the whites beaten.


BROILED FINNAN HADDIE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Wash fish well; lay in dripping pan, cover with fresh water and allow to
stand an hour. Drain, place on fish plank, brush with melted butter and
put under blaze, not too close, and broil for twenty minutes, or until a
nice brown. Take out plank, surround the edge with mashed potatoes,
decorate with hard boiled eggs and sprigs of parsley.


FRIED SHAD ROE

Mrs. W. R. McGhee

Boil shad roe for fifteen minutes in acidulated salted water; remove,
cover with cold water and let stand for a few minutes; dry thoroughly
and roll in cracker crumbs, egg and again in crumbs and fry. Garnish
with lemon slices.


STUFFING FOR FISH

Mrs. Max Mauermann

One cup cracker crumbs; one saltspoon salt; one saltspoon pepper; one
saltspoon chopped onions; one saltspoon parsley; one teaspoonful capers;
one teaspoonful chopped pickles; small piece of butter.


SHAD ROE, BAKED--CASSEROLE

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Boil roe in salted water (acidulated) five minutes, drain, and cover
with cold water five minutes; drain and wipe dry. Brush with melted
butter, dust with salt and pepper and paprika. Put in casserole, pour on
one-half cup stock and one-fourth cup best sherry or water and bake
twenty minutes. Add to sauce two or three yolks mixed with one cup cream
and strain over roe. Or pour over thin tomato sauce.


FROGS LEGS A LA POULETTE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Trim and clean the frogs legs; boil three minutes. Cover with a sauce
made as follows: Three tablespoonfuls butter and three of flour rubbed
together; add one-half cup of cream and one cup of chicken stock; season
with salt and pepper and just before serving add the yolks of two eggs,
well beaten, and one-half tablespoonful lemon juice. Very nice served in
a chafing dish.


FROGS LEGS, TARTARE SAUCE

Trim and wipe the desired number of frogs legs; sprinkle with salt and
pepper, dip in fine cracker crumbs, beaten egg and again in crumbs. Fry
three minutes in deep hot fat. Drain and serve at once with tartare
sauce.


SALMON EN CASSEROLE

Mrs. George D. Milligan

One pint milk; three tablespoonfuls flour; stir until smooth; cook and
remove from fire; add one-half cup butter. When cool add two well beaten
eggs, pepper and salt and bake in casserole, putting a layer of sauce,
then salmon and finish with bread crumbs on top. Bake about thirty
minutes.


MOULDED SALMON

Mrs. C. A. Robinson

One can of salmon; three eggs; one-half pint milk; chopped parsley,
pepper and salt and a little Worcestershire sauce. Chop the salmon very
fine, first picking away all skin and bone; beat the eggs, add the
seasoning, mix thoroughly and steam two hours in a mould.


SALMON CROQUETTES

Mrs. George Longwell

One pound of salmon; one cup cream; two tablespoonfuls butter; one
tablespoonful flour; three eggs, seasoning. Chop the salmon fine, make a
cream sauce of the butter, flour and cream; add the salmon and
seasoning; boil one minute; stir in one well beaten egg and remove from
fire. When cold, make into croquettes; dip in cracker crumbs, then in
beaten eggs, again in cracker crumbs and fry in deep fat.


COLD SALMON LOAF

Mrs. R. E. P. Kline

One pound can of salmon; one-half tablespoonful each of sugar and flour;
one tablespoonful melted butter; one teaspoonful salt; one-half
teaspoonful mustard; dash of cayenne; yolks of two eggs, beaten;
three-fourths cup milk or cream; one-fourth cup vinegar. Pick salmon
over and put with other ingredients (after carefully blending them) into
double boiler; cook until eggs are done; remove from fire and add three
tablespoonfuls of gelatin, softened in cold water. Mould, chill, and
serve with cucumber sauce.

Sauce: One-half cup cream, beaten; season with salt, pepper and a little
onion juice. Add two tablespoonfuls vinegar and one cucumber chopped
fine and drained as dry as possible.


SALMON EN SURPRISE

Mrs. T. D. McMicken

Moisten one cup flaked salmon with butter sauce, pinch minced parsley;
one hard boiled egg, chopped fine. Line individual buttered molds with
mashed potatoes. Fill centers with fish, cover with potato. Turn out
carefully, roll in egg crumbs and fry brown. Garnish with a slice of
hard boiled egg on top of mold and parsley.


SMOKED STURGEON AND SCRAMBLED EGGS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Mince one-half pound smoked sturgeon; beat six eggs until light, add
sturgeon; have butter heated in a skillet, add the mixture and scramble.
Serve with toast points.


EGG SAUCE FOR FISH

Mrs. Maxwell

Cook together a tablespoonful each of butter and flour; pour upon this a
cupful of sweet milk and stir until thick and smooth. Season with salt
and white pepper, add one hard boiled egg chopped fine; and one raw egg
beaten light. Stir just long enough for the sauce to return to the boil
and serve.




SHELL FISH

          "_I wiped away the weeds and foam,
            I fetched my sea-born treasures home._"


OYSTER SAUSAGE

Mrs. W. L. Gregson

One-half pound of veal; one pint oysters; one-fourth pound of suet; all
chopped fine. Add enough rolled cracker to make into patties; dip in egg
and fry in butter.


OYSTER CROQUETTES

Mrs. Frank Maccoy

Two sets of calf brains, stewed in salt water; one quart oysters, stew
in their own liquor until they curl, cut in small pieces. Chop brains
and mix with oysters; two tablespoonfuls melted butter; a few drops
onion juice; four tablespoonfuls bread crumbs; one-half cup cream. If
too dry add a little of the oyster juice. Bake in shells.


DEVILED OYSTERS

One pint of oysters, seasoned with salt and pepper, stiffened with
cracker dust to hold shape, place in oyster shells, pour over melted
butter. Put shells in a dripping pan and bake in a quick oven to a light
brown.


CREAMED OYSTERS IN CHAFING DISH

Mrs. Marquis Regan

Put large tablespoonful of butter in chafing dish, when melted add two
tablespoonfuls of sifted flour, mix thoroughly, then add juice strained
from one quart of oysters, cook until thickness of cream, constantly
stirring, then add oysters, cook until edges curl, season to taste with
salt and pepper, serve on toasted crackers.


OYSTERS SCALLOPED WITH CELERY

Blanch Ellis Layton

One quart of bulk oysters, one-half dozen stalks of celery, cut into
one-half inch pieces. Drain the oysters, reserving the liquor. Cover
bottom of baking dish with crumbs of bread or crackers, then a layer of
the oysters, with a generous dash of salt and pepper and plenty of
butter. Over this put a lawyer of the celery, fill the dish in this way
and pour over one cup of the oyster liquor. On top sprinkle a thick
layer of the crumbs, adding butter in small pieces. Bake one hour in a
moderate oven.


OYSTER PIE

Line a shallow pudding pan with light pastry, put in oysters, milk,
butter, salt and pepper, bake in a very quick oven 20 minutes; one pint
of oysters, one pint milk, one tablespoonful butter, salt and pepper to
taste.


ROAST OYSTERS ON THE HALF SHELL

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Scrub the shells of live oysters until free from sand; place in dripping
pan in a hot oven and roast until shells open; take off the top shell,
being careful not to spill the juice in lower shell; serve in the shell
with side dish of melted butter.


PANNED OYSTERS

Mrs. H. Clay Calhoun

Clean one pint of oysters and drain from their liquor. Put in a stewpan
and cook until oysters are plump and edges begin to curl. Shake pan to
prevent oysters from adhering to pan. Season with salt, pepper and two
tablespoonfuls butter and put over small slices of toast. Garnish with
parsley.


OYSTER FRICASSEE

Mrs. Arthur M. Lucius

Clean one pint of oysters, heat oyster liquor to boiling point, strain
through double thickness of cheese-cloth; add oysters to liquor and cook
until plump. Remove oysters with skimmer and add enough cream to oysters
to make one cupful. Melt two tablespoonfuls butter and add two of flour;
then pour on gradually the hot liquor; add salt, paprika, one
teaspoonful finely minced parsley and one egg slightly beaten. Pour over
oysters and serve.


BROILED OYSTERS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Clean oysters and dry on a towel. Dip in butter, then in cracker crumbs
seasoned with salt and pepper; place in a buttered wire broiler and
broil until juice runs; turn and cook other side. Place on toast, mince
celery over the oysters and pour over all a thin cream sauce.


BROILED OYSTERS

Mrs. W. K. Mitchell

Select large oysters; wrap a thin slice of bacon around each, fastening
with a toothpick; place in a broiler, which in turn is put in a dripping
pan to catch the drippings; broil until bacon is brown and crisp,
turning to cook other side. Garnish with parsley.


OYSTERS IN BROWN SAUCE

One pint oysters; one-fourth cup butter; one-fourth cup flour; one
cupful oyster liquor; one-half cup milk; one teaspoonful Kitchen
Bouquet; one-half teaspoonful salt; one-eighth teaspoonful pepper.
Parboil and drain the oysters. Brown the butter, add the flour and stir
until well blended, add oyster liquor, milk, Kitchen Bouquet, salt,
pepper and oysters. Serve in patty cases or ramekins.


CASSEROLE OF OYSTERS

Miss Agnes Sieber

Line ramekins or large casserole with minced chicken, seasoned well, and
moistened with a little cream. Fill with parboiled oysters cut in
pieces, and mushrooms sliced sauted in butter and mixed with the
following sauce: Cook three tablespoonfuls salt pork fat with three of
flour, add salt, cayenne, nutmeg and parsley; also thyme and mushroom
parings. Cook a moment, add one and one-half cups white stock, and
simmer one hour, skimming often. Strain, add about one-half cup hot
cream or enough to make sauce right consistency. Add four drops lemon
juice. Cover with more chicken, sprinkle with buttered crumbs, and brown
in oven.


OYSTERS AND MACARONI

Mrs. H. Clay Calhoun

Boil macaroni in salted water, drain through a colander. Drain oysters
until the liquor is all off. In a casserole put alternate layers of
macaroni, oysters and a thick cream sauce, until dish is filled;
sprinkle top with grated cheese and bake about half an hour.


OMELETTE AUX HUITRES

Mrs. R. Woods

Drain two dozen oysters. Have ready some hot lard and throw them in. Let
fry until they begin to curl, then spread over them four well beaten
eggs seasoned with salt and pepper and stir all together until done.
Serve hot.


FRIED SCALLOPS

Clean one quart of scallops, turn into a saucepan and cook until they
begin to shrivel; drain and dry between towels. Roll in fine cracker
crumbs seasoned with salt and pepper, dip in egg and again in crumbs and
fry in deep fat. Garnish with slices of lemon dipped in parsley.


JAMBALAYA OF RICE AND SHRIMPS

Mrs. Robert Woods

Boil two dozen of large shrimps; when cold, peel and set aside. Fry in
hot lard a chopped onion and a cupful of rice washed in cold water. Let
the onion and rice fry well, add the shrimps, stirring constantly. When
browned, add enough water to cover the whole. Season with salt and
pepper, a bay leaf, thyme and chopped parsley. Let boil slowly, and add
water until the rice is well cooked. When done, let it dry and serve
hot.


SHRIMP FRICASSEE

Mrs. Ada Woods

Boil the desired quantity of shrimp and set aside. For sauce fry in
three tablespoonfuls bacon drippings a large onion, chopped fine; when
browned, add three tablespoonfuls flour and blend; add slowly about a
quart of water, stirring constantly; when smooth add the shrimp; season
with a bay leaf, thyme, a tablespoonful chopped parsley and a clove of
garlic, minced. Let cook slowly until ready to serve. Boil rice until
dry and creamy and serve with the above.


SHRIMP RAMIKINS

Mrs. Max Mauermann

One pint of shrimp; one tablespoonful flour; one tablespoonful butter;
one tablespoonful catsup; one tablespoonful cream; one cup hot soup
stock; two yolks eggs; salt, cayenne pepper and grated onion. Heat
butter, add flour, then other ingredients. Cook until smooth, then add
shrimp. Fill the ramikins with mixture and cover with cracker crumbs and
butter. Bake six minutes.


SHRIMP WIGGLE

Mrs. Willard Brown

Make a rich cream sauce; add one can of shrimp and one can of green
peas; allow to cook until all is well heated, serve on toast.


CRAB A LA CREOLE

One can Japanese crab meat; four tablespoonfuls shortening; two green
peppers; one large onion; three tomatoes; one cupful milk; two
tablespoonfuls flour; one teaspoonful Kitchen Bouquet, one teaspoonful
salt, one-fourth teaspoonful pepper. Make a white sauce by melting half
the shortening, add flour and when well mixed slowly add milk; stir
until creamy, add salt and pepper. In another saucepan melt the other
half of shortening, when hot, fry onion and pepper, minced, for ten
minutes. Then add tomatoes, cut up, and when tender add Kitchen Bouquet
and crab meat and stir slowly into the white sauce. When well mixed,
pour over buttered toast and serve.


LOBSTER A LA BOUQUET

One good sized lobster; two ounces butter; one small onion; one can
mushrooms; one pint boiling water; one teaspoonful Kitchen Bouquet; one
teaspoonful salt; one saltspoonful pepper. Put the butter and chopped
onion in saucepan, cook until onion is brown, then add two
tablespoonfuls flour and the water. When boiling add salt and pepper.
Strain and add mushrooms and Kitchen Bouquet. Simmer for ten minutes
then stand over hot water. Cut lobster in good sized pieces, put into
sauce, cover the pan closely, let stand ten minutes longer over hot
water and serve.





MEATS AND FOWL


          "_Some hae meat and canna eat,
            And some wad eat that want it.
            But we hae meat and we can eat,
            And, so the Lord be thank it._"


BEEFSTEAK ROLL

Mrs. J. E. Kelly

Use a large slice of round steak cut one-half inch thick. Make a
dressing by mixing together: One cupful grated breadcrumbs, two-thirds
teaspoonful salt, one well-beaten egg, one tablespoonful melted butter,
one small onion, grated, a few dashes of paprika and a half teaspoonful
powdered sweet herbs. Lay the steak on a board, sprinkle with salt and
pepper, spread thickly with the dressing and roll up. Wind with soft
cord to hold in place. Put three tablespoonfuls of pork fat in a frying
pan and when very hot, dredge the roll with flour and brown it quickly
on all sides. Place meat in kettle that has a tight fitting cover.
Meanwhile, add to the fat in the pan two slices of minced onion, and one
tablespoonful flour. Stir until very smooth, pour in a cupful of stock
(or hot water) and when the gravy boils, pour over the roll with a pint
of strained tomato. Season to taste with salt and pepper, cover the
kettle closely and as soon as the contents boil, place where it will
simmer for about two hours. When cooked, remove the strings, and serve
on a heated platter, with the strained gravy poured over it.


HAMBURGER POT DINNER

Mrs. Antonio Sterba

With two pounds hamburger steak, mix well one cup raw rice (wash well);
one medium sized onion, chopped; season and make into balls. Line bottom
of a pot with small pieces of suet; when this is melted, place meat
balls in the pot, cover with water, and cook until rice is about done.
Add one can of tomatoes (quart can). A half hour before serving, peel
enough medium-sized potatoes to circle the platter to be used. Place
these on top of tomatoes. When potatoes are done, arrange them around
the outside rim of the platter with the meat balls in the center, and
pour over the meat enough gravy for first serving. Remainder of gravy
may be used on table in a casserole or gravy dish. Care must be used in
measuring the rice--too much will cause the balls to fall to pieces. One
advantage of this dish is that it may be prepared the day before, or the
morning before serving, with the exception of the potatoes.


CALVES' HEARTS STUFFED AND BRAISED

Mrs. W. R. McGhee

Remove veins, arteries, and blood clots, wash, stuff and sew. Sprinkle
with salt, pepper, roll in flour and brown richly in hot dripping. Place
in Dutch oven or in one of the small vessels in fireless cooker. Half
cover with boiling water, surround with six slices carrot, one stalk
celery, broken in pieces, one onion sliced, two sprays parsley, a bit of
bay leaf, three cloves and one-half teaspoonful peppercorns. Cover
closely and bake slowly two or more hours basting often if cooked in
Dutch oven. If necessary, add more water. Remove hearts to serving
platter, strain and thicken the liquor with flour diluted with water.
Season with salt, pepper and one-half teaspoonful Kitchen Bouquet.


LUNCHEON BEEF

Mrs. I. A. Wilcox

One cup or more of cold cooked beef chopped; one cup of bread crumbs;
season with salt, pepper and butter. Place in baking dish and cover with
buttered bread crumbs. Pour milk in dish until you can just see it. Bake
in oven till light brown on top. Can use any kind of cold cooked beef,
as steak, roast, or boiled beef. If you have a few cold mashed potatoes,
put them through ricer on top of meat to form upper crust. Dot with
butter and let brown.


POT ROAST

Mary S. Vanzwoll

Round steak one and one-half inches thick. Salt and pepper. Pound a cup
of flour in, on both sides. Sear both sides in melted fat, and butter.
Put in baking dish and cover with water. Cook in oven two and one-half
hours.


SPANISH STEAK

Mrs. W. H. Hart

One and one-half pounds round steak, ground; one and one-half pounds of
pork steak, ground; one heaping cupful bread crumbs; one cupful canned
or fresh tomatoes; two green peppers, minced; one-half cupful minced
onion; one egg; two teaspoonfuls salt. Mix all together and bake
forty-five minutes in flat cake.


BRAISED BEEF

Mrs. I. S. Blackwelder

Round steak about three inches thick (about two pounds); place in a hot
skillet and turn so that it is seared on both sides, to prevent escape
of juices. In a covered baking pan make a bed of chopped vegetables
(potatoes, turnips, carrots, onions, etc.); season well. Place upon it
the beef with enough water to keep the mess steaming for four hours.
Cover tight.


MOTHER'S BEEF LOAF

Mrs. F. E. Lyons

Three pounds round steak, ground; three eggs; two-thirds cup cracker
crumbs; three teaspoonfuls ground sage; two teaspoonfuls salt; one
teaspoonful pepper. Mix together thoroughly and bake in a 5x10-inch
bread pan, from one to one and one-half hours.


MEAT PIE

Butter an earthen baking dish and line to the depth of one and one-half
inches with hot mashed potatoes, season with finely chopped chives (one
tablespoonful to two cups mashed potatoes). Fill center with chopped
left-over cold beef, veal or chicken. Moisten with brown or cream sauce,
to which add one-half tablespoonful minced parsley and onion juice.
Cover with a layer of the potato mixture, make several openings in top
of pie and brush top over with beaten egg, diluted with milk. Bake in
hot oven until heated through and well browned. Serve hot in baking
dish.


BRAISED LARDED LIVER

Mrs. W. R. McGhee

Skewer, tie in shape (if necessary) and lard the upper side of calf's
liver. Place in a deep pan with remnants of lardoons; season with salt
and pepper; dredge with flour. Surround with one-half each carrot,
onion, celery, cut in dice; one-half teaspoonful peppercorns, six
cloves, bit of bay leaf and two cups brown stock or water. Cover closely
and bake slowly two hours, uncover the last twenty minutes of cooking.
Remove from pan, serve with the French onions or pour around brown
sauce.


HAMBURG STEAK

Sue C. Woodman

Mix one egg and a little salt and pepper; make into balls and bake in
closed pan quickly.


POT ROAST

Mrs. C. S. Junge

Procure a Boston cut of roast of beef; brown a minced onion in skillet
with butter and bacon fat; in this brown all sides of the roast. Remove
the roast and in the fat stir two tablespoonfuls of flour and fill
skillet nearly full of hot water. Season this gravy well with salt,
pepper, bay and garlic and pour over roast in casserole. Place a few
slices of tomato on top or pour in a cup of strained tomato; place some
carrots around the roast and put in cooker for at least four hours.


BRAIN PATTIES

Mrs. E. Iglehart

Plunge the calf's brains into boiling water for three minutes, remove
from water and pick off the dark muscles, roll into cracker dust or
bread crumbs in small patties and drop into hot fat. Salt and pepper.


ROAST BEEF SOUFFLE

Mrs. H. S. Hart

One tablespoonful butter melted in sauce pan, one tablespoonful of flour
added and well mixed, one cup milk. Chop beef, or any kind of cold meat
quite fine and add to milk after it has thickened; salt and pepper to
taste. Then stir in the yolks of three eggs, cook slightly, cool, add
beaten whites of eggs. Put in greased dish and bake about half an hour.
Is nice served with tomato sauce or peas. About one and one-half cups of
the chopped meat for the above.


MEAT LOAF

Mrs. L. E. Brown

Two pounds of round steak; one pound fresh pork; four tomatoes; three
pimentoes; two eggs; four crackers, rolled; salt, pepper and paprika.
Mix altogether; bake in bread pan two hours in moderate oven. Sauce: One
and one-half tablespoonfuls butter, flour and milk. Season with liquid
from meat.


TOUGH STEAKS

Mrs. E. S. Smith

Pour a mixture of two tablespoonfuls of vinegar; and one of olive oil
over a steak. Let stand several hours before broiling. The result is
delicious.


VEAL CROQUETTES

Belle Shaw

Two pounds veal, chopped fine; one teaspoonful chopped parsley; two
eggs, hard boiled and chopped; salt and pepper, to taste. Soak enough
bread crumbs, and add to mixture; form balls. Roll in egg and cracker
crumbs and fry in deep fat.


BONED AND STUFFED LEG OF LAMB

Mrs. H. L. Baumgardner

Order a leg of lamb boned at the market. Make a stuffing as for chicken.
Put in roasting pan with a small sliced onion, one-fourth cup each of
turnip and carrot, season with bay leaf and parsley. Add three cupfuls
of hot water, salt and pepper. Cook slowly until done. Serve with
Currant Jelly Sauce.

Currant Jelly Sauce: To the regular brown gravy you would make with
roast, add one-half cupful of currant jelly which has been beaten and a
little lemon juice; well stirred together and let all boil a minute or
two.


LAMB STEW A LA CREOLE

Wipe three pounds lamb, cut from neck or shoulder. Cut into pieces two
inches square. Melt one-fourth cup dripping, add meat and stir and brown
evenly. Add two onions, thinly sliced, one sprig parsley, small bit bay
leaf, two cloves and one-half teaspoonful peppercorns (tie last three
spices in a bit of cheese cloth), and boiling water to nearly cover
meat. Simmer slowly until meat is tender (about one and one-half hours).
Then add two or three small carrots, scraped and cut in lengthwise
pieces, season with salt. Parboil six medium-sized potatoes cut in thick
slices five minutes, drain, add to stew; add two cups thick tomato puree
and simmer slowly until vegetables are tender. Add more water if
necessary. Remove spices, add one cup French peas when heated through,
turn into deep, hot platter and sprinkle with chopped parsley.


LAMB HASH WITH GREEN PEPPERS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Mince cold roast lamb in about half inch pieces; add a sweet green
pepper, minced (discarding seeds); add the gravy and heat thoroughly.
Serve on toast.


RECIPE FOR CORNING BEEF

Mrs. W. T. Foster

Five tablespoonfuls of salt; two tablespoonfuls of brown sugar; one-half
teaspoonful salt peter, or less; this is for five pounds of beef. Cover
with water; leave three or four days and boil in same water.


MOCK TERRAPIN

Mrs. W. H. Muschlet

Two cupfuls cold boiled or roast lamb cut into small pieces. Put a
tablespoonful of butter into double boiler; when melted add one
tablespoonful of flour. Rub smooth; add one pint of milk; stir
continuously till it thickens; then set pot back where it won't cook
hard, and add one well beaten egg, a tablespoonful minced parsley, a
little nutmeg, red pepper, salt to taste, two hard boiled eggs cut (not
too fine); then the lamb. Let it keep hot, but not boil, till lamb is
thoroughly heated. When serving, add a teaspoonful lemon juice.


VEAL LOAF WITH EGG

Mrs. H. B. Rairden

Two and one-half pounds of veal; two pork chops, ground together; three
eggs; three rolled crackers; one teaspoonful each salt and pepper. Mix
well together. Put half of mixture in a loaf pan, peel six eggs which
have been hard boiled, clip off the ends so they fit closely together,
and lay them in the center of the loaf; place the balance of the meat
about them, fill up pan, packing it solid; put in double baker on top of
stove to steam for one and one-half hours, spread butter over top and
put in oven to finish baking. In slicing it you get the slice of hard
boiled egg in the center.


VEAL LOAF

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One and one-half pounds of veal and one slice of salt pork, chopped
fine. Add two tablespoonfuls of cracker dust; one egg; piece of butter
size of an egg; one teaspoonful each of salt and pepper; little grated
nutmeg; dash of Worcestershire sauce. Mix well and bake in a loaf shaped
pan with cracker crumbs and bits of butter on top. Bake about one and
three-quarters hours.


BAKED SPICED HAM, ALABAMA STYLE

Mrs. K. T. Cary

Soak a fifteen pound ham in cold water to cover over night. Wash, scrub
and trim off inedible parts. Set over a trivet in a boiler and cover
with boiling water. Mix four cups brown sugar, one large sliced onion,
one red Chili pepper pod, one tablespoonful each of whole cloves,
allspice and cassia buds, two thinly sliced lemons, discarding seeds,
add to water in boiler. Cover and cook slowly two and one-half hours.
Remove from boiler, peel off rind and put ham in dripping pan, fat side
up. Bake slowly two and one-half hours, basting with one cup sherry wine
(using a tablespoon) a little at a time until all is used, then baste
with dripping in pan thirty minutes, before removing from oven, sprinkle
fat side with equal measures of brown sugar and fine bread crumbs, stick
with cloves and brown richly. Serve hot champagne, horseradish or
mustard sauce.


KOLDOLMA

Mrs. F. W. Waddell

Two pounds of veal; one pound fresh pork; one-half lemon, bay leaf and
one small bottle capers; one clove of garlic; juice of one onion. Put
all through grinder, salt, pepper to taste. Roll in small soft balls.
Enclose neatly in cabbage leaves, secure with toothpicks. Place in Dutch
oven which has previously melted one-fourth pound of butter with a
little chopped parsley. Alternate layers with a small sifting of flour
until all are in pan. Let simmer in one pint of water (boiling) without
allowing any steam to escape for two hours; remove and thicken broth
with yolks of five eggs. Serve eight persons.


VIRGINIA HAM

Mrs. G. W. Plummer

Buy a center cut of ham, two inches thick (about two and one-half or
three pounds); soak over night in milk (sweet or sour) sufficient to
cover ham. About two hours before serving time drain off enough milk so
that the top of ham is uncovered; spread over this uncovered top; one
tablespoonful dry ground mustard mixed with two tablespoonfuls brown
sugar; bake in a slow oven. The milk will disappear in a rich brown
gravy; if it gets too low in pan add water. When ready to serve remove
ham to platter, add flour to fat in pan and when well cooked, add
boiling water to make gravy of consistency of thick cream. Lemon slices
and sherry may be added. It may need to be strained if milk curds are
objected to; pour around ham. Has flavor of finest "Old Virginia Ham."


HAM EN CASSEROLE

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Have ham cut two inches thick, leaving on rind. Pour over it good,
generous cup of milk and one-half cup brown sugar, partly dissolving
sugar in the milk on top of stove, before pouring over ham. Cook all in
casserole two hours. Serve with rings of fried apples on chop plate.


ROGNONS AUX TOMATOES

Mrs. R. Woods

Cut in small pieces a fresh kidney and fry in hot lard. When almost done
add to it a sliced onion, half cup of tomatoes and a slice of ham. Let
all fry together, and when done add a spoonful of flour, a piece of red
pepper and a spoonful of chopped garlic and parsley. Thin with a little
water, season with salt, and let boil a few minutes, when it is done.


EASTER HAM

Mrs. E. Iglehart

One-half pint grated bread crumbs, one cup currants, one saltspoonful of
salt, one saltspoonful sweet marjoram or thyme, one salt spoonful of
black pepper, moisten with sweet milk. Boil small ham until tender,
remove bone and skin, fill in the cavity with dressing, wind with cord
into shape, puncture with skewer in the fat parts and fill the holes
with dressing. Bake in a closed pan in a hot oven one hour.


HAM PUFF

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Scald one pint of milk, one cup flour; stir constantly until thick. Let
cool, then add beaten yolks of eight eggs. Beat thoroughly, add beaten
whites, a little suet, one and one-half cups of chopped, boiled ham, and
one-half cup butter. Set tin in pan of water, and bake three-fourths of
an hour. Keep standing in water until served.


HAM LOAF

Mrs. W. C. Thorbus

Two pounds of ham, ground; one pound of pork loin, ground; two eggs,
beaten; one cupful rolled cracker crumbs; one cupful milk; pepper to
taste. Mix all together, put in a baking tin and pour over it one cupful
tomatoes and bake two hours.


JAMABALA OF HAM

Mrs. H. Clay Calhoun

One large slice of raw ham; one large onion; put through the grinder and
fry. When thoroughly cooked add two cups boiled rice; one quart of
tomatoes and half of a sweet green pepper, chopped fine. Serve hot on
toast.


BARBECUED ROAST PORK

Mrs. Chase

Place pork roast in dry self-basting or similar roaster. Place in oven
for thirty minutes. In meantime put one cup of vinegar, one teaspoonful
red pepper, one teaspoonful black pepper, one teaspoonful salt in
saucepan and bring to a boil. Baste roast every fifteen or twenty
minutes with this sauce at boiling point, draining off sauce after each
basting and returning sauce to saucepan, which should be kept at the
boiling point. Drain off sauce and serve in separate dish.


CROWN ROAST OF YOUNG PORK

Mrs. M. Dippen

Have crown roast made of young pork ribs, same as of lamb; fill the
center with medium sized potatoes, boiled and rolled in butter and
minced parsley; surround with fried apples.


BROILED SAUSAGE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

One and one-half or two pounds of well seasoned sausage meat mold it
into a flat cake; place in a frying basket which, in turn, is put in a
larger pan, to catch the drippings. Put under the blaze and let it broil
slowly; when nicely browned on one side turn it over and brown that
side. When done remove to hot platter and surround with fried apples.


PORK CHOPS WITH POTATOES

Mrs. C. S. Junge

In a casserole place a layer of sliced raw potatoes and over it sprinkle
of flour. Put in a layer of chops and a layer of potatoes and repeat
until casserole is full. Nearly cover with milk that is seasoned with
salt and pepper. Sprinkle cheese over top and bake two hours.


GRANDMOTHER'S PORK NOODLES

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

One-half pound of salt pork, sliced; six medium onions; six medium
potatoes; noodles. Boil salt pork until very nearly done. Add potatoes
and onions. Cook until they are beginning to be tender. Have about two
quarts of water left. Add noodles and finish cooking. This will make a
thick stew.


PORK CHOP CASSEROLE

Mrs. George D. Milligan

Sprinkle bottom of dish with flour; place pork chops then on top a layer
of sliced raw potatoes and onions, finish with bread crumbs. Bake until
potatoes are done. Use no liquid.


BAKED PORK CHOPS

Sue C. Woodman

Cut thick, wash and dip in flour; place in deep pan; season with pepper,
salt, and a little sage. Cover tightly and bake forty minutes in quick
oven.


STUFFED PORK TENDERLOINS

Mrs. C. E. Balluff

Split two large tenderloins and flatten out as wide as possible, spread
one with a very thick layer of dressing (such as is used for turkey
dressing). Place the second tenderloin on this and tie them together,
roast in a medium oven, basting frequently with boiling water and a
small piece of melted butter.


STUFFED SPARERIBS

Mrs. H. L. Middleton

Have two sets of ribs cracked across the middle; rub the insides with
salt, pepper and dredge with flour. Cook sauerkraut half an hour, drain
and fill the ribs; tie or sew closely together and put in oven. Pour
over the ribs the water in which the sauerkraut was boiled. When one
side is browned, turn them over and brown the other side. Serve with
brown gravy.


DELMONICO CLUB HOUSE SAUSAGE

Miss A. Brennan

To every twenty-one pounds of meat: Lean pork, seven pounds; fat, seven
pounds; round beef, seven pounds. Seven ounces salt; one and one-half
ounces black pepper; one coffee cup powdered sage and summer savory; one
teaspoonful cayenne, slack; one tablespoonful freshly ground ginger; one
tablespoonful ground mustard. Get your meat ground at the butchers. Mix
the sausage yourself. Mix spices all together with salt, working it
through the meat with your hands.


FRIED PICKLED PIGS' FEET

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Have butcher split the pigs' feet; boil until bones are ready to fall
out; put in an earthen dish and cover with a mild vinegar which has been
boiled for ten minutes with a few slices of onion and spices; when the
vinegar is cold the pigs' feet will be sufficiently pickled. Drain, roll
in flour and fry.


ENGLISH SAUSAGE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Six pounds lean pork; two pounds fat pork; one pound loaf bread
thoroughly soaked in water; two ounces salt; one ounce best white
pepper; two medium sized nutmegs, grated. Mix all together, put into
chopper. Leg of pork is best, but shoulder will do.


ESCALLOPED SWEETBREADS

Mrs. E. K. Parker

One pair sweetbreads; one can mushrooms; two cups of cream; butter size
of an egg; one tablespoonful flour. Parboil sweetbreads twenty minutes
then chop rather fine; add mushrooms and chop. Put butter in spider and
let it melt and as it begins to brown, add the flour and stir; then add
cream, stirring all the time to prevent lumps. Put in the sweetbreads
and mushrooms and let cook a few minutes. Add one teaspoonful
Worcestershire sauce and pour mixture in baking dish. Put cracker crumbs
and lumps of butter on top and bake half an hour.


CREAMED SWEETBREADS WITH TOMATO SAUCE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Parboil sweetbreads in acidulated salt water, cook slowly for twenty
minutes; drain, plunge into cold water. Make a rich cream sauce,
separate sweetbreads and mix with the cream sauce; put in ramekins,
cover with bread crumbs; in the center place a tablespoonful tomato
sauce; put in oven and bake until crumbs are brown; place a sprig of
parsley on top and serve.


CHICKEN A LA KING

Mrs. W. C. Thorbus

Heat two tablespoonfuls butter until it bubbles; add one chopped green
pepper; let cook slowly for three minutes, then add one tablespoonful
flour; salt and pepper to taste and enough rich milk to make a smooth
thickened sauce; when thoroughly done add two cupfuls cooked chicken and
let it heat through. Mushrooms may be added.


CHICKEN NOODLES AND MUSHROOMS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Pick the meat from the bones and cut in rather large pieces; add a can
of mushrooms and the thickened chicken gravy. Boil noodles twenty
minutes in salted water; drain and add noodles to the chicken. Mix all
together and let heat thoroughly. Serve with toast points.


CHICKEN A LA CREOLE

Mrs. R. Woods

Clean and cut up two young chickens, sprinkle with salt and pepper and
fry in hot lard. When done, put in a dish and set aside. And now start
your sauce. Fry an onion and add flour for thickening. When brown, add a
can of sweet peppers, let fry a little, then add the tomatoes and a few
bay leaves and a sprig of thyme. When the sauce is done throw in the
fried chickens, but do not let the whole boil long.


SWEET BREAD PATTIES

Parboil one pair sweetbreads in boiling, salted, acidulated water,
fifteen minutes. Drain and cut in one-half inch cubes. Add one-half the
measure of small mushrooms, heated in the liquor in the can, drained,
cooled and sliced, and one tablespoonful pimento cut into bits. Reheat
in one and one-half cups of sauce (cream) and serve in patty shells.


BAKED MACARONI AND CHICKEN

Bertha Z. Bisbee

Stew until tender a nice fat hen, in plenty of water. Pick meat off
bones and shred rather finely. Boil one pound of macaroni or spaghetti
twenty minutes in plenty of water to which has been added a teaspoonful
of salt. Drain as dry as possible. Cover the bottom of a buttered baking
dish with the macaroni, adding chicken and macaroni in alternate layers.
Add one cup of cream to the gravy in which the chicken was cooked, salt
and pepper to taste, and thicken with flour or corn starch. Pour enough
over the macaroni and chicken to cover it. Bake in a slow oven until
nicely browned on top.


REAL COTTAGE CHICKEN

Mrs. F. W. Waddell

Boil one package of macaroni in salted water in the usual manner. Use
three or four pounds chicken. Place in Dutch Oven whole. After browning,
four tablespoonfuls of butter with a little parsley cover tightly and
simmer forty-five minutes. Remove cover and add salt and pepper. When
sufficiently cooked, so that the fowl will slip from the bone, turn out
fire and let cool. Remove bones and place in receptacle once more. Add
one pint of pure cream, the macaroni previously cooked, and let boil up
just three minutes, and let stand until ready to serve. Better to stand
for an hour.


BOUCHEES A LA REINE

Mrs. Robert Woods

Take good sized young hen and boil it. When done take all the meat, chop
it, but not too fine and keep the "bouillon." Have ready some mushrooms
and truffles cut in small pieces. Fry an onion in hot lard, add flour
and brown well; in this throw your meat, mushrooms and truffles. Give
two or three turns in the pan and add the bouillon to make the sauce. Do
not make it too thin. Season with a little pepper. The small "pates" are
ordered from the confectioner and are kept warm until needed. When the
filling is done and you are ready to serve, fill each pate with the stew
and send warm to the table.


CHICKEN IN ASPIC

Mrs. E. S. Bailey

Draw one large chicken; boil until meat drops from bones and there is
about one pint of liquid. Chop chicken and add a teaspoonful of salt and
one-half teaspoonful pepper; also one tablespoonful of celery salt. Hard
boil three eggs and soak one-half package gelatine five minutes and add
to hot liquid. Chill mold and put in layer of chicken and three eggs and
put balance of chicken in. Then pour the liquid on mold and chill.


CHICKEN TERRAPIN FOR SIX PEOPLE

Mrs. J. P. Cobb

One cup of chicken cut the size of an egg; one cup of canned mushrooms;
make a cream sauce of the chicken stock; when this is boiled up, add the
chicken and mushrooms, yolk of one egg beaten, one teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce, teaspoonful sherry. Serve on platter with whipped
cream or brown with bread crumbs.


SPANISH CHICKEN

Mrs. Lester Tennant

Cut up two chickens, about five pounds in all; good fat yellow hens are
the best. Put in a good sized pot and put in cold water enough to cover
about two inches over all; cover and let heat very slowly; stew until
meat can be picked from the bones. When the liquor the chicken is cooked
in becomes cold, remove all fat and save to make stew in. Cut up six
fair sized potatoes; one large onion; two large green peppers; one clove
of garlic; one can of mushrooms; one can tomatoes; one can of peas; one
bottle of little stuffed olives. Remove meat from chicken bones, then
put in tomatoes, potatoes, peas, etc., in the liquor. Cut each mushroom
through and add one wineglass each of olive oil and good white wine;
three fair sized bay leaves; a large pinch of thyme; a few sprigs of
parsley; salt; celery salt; black pepper and tobasco sauce to taste.
When potatoes are done, add one large tablespoonful butter, put in the
chicken meat and the stew is ready to serve. Have plenty of toast to
serve chicken on. This will serve sixteen people and may be made the day
before.


CURRY OF CHICKEN EN CASSEROLE

Mrs. W. P. Hilliard

Clean, singe, dress and cut up a three and one-half pound chicken as for
fried chicken; melt one-third cup butter in an iron frying pan; sprinkle
chicken with salt and pepper; arrange in hot frying pan and cook ten
minutes, turning so as to brown evenly; add giblets; continue cooking
ten minutes longer. Arrange chickens in a hot casserole with one thinly
sliced onion; one-half tablespoonful salt, and broth or boiling water to
cover; cover casserole and simmer in oven until chicken is tender.
Remove chicken; strain liquor; melt one-fourth cup butter; add two
tablespoonfuls flour, mixed with two tablespoonfuls curry powder; stir
until smooth. Add strained liquor (there should be two cups); one-third
cup currant jelly and salt to season. Turn one-half of sauce into
casserole; arrange chicken over sauce and cover with remaining sauce.
Serve in casserole. Serve boiled rice with chicken curry.


SALMI OF DUCK

Mrs. S. E. Baumgardner

Cut cold roast duck in pieces and heat in the following sauce: One
tablespoonful butter; one small onion chopped fine; a stalk of celery
and one sliced carrot; saute until brown then add one tablespoonful
flour; two cups water; a bayleaf; a spray of parsley; a few cloves and
salt and pepper; let cook a few minutes. Strain, put in the duck; add
six olives sliced lengthwise; a small can of mushrooms, cut in two; let
all heat and serve.


CREOLE CHICKEN

Cut two chickens in pieces for serving; sprinkle with salt and pepper.
Melt one-half cup butter; add one-half cup finely chopped onion; add
chickens, saute a golden brown, turning chickens to evenly brown; remove
chickens; add one-half cup flour; stir until well blended; then pour on
two cups chicken stock and two cups tomato puree; one mild red pepper,
finely chopped; one-half can mushrooms, drained and thinly sliced; one
cup finely cut celery; season with salt and pepper. Add chickens and
simmer until tender. Dispose on hot serving platter; surround with
sauce; garnish with parsley.


CHICKEN CURRY WITH MUSHROOMS IN CHAFING DISH

Mrs. M. Regan

One medium sized can of boneless chicken; one-half can of French
mushrooms; one heaping teaspoonful Indian currypowder; one large
tablespoonful of butter; two tablespoonfuls of sifted flour and two cups
milk. Put butter in chafing dish, when melted add flour; then milk
slowly, and salt and pepper to taste. When creamy add chicken cut fine
and chopped mushrooms; stir constantly until heated thoroughly and just
before serving add curry powder. Eat on hot toast.


SQUAB EN CASSEROLE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Wash squabs and stuff with boiled rice in which the cooked, minced
giblets of the squabs have been mixed; place in casserole and pour a
little melted butter over each squab; sprinkle with salt and pepper and
onion salt. Use the water in which the giblets were cooked for stock,
there should be one cup. Put in oven and bake until tender.


PIGEON PIE

Mrs. Culbertson

Dress, clean and truss six young, fat pigeons. Brown them richly in
tried out salt pork fat. Put in a Dutch oven or kettle, cover with
boiling water. Add two stalks celery, broken in pieces; a bit of bay
leaf; one-half teaspoonful pepper-corns; one onion sliced; six slices of
carrot; two sprays parsley and simmer five to six hours or until tender.
Add one-half tablespoonful salt last hour of cooking. Remove pigeons;
strain liquid and thicken with one-fourth cup butter, cooked one minute
with one-fourth cup flour, stirring constantly, until gravy is smooth.
Arrange pigeon in a deep baking dish; pour over gravy and cover with a
baking powder crust, and bake in a hot oven.


A GOOD IMITATION OF MARYLAND FRIED CHICKEN

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

It may be made from rabbit. Choose a young tender rabbit; cut it into
pieces of desired size; put pieces in a pot, cover with boiling water,
and parboil gently for twenty minutes; dip each piece in flour, egg and
cracker crumbs and fry in deep fat until a rich brown. Evaporate by
boiling some of the water in which the meat was boiled. Use some of it
with milk in making "cream gravy."


RABBIT STEW

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

Rub the inside of a saucepan with a dose of garlic; put in pieces of
hare left; add three-quarters cup of stewed tomatoes; two raw carrots,
cut into small cubes; one small onion, sliced; a teaspoonful of chopped
parsley, and about a cup of hot water. Cover tightly and cook until the
potatoes are tender (and carrots). Thicken and serve in a border of
steamed rice and serve with tiny dumplings.


BELGIAN HARE EN CASSEROLE

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

Separate a dressed hare into pieces of desired shape; rub each piece
with a little lemon juice and oil which have been stirred together. Let
the meat stand covered a few hours; sprinkle with paprika and brown each
piece in a little fat in a "sizzling hot" frying pan. Some use two or
three slices of fat bacon cut into small pieces for the browning. When
golden brown, put the meat in the casserole, cover with boiling water;
cover and place in a very moderate oven. At the end of half an hour add
two cups of stock or hot water; one tablespoonful of lemon juice, or
vinegar, a bit of bay leaf and two teaspoonfuls of onion juice. Cook in
a moderate oven about three hours. Bring to the table without removing
the cover. And if you have any of the Belgian Hare en Casserole left,
make for lunch the next day, the savory little Rabbit Stew.


CHOP SUEY

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

One pound veal; one pound pork; one can mushrooms; eight stalks celery;
fifteen onions; two tablespoonfuls molasses; little flour on top. Cut
meat in small pieces and simmer about twenty minutes; add mushrooms and
molasses; then celery and onions. Cook slowly until tender. Sprinkle a
little flour over it and mix well; then salt, paprika and about three
tablespoonfuls or more (to taste) of chop suey sauce. Simmer meat
without water; serve with boiled rice.


CHOP SUEY

Mrs. C. S. Junge

Cut tender, fresh, lean pork, chicken, veal or all of these into thin,
inch squares and saute well in bacon fat. Have ready one-half as much in
bulk of celery; cut in inch pieces and an onion; saute these in same
fat. After this, saute mushrooms; put altogether and barely cover with
hot water, chicken or veal broth. Add Chinese potatoes and sprouted
barley, if they can be procured; add one tablespoonful of molasses; one
teaspoonful of salt; one teaspoonful of Chinese Soy; a dash of pepper
and put in cooker for three hours or more.


CHOP SUEY

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

One pound pork from shoulder; one pound veal from leg; fry one-half hour
in a little fat. When brown, add a little water and cook ten minutes,
and add one cup celery cut up; one onion, cut up. When nearly done,
sprinkle with flour enough to thicken, add two tablespoonfuls of
molasses. Serve with rice.


CHESTNUT STUFFING

Mrs. S. E. Baumgardner

Shell and blanch four cupfuls French chestnuts; cook in boiling salted
water until tender; put through a ricer; season with salt, pepper and a
little nutmeg; two tablespoonfuls butter and one-half cupful of cream.
Add this to your regular bread mixture for stuffing fowl.


CHESTNUT STUFFING

Shell and blanch French chestnuts, there should be two cups. Cook in
boiling salted water until soft. Drain, mash and pass through a potato
ricer; add one-four cup butter; one teaspoonful salt; one-eighth
teaspoonful pepper; a few grains nutmeg and one-half cup cream. Melt
one-fourth cup butter, pour over one cup soft bread crumbs; mix well;
combine mixtures and use as filling for turkey, capon or guinea chicken.


OYSTER DRESSING FOR FOWLS

Mrs. W. S. Kiskaddon

For an eight or ten-pound turkey cut the brown crust from slices of
stale bread until you have as much as the inside of a pound loaf. Put
into a suitable dish and pour tepid water over it; take up a handful at
the time and squeeze it hard and dry with both hands, placing it as you
go along in another dish; now when all is pressed dry, toss it all up
lightly through your fingers; now add pepper and salt--about a
tablespoonful--also powdered summer savory and sage, and one pint of
oysters drained and slightly chopped. For geese and ducks the dressing
may be made the same.


RICE DRESSING FOR DUCK OR GOOSE

Mrs. H. P. E. Hafer

Boil one cup of rice tender. Chop one stalk celery; two onions; one
outside of green pepper; a little piece of garlic; fry in butter and add
boiled rice.




SAUCES


HOLLANDAISE SAUCE

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One tablespoonful flour and one teaspoonful butter; mix over fire until
smooth; add, gradually, one pint of boiling water, until all is the
consistency of cream. Boil for two or three minutes and season with one
salt spoon of salt; one-half teaspoonful mustard; one-quarter
teaspoonful pepper. Take from fire and add yolks of two eggs, well
beaten; mixing all until smooth. Add slowly, three tablespoonfuls oil
and one tablespoonful vinegar. Lemon juice instead of vinegar makes it
much more delicate.


HOLLANDAISE SAUCE

Belle Shaw

Two tablespoonfuls butter; one tablespoonful flour; one-half pint
boiling water; one-half teaspoonful salt; add gradually yolks of two
eggs, well beaten; juice of one-half lemon; one-half teaspoonful onion
juice; cook over hot water. Be careful not to get sauce too thick.


TARTAR SAUCE NO. 1

Mrs. Carl S. Junge

Sweet cucumber pickles; green peppers and onion. Chop fine and mix with
mayonnaise salad dressing.


TARTAR SAUCE NO. 2

Mrs. Carl S. Junge

Tablespoonful mixed capers; tablespoonful cucumber pickles, chopped;
teaspoonful parsley; teaspoonful Tarragon; teaspoonful mixed mustard;
one-half pint mayonnaise dressing.


RICH GRAVY WITHOUT MEAT

Mrs. T. M. Butler

Heat a sufficient amount of lard or drippings in a skillet into which
two or three tablespoonfuls of flour have been stirred until a very
light brown; then add two-thirds milk to one-third water and season with
salt and pepper, adding a level teaspoonful of extract of beef and stir
until completely dissolved.


A VEGETABLE SAUCE

One-half teaspoonful kitchen boquet; one level tablespoonful flour; two
tablespoonfuls butter; one-fourth teaspoonful salt; two cupfuls hot
milk; two egg yolks; blend flour and butter; add salt and milk and boil
until smooth and of the desired thickness. Then gradually add the yolks
of eggs and kitchen boquet. This may be served on any vegetable
desired.


CREOLE SAUCE

One teaspoonful Kitchen Boquet; one onion; five shallots; two green
peppers; one tablespoonful butter; one tablespoonful flour; four large
tomatoes; one-half bean garlic; one teaspoonful salt; one teaspoonful
sugar; six canned mushrooms; one-half teaspoonful parsley. Slice fine
onion, shallots and pepper. Cook in butter to a light brown; stir
constantly. Then the garlic minced, and the flour. Stir all together and
add tomatoes, seasoning, mushrooms, and parsley. Cook twenty minutes,
stirring occasionally. Just before serving, add one teaspoonful Kitchen
Boquet.


MUSHROOM SAUCE

Three tablespoonfuls Kitchen Boquet; one-third cupful butter; one-third
cupful flour; one teaspoonful salt; dash cayenne; one teaspoonful onion
juice; two cupfuls milk; one can mushrooms. Melt the butter, add flour
and milk gradually, stirring all the while. When cooked, add the salt,
cayenne, onion and kitchen boquet. Drain and chop mushrooms; add to
sauce and cook three minutes.


TOMATO CELERY SAUCE

Two teaspoonfuls kitchen boquet; one quart tomatoes; one teaspoonful
sugar; three pepper-corns; one tablespoonful butter; one head of celery;
one onion; one green pepper; one bay leaf; four cloves; salt and pepper;
one tablespoonful flour. Place the tomatoes in a saucepan; add the
celery cut up into inch lengths; the onion slices and spices. Simmer
slowly for twenty minutes, pass through a sieve; return to the fire, and
stew down until you have one cupful of puree. Blend the flour and butter
together in a double boiler; stir in the tomato-celery puree, and stir
until smooth and thick; season with kitchen boquet, salt and pepper. If
too thick, add a little water or stock. This is fine to serve with meat
loaf, salmon loaf or rice croquettes, etc.


SAUCE BERNAISE

Heat a granite saucepan slightly and break into it four eggs. Beat the
eggs briskly over a slow fire, but do not let them boil; mix four
tablespoonfuls hot water and two tablespoonfuls beef extract, and as the
eggs begin to cook stir in the mixture, adding the juice of one lemon,
one tablespoonful onion juice and one teaspoonful Tarragon vinegar, salt
and pepper. When this is well mixed pour on beef-steak and serve.


MINT SAUCE

One bunch mint; one tablespoonful sugar; three-fourths cup vinegar.
Rinse the mint in cold water; chop very fine; dissolve the sugar in the
vinegar; add the mint; let it stand for one hour to infuse before using.
If the same is wanted hot, heat the vinegar and stir in the mint just
before using.


SAUCE ALLEMANDE

Mrs. Bertha C. Hansen

Four tablespoonfuls butter; four tablespoonfuls flour; one egg yolk; one
cup white stock; one cup cream; one-half teaspoonful salt; few grains
pepper. Make same as a thin white sauce. Just before serving, add the
yolk of one egg and cook slightly.


HORSE-RADISH DRESSING FOR ROAST BEEF

Mrs. E. D. Gotchy

To a cup of grated horse-radish, add two tablespoonfuls of sugar;
one-half teaspoonful salt; one-half cup thick, sweet, cream. Mix the
ingredients thoroughly, then add vinegar to taste.




VEGETABLES

          "_Oh, muckle is the powerful grace
            That lies in herbs._"


A PORTO RICAN DINNER

Mrs. G. W. Plummer

One quart cooked red kidney beans (canned beans are good and save fire);
four good sized ripe tomatoes (or the solid tomatoes from a can); four
medium sized onions; four green sweet peppers; one-fourth pound nut
meats (pecans, almonds or English walnuts are best); two dozen green
olives; salt to taste.

Process: If tomatoes are fresh, skin and put in a chopping bowl with
onions and peppers, which last should have seeds and white fiber first
removed; chop all until about size of a lima bean. Put into skillet a
heaping tablespoonful of drippings, from ham or bacon preferred; when
hot add chopped vegetables and cook until all are soft and well blended.
About fifteen minutes before serving add nut meats and olives cut into
strips. In the meantime, heat the beans by themselves; turn all together
and cook ten minutes, when it is ready to serve.

Service: Half an hour before time to serve, wash well, enough rice to
make a border around your chop platter. Put it into gallopin boiling
water, quite heavily salted; water should be at least four times
quantity of rice. Boil until barely done; drain in a collander and set
to drain in the mouth of the oven for five minutes.

Dispose around the edge of the platter; pour the bean mixture (which
should be moist), in the middle, garnish with a wreath of parsley
between rice and beans.

This, with a green salad and French dressing is an abundant and
satisfying dinner. No meat should be served.


STUFFED POTATOES

Select large uniform sized potatoes. Scrub them with a vegetable brush.
Bake in a hot oven, the temperature of the oven should be such that it
will bake a potato of medium size in forty to forty-five minutes. Remove
a thin slice from the side lengthwise of potatoes; scoop out the pulp,
pass through the ricer; add two tablespoonfuls of butter or bacon fat;
moisten with hot milk; add two tablespoonfuls each finely chopped chives
or onion. Season with salt and pepper, beat thoroughly and return to the
shells, using pastry bag and tube, brush over with slightly beaten egg
and return to oven to brown delicately.


A "DIFFERENT" DINNER

Mrs. G. W. Plummer

A fine, firm head of cauliflower; enough rice to form a border for your
chop platter; four tablespoonfuls grated or shredded ripe cheese; one
teacupful rich milk; two tablespoonfuls bacon drippings. Garnish with
blanched lettuce leaves, canned pimento and parsley.

Process: Wash, trim and put to boil in a large granite or aluminum
kettle, the whole head of cauliflower in plenty of salted water. Do not
cover. When about half done, put into an iron skillet two tablespoonfuls
of bacon drippings and when smoking hot turn in the dry rice which has
previously been well washed and dried on a clean towel. Parch this rice
in the drippings, stirring constantly until a golden brown. Then dip the
water in which the cauliflower boils, spoonful by spoonful, into the
rice; as it absorbs the water add more until the rice is puffed, dry and
thoroughly done; a little onion may be cooked in with rice if liked. In
the meantime make a fine, thick white sauce, using butter and twice the
quantity of flour; cook but do not brown; add milk and rub smooth; add
shredded cheese, red pepper and salt; cook to a smooth masking sauce.

Service: Put cauliflower, unbroken, in center of platter; mask with
sauce and sprinkle with grated cheese. Around the flower dispose the
lettuce in such a way as to simulate a growing head. Encircle this with
border of rice and put an outside border of parsley. The pimento should
be cut in strips and laid up the sides of flower inside lettuce leaves.


SUNDAY NIGHT SUPPER DISH

Mrs. G. W. Plummer

Wash round, solid, medium sized tomatoes (one for each service) and cut
in half but do not skin. Insert slivers of onion in each half tomato on
cut side. Dip cut side in egg, beaten with a little water, seasoned with
salt and paprika; then in rolled bread crumbs or rolled shredded wheat
biscuit. Two tablespoonfuls of bacon drippings heated to a smoke in
skillet or on cake griddle. Put in tomatoes, cut side down, and fry
until a golden brown; then turn carefully; reduce heat and cook gently
until cooked but not broken. Remove to platter and place on each a
generous spoonful of the following sauce:

Sauce: Add dripping to that in skillet in which tomatoes were cooked to
make two tablespoonfuls; add four tablespoonfuls flour; one thin slice
of onion and cook four minutes; add two cups milk; celery salt, salt and
pepper and when incorporated add one-half cupful grated or shredded
cheese and cook until smooth.


CUBAN RICE

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

One and one-half pounds fresh pork, ground; one onion, chopped; one egg;
salt and pepper. Make into little round balls. One quart of tomatoes,
strained. Boil meat balls in tomato juice for one hour. Cook rice and
serve as a vegetable, pouring meat and tomatoes around it on platter.


INDIAN VEGETABLE CURRY

Mrs. Jean Wallace Butler

One pound can baked beans; one pound can lima beans; one pound can green
string beans; one pound can wax beans; two pound can tomatoes; eight
large onions; one heaping teaspoonful Cross & Blackwell's curry; one
tablespoonful salad oil. Remove all vegetables from cans; heat the beans
in large cooking vessel; heat tomatoes separately, seasoning very
strongly with salt and pepper. Slice onions and boil in water. When
sufficiently cooked, add onions and tomatoes to other vegetables. Fry
curry in salad oil to a nice brown. Add to the vegtables, and simmer
half an hour. While this is simmering, boil rice to serve on plate with
curry. This serves ten people. In winter time, for large family you can
double recipe, and keep frozen. Better every time reheated. No bread,
butter or anything else is served with this, except Indian chutney.


POTATO PUFF BALLS

Scoop out the inside of hot baked potatoes, force the pulp through a
ricer, there should be two cups. Add two tablespoonfuls butter; moisten
with rich cream; season with salt and paprika, while beating constantly;
add one slightly beaten egg yolk and one-half teaspoonful finely chopped
parsley; cook one minute, stirring constantly. Remove from range and
fold in the stiffly beaten white of one egg. Shape in balls and roll in
finely chopped seasoned nut meats; place on buttered pan and brown
delicately in the oven. Arrange around broiled whitefish.


POTATO FLUFF

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Pass enough hot boiled potatoes through a ricer to make three cups;
season with pepper, salt, a big piece of butter and half a cup of cream;
beat an egg very light, beat it in the potato; turn into a buttered
baking dish; sprinkle bread crumbs on top and bake until browned.


STUFFED SWEET POTATOES

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Bake three large sweet potatoes; cut in halves lengthwise; carefully
scoop out pulp and press through a ricer. Reserve the shells. Season
with one-half teaspoonful of salt; one-fourth teaspoonful paprika;
one-half tablespoonful powdered sugar; three tablespoonfuls butter; and
one-third cup hot cream or rich milk. Beat them thoroughly, then stir in
one-half cup finely chopped almonds, blanched; refill shells. Cut
marshmallows in four pieces and cover each portion. Bake in a moderate
oven until heated through and marshmallows are delicately browned.


FRENCH FRIED SWEET POTATOES

Mrs. A. M. Cameron

Wash and peel very large sweet potatoes and cut lengthwise; as you would
white potatoes; fry in the same manner and sprinkle lightly with salt;
serve at once.


SWEET POTATO CROQUETTES

Two cupfuls of mashed sweet potatoes; one cupful of hot milk; two eggs;
one teaspoonful salt; two tablespoonfuls of butter; bread crumbs; one
tablespoonful of butter. Beat the potatoes and milk, gradually stir in
the melted butter; salt and one of the eggs well beaten. Form into
croquette balls; dip in beaten egg and bread crumbs. Fry in deep fat
until golden brown. Drain on paper and serve with cream sauce.


POTATO SURPRISE

Prepare a rich mashed potato in the usual way, using six medium-sized
potatoes and hot cream instead of milk. Beat until fluffy, then add one
tablespoonful each finely chopped chives or onion juice and one
tablespoonful parsley; add one-third cup finely minced ham. Beat again
and turn into a buttered baking dish, piling it well in the center.
Cover lightly with buttered cracker crumbs, well seasoned with salt and
pepper. Bake in oven fifteen minutes. Serve in baking dish.


MASHED POTATOES WITH GREEN PEPPERS AND ONIONS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Pass through a ricer six large hot boiled potatoes; add two
tablespoonfuls butter and gradually one-third cupful hot thin cream;
season with salt and whip until light and fluffy. Parboil a green pepper
(removing seeds and veins) eight minutes; drain and chop fine; mix with
two tablespoonfuls finely chopped onion; add gradually to potatoes and
heat again. Serve immediately with roast goose, duck or pork.


JUMBALAYA

Mrs. M. T. Wagner

One minced onion fried in butter; one-half cup of ham minced; one cup of
rice; four cups of tomato juice (if there is not juice enough in a can
of tomatoes to make the required quantity, add water); one teaspoonful
curry powder; one teaspoonful thyme; a few bay leaves broken up fine;
three teaspoonfuls salt and a few grains of cayenne. Mix all together
and bake one and one-quarter hours.


SAVORY RICE

Mrs. W. R. McGhee

Cook one cupful rice, well washed, in three quarts boiling salted water
until partly done; drain; add to rice two cupfuls well seasoned chicken
broth; put into double boiler and let it steam until rice is soft and
stock is absorbed. Stir in one-fourth cup butter and one tablespoonful
finely chopped chives or onion; if onion is used then add one-half
tablespoonful chopped parsley.


EASY RICE CROQUETTES

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Two cups boiled rice (salted); one beaten egg; grated rind of one lemon;
add to rice, roll in flour; fry in hot lard. Lay on brown paper and
sprinkle well with sugar. Have rice as soft as possible.


STUFFED TOMATOES WITH SHRIMP

Mrs. J. E. Kelly

Use six large tomatoes, and scrape out pulp; put little butter in pan
and fry the pulp with one small onion, cut fine, and one can of shrimps;
add one egg (beaten), and enough bread crumbs to make soft filling.
Season with salt and pepper. Fill tomatoes, and sprinkle dry bread
crumbs, or cracker crumbs, over top and small piece of butter on each.
Bake fifteen minutes and serve hot.


RICE WITH TOMATOES AND GREEN PEPPERS

Finely chop one Bermuda onion, two green peppers; mix with one cup
minced raw ham. Saute ten minutes (without browning) in four
tablespoonfuls butter. Add one cup of washed rice and three cups of
chicken stock or beef broth. Simmer one-half hour stirring occasionally
with a fork. Then add four tomatoes peeled and chopped; one-half
tablespoonful salt; a few grains cayenne and one-fourth teaspoonful
paprika. Cover and cook over hot water until rice is tender. Serve as a
vegetable.


SPAGHETTI--ITALIAN STYLE

Mrs. J. H. Shanley

One package spaghetti, unbroken, boiled until tender, then let cold
water run through it. Fill iron spider with sliced onions and cook until
tender, not brown; add two small green peppers, chopped fine; one can
mushrooms and one pound chopped steak. Cook together long enough to
season, about ten minutes. Put in with the spaghetti in a baking dish,
and add one quart tomatoes, strained. Mix thoroughly and sprinkle with
grated cheese, viz: layer of spaghetti, then cheese, etc. Also put
cheese on top to form crust. Bake until heated through.


ITALIAN SPAGHETTI

Mrs. C. A. Jennings

One heaping tablespoonful butter; two medium-sized onions; one bead of
garlic; one can tomatoes; two-thirds package spaghetti. Cut onions and
garlic fine and put in saucepan to fry with butter a light brown. Add
the tomatoes, strained and let simmer one hour. Put spaghetti in large
vessel of salted boiling water and keep boiling fast for forty minutes.
Have hot dish ready; into this put spaghetti and tomatoes and a small
cup of grated Herkimer or other snappy American cheese. Mix thoroughly;
serve with small dish of same cheese to springle over spaghetti at
table.


SCALLOPED TOMATOES

Alice Clock

One No. 3 size tin of tomatoes; one medium-sized onion; six slices
bacon; two cups fresh bread crums. Chop the onion and bacon, fry to
crisp brown; place first a layer of tomatoes, then a layer of bread
crumbs, then a layer of onion and bacon; over which salt and pepper is
shaken. Repeat layers until all material is used. Bake forty-five
minutes in moderate oven.


ITALIAN MACARONI

Mrs. W. I. Clock

One-half pound streaky salt pork, no bones, very little lean meat; three
onions; a suspicion of garlic; one teacup of chopped parsley; one No. 3
can of tomatoes; four heaping teaspoonfuls granulated sugar; one
teaspoonful salt; one-fourth teaspoonful pepper; two tablespoonfuls of
grated Parmesan cheese; one pound of spaghetti. Put finely chopped pork,
onions and parsley into frying pan and fry to nice brown; add sugar,
salt, pepper and cheese. At same time the above is cooking have the
tomatoes heating in enameled saucepan; also have water boiling ready to
put spaghetti in, for it must actually boil twenty-five minutes to be
tender. After the tomatoes have cooked about ten minutes, put through
sieve and add to pork and onions and let all simmer while spaghetti
cooks. Put spaghetti in collander to drain. Serve by placing a layer of
spaghetti in deep dish, then sauce and cheese, and so on each layer
until all material is used; serve very hot.


MACARONI

Mrs. Gussie Enos

Boil macaroni one-half hour. Put one pint milk; one and one-half cups
grated cheese; one tablespoonful butter; one tablespoonful flour; salt
and pepper together and boil all until smooth. Put layer of macaroni and
layer of sauce with sauce on top. Bake one-half hour.


HOMINY CROQUETTES

To one-half cup hominy (taken from a carton); add two cups hot stewed
and strained tomato pulp; cook in a double boiler until hominy is
tender. Stir in two tablespoonfuls butter; three-fourths teaspoonful
salt; one-fourth teaspoonful paprika. Spread mixture on a plate to cool.
Then shape into balls the size of small lemons, roll in crumbs, dip in
egg and again in crumbs and fry in hot deep fat. Drain on brown paper
and serve with cheese sauce.


HOMINY GRITS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Put two cupfuls of milk and two of water into a double boiler; add a
little salt and one cupful of hominy grits; let boil hard one hour; do
not stir. The moisture will all be absorbed and it will be light and
creamy. Use as a vegetable or in place of potatoes.


TOMATOES, CREOLE STYLE

Wash and wipe the desired number of medium-sized tomatoes. Cut a slice
from the blossom ends, scoop out pulp, sprinkle with salt in the inside,
invert on plate, let stand one hour. Melt two tablespoonfuls butter, add
two tablespoonfuls flour mixed with one-half teaspoonful salt,
one-fourth teaspoonful paprika and few grains cayenne. Stir until
blended, then pour on slowly one-half cup cream. Stir until smooth and
add one cup green corn, cut from cob, and mixed with one-half
tablespoonful each red and green pepper, finely chopped. Flavor
delicately with onion juice. Fill tomatoes, cover with buttered crumbs
and bake in moderate oven until tomatoes and corn are tender.


TOMATOES ON HALF SHELL

Mrs. R. McNeil

Cut tomatoes in half without peeling. Place them in baking dish. Put in
a piece of butter on each, and dust with salt and pepper. Put in oven
and cook until tender. Have ready squares of toasted bread. On each
place a half tomato and pour around white sauce and serve hot.


BAKED TOMATOES

Mrs. W. O. King

Select nice smooth tomatoes; slice off top and remove pulp and seeds.
Rub this through collander. Add one-half cup of each bread and cracker
crumbs, pepper, salt and minced onion to tomatoes with a little butter.
Stuff tomatoes, place top on, using toothpicks; bake one hour in a
moderate oven.


FRIED TOMATOES

Mrs. C. S. Junge

Green or ripe tomatoes may be used. Slice and dip in flour. Place in
skillet with plenty of bacon fat and a little butter. Fry until brown
and lift carefully onto a platter. In the remaining fat stir a
tablespoonful of flour, then pour a cup and a half of milk. When
creamed, turn over tomatoes and serve.


BAKED NOODLES

Mrs. E. Lewis Phelps

One box of home made noodles, boil until tender then drain. Butter a
baking dish; put in a layer of noodles; sprinkle with grated cheese and
seasoning; then another layer of noodles; then two cups of cooked boiled
ham chopped fine; chopped green pepper and chopped onion; put the
remainder of noodles on top and add cheese, etc. Beat up four or five
eggs; add milk enough to cover all the noodles. Set pan into pan of
water and bake slowly until eggs are done. Can add buttered cracker
crumbs on top if liked.


CORN PUDDING

Helen M. Bailey

Six ears corn; two eggs; one-half pint milk; pinch salt; pinch pepper;
cut corn from cob, beat eggs, and add milk, eggs and seasoning to corn.
Bake until light brown.


CORN OYSTERS

Mrs. E. S. Smith

Mix one pint of grated corn; three tablespoonfuls of milk; one teacup of
flour; a piece of butter the size of an egg. Drop by dessertspoonfuls
into a little hot butter. Fry on both sides.


CORN CROQUETTES

One cupful of stewed or canned corn; one-half cupful of dried bread
crumbs; one-half cupful of milk; one beaten egg; one teaspoonful of
salt; one teaspoonful of baking powder; one tablespoonful of flour. Chop
corn, mix with bread crumbs, milk and other ingredients. Drop from spoon
into deep fat and fry until light brown.


GREEN PEPPERS STUFFED WITH RICE, TOMATOES AND NUT MEATS

Cut a slice from the stem ends of six medium-sized mild, green peppers;
remove seeds and veins; parboil in boiling water eight minutes. Drain.
Have ready one and one-half cups hot boiled rice; mix with three-fourths
cup thick tomato puree; add one cup chopped English walnut meats. Season
with salt, pepper and a few grains of cayenne; add one teaspoonful each
finely chopped parsley and chives or onion. Fill peppers. Arrange on
buttered dripping pan; cover with buttered cracker crumbs and bake in
oven until heated through and crumbs are brown.


GREEN PEPPERS STUFFED WITH ONIONS

Parboil six green peppers eight minutes (discarding seeds and veins) in
boiling water to cover. Drain, keep warm. Cover one-half dozen silver
skin onions with boiling water, heat to boiling point and drain. Cover
again, with boiling salted water and cook until tender, drain and finely
chop, mix with one cup soft bread crumbs, add three tablespoonfuls
melted butter, season highly with salt, pepper and one-half teaspoonful
finely chopped parsley. Fill prepared peppers (if too dry add one
tablespoonful cream) with mixture, cover with buttered crumbs, set them
in buttered gem pans and bake in oven until peppers are tender and
crumbs are brown.


GREEN PEPPERS STUFFED WITH CORN

Mrs. T. D. Caliger

Select sweet green peppers of medium size; cut a thick slice from stem
ends; remove seeds and veins. Soak in salt water one hour, drain, and
fill with following mixture. Put three cups of canned corn into a
saucepan, with two tablespoonfuls finely chopped green peppers, butter
and one tablespoonful of onion juice. Simmer slowly fifteen minutes,
stirring often to prevent burning. Cover tops of peppers with buttered
bread crumbs, and bake one-half hour in moderate oven.


EGG PLANT AND SHRIMP

Mrs. Ada Woods

Boil a whole egg plant, cutting off the stem end. When done take off
skin and put the inside to drain. Put a cup of stale bread crumbs, a
grated onion, salt and pepper, tablespoonful parsley and a clove of
garlic minced fine, in a skillet with two tablespoonfuls bacon
drippings, and fry until brown; add this to the egg plant, put in two
dozen shrimps, broken up, and when all is well mixed put in the oven and
brown.


FRENCH FRIED EGG PLANT

Mrs. A. M. Cameron

Prepare egg plant in the usual way; drain and cut as you would potatoes
for French fry; sprinkle with salt, pepper and flour; place in a frying
basket and fry strips until crisp and a pretty brown; drain on brown
paper.


BAKED STUFFED EGG PLANT

Cut slice from stem end; reserve for cover, scoop out inside, leaving a
wall one-fourth inch thick, sprinkle inside with salt and pepper, finely
chop pulp. Cook one-half onion, finely chopped, in one tablespoonful
butter three minutes without browning, add three fresh mushrooms, finely
chopped, four tablespoonfuls finely chopped lean raw ham, season with
salt, pepper; cook five minutes, stirring constantly. Add egg plant
pulp, three-fourths cup soft bread crumbs, one-half teaspoonful finely
chopped parsley. Mix well, refill shell, cover with buttered crumbs.
Bake in moderate oven forty-five minutes.


NEW STRING BEANS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Cut two thin slices of bacon crosswise in narrow shreds, using shears
for this purpose. Saute to a delicate brown. Add two cups hot, cooked,
well-drained string beans and one-half tablespoonful grated onion or
onion juice. Shake the frying pan to thoroughly mix the ingredients,
season with salt and pepper. Turn into hot serving dish.


CREAMED PEAS AS AN ENTREE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Cut with a cookie cutter a round of bread from a thick slice, then a
ring with a doughnut cutter. Dip in melted butter and toast a delicate
brown in the oven. Fill them with peas in cream sauce.


FRENCH FRIED ONIONS

Bertha Z. Bishee

Peel onions, slice and separate rings. Beat an egg, white and yolk
together; salt and pepper to taste and stir in enough flour--about a
tablespoonful--to make a thin batter. Pour over the onion rings, making
sure that they are well coated, and fry a handful at a time in deep fat,
which must be hot enough to brown quickly. Drain and serve covered with
a napkin.


BAKED SPANISH ONION

Alice Clock

Three Spanish onions; two cups of fresh bread crumbs; one pint milk; one
heaping tablespoonful butter. Take greased baking dish. Place alternate
layers of sliced onion, and bread crumbs, seasoning each layer with salt
and pepper. When materials are used up, pour over the pint of milk; and
the butter cut in small pieces is placed on the top last. Bake slowly,
until onion can be pierced easily.


SCALLOPED CABBAGE

Miss Kennedy

Cut one-half of boiled cabbage in small pieces; sprinkle with salt,
pepper and one finely chopped pimento; pour over one and one-fourth cups
thin white sauce, mixed with one-third cup grated cheese. Mix well and
turn into a buttered baking dish; cover with buttered and seasoned
cracker crumbs. Place in oven and bake until crumbs are brown.


CABBAGE ROLLS

Mrs. C. S. Junge

Parboil in salt water the large leaves of a cabbage. Take them from the
water and place singly on the cake board and pepper them. Mix half and
half, chopped beef and pork and season. Make into rolls twice the size
of an egg. Round these roll several cabbage leaves and fasten with tooth
picks. Place these in the skillet with two tablespoonfuls of bacon fat
or lard with a little butter. Turn in a small amount of water and cook
covered over a slow fire. When water cooks off add more in small
quantities for nearly an hour. Remove tooth picks and serve.


CAULIFLOWER AU GRATIN

Miss June Baumgardner

Boil cauliflower until tender; separate so that a flower will be in each
ramekin. Make a white sauce and grate three tablespoonfuls yellow
American cheese in it; when the cheese is melted pour over the vegetable
in ramekin, put a few buttered bread crumbs on top and put in the oven
to brown.


PARSNIP SAUTE

Wash parsnips and cook until tender in boiling water. Drain and cover
with cold water; with the hands slip off the skins. Mash and rub through
a strainer. Season pulp with salt, pepper and butter, shape in flat
cakes and dredge with flour. Saute a golden brown in equal parts hot
butter and chicken fat.


FRIED SUMMER SQUASH

Wash, wipe and cut tender squash in one-half inch slices, sprinkle with
salt, pepper and dredge with flour, dip in egg, then in fine cracker
crumbs, repeat and fry in deep, hot fat, drain and serve.


CREAMED CELERY CABBAGE

Mrs. H. Clay Calhoun

Cut celery cabbage in inch lengths, boil until tender in salted water;
drain and pour over a rich cream sauce.


BAKED, STUFFED ARTICHOKES

Mrs. Francis A. Sieber

Six artichokes; four ounces fat pork; two cups chopped mushrooms; two
tablespoonfuls chopped shallots; one teaspoonful minced parsley; one
tablespoonful flour; one tablespoonful butter; one-half cup spinach
sauce; one-half teaspoonful salt, a little pepper, nutmeg; one cup
broth; one glass white wine. Prepare artichokes, boil thirty minutes and
drain. Mince pork and fry with shallots; add mushrooms and parsley and
simmer ten minutes. Blend with it the flour mixed with butter; add
Spanish sauce and seasoning. Stuff artichokes, and tie each with string;
brown outside in a little olive oil, add the broth and wine. Cover and
cook forty minutes in moderate oven. When they are ready to serve remove
the strings and arrange on a hot platter and pour the sauce over them.
Garnish with a whole mushroom on top of each.


MUSHROOMS

Mrs. H. P. E. Hafer

Peal one pound fresh mushrooms. Fry in butter slowly for three-quarters
of an hour. Add two cups of soup stock and one-half cup of cream and
thicken with flour. Serve on toast.


STUFFED MUSHROOMS

Mrs. K. Larson

Brush twelve large mushrooms. Remove stems. Chop finely, and peel caps.
Melt three tablespoonfuls butter, and one-half tablespoonful finely
chopped shallot, and chopped stems. Then cook ten minutes. Add one and
one-half tablespoonfuls of flour, chicken stock to moisten, a slight
grating of nutmeg, and one-half teaspoonful finely chopped parsley, salt
and pepper to taste. Cool mixture and fill caps, well rounding over top.
Cover with buttered cracker crumbs, and bake fifteen minutes in a hot
oven.


STEWED MUSHROOMS

Mrs. E. R. Hornig

Peel and wash mushrooms, cut one or two onions very fine and stew in a
tablespoonful of butter, add mushrooms, season with pepper and salt and
sprinkle over a little flour. Cook about fifteen minutes and serve hot.


STEWED CUCUMBERS

Mrs. E. R. Hornig

Pare and cut lengthwise in quarters, remove seeds. Put into hot butter,
or finely cut bacon, season with salt and pepper. Cook about fifteen
minutes over a slow fire, or until they appear glossy. Add a teaspoonful
vinegar or a little sour cream. Serve hot.


FRIED CUCUMBERS

Mrs. William H. Fahrney

Peel and slice, medium thick, large cucumbers; dip in batter and cracker
crumbs and fry in hot fat until brown.


KOHLRABBI

Mrs. E. R. Hornig

Take three bunches of kohlrabbi, remove hard leaves, strip tender leaves
from their ribs, cut them up fine. Peel kohlrabbi, cut in slices quarter
of an inch thick, and add tender green leaves. Put on to boil with cold
water, just enough to cover, until tender. Season with pepper and salt,
blend a teaspoonful of flour with butter, add to vegetable, and stew a
few minutes longer. Serve hot.




SALADS

          "_'Twould tempt the dying anchorite to eat;
            Back to the world, he'd turn his weary soul,
            And plunge his fingers in the salad bowl._"


TEA SALAD

Mrs. Frederick Dunn

Upon a leaf of head lettuce, place a round of boiled ham. (One slice of
ham will make two rounds.) Then place a thick slice of tomato; and next
a half a hard boiled egg, cut crosswise; then a ring of sweet green
peppers; and over all pour Thousand Island dressing. Garnish with
parsley and radish rosettes. Two such portions served on a salad plate
makes an appetizing dish, or it can be served on a large platter at the
table, or passed.


PERFECTION SALAD

Mrs. Louis Geyler

One envelope Knox's sparkling gelatine; one-half cup cold water;
one-half cup mild vinegar; one pint boiling water; one teaspoonful salt;
one cup finely shredded celery; one cucumber chopped finely; one bunch
radishes chopped; one green pepper chopped; one-half cup sugar; juice of
one lemon; little onion juice; seeds of one pomegranite. Soak gelatine
in cold water five minutes; add vinegar; lemon juice; onion juice;
boiling water; sugar and salt. Strain and when beginning to set, add
ingredients. Turn into ring mold and chill. Serve on lettuce leaves,
garnish with asparagus tips in center and tomatoes quartered around it.
Use cooked mayonnaise as dressing.


CHICKEN SALAD

Mrs. Jarvis Weed

To the white meat and a very little bit of the dark meat of a chicken
add one cupful blanched almonds, a cupful of celery and about six slices
of Hawaiian pineapple shredded. Cover with an oil mayonnaise and mix
well.


FROZEN FRUIT SALAD

Mrs. C. H. Bushnell

Three cakes blue label cream cheese; one-half pint mayonnaise dressing;
one pint whipped cream; one ten-cent bottle maraschino cherries; one can
white cherries; one can pineapple cut fine; one-half cup pecan nuts.
Beat cheese to cream, mix with fruit, put in melon mold and freeze about
three hours. Serve on lettuce with mayonnaise.


FROZEN SALAD

Mrs. A. E. Kaltenbrun

Five eggs beaten separately. One cup of vinegar; one cup of milk and
cream mixed; one tablespoonful butter; one-half teaspoonful mustard;
one-fourth teaspoonful salt; one cup of sugar. Cook until thick. Let
cool and add: two bottles whipping cream, any kind of fruit--preferably
pineapple, oranges, peaches, etc., and freeze like a mousse. Baking
powder can molds are splendid. Slice and serve with cherry on lettuce.


FROZEN SALAD

Mrs. Thos. D. Caliger

Melt one tablespoonful butter and add yolks of two eggs, well beaten;
mix three and one-half tablespoonfuls flour, three tablespoonfuls sugar,
one teaspoonful salt, one-third teaspoonful paprika, few grains cayenne.
Add to the above mixture: Two-thirds cup milk; one-third cup vinegar.
Cook same in double boiler until thick. Stir constantly; when cooked,
beat two minutes and chill; then add two large tablespoonfuls of
pineapple juice, four cupfuls of fruit cut fine, one bottle of whipped
cream. Pack in ice and salt for three hours. Slice and serve on lettuce
leaves.


HAWAIIAN SALAD

Mrs. C. A. Jennings

One large or two small heads of lettuce; four medium sized tomatoes; one
alligator pear. Place lettuce leaves on plate with two or three slices
of tomatoes. Cover with rings of alligator pear cut very thin. Serve
with French dressing.

French Dressing: Rub salad dish with bead of garlic (omit if
objectionable). One-half teaspoonful salt, generous dash of paprika,
four tablespoonfuls olive oil, one and one-half tablespoonfuls vinegar.
This will serve six people.


COTTAGE CHEESE AND PRUNE SALAD

Mrs. Lyman Holsey

One and one-fourth cups cottage cheese; one and one-half dozen medium
sized prunes: one-fourth cup chopped hickory nuts; one-fourth
teaspoonful salt; dash paprika. Wash prunes. Remove pits and let soak
over night. Mix remaining ingredients and stuff prunes with this
mixture. Place on lettuce leaf and serve with French dressing.


FRUIT SALAD

Belle Hallen Molt

One can pineapple cubed; one pound Malaga grapes seeded and cut in half;
one-fourth pound pecans; one-fourth pound marshmallows cut in half.

Dressing: Yolks of four eggs; one-half teaspoonful mustard; one-half
teaspoonful salt; juice of one lemon; one-half cup of cream; boil in
double boiler until thick and smooth. Let this get cold and add one-half
pint whipped cream and pour over and mix thoroughly with fruit and let
stand in icebox four hours before serving, giving the marshmallows a
chance to become creamy. It will come out like a thick fluff.


FRUIT SALAD

Mrs. C. B. Martin

Into a quart of boiling water, put two packages of lemon jello; when
thoroughly dissolved, strain; and when cool mix in one cup of chopped
nuts; one cup of green grapes, seeded and cut in half; one cup of sliced
pineapple; one-half cup pimento; two cups chopped cabbage; stir and add
to jello.


FRUIT SALAD

Mrs. J. Blackburn

Green California grapes cut in half and seeded, a little celery cut in
dice, pecan nuts cut in halves and a few quartered olives. Mix carefully
with salad dressing and before serving add one-half cup of cream.


BEST EVER SALAD

Mrs. Kathryn M. Haskell

One orange cut in quarters; one banana cut in small oblong pieces; one
small can of pineapple cut in small pieces; one-half cup chopped English
walnuts.

Dressing: Two eggs beaten lightly; one-fourth cup pineapple juice;
one-fourth cup lemon juice; one-half cup sugar; cook until it thickens;
let get cold and pour over fruit.


TOMATO STUFFED WITH COTTAGE CHEESE AND ALMONDS

Katherine Blade

Peel nice ripe tomatoes; scoop out the centers and fill with cottage
cheese and minced almonds; place a spoonful mayonnaise on top and
sprinkle minced almonds over the mayonnaise.


TOMATO EN SURPRISE

Mrs. J. E. Kelly

Peel a nice large tomato and empty its contents; take some cold slaw and
celery hashed up very fine and mix it with mayonnaise dressing; and add
a pinch of salt and a dash of paprika. Mix well and fill the tomato with
this mixture. The tomatoes must be served very cold.


A NOVEL SALAD DISH

Mrs. Campbell

Take large and long cucumbers, cut them through the middle lengthwise,
scrape out the inside and one has a pretty green boat in which to serve
the salad. This is particularly pretty with lobster or shrimp salad on
account of the contrast in the color.


CHRISTMAS SALAD

Marian Blade

Two large grapefruit; one cup chopped celery; one cup chopped tart
apples; one-half cup hickory nut meats. Cut grapefruit in small pieces,
being careful to remove all partitions and tough parts. Drain off juice,
add celery, apples, nuts and mayonnaise. Toss together and serve on
small leaves of cabbage. Garnish with round pieces of pimentos to
resemble holly berries and pieces of green pepper cut to resemble holly
leaves.


DATE AND PINEAPPLE SALAD

Mrs. Lyman

One pound dates; four slices pineapple; one cup nut meats. Wash the
dates and steam for five minutes, dry in oven. Cut in half removing the
seed. Chop nut meats. Cut pineapple into small cubes and mix with nut
meats. Marinate with French dressing and stuff dates with mixture. Serve
on lettuce leaf with Mayonnaise dressing.


NEAPOLITAN SALAD

Mrs. Lyman Holsey

Two cups of cottage cheese; one-half cum cream; one-half teaspoonful
salt. Mix cheese with cream and salt. Color one-third of mixture with
beet juice, pink. Mold in brick shaped tin which has been dipped in very
cold water. Put in a layer of white, then the pink, then white. Chill
thoroughly before turning out. Slice with very sharp knife dipped in hot
water. Serve on lettuce leaves.


ANCHOVIE BONNES-BOUCHES

Mrs. Trumen

Fillet some anchovies, cut them into thin strips, and put them on a dish
with some shredded lettuce leaves, small radishes, some capers, thin
slices of lemon and chopped parsley. Arrange all tastefully, season with
lemon juice mixed with salad oil, garnish with stoned olives and the
yolks and the whites of hard boiled eggs.


CUCUMBER SALAD

Mrs. J. T. Brown

One cucumber cut very fine; one can grated pineapple; juice of four
lemons; sugar to taste; two tablespoonfuls of gelatine. Cook the
gelatine in a little water; then add the juice of pineapple and lemons;
when it begins to set add the cucumber and pineapple. Put in molds,
serve with a cream mayonnaise dressing.


CUCUMBER SALAD

Mrs. Maxwell

Peel the cucumbers, cut them in thin slices without cutting the slices
off, thus giving the appearance of a whole cucumber. Insert in each
opening thin slices of radishes with the peel on, sliced to the exact
size of the cucumber. Chill thoroughly and serve with French dressing.


BUTTER BEAN SALAD

Mrs. Lyman

One pint butter beans (canned or cooked); one cup chopped celery; one
tablespoonful finely chopped onion; one tablespoonfud finely chopped
green pepper. Mix ingredients together lightly. Garnish with grated
cheese, and serve with French dressing.


CREAM CHEESE

Mrs. C. E. Ellis

One Neufachatel cheese; one-half that quantity of butter; one
tablespoonful cream; dash of tabasco sauce or cayenne pepper. Tint pink
with vegetable coloring; roll in nuts, finely chopped. Serve on a
lettuce leaf.


BANANA SALAD

Cut bananas lengthwise, roll them in mayonnaise then in ground peanuts
and serve on lettuce leaves.


NORMANDY SALAD

Mrs. Theresa B. Orr

One can French peas washed and strained. One-half pound English walnuts
cut the size of the peas. Mix dressing with nuts. Toss with peas and
serve on lettuce leaves.


PIQUANT RAISINS FOR SALADS

Mrs. Lyman

Carefully seed one-half pound cluster raisins. Rinse quickly in hot
water and drain well. Add one-fourth cup cold water, let stand one or
two hours, then simmer, covered, until raisins begin to plump. Add one
tablespoonful of Tarragon vinegar and simmer until vinegar is absorbed.
Remove from fire, place tea towel under cover to absorb moisture and let
stand until cold. These raisins are used as garnish or component part of
salads.


CABBAGE SLAW

Mrs. T. M. Butler

Chop up very fine one-half of medium sized cabbage head, one stalk of
celery and one sweet pepper, salt to season, add one-half cup of sugar
and enough vinegar to moisten the mixture.


POTATO SALAD

Four cupfuls sliced boiled potatoes; one small onion, chopped; one-half
cupful weak vinegar; one teaspoonful salt; one-eighth teaspoonful
pepper; three tablespoonfuls olive oil; two slices bacon diced; four
stalks celery; chopped lettuce; one tablespoonful minced parsley. Put
onion in a large bowl, add salt and vinegar, and let stand ten minutes;
then slice in the potatoes while still warm and mix thoroughly. Add oil,
the celery cut fine, the bacon fried to a crisp, and the bacon fat; then
the parsley. Arrange on a bed of lettuce and garnish with beets and hard
cooked eggs that have been chopped.


POTATO SALAD

Mrs. Campbell

Cut cold boiled potatoes into dice and mix them with two minced raw
onions and one tablespoonful minced parsley. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper to taste, stir lightly together and add one small diced cucumber
and a hard boiled egg, also diced. Set in ice box for an hour. When
ready to serve, stir in one cucumber cut into dice and mix with
two-thirds cupful of salad dressing. Garnish with hard boiled eggs and
olives.


TO SERVE WITH A SALAD

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Cream together one cake Blue Label Cream Cheese, and one-quarter pound
or less of Roquefort cheese; fold into this one bottle of cream whipped
stiff. This will serve eight people.


HAM SALAD

Edna Blade

Chop one cupful of cooked ham very fine. Soak one tablespoonful of Knox
gelatine in one tablespoonful of cold water for half an hour, then
dissolve in one cupful of hot water with one teaspoonful each of onion
juice and chopped parsley. Add to the ham and stir occasionally until
the mixture thickens; fold in one cupful of whipped cream and add
one-half saltspoonful of paprika. Form it into little basket shapped
molds and, when set, partly fill each little pink basket with
mayonnaise. Surround with tiny lettuce leaves and simulate handles by
two arched plumes of parsley. Placed on pretty plates, these form a
delectable decorative fancy. If the larder does not contain the leftover
meat, a can of deviled ham may be substituted.


LOBSTER SALAD

Mrs. Campbell

Take a can of lobster, taking care to free it from any pieces of shell;
set it on ice while you make a good mayonnaise dressing and set that on
ice also. Have ready one-half as much celery as you have lobster, cut
into one-half inch lengths; mix lobster meat and celery together,
sprinkle with salt and cayenne, then stir in one cup of mayonnaise.
Arrange two or three lettuce leaves together to form a shell and put two
or three teaspoonfuls of the salad on each. Garnish with hard boiled
eggs cut lengthwise.


OYSTER SALAD

Miss Anna Brennan

Allow six oysters to each person. Parboil them in their liquid and drain
at once. When cool cut each one in four pieces. Break tender young
leaves of lettuce and mix in equal parts with oysters. Pour over all the
following dressing. Allow one egg to two persons. Boil eggs twenty
minutes. When cold cut whites in slices and mix with oysters and
lettuce. Mash yolks fine in deep bowl and add one raw yolk. Stir in
olive oil slowly until it is a smooth paste. Season with lemon juice,
English mustard and salt. Add oil until as thick as cream. Pour over
salad.


DANDELION SALAD

Mrs. Maxwell

Pick the young tender leaves of the dandelion, wash and lay in ice water
for half an hour. Drain, shake dry and pat still drier between the folds
of a napkin. Turn into a chilled bowl, cover with a French dressing,
turn the greens over and over in this and send at once to the table.


TOMATO JELLY

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Cook, for twenty minutes, two cups of tomatoes, with slice of onion; one
teaspoonful salt; dash of pepper; strain and add one tablespoonful Knox
gelatine, which has already been soaked in cold water. Stir all until
gelatine is entirely dissolved; then pour in a ring mold that has been
dipped in cold water. When ready to serve turn out on a bed of lettuce
leaves and fill center with chopped celery well mixed with mayonnaise.


SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. H. P. Sieh

One-half cup olive oil; one teaspoonful paprika; one teaspoonful
Worcestershire sauce; a pinch mustard; one-half cup sugar; one-third
teaspoonful salt. Mix all together well and add vinegar until the right
consistency.


SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. E. Hilliard

Three yolks of eggs, one tablespoonful sugar, one-quarter teaspoonful
mustard; one-tenth teaspoonful cayenne pepper, one tablespoonful salt,
one pint sweet oil, few drops at a time, one-quarter cup vinegar,
one-quarter cup lemon juice. Add sweet cream before using.


EXCELLENT SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. Frederick Dunn

Two tablespoonfuls granulated sugar; two teaspoonfuls dry mustard;
little red pepper; eight yolks eggs; eight tablespoonfuls vinegar; two
teaspoonfuls salt; two teaspoonfuls butter. Cook in double boiler five
minutes; when cold add one cup chopped pecan nuts or blanched almonds,
twenty-four chopped marshmallows, two cups whipped cream. Pour over
apricots or fruit salad. Garnish with maraschino cherries. This serves
sixteen persons.


CREAM SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. N. A. Flanders

Two tablespoonfuls butter; two tablespoonfuls sugar; two eggs; one-half
cup whipped cream; one-half teaspoonful salt; one-half teaspoonful
mustard (together); one-eighth cayenne pepper; one-fourth cup vinegar.
Mix sugar, salt and mustard together in small pot, add vinegar and put
on fire to heat. Beat eggs very light in a round bottomed bowl. Add the
vinegar and other ingredients. Stand bowl in a pan of hot water over
fire, and beat with a dover beater until it thickens. Take the bowl out
at once and beat in the butter. Set aside to cool. Add whipped cream
before serving. (Last item not necessary.)


CREAM SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. J. H. Shanley

Four tablespoonfuls butter; one tablespoonful sugar; one-half cupful
vinegar; one tablespoonful flour; one teaspoonful each, salt and dry
mustard; one cupful milk; three eggs; dash cayenne pepper. Let the
butter get hot; add flour and stir until smooth, being careful not to
brown. Add milk, stir, and let boil up. Place saucepan in another of hot
water; beat eggs, salt, mustard, add vinegar and stir into boiling
mixture. Continue stirring until it thickens. When cold, bottle.


MRS. LUFF'S MAYONNAISE

Yolks of three eggs; two teaspoonfuls mustard; one teaspoonful salt; one
saltspoonful white pepper; two tablespoonfuls salad oil: two
tablespoonfuls sugar; one tablespoonful flour, heaping; one-half cup hot
vinegar; one cup milk or cream. Beaten whites added last. Put in double
boiler and stir until it begins to thicken. Take it off stove and beat
until cool.


FRUIT SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. A. R. Swickheimar

Butter size of an egg; three eggs; juice of two oranges; juice of one
lemon; one-half can pineapple juice; one-half cup sugar; one-third
spoonful dry mustard; one teaspoonful flour. Cook in double boiler until
thick; set aside to cool; add one cup of cream, whipped.


FRUIT SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. Frank Sessions

Yolks of two eggs, well beaten; two tablespoonfuls each of oil, vinegar
and sugar; one-half teaspoonful salt and dash of paprika. Put in bowl
over the teakettle, beat until cool. Just before serving add the beaten
whites and a little cream.


FRUIT DRESSING

Mrs. A. E. Kaltenbrun

To the juice of one can of pineapple add: one tablespoonful flour;
one-half cup sugar; a pinch of salt; tablespoonful butter. Cook until
creamy, let cool and add one bottle of whipped cream, one-half pound of
dates and marshmallows. Serve on fruit.


FRUIT SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. T. M. Butler

Two eggs, well beaten, add one cup of sugar; one-half cup of pineapple
juice, one-fourth cup of lemon juice or juice of one lemon. Place in
double boiler and cook until creamy and thick. Let it cool and just
before serving whip one-half pint of cream and stir in the sauce.


SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. W. H. Muschlet

One heaping teaspoonful flour; one heaping teaspoonful Colemans mustard;
one-half cup granulated sugar; one teaspoonful salt; mix all together.
Yolks of three eggs; one-half cup vinegar; one cup cream or cream and
milk; large lump butter; little paprika. Cook in double boiler until
thickened. Before getting cold stir in the beaten whites.


ITALIAN SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. Theresa B. Orr

Yolks of three eggs boiled hard and mashed fine. One small spoonful
salt; one small spoonful mustard; a little cayenne pepper; one
saltspoonful of powdered sugar; four tablespoonfuls olive oil; one
tablespoonful lemon juice; one tablespoonful vinegar. Do not let come to
boil but stir constantly.


SOUR CREAM SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. A. R. Swickheimar

Three eggs beaten with one cup sour cream; two tablespoonfuls sugar;
one-half teaspoonful mustard; one-half cup vinegar; one tablespoonful
flour. Cook in double boiler; when cold, add one-third cup olive oil.


THOUSAND ISLAND DRESSING

Mrs. Carolyn Chandler

To a foundation of either boiled dressing or mayonnaise, add: Chili
sauce, catsup, hard boiled egg and green olives. Serve on either lettuce
hearts or French endive.


THOUSAND ISLAND DRESSING

Mrs. F. B. Woodland

Three tablespoonfuls mayonnaise dressing; one tablespoonful Tarragon
vinegar; two tablespoonfuls chili sauce; one tablespoonful cream; a
little dash salt, pepper and paprika; dash English mustard; and some
chopped chives or onions.


MRS. PHELPS' THOUSAND ISLAND SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. E. Lewis Phelps

Rub the bowl with garlic; two tablespoonfuls cooked salad dressing,
cream this with one tablespoonful chives, cut fine; one tablespoonful
green pepper and one of red peppers, both cut fine; one tablespoonful
roquefort cheese; four tablespoonfuls home made chili sauce.


COOKED SALAD DRESSING

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

One-half tablespoonful salt; one-half tablespoonful flour; two
tablespoonfuls sugar; one teaspoonful dry mustard, little cayenne
pepper; yolks of two eggs; three-fourths cup milk; one-fourth cup
vinegar; butter size of egg. Mix all dry materials, then add eggs well
beaten; butter, milk and vinegar. Cook until thick, stirring constantly.
Thin with cream.


BOILED DRESSING

Mrs. Arthur Hammer

One teaspoonful each of mustard and sugar; two teaspoonfuls flour;
one-half teaspoonful salt; one-eighth teaspoonful paprika; one egg and
one cup of milk. Have butter the size of an egg hot in a spider; have
the above ingredients thoroughly mixed and put in the hot butter,
stirring constantly until thick. Add vinegar and lemon to taste and beat
until smooth.


WALTHAM SALAD DRESSING

B. C. Hansen

One cup of sour cream; two egg yolks; one-fourth cup vinegar; two
teaspoonfuls salt; two teaspoonfuls sugar; one teaspoonful mustard;
one-eighth teaspoonful pepper. To cream, add egg yolks, slightly beaten,
vinegar and remaining ingredients, thoroughly mixed. Cook in double
boiler, stirring constantly, until mixture thickens.


ROQUEFORT CHEESE DRESSING

Mrs. A. E. Kaltenbrun

Take a ripe piece of cheese, cream with a fork and add cream or vinegar
until it makes a paste. Add oil and vinegar, salt and paprika as for
French dressing.


CHEESE MAYONNAISE

Half a cream cheese; four tablespoonfuls of olive oil; one tablespoonful
of vinegar; one teaspoonful of salt; dash of cayenne. Rub the cheese to
a paste with the olive oil, seasonings and vinegar until it is thick
like an egg mayonnaise. To some the flavor of oil is unpleasant, but a
very good mayonnaise can be made without oil, provided you use two eggs
instead of the one egg yolk ordinarily required.




PIES

          "_No soil upon earth is so dear to our eyes
            As the soil we first stirred in terrestrial pies._"


PIE CRUST UNFAILING

Mrs. H. S. Mount

One cup flour; two tablespoonfuls of lard; three tablespoonfuls of
boiling water; pinch salt; baking powder enough to cover the end of
silver knife. Put lard into water. Beat well; then add to dry
ingredients, and roll out.


PIE CRUST

Anna May Price

One cup shortening; one-half cup boiling water; cream. Two cups sifted
flour and two level teaspoonfuls baking powder.


PIE CRUST

Mrs. N. L. Hurlbut

One cup flour; two heaping tablespoonfuls lard; pinch salt; one
teaspoonful baking powder. Cold water enough to make dough. Handle as
little as possible.


LEMON CREAM PIE

Mrs. Becker

Bake crust separate. One heaping tablespoonful lard; one-half cup flour;
two tablespoonfuls water; one-fourth teaspoonful salt. Filling: Two cups
water; juice of one lemon; yolks of two eggs; two tablespoonfuls corn
starch; one-half cup sugar; pinch of salt. Boil filling separate and
when cool fill in baked crust. Beat whites of eggs with two
tablespoonfuls sugar and put on the top.


LEMON PIE

Juice of three lemons; three eggs; pint milk; one-half cup sugar;
one-fourth cup rolled crackers; one lemon rind.


LEMON CREAM PIE

Mrs. Willet Wanzer

Bake the crust, then fill with the following: One cup sugar; one lemon
juice and peel; three egg whites saved for frosting; three heaping
teaspoonfuls flour stirred up in a little cold water; one teacup boiling
water; mix together and boil up. Then place in baked crust. Stir whites
of eggs until thick. Add about one-half cup sugar, a little at a time.
Then place on pie and brown slightly.


LEMON CREAM PIE

Mrs. H. Clay Calhoun

One cupful granulated sugar; one tablespoonful butter, creamed; two
tablespoonfuls flour; juice of one large lemon; yolks of two eggs; one
cupful milk; stir all together and fold the stiffly beaten whites of the
two eggs in last.


LEMON PIE

Mrs. R. F. Morrow

One lemon; one-half orange; one cup sugar; yolks three eggs; one cup
water; one tablespoonful (heaping) flour; one lump butter; beat all
together and cook until thick custard. Put into crust; with whites beat
stiff one spoonful sugar.


FLAT CUSTARD PIE

Mrs. Earl Combs

Four eggs beaten; one quart of milk; two tablespoonfuls flour; one pinch
salt; one tablespoonful butter; put in hot pan. Then pour custard and
bake about twenty minutes. When done put creamed sugar on top while hot.
Creamed sugar. One cup powdered sugar; two tablespoonfuls butter; one
teaspoonful vanilla; cream all together.


CRANBERRY PIE

Mrs. Harry M. Boon

One pint cranberries; one-half cup raisins. Wash and cut up raisins, put
with cranberries with a small cup of sugar; cook and when soft put in
pie crust.


BOSTON CREAM PIE

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

Two cups milk; three-fourths cup sugar; three-fourths cup cocoanut;
pinch salt. Put in double boiler and heat. Teaspoonful vanilla; three
tablespoonfuls corn starch dissolved in a little milk; beaten whites of
four eggs last; then beat steadily. Bake crust first. Beat a bottle of
cream until stiff; sweeten it with three tablespoonfuls of powdered
sugar and a teaspoonful vanilla and spread on pie.


CREAM PIE

Mrs. Willet Wanzer

Two egg yolks; four heaping teaspoonfuls sugar; two cups milk; one-half
tablespoonful butter; three even tablespoonfuls corn starch; one
teaspoonful vanilla. Cook in double boiler until it thickens. Then
spread on the baked pie crust, and put the whites beaten with sugar
added on top, and brown slightly. To be eaten cold. Chocolate added
makes a very delicious pie.


BUTTER SCOTCH PIE

Mrs. William Molt

Make and bake crust first, before adding filling. One cup light brown
sugar; butter size of an egg; one tablespoonful flour; pinch of salt;
mix thoroughly, then add one cup of milk and boil in double boiler until
thick; then add beaten yolks of two eggs. Add to the baked crust; beat
whites of the two eggs stiff, with a little sugar and brown slightly in
oven.


CREAM PIE

Mrs. T. M. Butler

One egg, one tablespoonful of flour, three-fourths cup of sugar, butter
size of a walnut, one pint of milk. Stir constantly while cooking until
thickened and fill previously baked crust and sprinkle over with
cocoanut and nutmeg.


BUTTER-SCOTCH PIE

Mrs. P. D. Swigart

One and one-half ounces butter; three-fourths cup light brown sugar; two
eggs; one and one-half cups sweet milk. Put butter in pan, mix in brown
sugar, stirring constantly until caramel color, then add milk and boil
until sugar is melted. Separate the yolks from whites, add to yolks
one-half cup flour and one teaspoonful corn starch. Add enough water to
make a thick paste, stir into ready baked pie crust, put whites to which
sugar has been added on top and brown. Instead of whites of egg for top
of pie, whipped cream may be substituted.


BUTTER-SCOTCH PIE

Mrs. Earl Combs

One-half cup brown sugar; one-half cup white sugar; two yolks of eggs;
two tablespoonfuls flour; one large cup milk; two tablespoonfuls butter;
dissolve sugar and butter with a small amount of milk; and let boil
until it threads a little. Mix flour with a little water to thin paste
and then add milk and yolks of eggs. Stir all together and boil until
smooth, thick paste. Put in baked crust. Whip whites, put in little
sugar, and put on top. Bake a golden brown.


FILLING FOR PUMPKIN PIE

Mrs. W. H. Hart

One scant cupful sugar beaten into two eggs; one teaspoonful flour; two
heaping tablespoonfuls of cooked pumpkin; spices to suit taste; one and
one-half cupfuls of sweet milk. Mix in order given; this makes one large
pie. When done and before serving, spread the top with whipped cream;
nuts can also be added.


BLUEBERRY PIE

Mrs. C. S. Junge

One cup of flour; two heaping tablespoonfuls of lard; three
tablespoonfuls of sour cream. Mix lightly into crust. Sprinkle a layer
of flour in lower crust and fill with berries. Sprinkle over them two
tablespoonfuls of flour and a cup and a half of sugar. Put in two
tablespoonfuls of water and add upper crust. Heat stones of cooker
fifteen minutes beginning as you begin your pie. Bake pie forty minutes.


SOUR CREAM PIE

Mrs. H. Freeman

One cup sour cream; one cup sugar; one-half cup seeded raisins, chopped
fine; yolks two eggs; one-half teaspoonful cloves, and cinnamon. Mix one
teaspoonful flour with sugar; spread on the pie after it is baked,
whites of two eggs beaten to a froth, stiff, with two tablespoonfuls
sugar. Set in oven and brown slightly. Cream must be sour.


MOCK CHERRY PIE

Belle Shaw

One cup cranberries, split lengthwise (work out seeds); one-half cup
raisins chopped fine; one cup sugar with one tablespoonful flour mixed
with it. Mix all together; pour in one-half cup boiling water; add one
teaspoonful vanilla. Bake between rich crusts.


PUMPKIN PIE

Mrs. Max Mauermann

One cup pumpkin; one-fourth cup of sugar; one-half teaspoonful salt;
one-fourth teaspoonful cinnamon; one-fourth teaspoonful mace; one-half
teaspoonful vanilla; one egg and one yolk, beaten separately, and whites
added last; one-half cup milk; one-fourth cup cream; one tablespoonful
corn starch. Bake in plain pastry until set.


RICE RAISIN PIE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Boil one cup of raisins in one cup of water for five minutes; then add
three tablespoonfuls boiled rice and one cup of sugar. Boil another five
minutes and add a tablespoonful butter and bake in two crusts.


DUTCH APPLE PIE

Mrs. H. Abells

Line pie plate with crust and fill with quartered apples. Add to one cup
of sugar, one large tablespoonful of flour and stir into one cup of
cream; pour over apples. Grate nutmeg over all and bake without upper
crust.


SWEET POTATO PIE

Mrs. Earl Combs

One pound of sweet potatoes mashed; two cups of sugar; one cup of cream;
one-half cup butter; three eggs well beaten; little nutmeg, pinch of
salt. Bake in crust.


SWEET POTATO PIE

Mrs. Thomas D. Caliger

Three medium sized potatoes. Boil soft and mash fine. Mix with it yolks
of three eggs; sugar, to taste; one tablespoonful butter; flavoring,
nutmeg and vanilla to taste. Whip whites of eggs, and add small portion
of ground citron.


POTATO PIE

Mrs. Charles T. Daily

Four medium sized potatoes; two eggs; one and one-half cups milk; one
cup sugar; one teaspoonful vanilla; butter the size of an egg; grate a
little nutmeg on top of pie. Mash the potatoes and whip them until light
and fluffy; add milk and run through sieve to remove all lumps; add
other ingredients; put whole in crust and cook slowly in moderate oven
until done.


PRUNE TARTS

Mrs. Litson

Stone stewed prunes; chop fine; then stew them in their own liquor ten
minutes; sweeten and thicken with flour or corn starch. When nearly
cool, fill puff paste forms and pile high with whipped cream and
serve.




DESSERTS

          "_Among the great, whom heaven hath made to shine,
            How few have learned the art of arts,--to dine!_"


KISS TORTE

Mrs. F. Dunn

Six whites of eggs; two cups granulated sugar; one teaspoonful vinegar;
one teaspoonful vanilla. Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff, dry froth;
add the sugar a little at a time and beat; add the vanilla and vinegar.
Grease a spring form pan and pour in the mixture. Bake about one hour in
a slow oven. Serve with crushed strawberries or raspberries and whipped
cream. Can be baked in individual molds and the centers filled with
berries, etc. Very delicious. Bake forty minutes in a slow oven.


KISS TORTE

Mrs. Harry M. Boon

Three egg whites beaten very stiff; gradually put in above one cup of
granulated sugar, one teaspoonful vinegar, one-half teaspoonful vanilla.
Bake in a very light warm oven in two layers. Fill with one quart ice
cream, whip cream on top, use berries if you desire, with cream. Serves
four or five people. Recipe can be doubled.


CHERRY TORTE

Mrs. H. S. Mount

Thicken cherries with corn starch. Torte: Two tablespoonfuls butter; two
tablespoonfuls sugar; one yolk egg. Work little by little into above
mixture one cup of flour; put in pie tin and fill with cherries. Bake in
oven twenty minutes.


DATE TORTE

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

One cupful sugar; three eggs; one cup sliced date; one cup sliced nut
meats; three tablespoonfuls flour; one-half teaspoonful salt; one
teaspoonful baking powder. Bake about one hour. Serve with whipped
cream.


PINEAPPLE CREAM

Mrs. C. S. Junge

One cup whipped cream; fifteen marshmallows cut into quarter inch
squares; four slices pineapple cut into this mixture and let stand on
ice for two hours. Bananas or prunes may be used this same way.


PINEAPPLE BAVARIAN CREAM

Mrs. C. S. Junge

One tablespoonful Knox gelatin; one quarter cup cold water; one-half can
grated pineapple; one-quarter cup sugar; one-half tablespoonful lemon
juice; one and one-half cups whipped cream. Soak gelatin in the cold
water. Heat pineapple and add sugar, lemon juice and gelatin. Chill in
pan of ice water, stirring constantly. When it begins to thicken, beat
until frothy. Fold in cream and turn into molds. When cold serve with
maraschino cherry on top.


PINEAPPLE MERINGUE

Mrs. May F. Kenfield

Heat one can of grated pineapple and one-half cup granulated sugar and
when boiling, thicken with about two tablespoonfuls of corn starch,
dissolved in one-fourth cup of water. Boil five minutes. Add juice of
one-half lemon and three beaten egg yolks. Remove and cool. Fill pastry
shells and cover with a meringue, made of three whites, beaten stiff,
with eight tablespoonfuls powdered sugar. Serve very cold.


PINEAPPLE SPONGE

One small fresh pineapple or one and one-half pint can of the fruit; one
small cup of sugar; one-half package Knox gelatine; one-halm cup water;
whites of four eggs. Soak gelatine two hours in one and one-half cups
water. Chop pineapple, put it with juice in a small saucepan with sugar
and the remainder of the water. Simmer ten minutes, add gelatine, take
from fire immediately and strain (if you prefer to leave the pineapple
in, take out before straining) into a basin. When partly cold, add
whites of eggs beaten. Beat until mixture begins to thicken. Serve with
soft custard, flavored with wine.


WHIPPED CREAM SECRET

Mrs. W. H. Muschlet

For one pint whipped cream soak a scant tablespoonful granulated
gelatine in enough water, cold, to barely cover, until soft; then add a
small half teacupful of boiling water and stir until the gelatine is
completely dissolved; after which add three-quarters of a cupful of
sugar and flavoring. Turn into a bowl and beat it with an egg beater
until it is white, like marshmallows, and begins to become firm. Just as
soon as it has reached that point, but before it commences to grow
stringy, beat it by spoonfuls into the cream. This will increase the
bulk of the latter, and it will keep firm any length of time.


SPANISH CREAM

Pint milk with one-half box Keystone gelatine in double boiler; yolks of
two eggs and five tablespoonfuls sugar beaten together very lightly;
pour milk, etc., into egg mixture; then return to double boiler and stir
constantly. Beat whites of two eggs, pour mixture very gradually with
same and stir until cold; then add two tablespoonfuls cream and pour
into mold. Stand two hours on ice before serving. Be careful and have
mold damp inside, but not wet, before using.


DREAM WHIP

Mrs. W. I. Clock

One pint whipping cream; one-half pound marshmallows; two tablespoonfuls
sugar; one teaspoonful vanilla; one-fourth pound pecan nuts (other nuts
can be substituted if desired). Cut the marshmallows up with scissors,
add to stiffly beaten cream; also add sugar and vanilla. Let stand all
one day. When ready to serve place a small amount in glasses, adding the
chopped nuts, chocolate sauce or any fruit desired. This cream and
marshmallow combination can be served as the foundation of any number of
desserts.


CHARLOTTE RUSSE

Katharine Orr

One-half pint whipping cream; one tablespoonful Keystone white gelatine;
one-fourth cup hot water; one-fourth cup powdered sugar; whites of two
eggs; flavor with vanilla. Add gelatine when cold to whipped cream and
sugar; then flavoring and well beaten whites of eggs. Pour over lady
fingers and decorate top with cookies standing up.


DRESDEN CHOCOLATE

One cup stale bread crumbs; one-half grated chocolate; two
tablespoonfuls sugar; one-fourth teaspoonful salt. Put in oven in
buttered tin until chocolate melts. Serve with whipped cream.


CHOCOLATE LADY FINGER DESSERT

Mrs. S. Friedlander

Eighteen large lady fingers divided in half and put in a pan flat side
up and pan lined with waxed paper. Melt two cakes Baker's chocolate
(sweet) in double boiler with three tablespoonfuls water and two
tablespoonfuls sugar. Let cool, then add yolks of four eggs, beating one
at a time. Beat four whites stiff and add to above mixture. Take layers
of lady fingers, then one of the chocolate mixture, another of lady
fingers and so on, making three layers of lady fingers and two of the
chocolate mixture. When ready to serve, whip two bottles of cream and
put on top. Candied cherries and chopped nuts may be added also.


RIZ AU LAIT

Mrs. R. Woods

Boil one-half a cupful of rice in a pint of water until very tender and
creamy. Add one cup of milk, a small piece of lemon rind, a handful
currants and sugar to taste. Let cook slowly for fifteen minutes and
remove from fire. Beat yolk of an egg in a spoonful of milk and stir in
the rice; do not set back on fire. Serve cold.


PRUNE SOUFFLE

Mrs. William Molt

To one cup stewed prunes, seeded, add three tablespoonfuls sugar;
one-half teaspoonful vanilla and beaten whites of three eggs folded in
lightly. Steam for two hours in double boiler. (When adding water to
boiler be sure it is boiling hot.) Serve hot with whipped cream.


MAPLE CREAM CUSTARD

Mrs. Jarvis Weed

Three bottles cream; three eggs beaten very light; one cup pure maple
syrup; put all together in a double boiler and stir constantly until
very smooth. Line a dish with lady fingers and pour the custard over
them; put in ice box and serve when very cold.


PEACH SURPRISE

Mrs. W. I. Clock

Canned peaches; maccaroons; whipping cream. Take the juice of peaches
and add macaroons broken up. Fill the centers of halves of peaches with
this mixture, and serve with whipped cream.


CARAMEL CUSTARD EN SURPRISE

Mrs. T. D. McMicken

Caramel custard baked in individual molds. Unmold on rounds of sponge
cake a little larger than the custard molds, cover with meringue creamed
with almond extract. Sprinkle with sugar and brown. Decorate with
blanched almonds on top.


BLUEBERRY SHORTCAKE

Mrs. C. A. Jennings

One-half cup butter; one cup sugar; one-half cup milk; two eggs; two and
one-half cups flour; two heaping teaspoonfuls baking powder; one pint
blueberries. Mix batter and add berries last. Bake in muffin rings or
shallow dripping pan. Serve hot.


PEACH SHORTCAKE

Mrs. W. N. Hurlbut

Two cups flour; four level teaspoonfuls baking powder; half teaspoonful
salt; two teaspoonfuls sugar; one-third cup butter; three-quarters cup
milk. Mix and sift flour, baking powder, salt and sugar, work in butter
with finger tips, and add milk gradually. Toss on floured board, divide
in two parts, bake in hot oven on large cake tins. Spilt and spread with
butter. Sweeten sliced peaches to taste. Crush slightly, and put between
and on top of cakes. Cover with whipped cream.


THORN APPLES

Prepare a syrup by boiling eight minutes two cups sugar and
three-fourths cup of water. Wipe, core and pare eight apples
(Greenings). Drop apples into syrup as soon as pared. Cook slowly until
soft but not broken, skim syrup when necessary. Drain from syrup, fill
cavities with quince yelly and stick apples thickly with blanched,
shredded and delicately toasted almonds. Chill and serve with cream as
dessert or use as a garnish with cold meats.


FOOD FOR THE GODS

Mrs. J. F. Nichols

One cup sugar; one teaspoonful baking powder; four tablespoonfuls,
heaping, cracker crumbs; three eggs, beaten separately; one cup dates;
one cup nuts. Bake slowly in oven. Serve with whipped cream.


STRAWBERRY FOAM

Mrs. A. J. Langan

One cup strawberries, mashed; one cup sugar; white of one egg beaten
stiff; whip all together for ten minutes, serve on pieces of angel food
or sunshine cake.


CRUMB TARTAR

Mrs. Wm. J. Maiden

One cupful sugar; one cup dates, pitted and chopped; one cupful nuts,
chopped; two eggs; one tablespoonful flour; one teaspoonful baking
powder; pinch of salt. Mix eggs, sugar and salt, then flour and baking
powder, adding the dates and nuts last. Bake in slow oven and serve with
whipped cream.


FIGS AS A DESSERT

Dried figs make a very agreeable dish, but they must be prepared the day
before and set away on ice. Soak them, simmer slowly until plump. Drain
and pile in a bon-bon dish. Serve with whipped cream around the dish.
Flavor and sweeten with vanilla.


HOT APPLE DESSERT DISH

Mrs. Eustace

Pare, quarter, core and slice five or six large apples. Put these in a
serving dish suitable for the oven, in layers, with seeded raisins and
one cup of sugar. Cover and let bake until apple is tender. Remove the
cover and set marshmallows over the top of the apples, using as many as
desired; return dish to the oven, for a minute only, to heat the
marshmallows, and brown them slightly. Serve with or without cream.




PUDDINGS

          "_The pudding's proof does in the eating lie,
            Success is yours, whichever rule you try._"


FIG PUDDING

Mrs. C. B. Martin

One cup suet; one cup sugar; one cup milk; one cup of figs, ground;
three cups flour; one-half teaspoonful salt; one teaspoonful each of
cinnamon and baking powder. Steam two hours.


STEAMED FIG PUDDING

Mary Roberts

Three ounces beef suet; one-half ounce figs, chopped fine; two and
one-third cups stale bread crumbs; one-half cup milk; two eggs; one cup
sugar; three-fourths spoonful salt. Chop suet and work with hands until
creamy; then add figs. Soak bread crumbs in milk. Add eggs, well beaten;
then sugar and salt. Combine mixture. Steam three hours in a buttered
mould. Serve with following sauce:

Sauce: Two eggs; one cup powdered sugar; three tablespoonfuls wine; beat
yolks until thick, add one-half of the sugar. Beat whites stiff, add
remaining sugar. Combine, and add wine.


FIG PUDDING

Mrs. W. K. Mitchell

One cup suet; one cup sugar; one cup milk; three cups flour; one cup
figs, ground; two eggs; one-half teaspoonful salt; one teaspoonful each
of cinnamon and baking powder. Mix all together and steam about two
hours.


CHOCOLATE PUDDING

Mrs. C. A. Bowman

One pint of milk; two tablespoonfuls corn starch; one tablespoonful
sugar; pinch of salt. Boil until thick, add one heaping teaspoonful
cocoa dissolved in a little boiling water, and last the stiffly beaten
whites of two eggs. Let all cook one minute and flavor with vanilla.


CHOCOLATE PUDDING

Mrs. J. L. Putnam

One pint of milk; one tablespoonful Baker's cocoa; one tablespoonful
corn starch; one egg; one and one-half cups sugar. Heat milk in double
boiler. Mix dry ingredients and beat in egg. Add to scalded milk. Boil
fifteen minutes. Remove from fire and whip with egg beater. Add one
teaspoonful vanilla. Serve with cream.


STEAMED CHOCOLATE PUDDING

Mrs. William H. Fahrney

One and one-half tablespoonfuls butter; two-thirds cup sugar; one egg;
one cup milk; one-half teaspoonful salt; two and one-fourth cups flour;
three teaspoonfuls baking powder; two squares of chocolate, melted.
Steam in a buttered pudding mold, tightly covered, for two hours.

Cream Sauce: One-fourth cup butter; one cup powdered sugar; stir until
creamy; then add one cup whipped cream just before serving; flavor.


STEAMED CHOCOLATE PUDDING

Mrs. H. R. Foster

Three-fourths cup sugar; one tablespoon butter, creamed. Two eggs;
one-half cup milk; one and one-half cups sifted flour; one and one-half
teaspoonfuls baking powder; two squares melted chocolate, or two
tablespoonfuls cocoa; one teaspoonful vanilla. Steam one hour and serve
with hard sauce.


CHOCOLATE ICE-BOX PUDDING

Two cakes sweet chocolate; two tablespoonfuls boiling water; one-fourth
cup confectioner's sugar; yolks four eggs; whites four eggs; nut meats;
lady fingers. Melt chocolate in top of double boiler; remove from range,
add boiling water and the yolks of eggs beaten until thick and light.
Fold in the stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Line a small pan (dimensions,
7 1/2 x 4 3/4 x 2 1/2) with wax paper. Put in a layer of split lady
fingers cut to fit and cover bottom; cover these with half of the
chocolate mixture; sprinkle with bits of trimmings of lady fingers and
nut meats. Cover with a layer of lady fingers, pour over remainder of
chocolate mixture, sprinkle with nut meats and chill in refrigerator
twenty-four hours. Serve with whipped cream.


CARAMEL PUDDING

Mrs. H. R. Foster

One-half pint brown sugar; one-half pint cold water; one-fourth box
gelatine; four eggs, whites; one-half teaspoonful vanilla. Soak gelatine
in one gill of cold water. Put sugar and other gill of water in saucepan
and boil until it becomes a thick syrup. Add gelatine and vanilla and
again heat to boiling point. Beat whites to stiff froth. Pour hot syrup
on eggs, beating until cold. Turn into mold and serve on flat dish with
custard sauce made from yolks of eggs.


MOLASSES PUDDING

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One egg well beaten; two tablespoonfuls sugar, rounded; one
tablespoonful butter, level; one pinch salt; one-half cup molasses; one
and one-half cups flour, well sifted; one teaspoonful baking powder; one
teaspoonful soda, level, dissolved in one-half cup boiling water. Steam
in buttered tins two hours.

Sauce: Two eggs; one-half cup sugar; pinch salt; half teaspoonful
vanilla; cream together and add one cup of whipped cream.


ICE-BOX PUDDING

Katherine T. Peck

Scant one-fourth cup unsalted butter; one cup granulated sugar; cream
together. Add yolks of three eggs, one at a time, rind of one lemon,
half; and juice of one lemon. Beat the whites of the three eggs and add
last. Place mixture alternately with lady fingers, three dozen lady
fingers will serve eight people. Put oil paper in bottom of dish to lift
pudding out easily. Serve with whipped cream. Place in ice-box until
thoroughly chilled. Can be made the night before.


ICE BOX CAKE

Mrs. J. F. Nichols

One dozen lady fingers; one tablespoonful sugar; three eggs, separated;
one cake sweet chocolate. Melt chocolate in double boiler with
tablespoonful warm water. Add mixture of yolks of eggs and sugar, well
beaten, a little vanilla, and lastly well-beaten whites of eggs. Dip
each lady finger in mixture, arrange in form which has been wet with
cold water, and fill in. Place in ice box over night. Serve with whipped
cream.


ICE BOX CAKE

Mrs. H. S. Mount

Three cakes sweet chocolate, three tablespoonfuls powdered sugar, three
tablespoonfuls hot water, two dozen lady fingers. Melt chocolate, sugar
and water in double boiler and add half beaten yolks of six eggs. Cook
until thick. When cold add beaten whites of six eggs. Line a mold with
lady fingers and pour half the mixture on them, then fill with lady
fingers, repeating with the chocolate mixture. Made twenty-four hours
before served. Just before serving, whip one-half pint cream and put on
top of cake. Grate a little chocolate over all.


SPONGE PUDDING

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One-fourth cup sugar; one-half cup flour; one pint milk; one-fourth cup
butter; five eggs. Mix sugar and flour, and add milk and cook until
thick and smooth. Let cool, then add butter. Separate eggs, beat yolks
until light and fold into mixture. Add whites beaten stiff, and pour
into buttered dish. Stand dish in pan of water and bake in moderate oven
one-half hour.

Sauce: One-fourth cup butter; one-half cup powdered sugar; four
tablespoonfuls cream added slowly, one teaspoonful vanilla. Set mixture
over pan of boiling water until creamy.


SUNSHINE PUDDING

Mrs. Carscadin

One-half cup flour; one-fourth cup sugar; one-fourth butter; one pint
milk; five eggs. Mix sugar and flour; add milk; and cook until smooth in
double boiler. Take off stove and add butter. Separate eggs, beat yolks
and add. Beat whites until stiff and add. Butter pan, set in pan of
water and bake.

Sauce: One-fourth cup butter; one-half cup powdered sugar; four
tablespoonfuls cream, added slowly.


DATE PUDDING

Mrs. W. I. Clock

One cupful sugar; one cupful chopped nut meats; one cupful dates; two
eggs; one-half cupful milk; one tablespoonful flour and one teaspoonful
baking powder. Bake twenty or thirty minutes in moderate oven. When
baking the pudding raises beautifully, but when done it falls in the
center; this is the correct occurrence.


PEACH PUDDING

Mrs. E. Oliver

Butter pudding dish. Slice six large peaches in it. Batter: One cup
sugar; one egg; one and one-half teaspoonfuls baking powder; butter size
of an egg; three tablespoonfuls of milk; flour enough to make a soft
batter. Pour over peaches and bake twenty minutes. Serve hot, with
cream.


CREAM PUDDING

One cup nut meats; one cup dates; cut very coarse. One tablespoonful
bread crumbs; one cup sugar; two eggs, beaten separately; add whites
last. Bake twenty minutes in slow oven. Serve cold with whipped cream.


SOUR CREAM PUDDING

Mrs. William H. Fahrney

One cup brown sugar; two eggs; pinch of salt; one cup sour cream; one
teaspoonful soda; two cups flour; three-fourths cup nuts. Bake.

Sauce: Cream one cup powdered sugar and one-fourth cup butter; add one
egg; one teaspoonful vanilla or tablespoonful sherry wine.


APPLE PUDDING

Miss Flora Gill

One cup sugar; one cup flour; two eggs; one-half cup of sweet milk; fill
a three-pint baking dish with sliced apples, two-thirds full. Add
one-half cup of sugar, a little cinnamon, and some water. Bake until
very tender. When still very hot pour over the top a cake batter made as
follows: Beat one cup of sugar with yolks of two eggs; one tablespoonful
soft butter, and milk and flour. Mix two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking
powder with flour before adding to the batter. Fold in stiffly beaten
whites of the eggs and add extract of vanilla. Bake half an hour in a
moderate oven. Serve with prepared sauce.


LEMON PUDDING

Mrs. W. I. Clock

Mix three tablespoonfuls corn starch; three cups boiling water; two cups
sugar; two egg yolks; juice of two lemons, little grated rind of one.
Dissolve three tablespoonfuls of corn starch in a little cold water, add
to the boiling water. Have saucepan in water bath. Add sugar and lemons,
cook for twenty minutes. Remove from fire and stir in beaten egg yolks;
set mixture in oven for two minutes and serve with cream.


SOUR MILK BLUEBERRY PUDDING

Mrs. C. S. Junge

One-half cup sugar; one-quarter cup butter; cream these. Two eggs well
beaten; one-half cup sour milk; one-half teaspoonful soda; one cup flour
with one cup blueberries. Bake thirty minutes and serve with sauce made
with one cup of powdered sugar stirred with one tablespoonful of butter
and flavored with vanilla.


CARROT PUDDING

Mrs. P. D. Swigart

One and one-half cups flour; one cup sugar; one cup suet; two cups
raisins; one cup grated sweet potatoes; one cup grated carrots; one
teaspoonful each salt and soda. Steam three hours; put three
tablespoonfuls hot water on soda.

Sauce: Two yolks of eggs; one cup powdered sugar; cream the above. Last
thing, add a cup whipped cream.


CARROT PUDDING

Mrs. Frederick T. Hoyt

One cup chopped raw carrots; one cup chopped raw potatoes; one cup
chopped suet; two cups chopped raisins; one cup brown sugar; one cup
flour; one teaspoonful salt, cinnamon and allspice; a little nutmeg; one
teaspoonful soda in about two tablespoonfuls hot water. Mix well, put in
mold, and steam two and one-half hours; serve with a good pudding sauce.

Pudding Sauce: One cup sugar; two egg yolks; one cup sherry wine; beat
all until very light, add one pint cream, which has been whipped very
stiff.


PRUNE PUDDING

Mrs. Eustace

Whites of five eggs beaten with one-half teaspoonful of salt; add one
cup of powdered sugar sifted with one even teaspoonful cream of tartar.
Add five large cooked prunes chopped. Bake twenty-two minutes in
ungreased custard cups. Set in pan of hot water. Slow oven. Serve with
whipped cream.


STEAMED MARMALADE PUDDING

Mrs. T. D. McMicken

One cup orange marmalade; one-fourth cup butter; one-third teaspoonful
soda; two cups stale bread crumbs. Dissolve soda in a little hot water;
combine marmalade, one egg, butter, soda, and bread crumbs. Pack in a
mold. Steam one and one-half hours. Serve with marshmallow cream.


GRAHAM PUDDING

Mrs. R. H. Wheeler

One cup molasses; one cup sweet milk; two and one-half cups graham
flour; one cup Sultana raisins; one saltspoonful salt; two teaspoonfuls
soda dissolved in warm water. Steam in pudding mold two hours.

Sauce: One egg thoroughly beaten. Add one cup pulverized sugar; one cup
whipped cream; one-half teaspoonful vanilla.


BROWN BETTY

Butter the inside of a baking dish, cover the bottom with a layer of
tart apples, peeled and sliced. Sprinkle this with sugar and cinnamon or
nutmeg and put over it a layer of crumbs, strewing it with bits of
butter. Repeat the layers of apple and crumbs until the dish is full,
making the top crumbs with an extra quantity of butter. Cover the
pudding dish, put it in the oven, and bake slowly for twenty or thirty
minutes; uncover, brown lightly; serve in the dish in which it was
cooked, with either hard or liquid sauce.


SURPRISE PUDDING

Mrs. C. E. Upham

Four thin slices bread, buttered and cut in squares; one egg; one-third
cup sugar; four tablespoonfuls molasses; three cups milk; turn all over
bread. Let stand half an hour and mash well together; then bake one and
one-half hours slowly. Be careful it does not turn to whey. If in a
shallow pan, a big hour is long enough. Sauce: Beat white of one egg,
then beat yolk; mix, add one cupful sugar, vanilla, and beat all
together. Beating separately makes it very frothy.


CHERRY PUDDING

Mrs. P. D. Swigart

One-half cup sugar; one tablespoonful butter; one egg; one-half cup milk
or water; one and one-half cups flour; one and one-half teaspoonfuls
baking powder. Steam forty minutes, put cherries in cups, then the
batter.

Sauce: One and one-half cups cherry juice; one tablespoonful butter;
sweeten; thicken with corn starch.


SIMPLE HASTY FRUIT PUDDING

Mrs. C. S. Junge

One tablespoonful butter; two tablespoonfuls sugar; three tablespoonfuls
flour; one teaspoonful baking powder; two tablespoonfuls milk; one egg.
Turn this mixture over sliced peaches, bananas, oranges, blueberries,
pineapples or plums and bake twenty minutes in moderate oven. Serve with
cream or with hard sauce made by rubbing butter and sugar together.


ECONOMICAL PUDDING

Mrs. Minnie A. Watkins

Fill a mold with dry pieces of cake, alternating layers with bananas
that have been scraped and cut lengthwise. Fill up mold with a boiled
custard thickened with yolks of eggs. Put on ice. Serve cold with
whipped cream. Also serve toasted Brazilian nut meats with it.


PHILADELPHIA RICE PUDDING

Mrs. B. Z. Bisbee

Wash well one-fourth cup of rice. Put in a baking dish with one quart of
milk, four tablespoonfuls of sugar, lump of butter size of a walnut;
flavor to taste with nutmeg and cinnamon. Bake in a very slow oven four
hours; when it commences to brown on top stir well. Serve cold.


NOONDAY DESSERT FOR SCHOOL CHILDREN

Mrs. Minnie A. Watkins

Hot steamed rice served with rich canned peaches, and cream, either
plain or whipped. Serve English walnut meats with same.


MOTHER'S RICE PUDDING

Mrs. F. E. Lyons

One quart milk; three tablespoonfuls rice; three tablespoonfuls sugar;
one teaspoonful vanilla. Put in a very slow oven and bake from two and
one-half hours to three hours. (If heated on top of stove before putting
in oven, it will save time baking.)


HONEYCOMB PUDDING

Mrs. C. A. Bowman

One-half cup brown sugar; one-half cup milk; one cup molasses; one
teaspoonful soda; two eggs; tablespoonful butter; one cup flour. Bake
and serve with whipped cream or hard sauce.


INDIVIDUAL PUDDINGS

Miss Nora Edmonds

One-half cupful flour; one-fourth cupful sugar; one-fourth cupful
butter; one pint of milk and five eggs. Mix flour and sugar, add milk
and cook in double boiler until smooth. Remove from stove and put in
butter. When cold add beaten yolks of eggs and fold in stiffly beaten
whites last. Put in buttered pans and bake in water.

Sauce: One-fourth cupful butter; one-half cupful powdered sugar and four
tablespoonfuls cream added.


TAPIOCA CREAM

Mrs. A. H. Schweizer

Soak one tablespoonful of pearl tapioca until soft in enough water to
cover it. This will require several hours. Put it into a double boiler
with a cupful of water and cook until the pearls are clear; drain off
the water and stir in half a pint of grape juice heated, one
tablespoonful sugar, and cook ten minutes longer. Serve with cream when
cold.


ENGLISH PUDDING

Mrs. William Molt

One-half pound suet; one quart milk; two eggs; one pound currants; one
pound raisins; one cup nut meats, chopped fine; two teaspoonfuls baking
powder; one teaspoonful salt and flour enough to make a stiff batter.
Steam for four to five hours. Serve with foam sauce.

Foam Sauce: White of one egg; enough confectionery sugar to make stiff
and enough hot water to make it smooth.


ORANGE PUDDING

Mrs. H. B. Rairden

In bottom of pudding dish lay slices of cake; cover with slices of
oranges. Make a custard of one small cup sugar; one tablespoonful corn
starch; one pint of milk and a small piece of butter. Pour over the cake
and oranges and bake.


ENGLISH PUDDING

Miss J. Eliza Ball

One cup molasses; one-half cup sugar; one-half cup butter; two eggs; one
cup milk. Spice and fruit. Flour enough to make a stiff batter. Soda and
cream of tartar or baking powder as preferred.

Liquid Pudding Sauce: Beat one egg and one cup of white sugar to a
froth. Make a very thin batter with one pint of water and butter the
size of an egg. Pour butter boiling hot over egg and sugar just as it
goes to the table.


CHRISTMAS PUDDING

Mrs. Joel H. Norton

Chop the meats from one pound English walnuts; chop one pound figs; one
pound raisins seeded; one cup suet. Rub the above well in flour; grate
one nutmeg into three cups flour and one teaspoonful salt. Moisten with
one cup milk. Dissolve well one teaspoonful soda in one cup molasses,
and add last with one tablespoonful brandy. Dip a square of cloth in
boiling water; then quickly flour center. Mold in form of a ball and tie
securely with string. Boil three or four hours in boiling water in very
large kettle or boiler. Hang up to dry and when thoroughly dry place in
jar with an apple to keep from molding. Make a week or two before you
wish to use it. Boil it in boiling hot water for one hour when ready to
use. Any sauce will do, but whipped cream sweetened with maple sugar is
delicious. Brandy can be poured over pudding and set on fire if you
wish, if served at table.


NUT PUDDING

Mrs. R. E. P. Kline

Two cups flour; one-half cup sugar; two teaspoonfuls baking powder;
one-half teaspoonful salt; two eggs well beaten; one cup milk; one and
one-half cups English walnuts blanched and broken or chopped; one-third
cup melted butter. Grease mold well and steam three hours.

Sauce: One and one-half cups sugar and three-fourths cup water boiled
until it threads. Then pour over the well beaten yolks of three eggs,
stirring all the time. When cool, add flavoring and two cups whipped
cream.


NUT PUDDING

Miss Julia Hunt

Two cups boiling water; one and three-fourths cups brown sugar, boil ten
minutes. Two and one-half tablespoonfuls (heaping) corn starch mixed
well with one-third cup cold water; add to boiling syrup; boil a few
minutes until mixture thickens, then add one-half cup broken walnut
meats and vanilla. Pour into molds and chill. Raisins and currants may
be added if desired. Serve with cream or whipped cream.


PUDDING SAUCE

Mrs. R. F. Morrow

One cup brown sugar; one-fourth cup butter; yolks of two eggs; one-half
cup cream; cook to a custard. Add beaten whites, and one-fourth cup
brandy.


PUDDING SAUCE

Mrs. Weatherell

Blend one tablespoonful butter, one cup sugar and white of one egg (do
not beat egg separately). Dissolve one tablespoonful corn starch and a
little salt and add to one pint of boiling water. Let cook ten minutes.
Then add the butter, egg and sugar, and whip until foamy. Flavor to
taste.


PUDDING SAUCE

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

Two eggs; one cup powdered sugar; one cup cream; a pinch of salt. Beat
eggs and gradually add sugar until a smooth creamy consistency. Just
before serving add whipped cream.


FRUIT SAUCE

Mrs. May F. Kenfield

For steamed or baked puddings: One-half cup of butter and one and
one-half cups of powdered sugar; cream together and add yolk of one egg.
Then to this add a cupful of crushed strawberries or any fruit in
season.


HARD SAUCE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Four tablespoonfuls butter; eight of powdered sugar; frothed white of
one egg; half a glass of wine. Cream butter and sugar together; add
wine, then white of the egg. Set in a cool place to harden. Grate nutmeg
over top.


GRAPE SAUCE

Remove the pulps of the grapes from the skins, boil the pulp until the
seeds can be separated, strain through a collander, add the skins, and
boil five minutes, after which add two-thirds the amount in sugar. Boil
twenty minutes, stirring constantly.


STRAWBERRY SAUCE

One-half cup butter; one cup sugar; then add one cup crushed
strawberries. This can be made only in strawberry season.




FROZEN DISHES

          "_Seek roses in December, ices in June._"
                                        --BYRON.


NESSELRODE PUDDING

Miss Agnes Seiber

Three cups milk; one and one-half cups sugar; yolks five eggs; one-half
teaspoonful salt; one pint cream; one-fourth cup pineapple syrup; one
and one-half cup prepared French chestnuts. Make custard of first four
ingredients, strain, cool, add cream, pineapple syrup and chestnuts;
then freeze. To prepare chestnuts, shell, cook in boiling water until
soft, and force through a strainer. Line a two-quart melon mold with
part of the mixture; to remainder add one-half cup candied fruit cut in
small pieces, one-quarter cup Sultana raisins, and eight chestnuts
broken in pieces, first soaked several hours in Maraschino syrup. Fill
mould, cover, pack in salt and ice, and let stand two hours. Serve with
whipped cream, sweetened and flavored with Maraschino syrup.


MACAROON ICE CREAM

Mrs. G. Shelly

Roll until fine one-half pound dried macaroons; add one-half cup sherry
wine, let stand three hours. Whip one and one-half pints heavy cream
until solid, then fold in macaroons. Cook one cup of sugar and one-half
cup water for two minutes; cool and add to one quart thin cream, combine
mixtures, add three-fourths tablespoonful each vanilla and almond
extracts and a pinch of salt. Freeze, pack in mold and let stand in ice
and salt from two to three hours.


FROZEN PEACHES

Miss B. L. Chandler

One can or twelve large peaches, two coffee cupfuls sugar; one pint
water and the whites of three eggs beaten to a stiff froth; break the
peaches rather fine and stir all the ingredients together; freeze the
whole into form.


STRAWBERRY ICE CREAM

Three pints thin cream; two boxes berries; two cups sugar; few grains
salt. Wash and hull berries, sprinkle with sugar, cover and let stand
two hours. Mash, and squeeze through cheese-cloth; then add salt. Freeze
cream to consistency of mush, add gradually fruit juice, and finish
freezing.


PEACH ICE CREAM

Mrs. R. J. Roulston

One quart peaches, one pint milk, two cups sugar, one pint cream. Put
sugar in peaches and dissolve before sifting. Mix and rub through a
potato ricer after sugar is dissolved. Add milk and cream. Freeze.


CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM

One quart thin cream; one cup sugar; few grains salt; one and one-half
squares Baker's Chocolate or one-fourth cup prepared cocoa; one
tablespoonful vanilla. Melt chocolate, and dilute with hot water to pour
easily, add to cream; then add sugar, salt and flavoring, and freeze.


FIG ICE CREAM

Mrs. George Lomax

Three cups milk; one cup sugar; yolks five eggs; one teaspoonful salt;
one pound figs, finely chopped; one and one-half cups heavy cream;
whites five eggs; one tablespoonful vanilla; two tablespoonfuls brandy.
Make custard of yolks of eggs, sugar and milk; strain, add figs, cool
and flavor. Add whites of eggs beaten until stiff and heavy cream beaten
until stiff; freeze and mold.


ICE CREAM

Mrs. Everett Maynard

One quart cream, one pint milk, two eggs, two cups sugar, one-half cup
flour. Sift flour and sugar; beat eggs and milk and cook in double
boiler. Strain, and add vanilla to taste.


PINEAPPLE CREAM

Two cups water; one cup sugar; one can grated pineapple; two cups cream;
make syrup by boiling sugar and water fifteen minutes; strain, cool, and
add pineapple, and freeze to a mush. Fold in whip from cream; let stand
thirty minutes before serving. Serve in frappe glasses and garnish with
candied pineapple.


MAPLE PARFAIT

Mrs. Earl Combs

One cup of maple syrup: three eggs; a pinch salt; two cups whipped
cream; one teaspoonful lemon juice; beat eggs very light, bring maple
syrup to boiling point: pour it on the eggs, beating while pouring. Cook
all together until thick, then set aside to cool. When cool, add
whipping cream, mix thoroughly, turn into mold, cover closely and bury
in ice and salt for three hours.


ANGEL PARFAIT

Mrs. Frank A. Simmons

Boil together one-half cup sugar and one-half cup water until a soft
ball can be formed. Whip whites of three eggs until foamy but not stiff;
pour syrup in a fine stream over them, beating until cold. Add one
tablespoonful vanilla. Fold in one pint thick cream, beaten stiff. Turn
into a quart mold and pack in salt and ice for four hours. Serve in high
glasses and decorate with candied cherries.


CAFE PARFAIT

L. E. Kennedy

One pint whipping cream; two tablespoonfuls black coffee; sugar to
taste. Whip until stiff; put into a colander to drain. Pack in ice for
three hours.


GRAPE PARFAIT

Put one cup of sugar over the fire with half a cup of grape-juice, bring
to a boil and cook until it will spin a thread from the tip of the
spoon. Have ready the yolks of three eggs, beaten well, pour the
grape-juice syrup upon it, and add two cups of whipped cream. Turn into
a mold, pack in ice, salt and leave for three hours.


FROZEN PUDDING

Mrs. K. T. Cary

Two-third quart milk, two tablespoonfuls flour, two tablespoonfuls
gelatine, two eggs, one pint cream, two cups granulated sugar, one-half
pound apricots or cherries, vanilla to taste. Soak gelatine in warm
water two hours. Put milk in double boiler and scald. Stir eggs, flour
and one cup of sugar together and add to milk. Cook twenty minutes.
After it is cold add gelatine, cup of sugar, cream and vanilla. Freeze.


BISQUE

Mrs. Henry Thayer

One pint of cream whipped; three eggs beaten separately; one and
one-half pints of sugar; one tablespoonful vanilla, stir gently
together, put into ring mold and pack in ice and salt for five or six
hours.


FROZEN FRUIT COCKTAILS

Peel, seed and chop three large oranges; shred or chop one fresh
pineapple or a can of the fruit; peel and mince fine three bananas. Pour
over all one cupful of grapejuice, sweeten the mixture to taste, and
turn into a freezer. The fruit must not be frozen too hard, but it
should be well chilled and partially congealed. Serve in fruit cocktail
glasses, with or without whipped cream on top.


GRAPE WATER ICE

Boil one quart of water and one pound of granulated sugar for five
minutes without stirring after the boil is reached. Add to this two
cupfuls of grapejuice, the juice of two oranges and of two lemons, and
the grated peel of one of each fruit. Turn into a freezer and freeze
slowly.


PINEAPPLE SHERBET

Soak a tablespoonful of gelatine into two tablespoonfuls of cold water
and pour over this one pint of boiling water. Set aside until cold. Add
to it one cupful of sugar, one can of chopped or shredded pineapple, and
half a pint of grapejuice. Freeze. Serve in sherbet glasses.


CHOCOLATE SAUCE FOR ICE CREAM

Mrs. E. Oliver

Two squares bitter chocolate; one cup hot water; one-half cup sugar; one
teaspoonful vinegar; pinch of salt and flavoring, boil ten minutes.


TEA SHERBET

Mrs. A. H. Wagoner

Make half a pint of Ceylon tea; after five minutes standing, drain off
the tea and put it aside until cold. Add one pint of grapejuice, half a
cupful of white sugar, and turn it into a freezer. When half frozen, put
in a dozen quartered Maraschino cherries, and continue to freeze until
the mixture is so stiff that the dasher will not turn. Pack for an hour
before using.


FRUIT SHERBET

One-half envelope Knox sparkling gelatine; one orange; one and one-half
cups sugar; one lemon; three cups rich milk. Grate the outside of both
orange and lemon. Squeeze out all the juice, add to this the sugar. When
ready to freeze, stir in the milk slowly to prevent curdling. Take part
of a cup of milk, add the gelatine. After standing five minutes, place
in a pan of water (hot) until dissolved, then stir into the rest of the
milk and fruit juice. Freeze. This makes a large allowance for five
persons.


APRICOT SHERBET

Miss Maude Higgins

One quart apricots; one quart milk; one pound sugar. Put fruit through
soup sieve. Then mix all together and freeze in ice cream freezer.


MILK SHERBET

Mrs. Harry Hankins

One and one-half quarts milk, one cup cream, one pint sugar. Partly
freeze. Add juice of three lemons and two oranges, whites of two eggs,
beaten stiff. Turn freezer slowly until frozen.


A DELICIOUS SHERBET

Whip one-half pint cream very stiff, sweeten with confectionery sugar;
set away to chill. Chop fine one large banana, one orange, one-half cup
English walnuts, one-half cup preserved pineapple, one-half large
marshmallow. Just before serving beat the fruit and nut mixture through
the cream and serve at once in sherbet cups with a cherry on top. Enough
for six persons.


MAPLE MOUSSE

Yolks four eggs beaten very light; heat one cup of maple syrup in double
boiler, when hot stir into the beaten yolks, and put back into double
boiler and cook until thick. When cold mix lightly with one pint of
cream whipped. Turn into mold and pack in ice and salt for four hours.


PEACH MOUSSE

Mrs. J. H. Shanley

Whip one pint of thick cream until it is fluffy; add one cupful of sugar
and one teaspoonful vanilla. Mash up a pint can of peaches and mix them
in with the cream. Pour this mixture into a mold that has been wet with
cold water. Pack the mold in equal parts of chopped ice and coarse salt
and let it stand for four hours, when it will be ready to use.


MAPLE MOUSSE

Mrs. T. D. McMicken

Two-thirds cup maple syrup; two eggs; one-third quart cream; beat yolks
ten minutes, add syrup gradually and put in double boiler and cook
twenty minutes. Beat whites till dry, pour cooked yolks and syrup over
while hot, and set to cool. Whip cream and pour cold cooked syrup over,
being careful to only fold in. Put in mold and pack in ice and salt,
half and half, two or three hours.


GRAPE MOUSSE

Whip stiff one pint of cream, sweetening it as you whip it with
three-quarters of a cup of powdered sugar. When the cream is stiff and
firm, fold in half a cupful of grapejuice, pack the mixture in a mold in
ice and salt, cover this closely, and let it stand for three or four
hours.


CAFE MOUSSE

L. E. Kennedy

Yolks of five eggs; one-half cupful coffee; one cupful sugar; one pint
whipped cream. Pack in freezer and let stand four or five hours.


CAFE MOUSSE

Genevieve Macklem

One pint of whipped cream, very stiff, one-half cup hot coffee, very
strong; one-half cup sugar; two eggs, yolks beaten with sugar; pour
coffee on yolks and stir until cool or beat. Pour this on whipped cream
and add whites of two eggs well beaten. Pour into mold, cover tight, and
pack in salt and ice for five or six hours.


ORANGE PUNCH

Juice of six oranges and grated rind of one. Mix with one pint water,
one cup sugar and one cup cherries, bananas and chopped nuts. After this
is well frozen, take out dasher and beat in one-half pint of whipped
cream. Repack and let stand for three or four hours.


COCOA FRAPPE

Mix half a pound of cocoa and three cupfuls of sugar; cook with two
cupfuls of boiling water until smooth; add to three and a half quarts of
scalding milk (scalded with cinnamon bark); cook for ten minutes. Beat
in the beaten whites of two eggs mixed with a cupful of sugar and a pint
of whipped cream. Cool, flavor with vanilla extract, and freeze. Serve
in cups. Garnish with whipped cream.


PINEAPPLE FRAPPE

Two cups water; one cup sugar; juice three lemons; two cups ice-water;
one can shredded pineapple or one pineapple, shredded. Make syrup by
boiling water and sugar fifteen minutes; add pineapple and lemon juice;
cool, strain, add ice-water, and freeze to a mush, using equal parts ice
and salt. If fresh fruit is used, more sugar will be required.


FROZEN EGG-NOG

Mrs. Will J. Davis

Put one quart of milk, a good sized stick of cinnamon; six cloves and
six whole allspice in a double boiler and scald. Beat the yolks of a
dozen eggs until thick and light, gradually adding two cups of sugar,
beating constantly. Add one-half teaspoonful each of salt and nutmeg.
Strain spices from milk and pour milk slowly into the egg mixture,
continue beating. Cook over hot water, stirring constantly, until thick
enough. Remove from stove, cool, then add three pints thick cream and
freeze slightly. When about to serve add one-fourth cup each of Jamaica
rum and cognac.


FRUIT PUNCH

Mamie Johnson

Two cups sugar; one-half cup orange juice; one cup water; one-half cup
lemon juice; one cup strawberry juice; one cup pineapple juice and
one-half cup maraschino cherries. Boil sugar and water to a syrup and
add the fruit juices. Let stand twenty minutes and strain and chill. Add
whole cherries. Sweeten to taste or weaken if necessary. Serve ice cold.


CRANBERRY PUNCH

Mrs. Frank Germaine

Stew one quart of berries until soft. Pass through a sieve; add to pulp
juice of three oranges, one tablespoonful liquid from maraschino
cherries and sugar to sweeten. Cook twenty minutes, cool and freeze.
Garnish each cup with a teaspoon of whipped cream, candied cherries and
a mint leaf. Set sherbet cups on plates and serve with lady fingers.


WATERMELON ICE

Mrs. Charles S. Clark

Put watermelon pulp in potato ricer and squeeze juice out of it. For one
quart of liquid add juice of two lemons and sugar to taste. Freeze.


LEMON ICE

Sue C. Woodman

Juice four lemons; two cups sugar; strain juice into sugar; let stand
two hours on ice; one pint milk or cream. Freeze.


LEMON ICE

Mrs. Alice Snively

Four cups water, two cups sugar, three-fourths cup lemon juice. Make a
syrup of the sugar and water. Add lemon juice. Freeze.


ORANGE ICE

Four cups water; two cups sugar; two cups orange juice; one-fourth cup
lemon juice; grated rind of two oranges. Make syrup by boiling water and
sugar for twenty minutes; add fruit juice and grated rind; cool, strain
and freeze.


ALMOND ICE

Two pints milk; eight ounces cream, two ounces orange-flower water;
eight ounces sweet almonds; four ounces bitter almonds. Pound all in
marble mortar, pouring in from time to time a few drops of water; when
thoroughly pounded add the orange-flower water and half of the milk;
pass this, tightly squeezed, through a cloth; boil the rest of the milk
with the cream and keep stirring it with a wooden spoon; as soon as it
is thick enough, pour in the almond milk; give it one boiling, take it
off and let cool in a bowl or pitcher before pouring it into the mold
for freezing.


FROZEN LEMONADE

Mrs. Frederick T. Hoyt

Boil one pound of sugar in one pint water for five minutes, add one pint
of cold water, the grated rind of one lemon, and the strained juice of
four. Turn into a freezer, and turn until frozen like snow, serve in
lemonade glasses, and topped with a piece of candied or fresh lemon.


LEMON ICE

Belle Shaw

Juice of four lemons; whites four eggs; two cups sugar; two cups water;
one tablespoonful gelatine. Add gelatine to whites of eggs; mix sugar,
water and lemon juice together, then add to beaten whites of eggs, and
freeze.


THREE-OF-A-KIND ICE

L. E. Kennedy

Three oranges; three lemons; three cupfuls sugar; the whites of three
eggs and three cupfuls water. Freeze. This will serve twenty.




BREAD

          "_Here is bread which strengthens men's hearts,
            And, therefore, is called 'The Staff of Life.'_"


SPOON BREAD

Mary S. Vanzwoll

One cup buttermilk; one cup boiled rice; one-half cup corn meal; one
egg; one tablespoonful melted lard or butter; one-half teaspoonful soda
in water; salt. Bake in medium oven thirty minutes.


OATMEAL BREAD

Mrs. F. W. Bentley

One cake compressed yeast; one quart flour, half white and half oatmeal
flour; one tablespoonful brown sugar; one teaspoonful salt; one
tablespoonful drippings of bacon, melted (hot); one-half cup molasses;
put in half water and half milk enough to make a stiff batter. Let it
rise and mold into two loaves. Let rise to half its size, and bake in
moderate oven thirty-five minutes.


NUT BREAD

Mrs. Stevens

Four cups flour; one cup sugar; two cups nuts; two and one-half cups
milk; one egg; four teaspoonfuls baking powder; one teaspoonful salt.
Mix dry ingredients together. Beat egg, add milk to egg and pour in the
flour, stirring as little as possible. Make in two loaves and let stand
covered twenty minutes. Then bake in moderate oven forty minutes.


NUT BREAD

Mrs. T. M. Butler

Sift four cups of flour, one cup of light brown sugar sifted three
times, one cup of pecans chopped, four teaspoonfuls of baking powder;
one teaspoonful salt. All dry mixture work with hands, add one and
one-half cups of sweet milk, one egg beaten light, place in pans, let
stand twenty minutes. Then bake forty-five minutes.


NUT BREAD

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

Two cups of graham flour; one cup of white flour; three teaspoonfuls of
baking powder; one teaspoonful salt; one-third cup sugar, sifted
together. One tablespoonful melted butter; one and three-fourths cup of
milk; one cup of English walnuts. Mix in order given. Bake in bread tin
about an hour.


NUT BREAD

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

Three cups flour; four even teaspoonfuls baking powder; one cup sugar;
one teaspoonful salt; one egg; one and one-half cups sweet milk; one cup
nut meats. Bake slowly one hour.


NUT LOAF

Mrs. R. McNeil

Two cups of flour; three-fourths cup of sugar; one-half teaspoonful
salt; three-fourths cup walnuts crushed; three teaspoonfuls baking
powder; one egg. Beat egg with milk; add to the mixed and sifted dry
ingredients, let rise half an hour, and bake.


GRAHAM BREAD

Mrs. John T. Gilchrist

One cup white flour; two cups graham flour; one teaspoonful salt; one
teaspoonful soda; one-half cup dark molasses; one and one-half cups
sweet milk; one cup seeded raisins. Bake in a slow oven for forty-five
minutes.


RAISIN GRAHAM BREAD

Mrs. Clara A. Baldwin

One-half cup to one cup seeded raisins; one egg; two-thirds cup
molasses; one rounding teaspoonful soda dissolved in a little hot water;
two cups milk; four cups graham flour. Mix and bake one and one-half
hours in slow oven.


RAISIN BREAD

Mrs. T. D. McMicken

One and one-half cups sour milk; one and one-half teaspoonfuls soda;
one-fourth cup molasses; one-half teaspoonful salt; graham flour till
stiff enough to drop from spoon. One-half cup raisins.


SOUTHERN BROWN BREAD

Sue C. Woodman

One and one-half cups sour milk; one level teaspoonful soda; scant cup
brown sugar; two cups graham flour; one cup raisins; one teaspoonful
salt; bake one hour.


BOSTON BROWN BREAD

Mrs. Emma C. Portman

Two cups milk, sour; two cups graham flour; one cup wheat flour; three
tablespoonfuls molasses or sugar; one teaspoonful soda. Take pound
baking powder cans, lard them well and fill two-thirds full; put on lids
and set in a kettle which is half full of boiling water; put on the
kettle lid and keep boiling three hours; replenishing often with boiling
water.


BOSTON BROWN BREAD NO. 2

Mrs. M. A. Stewart

One cup sweet milk; one cup sour milk; one cup New Orleans molasses;
one-half teaspoonful salt; one teaspoonful soda; one cup corn meal; two
cups graham flour. Add a few raisins which greatly improve the flavor.
Put in a five-pound pail, set in cold water (one quart). From time it
commences to boil let cook for three hours.


MY MOTHER'S BROWN BREAD

Mrs. Grant Beebe

One cup molasses; one cup milk (sweet or sour); one cup of graham flour
and one cup corn meal, stiff; two cups raisins, two eggs; two even
teaspoonfuls soda; one tablespoonful brown sugar; one teaspoonful salt.
Bake one hour in moderate oven.


JOHNNY CAKE

Mary S. Vanzoll

One cup sweet milk; two eggs; one dessert spoonful of sugar; one-half
cup yellow corn meal; one-half cup flour to make like cake batter;
one-fourth cup melted butter; salt; heaping teaspoonful baking powder.


CORN CAKE

Mrs. J. L. Putnam

Scald one cup white corn meal with one pint of milk; while hot add one
tablespoonful of buttered bread crumbs, one of sugar and a little salt.
The yolks and whites of three eggs beaten separately. Pour into a well
buttered frying pan and bake twenty minutes in a hot oven.


CORN MEAL GEMS

Mrs. K. Larson

One-half cup corn meal; one cup flour; three teaspoonfuls baking powder;
one tablespoonful sugar; one tablespoonful melted butter; one-half
teaspoonful salt; three-fourths cup milk; one egg. Mix and sift dry
ingredients; add milk gradually and egg well beaten and melted butter.
Bake in hot oven in buttered gem pans for twenty-five minutes.


CORN GEMS

Josephine Hurlbut

Put two cups of corn meal into a bowl; pour over one cup of boiling
milk; add a tablespoonful butter; cover the bowl, allow the mixture to
stand until cool; add another cup of cold milk; the yolks of two eggs,
well beaten; one-half teaspoonful salt; half cupful flour, and two
teaspoonfuls baking powder. Beat thoroughly, then fold in the well
beaten whites of two eggs. Bake in gem pans in a moderately quick oven
thirty minutes.


BAKING POWDER BISCUITS

Mrs. H. B. Rairden

Thirteen tablespoonfuls flour; one teaspoonful salt; four level
teaspoonfuls baking powder; one tablespoonful lard; mix together with
milk enough to make dough.


PARKER HOUSE ROLLS

Mrs. H. R. Foster

Scald one pint of milk; one yeast cake put in warm water; two
tablespoonfuls sugar; two tablespoonfuls butter; one teaspoonful salt;
three cups flour; mix. Raise until double; then add flour to make soft
dough. Raise again, and make in roll pans and raise again. Bake in hot
oven.


OATMEAL GEMS

Mrs. Henry Crossman

Two tablespoonfuls left-over cooked oatmeal, beat in one egg, one-half
cup sweet milk, one teaspoonful baking powder, one scant cup flour,
pinch salt. Bake in hot oven in iron gem pans fifteen minutes.


LIGHT BISCUIT

Mrs. A. J. Atwater

Take a piece of bread dough that will make as many biscuit as you wish;
lay it out rather flat in a bowl; break into it two eggs, one-half cup
sugar; one-half cup butter. Mix this thoroughly with enough flour to
keep it from sticking to hands and board. Knead well for fifteen to
twenty minutes; make it into small biscuits; place in greased pan and
let rise until they are even with top of pan. Bake in quick oven for
half an hour.


POTATO BISCUIT

Mrs. H. S. Mount

One cup of milk; three potatoes (cooked and riced); one tablespoonful
lard; one teaspoonful butter; one and one-half teaspoonful salt; two
teaspoonfuls sugar. Let cool and add one cake yeast dissolved in
lukewarm water. Two eggs well beaten; four cups flour; let raise three
hours. Then roll out about one-half inch thickness. Butter, cut, turn
over with silver knife and shape like parker house rolls. Raise two
hours more and bake about ten minutes. Will make about fifty rolls.


SOUTHERN POTATO BISCUITS

Mrs. Granville Richardson

Three cups flour; three teaspoonfuls baking powder; one teaspoonful
salt; one cup hot mashed potatoes; three tablespoonfuls butter or other
shortening; one-half cup milk; one egg. Mash the potatoes through a
strainer, add salt, milk, butter or shortening and then the egg well
beaten. Beat until smooth, then sift in the flour and baking powder.
Turn on a floured board, cut with small biscuit cutter, put into hot
oven and bake twenty minutes.


"ABBIE'S" CORN BREAD

Mrs. Edward E. Swadener

One cupful corn meal; one cupful flour; one-third cupful sugar; one
teaspoonful baking powder; salt. Put these through flour sieve, add one
tablespoonful melted butter. Beat one egg very light in a cup, add
enough milk to fill the cup, stir this in the flour; then add one-half
cup more of milk. Use your judgment about quantity of milk. Bake either
in one pan or in muffin pan.


MUFFINS

Mrs. John M. Stahl

Beat three eggs and add two cupfuls milk; one quart of flour; two
heaping teaspoonfuls baking powder; one tablespoonful sugar; one
teaspoonful salt; one tablespoonful melted lard put in the last thing.
Bake twenty minutes in a hot oven. This makes eighteen muffins.


AFTERNOON TEA ROLLS

Mrs. C. N. Eastman

One cup hot mashed potatoes; one cup sugar; one cup melted butter; one
cake compressed yeast; four eggs; one cup lukewarm water; flour enough
to knead. Soak the cake of yeast in lukewarm water at noontime. Put
sugar in bowl with mashed potatoes at same time. Then at night put these
together. In the morning, add melted butter and eggs well beaten. Stir
in enough flour to knead and let rise until light. Make into small tea
rolls and let rise until very, very light. Bake twenty-five minutes in
moderate oven. Cream powdered sugar and butter to a paste and spread on
top of rolls just before serving.


OATMEAL MUFFINS

Dr. V. Racine

One and one-fourth cups cooked oatmeal; one and one-fourth cup bran
flour; two heaping tablespoonfuls white flour; one heaping teaspoonful
baking powder; one saltspoon salt; two heaping tablespoonfuls cocoanut;
one-half cupful raisins (seeded); two eggs beaten light. Mix the eggs
and cooked oatmeal; add the dry ingredients. The dough should be very
stiff. If too moist, use more bran. Bake in your gem pans or muffin
rings in a moderate oven.


BRAN MUFFINS

Josephine Hurlbut

Two cups bran; two cupfuls flour; two teaspoonfuls salt; two cupfuls
sour milk or buttermilk; one-half cup sugar; one tablespoonful
shortening; one egg; one and one-half teaspoonfuls baking soda; one
teaspoonful baking powder; one-half cup water. Beat shortening, egg and
sugar together until creamy; to the sour milk add the soda dissolved in
boiling water; then the bran, flour, salt, baking powder and the egg and
sugar mixture. Mix thoroughly and divide into buttered gem pans and bake
in a hot oven for twenty minutes. Sweet milk may be used by substituting
three teaspoonfuls of baking powder for the soda and baking powder
specified above.


MUFFINS

Mrs. Harry M. Boon

One and three-fourths cups flour; one-half cup sugar; one egg; two
teaspoonfuls baking powder and three-fourths cup milk. Stir all together
and bake in muffin tins in hot oven.


MUFFINS

Mrs. Thomas H. Iglehart

Two cups milk; two eggs; three cups flour; three spoons baking powder;
pinch salt. Beat eggs, add milk; then flour, into which baking powder
has been put. Bake in hot oven.


BLUEBERRY MUFFINS

Esther Blade

Beat one egg; add one cup sweet milk; two tablespoonfuls sugar; one
pinch of salt; one and one-half cups of flour with two teaspoonfuls
baking powder; one cup blueberries floured. Grease tins. Bake in hot
oven about twenty minutes.


MUFFINS

Mrs. George D. Milligan

Big spoonful of shortening (butter or substitute); one egg; three
tablespoonfuls sugar; one cup milk; two cups flour; three teaspoonfuls
baking powder. Bake twenty or twenty-five minutes.


COLD WATER MUFFINS

Mrs. Edward E. Swadener

One-half pint of cold water put in a bowl and break two eggs in it, beat
it until it froths; then add one cupful flour, one scant teaspoonful
salt. Bake in a moderate oven forty-five minutes.


SALLY LUNN

Mrs. J. P. Cobb

One cup milk. Quarter cup butter; one-half cup sugar; two eggs beaten
separately; teaspoonful baking powder (sifted in the flour); enough
flour to make the batter. Bake in quick oven.


FRENCH COFFEE CAKE

Mrs. H. P. Sieh

One cup butter and lard mixed; one cup granulated sugar; two eggs; one
cup milk; two cups flour (sifted); two teaspoonfuls baking powder; one
teaspoonful vanilla; or one-half teaspoonful nutmeg to suit taste. Bake
fifteen to twenty minutes.

Frosting: One-half cup granulated sugar; one tablespoonful flour; one
tablespoonful butter; one tablespoonful cinnamon; mix all together and
spread over top of cake before baking.


COFFEE CAKE

Mrs. Crouch

One egg; two tablespoonfuls each of butter and sugar; one cup milk; two
cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking powder. Put in pan, melt two
tablespoonfuls butter and pour over the top, then sprinkle thickly with
granulated sugar and cinnamon.


CINNAMON CAKE

Mrs. C. E. Upham

One scant cup sugar; two eggs; one teaspoonful salt; one tablespoonful
fat or substitute; one cup milk; two cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking
powder. Bake twenty minutes; take out and spread butter on top; also
cinnamon and sugar, mixed. Put back in oven one minute.


CINNAMON ROLLS

Mrs. A. J. Atwater

One quart bran; one pint graham flour; one teaspoonful salt; two
teaspoonfuls baking powder; one-half teaspoonful soda; one pint sour
milk; scant half pint molasses; one tablespoonful melted butter; one cup
nut meats. Bake one hour.


BREAKFAST PUFFS

Mrs. E. N. Wilder

One pint sour milk; one teaspoonful soda; flour enough to make stiff
enough to roll. Fry like doughnuts. Eat with syrup.


TOAST PATTY CASES

Mrs. A. J. Atwater

Cut the crust from a small loaf of baker's bread; divide into two or two
and one-half inch slices; toast on all six sides. With a sharp knife cut
around the inside edge of one side and carefully scoop out the bread,
leaving a bottom and four toast sides. You can brush the inside with
melted butter and brown if you wish or use as it is. Use as patty
shells.


YORKSHIRE PUDDING

Mrs. J. L. Putnam

Sift one even teaspoonful of salt and one of baking powder twice with a
pint of flour. Beat two eggs light and add to two cups of milk; turn in
the sifted flour and mix quickly. Have ready in a roasting pan six
tablespoonfuls of fat reserved from the drippings from the roast of
beef. Set it upon the upper grating of the oven. When it begins to
bubble hard, pour the batter into it and cook quickly. Cut into squares
and serve with the roast.


YORKSHIRE PUDDING TO SERVE WITH ROAST BEEF

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Two cups of flour in a bowl with half a teaspoonful salt; beat three
eggs and stir into the flour; add two cups milk; stir until smooth; turn
into a pan with some beef drippings and bake thirty to forty minutes. If
beef is placed on a rack put the pudding under the roast. Cut in squares
and serve with the roast.


POPOVERS

Mrs. W. I. Clock

One cup of flour; one-fourth teaspoonful salt; seven-eighths cup of
milk; two eggs; one-half teaspoonful of melted butter. Put all into a
bowl together and beat for five minutes with egg beater. Grease muffin
pan well, bake in hot oven for thirty minutes. Oven must not be hot
before putting popovers in.


POPOVERS

Mrs. R. F. Morrow

Three eggs; one-half teaspoonful salt--beat light; one cup flour; one
cup milk. Bake one-half hour in hot buttered tins. Makes eight popovers.


FRENCH PANCAKES

Mrs. Charles T. Daily

One cup flour; three eggs, very well beaten separately; a pinch of salt;
milk enough to make a real thin batter. Have skillet very hot and
greased and spread batter thin.


BANANA PANCAKES

Mrs. C. S. Junge

Mash three bananas to a pulp. Beat two eggs well. Add two teaspoonfuls
of sugar and pinch of salt. In two cups of sour milk put small
teaspoonful of soda. Mix all together and stir in enough flour to make a
thin batter and bake on a griddle.


RAW POTATO PANCAKES

Mrs. E. R. Hornig

Peel and grate about eight medium sized raw potatoes, add one scant
teaspoonful salt, two well beaten eggs. Mix thoroughly. Fry in lard on
hot griddle to a rich brown color on both sides.


POTATO PANCAKES

Mrs. F. B. Woodland

Boil three medium sized potatoes. Dry and mash. Add two eggs, beaten;
one cup flour; one cup milk; one-half teaspoonful salt; dash pepper; two
teaspoonfuls baking powder. Fry in buttered pan.


BREAD PANCAKES

Mrs. E. R. Hornig

Cover half a small loaf of stale bread with sour milk, let stand over
night. Add one tablespoonful salt, two teaspoonfuls soda, two eggs, and
enough flour to make proper consistency. Fry on hot griddle.


SOFT WAFFLES

Mrs. Thomas Meeks Butler

Sift together one quart of flour, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder; one
teaspoonful of sugar; one-half teaspoonful salt; mix in one
tablespoonful of butter, add two well beaten eggs. Beating the yolks
together, then the whites of the eggs to a stiff froth. Add the yolks
and one and one-half pints of milk. Add the whites of the eggs after
mixing the whole into a smooth batter not too thin and pour into well
greased irons.


WAFFLES

V. F. Hollenberger

Mix one pint flour: one pint milk to a smooth paste. Add small cup
butter, barely melted. Add to this the well beaten yolks of three eggs,
then the beaten whites. Just before baking, add one teaspoonful baking
powder, beat well for two minutes, and bake on very hot iron.


WAFFLES

Mrs. J. F. Nicols

One pint of milk; one-half cup butter; three eggs; flour enough to make
batter; salt; two heaping teaspoonfuls baking powder. Mix milk, butter,
yolks of eggs--stir, then add flour and salt. Stir in beaten whites of
eggs. Just before cooking add baking powder. Beat briskly.


WAFFLES

Mrs. Charles T. Daily

Two cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking powder; one teaspoonful salt;
three tablespoonfuls melted butter; one and one-half cups milk; three
eggs. Sift dry ingredients, add yolks, well beaten, milk, butter and
stiffly beaten whites. Beat well and cook on a hot waffle iron, well
greased.


CARRIE WATKINS' WAFFLES

Bertha Z. Bisbee

Three eggs; two cups milk; three tablespoonfuls melted butter; three
cups flour; one teaspoonful sugar; two teaspoonfuls baking powder; pinch
of salt. Beat whites and yolks separately; add milk to yolks, then salt,
sugar and butter, then flour and baking powder. When the iron is hot,
fold in the well beaten whites of eggs and bake immediately.


GLORIFIED HOE CAKES

Mrs. Archy S. Corken

(This recipe won a $10.00 Tribune prize for wartime conservation
recipes.)

Two cups yellow cornmeal; one teaspoonful salt; three and one-half cups
buttermilk; cottage cheese; one cup flour; one tablespoonful sugar; one
teaspoonful soda; green pepper. Sift together cornmeal, flour, salt and
sugar into a bowl. Pour three cups buttermilk (or sour milk) over the
sifted ingredients, and beat well. Dissolve one teaspoonful soda in one
cup of sour milk and beat thoroughly into the butter. Spread on well
greased hot griddle and fry until little bubbles cover the surface. Turn
quickly. Have ready some cottage cheese seasoned with salt and pepper in
which has been mixed chopped green pepper or pimento. Spread one-half
inch thick on top of hoe cake. Cut cake into quarters and serve on hot
plate. This recipe makes four griddle size cakes.


AMBER SYRUP

Mrs. Harry M. Boon

One cup brown sugar; two cups granulated sugar; two cups boiling water.
Boil five minutes and when cool add ten drops vanilla. It is hard to
distinguish this from maple syrup.




CAKES

          "_Now, now the mirth comes
            With the cake full of plums._"
                                    --HERRICK.


MARSHMALLOW CAKE

Mrs. J. H. Shanley

One-half cup butter; one and one-half cups sugar; two and one-half cups
flour; one-half cup milk; two level teaspoonfuls baking powder; five
eggs; one teaspoonful vanilla. Bake in layers and spread with the
marshmallow paste between layers and on top; also marshmallows cut in
half.

Marshmallow Paste: Three-fourths cup sugar; one-fourth cup milk, boiled
together six minutes. Melt one-fourth pound marshmallows, add two
tablespoonfuls water; combine with the boiled sugar and milk, add
vanilla and beat until stiff enough to spread.


GOLD CAKE

Mrs. Charles S. Daily

One and one-half cups sugar; three-fourths cup butter; four yolks of
eggs; three whites of eggs; three-fourths cup milk; two cups flour; two
teaspoonfuls baking powder; one teaspoonful flavoring. Cream butter and
sugar, then add the beaten yolks of eggs, add flavoring to this, then
add milk and flour alternately, first sifting flour and baking powder
together. Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth and add last, folding
them in gently. Bake in a loaf cake pan forty minutes in a modern oven.


COCOANUT CREAM CAKE

Mrs. H. S. Mount

One-half cup butter; one and one-half cup sugar; one cup cold water;
three cups sifted flour (sifted three times); two heaping teaspoonfuls
baking powder; whites four eggs beaten stiff; flavor with vanilla. Cream
butter and sugar. Add one-third water and beat thoroughly; then add one
cup flour and beat again. Add second one-third cup of water and second
cup of flour and continue beating. Into last cup of flour add baking
powder and add last one-third cup of water with the last cup of flour
and beat thoroughly. Then flavor and fold in the beaten whites of eggs;
carefully put in three layer tins. Grate a whole cocoanut. Whip one pint
of cream. After cakes are cool put whipped cream on first layer, then
cover with freshly grated cocoanut. Continue the same until the last
layer is well covered with whipped cream, and then cocoanut.


ORANGE CAKE

Mrs. Martin K. Northam

One-third cup butter; one cup sugar; grated rind of one orange; one-half
cup milk or water; one and one-half cups sifted pastry flour; two level
teaspoonfuls baking powder; yolks of two eggs, beaten light; whites of
two eggs, beaten dry. This makes two small layers.

Filling: The unbeaten white of one egg; add to this one-fourth cup
orange pulp and juice, with the rotary egg beater gradually beat in one
and one-half cups powdered sugar, beating it slowly. When that is stiff
enough to hold its shape spread upon the cake. Long beating makes this
icing spongy and white.


EGGLESS CAKE

Mrs. W. H. Muschlet

One cup apple sauce, unsweetened; one teaspoonful soda; one cup of
sugar; one-half cup butter; one and one-half cup flour--depends on
consistency of apple sauce; one teaspoonful ground cinnamon; one
teaspoonful ground allspice; one-half teaspoonful cloves; one-half
teaspoonful nutmeg; one-half cup citron, cut in small pieces; one or
over cups of nuts. Mix flour, nuts and citron well. Cream butter and
sugar till it pops; add apple sauce; which turns brown. Then add spices,
flour, nuts and citron. Bake in moderate oven in flat pan about 35
minutes, probably 40 minutes. If preferred iced, cut in squares. Make
double quantity, as the longer kept the better.


LADY BALTIMORE CAKE

Mrs. L. B. Maxwell

Take one cupful of butter; two cupfuls sugar; three and one-half cupfuls
of flour; one cupful sweet milk; whites of six eggs; two teaspoonfuls
baking powder; and one teaspoonful rose-water. Cream the butter, add the
sugar gradually, beating continually; then the milk and flavoring; next
the flour and baking powder and lastly the stiffly beaten whites of
eggs, which should be folded into the dough. Bake in three layer cake
tins in quite hot oven. To make the filling, dissolve three cups of
sugar in one cupful boiling water; cook it until it threads; then pour
it onto the stiffly beaten whites of three eggs, stirring constantly. To
this icing add one cupful of chopped raisins, one cupful of nutmeats
(pecans preferred) and five figs cut into very thin strips. This makes
enough icing for top and sides of cake.


TUTTI FRUTTI CAKE

Mrs. Wm. J. Maiden

Two tablespoonfuls butter; one cupful sugar; one cupful milk; one egg;
two cupfuls flour; two heaping teaspoonfuls baking powder; one-half
cupful dates (pitted and chopped); one-half cupful English walnuts,
chopped; one-half cupful raisins or figs (or both), chopped; three
tablespoonfuls chocolate or cocoa; one teaspoonful vanilla. This makes
two layers.

Filling: Three cupfuls 4x sugar; three tablespoonfuls cocoa; six
tablespoonfuls melted butter; six tablespoonfuls hot coffee; one
teaspoonful vanilla. Mix well and put on cake.


CREAM CAKE

Mrs. W. S. Holabird

One-half cup butter; one cup sugar; yolks of two eggs beaten light; one
and three-fourths cups sifted pastry flour; two level teaspoonfuls
baking powder; one-half cup cold water; whites of two eggs beaten dry;
flavoring to suit.

Cream Filling: One-fourth cup sifted flour; one cup hot milk; one-third
cup sugar; one-fourth teaspoonful salt; one egg beaten light; one ounce
chocolate; one teaspoonful vanilla extract. Mix flour and salt with a
very little cold milk; stir into the hot milk and cook ten minutes, add
the chocolate and stir until it is melted and evenly blended with the
flour mixture. Then beat in the egg mixed with the sugar, and lastly the
vanilla.


LADY FINGER CAKE

Mrs. C. A. Bowman

Five eggs, beaten separately; six lady fingers, browned and grated;
three-fourths cup almonds, ground fine; one cup sugar; vanilla to taste.
Mix all together, putting in stiffly beaten whites last. Bake in two
layers in moderate oven.

Filling: Yolk of one egg; one and one-half teaspoonfuls corn starch;
sugar and vanilla to taste. Spread between layers and put whipped cream
on top.


WEARY WILLY

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Whites of two eggs broken in a cup; enough soft butter to make the cup
half full; fill the cup with milk. Sift one and one-half cups pastry
flour; one cup sugar; two teaspoonfuls baking powder and pinch of salt.
Turn the cup of liquid into the dry ingredients, flavor and beat ten
minutes. Bake in rather slow oven in layers or loaf. If well beaten this
is a delicious, fine grained cake.


SUNSHINE CAKES

Charlotte Pangburn

Seven eggs; the whites and yolks beaten separately and very stiffly.
Then add one-fourth teaspoonful each of salt and cream of tartar; then
fold in one cup of sugar sifted three times; also one cup of flour
sifted three times, then flavoring, preferably orange flavor. Bake in a
slow oven forty-five minutes.


DELICIOUS WHITE CAKE

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

One and one-half cups sugar; one-half cup butter; one cup sweet milk;
two cups flour; one teaspoonful baking powder; whites of four eggs.
Cream sugar and butter, add milk, then flour and baking powder. Lastly,
add whites of eggs, stirring very little after whites are in.


WHITE CAKE (LAYER)

Mrs. Knap

Whites of eight eggs; one and one-fourth cups of granulated sugar;
one-half cup water; three-fourths cup butter; two and one-half cups
flour; two heaping teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Flavor.


SUNSHINE CAKE

Mary Roberts

Whites of seven eggs; yolks of five eggs; two-thirds cup flour, sifted
five times; one cup sugar; one pinch salt; one-third teaspoonful cream
of tartar; extract to taste. Beat whites very stiff, then add sugar;
beat lightly, then add yolks beat thoroughly; add flour, stir lightly;
then add extract. Put cream of tartar in eggs when half beaten.


GOOD LAYER CAKE

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

One cup sugar; one-half cup butter; two eggs; one cup milk; two and
one-half cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking powder; flavoring. Cream
sugar and butter, add eggs beaten lightly, then milk. Sift flour three
times before measuring, baking powder with flour in final sifting.


GOOD LAYER CAKE

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

One-half cup butter; one cup sugar; one-half cup sweet milk; three eggs,
beaten separately; one and one-half cups flour; one and one-half
teaspoonfuls baking powder. Cream butter and sugar; add milk, yolks,
flour and baking powder, and fold in whites. Bake in two layers or loaf.


GRAFTON CAKE

Mrs. Floyd E. Jennison

Beat two tablespoonfuls of butter (or substitute) to a cream; add
gradually one and one-half cups of sugar; the yolks of two eggs (beaten
light) and one cupful of warm water. Stir in two and one-half cups of
pastry flour and beat continuously for five minutes. Add two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder, one of vanilla and beat again. Now add
the stiffly beaten whites, folded in carefully. Bake in two layers.


THE ROBERT E. LEE CAKE

Mrs. Deborah Kaufman

Three eggs; one cup sugar; one-half cup hot water; one and one-fourth
cups flour; one teaspoonful baking powder; the grated rind of one
orange. Beat sugar and yolks of eggs with small portion of orange peel
and half of the beaten whites of eggs. Add hot water, and last the
sifted flour with baking powder, and pinch of salt. Bake in two layers
in hot oven.

Filling: The rest of the grated rind of orange, half cup sugar, the
remaining whites of eggs; whip together and place between layers while
cake is hot.


CRUMB CAKE

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One cup sugar; one cup flour; one-half cup butter; rub all together with
one-half teaspoonful cinnamon and nutmeg; one-half teaspoonful salt. Set
aside one-half cup of mixture. Then to portion left add one good sized
cup of flour, two teaspoonfuls baking powder, one-half cup of milk, one
egg. Mix thoroughly and put in baking pan and sprinkle the mixture, set
aside, on top and bake slowly.


WHEATLESS SPONGE CAKE

Sabin School

Four eggs; three-fourths cup sugar; one-fourth cup corn starch;
one-fourth cup potato flour; one-fourth teaspoonful vanilla. Beat whites
of eggs stiff, add sugar and beat again. Add yolks beaten separately;
fold in corn starch and potato flour sifted together; add vanilla. Bake
in slow oven thirty-five minutes.


SPONGE CAKE

Mrs. E. P. Rowen

Two eggs, well beaten together; one cup sugar, beat into eggs for five
minutes; one cup flour; one heaping teaspoonful baking powder in flour;
one-half cup boiling water added last. Put into oven immediately.


PRUNE CAKE

Mrs. C. B. Martin

One and one-half cups sugar and two tablespoonfuls butter creamed; yolks
of three eggs; white of one egg; add one cup chopped prunes, sweetened
and cooked; English walnuts; one teaspoonful cinnamon; one-fourth
teaspoonful cloves; little nutmeg; one cup sweet milk; level teaspoonful
soda; heaping teaspoonful baking powder; two and one-half cups flour.
Makes three layers.

Icing: Cream two cups pulverized sugar and one tablespoonful butter; add
whites of two eggs beaten stiff.


WAR CAKE

Mrs. M. A. Flanders

One-half cup corn syrup; four scant tablespoonfuls butter; one-half cup
milk; one egg, white and yolk beaten separately; fourteen graham
crackers rolled fine; two tablespoonfuls flour; one teaspoonful baking
powder; one-half teaspoonful vanilla; two tablespoonfuls chopped nuts
and two tablespoonfuls raisins.


EGGLESS, MILKLESS, BUTTERLESS CAKE

Mrs. C. E. Seaton

Put in a saucepan one cupful of brown sugar; one cupful of water, two
cupfuls of seeded raisins; one-third cupful of lard; one teaspoonful of
cinnamon, one-quarter teaspoonful nutmeg; one-half teaspoonful cloves,
ground, and a pinch of salt. Place over the fire and boil for five
minutes. Let cool, then add one teaspoonful soda dissolved in a little
hot water; two cupfuls flour, in which one-half teaspoonful of baking
powder has been sifted. Put in a loaf cake pan and bake one hour in a
moderate oven.


BUTTERLESS, EGGLESS, MILKLESS CAKE

Mrs. M. A. Flanders

Two cups raisins; one-half teaspoonful allspice; one-half teaspoonful
cinnamon; two tablespoonfuls shortening; one-half teaspoonful salt; one
cup boiling water; one cup brown sugar; one-half cup dates; boil five
minutes; when cool, add two cups flour, one teaspoonful baking soda,
dissolved in warm water. Bake in a loaf.


BLUEBERRY CAKE

Mrs. Henry Crossman

One quart of flour; three tablespoonfuls sugar; one teaspoonful baking
powder; pinch of salt; two eggs; two cupfuls milk; piece of butter size
of egg. Scatter baking powder, salt and sugar into flour and sift well,
add the beaten eggs, melted butter and milk; stir all together a few
minutes, then add berries, slightly floured. Bake in long square tin for
twenty minutes or half an hour.


SPONGE CAKE

Mrs. Earl Combs

Three eggs; four tablespoonfuls of cold water: one cup powdered sugar;
one cup flour and a pinch of salt; two teaspoonfuls baking powder;
beaten whites of two eggs; bake in loaf or layers.


FIG CAKE

Mrs. J. E. Kelly

One-half cup raisins; one-half cup figs, cut fine; a level teaspoonful
soda; one cup boiling water. Sit to one side while mixing; one cup
sugar; one-half cup butter; one egg; one teaspoonful lemon extract; one
heaping teaspoonful cinnamon; one-half teaspoonful cloves; two cups
flour; add first mixture and bake in moderate oven.

Frosting: One and one-half cups powdered sugar; one-half cup butter,
creamed together; two tablespoonfuls grated chocolate; two
tablespoonfuls strong coffee; one teaspoonful vanilla. Do not cook
frosting.


LAYER CAKE WITH APPLE FILLING

Mrs. W. F. Becker

Three tablespoonfuls butter; one scant cup sugar; one scant cup milk;
yolks of two eggs; one one-fourths cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking
powder; one teaspoonful vanilla. Cream butter and sugar and add eggs;
beat five minutes; add milk; then add flour sifted with baking powder;
add vanilla, and beat five minutes and put in two layer pans, put
filling between layers and on top.

Filling: Whites of two eggs; one-half cup sugar; two large grated
apples; one teaspoonful vanilla. Beat one-half hour.


APPLE SAUCE CAKE

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

One-fourth cup butter; one cup sugar; one egg yolk; one teaspoonful
cinnamon; one-half teaspoonful cloves; little nutmeg; one cup apple
sauce; one level teaspoonful soda; one cup raisins; two cups flour;
pinch of salt. Cream butter and sugar, add egg well beaten and soda
dissolved in the apple sauce; add raisins, mixed with flour and spices.

Frosting: One cup of confectioners' sugar; two tablespoonfuls melted
butter, enough hot water to spread.


DATE CAKE

Mrs. Edward S. Smith

One cup of dates chopped fine; sprinkle over them one cup of boiling
water, and one scant teaspoonful of soda. Let stand while you mix the
cake. One cup of sugar; one tablespoonful of butter; one and one-third
cups of flour; one-half cup of nut meats; vanilla. Mix and add dates.
Bake slowly thirty-five minutes.


CHOCOLATE FUDGE CAKE

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

Dissolve two ounces chocolate in five tablespoonfuls boiling water.
Cream one-half cup butter, adding gradually one and one-half cupfuls
sugar; add yolks of four eggs, beaten thoroughly, then add the
chocolate; one-half cupful milk; one and three-fourths cupfuls flour;
two level teaspoonfuls baking powder; one teaspoonful vanilla and add
beaten whites last.

Filling: Two cups sugar; one cup milk; one-half cup chocolate; butter
size of a walnut. Boil until thick enough and beat until rather stiff.
Spread on cake.


CHOCOLATE CAKE

Sharlotte Pangburn

Two cups of brown sugar; one-half cup of butter; one-half cup of sour
milk; two eggs. Cream this together. Then dissolve one teaspoonful
(level) soda in one-half cup of hot water; one teaspoonful baking
powder. Grate one-third cake of Baker's chocolate; add hot water and
soda and stir with cake. Lastly add two heaping cups of flour. For layer
or loaf cake.


CHOCOLATE CAKE

Mrs. T. C. Hollenberger

One-half cake chocolate; three-fourths cup brown sugar; one-half cup
sweet milk; cook until smooth. Add one teaspoonful vanilla. When cold,
add to the following: Cake one-half cup butter, one cup brown sugar, two
eggs, one-half cup milk, one and one-half cups flour, one teaspoonful
soda. Beat whites of eggs separately.


GRAHAM CRACKER CAKE

Mrs. Paul Klein-exel

One-third cup butter; one cup of sugar; three-fourths cup milk; three
eggs beaten separately; one package of graham crackers, ground fine; one
cup of nuts, one walnut; two teaspoons baking powder. Bake in two layers
for twenty minutes.


HICKORY NUT CAKE

Mrs. William S. Wood

One and one-half cupfuls sugar; one-half cupful butter; one cupful sour
milk; one teaspoonful soda; two eggs; three cupfuls flour; one cupful
stoned raisins; one and one-half cupfuls nut meats, cut up, and one
teaspoonful cinnamon.


POTATOE CAKE

Mrs. William Molt

One cup cold boiled potatoes, grated; two cups flour; one cup grated
chocolate; two cups sugar; three-fourths cup butter; one-half cup each
of chopped almonds and raisins; one-half teaspoonful each of ground
cloves, cinnamon and vanilla; five eggs, beat in one at a time; one cup
sour cream, or milk; one teaspoonful soda. Bake one hour.


LIZZIE'S NO-EGG CAKE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One cup sour milk; one teaspoonful soda; one cup chopped raisins; two
cups flour; one teaspoonful each of cinnamon and cloves; one cup
granulated sugar; one-half cup butter and a pinch of salt.


POOR MAN'S CAKE

Mrs. K. Larson

One tablespoon butter; one cup sugar; one teaspoonful soda; one
teaspoonful baking powder; two cups flour; one cup raisins; two
teaspoons vanilla; one teaspoonful allspice; one cup sour milk; one egg
beaten.


RYE BREAD TORTE

Mrs. Harry M. Boon

Four eggs, separate yolks and whites; three-fourths cup butter; one and
three-fourths cups each of sugar and rye bread. Let the rye bread dry so
it can crumble. Baked in two layers with whipped cream between makes a
very rich cake.


DARK CAKE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One-half cup brown sugar; one egg; one-quarter cup each of butter,
molasses and strong coffee; one and one-quarter cups flour; one-half cup
each of raisins and currants; one-half teaspoonful each of soda,
cinnamon and cloves; one-quarter teaspoonful mace. Mix together in above
order and bake.


DEVIL'S CAKE

Mrs. R. H. Wheeler

Part 1: One cup light brown sugar; one cupful Baker's chocolate (two
squares); one-half cupful milk; thoroughly cook in double boiler and
when cool mix with part 2.

Part 2: One-half cupful butter (scant); one cupful brown sugar; yolks of
three eggs; one-half cupful milk; two cupfuls flour; one teaspoonful
soda dissolved in two tablespoonfuls warm water.

Chocolate Frosting: One cupful sugar; butter size of a walnut; four
tablespoonfuls cream; dessertspoonful vanilla; two squares Baker's
chocolate. Cook in double boiler slowly.

White Frosting: Whites of four eggs; two cupfuls sugar; two
tablespoonfuls water; one cup nutmeats; two teaspoonfuls vanilla. Cook
six or seven minutes in double boiler.


DEVIL'S FOOD CAKE

Sue C. Woodman

Yolk of one egg; one-half cup milk; two squares Baker's chocolate; one
tablespoonful butter. Cook till thick. Add one cup sugar; one-half cup
milk; one-half cup flour; one teaspoonful soda; one teaspoonful vanilla;
bake in two layers.

Filling: One tablespoonful cocoa; one tablespoonful corn starch;
one-half cup sugar; a small piece butter; one-half cup chopped raisins;
one cup milk; one teaspoonful vanilla. Cook until thick.


SPICE CAKE

Mrs. Harry M. Boon

Three-fourths cup sour milk; three-fourths teaspoonful soda; one cup
sugar; one-half cup chopped raisins; one-quarter cup chopped walnut
meats; piece of butter size of an egg; two eggs; two level teaspoonfuls
cinnamon; one-half teaspoonful each nutmeg and ginger; one and one-half
cups flour, sifted. Bake in medium oven three-quarters of an hour.


SOUTHERN PORK CAKE

Miss Katharine Orr

One-half pound fat salt pork, minced; one and one-half pounds seeded
raisins; three eggs; five cups flour; one cup nut meats; two cups
(large) sugar; one cup of molasses; one teaspoonful soda in dry flour;
two teaspoonfuls cinnamon in dry flour; one teaspoonful cloves in dry
flour. Pour one pint boiling water over salt pork in bowl, and add all
ingredients, whip eggs and put in last next to flour. Bake one hour.


MRS. ROOSEVELT'S RECIPE FOR SPICE CAKE

Mrs. Theodore Roosevelt

One cup butter; two cups sugar; one cup milk; four eggs; four cups
flour; two teaspoonfuls Royal Baking Powder; one teaspoonful ground
cinnamon; one-half teaspoonful nutmeg.


BLACK FRUIT CAKE

Mrs. N. L. Hurlbut

Four pounds dried brown sugar; one pound flour, browned; three-fourths
pound butter; one wine glass each of milk, mixed with one of brandy and
one of wine; one teaspoonful of soda; one cup molasses; three pounds
currants; three pounds raisins; one pound citron; ten eggs; two
teaspoonfuls each allspice and cloves; two tablespoonfuls cinnamon and
one whole nutmeg. Cream butter and sugar together; mix soda in the milk
with the brandy and wine; then molasses and spices; beat eggs
separately. Put paper in bottom of pans and bake in slow oven two hours.


CINNAMON CAKE

Bertha Z. Bisbee

One cup each of granulated sugar and milk; two cups flour; a pinch of
salt; one tablespoonful butter or lard; two teaspoonfuls baking powder;
one egg. Put batter in pan, sprinkle brown sugar thickly over the top,
also cinnamon; put lumps of butter all over top. Bakes in about fifteen
minutes.




FILLINGS AND ICINGS


COCOANUT FILLING

Boil together one cupful sugar and one-half cupful water until they form
a soft ball when tested in cold water; pour slowly while hot into the
stiffly beaten whites of two eggs, beating all the time. When stiff add
one teaspoonful vanilla extract and one cupful cocoanut. Put between
layers of a cake.


CUSTARD FILLING

Dissolve two tablespoonfuls cornstarch in a little milk, put in double
boiler with a scant cupful milk and one teaspoonful butter; stir until
it begins to thicken; beat the yolks of two eggs and one-half cupful
sugar until very light; pour on some of the boiling custard; now turn
this back into the double boiler and stir a few minutes, adding
flavoring. When cool spread between layers of cake and sprinkle cocoanut
or ground nuts over; cover top of cake with thin layer of the custard
and sprinkle with nuts.


ORANGE FILLING

Miss Edmonds

Mix one-half cup sugar and two tablespoonfuls flour; add grated rind of
one-half orange and one-quarter cupful of orange juice and one-half
tablespoonful lemon juice; one egg, slightly beaten; melt one
teaspoonful butter and add the mixture, stirring constantly until it
reaches the boiling point. Cool before using.


MAPLE FILLING

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Two-thirds cup maple syrup, fill up cup with water; add one-fourth cup
sugar; one-fourth cup cornstarch, and one-fourth cup butter. When cool
add one-half pint bottle whipped cream.


MOCHA FILLING

Sue C. Woodman

One tablespoonful butter; one tablespoonful cocoa; one tablespoonful
cold coffee; one and one-fourth cup powdered sugar; one teaspoonful
vanilla.


MOCHA FILLING

One-half pint milk; one-half cup black coffee; one-half cup sugar; yolks
of three eggs; three tablespoonfuls blanched almonds chopped fine. Icing
of three whites and chocolate.


MOCHA CAKE FILLING

Mrs. Louis Geyler

One large cup strong coffee; two-thirds cup sugar; one tablespoonful
cornstarch; cook until clear. Before taking off stove, add large
dessertspoonful of butter. When cool, add one-half pint bottle cream
whipped.


FIG FILLING

Cook in a double boiler one-half pound figs, finely chopped; one-third
cupful sugar; one-third cupful boiling water and one tablespoonful lemon
juice, until thick enough to spread.


NUT FILLING FOR CAKE

Mrs. E. R. Blew

One cup sour cream, one cup hickory nuts chopped fine, one cup sugar.
Cook in double boiler till thick enough to spread.


SOUR CREAM FILLING FOR LAYER CAKE

Mrs. W. F. Becker

One cup sour whipping cream; one-half cup sugar; one-half cup walnuts
chopped; one teaspoonful vanilla.


LEMON FILLING

Mrs. G. D. Prentiss

One cupful sugar; one egg; one tablespoonful butter; juice and grated
rind of one lemon. Boil over hot water until thick and creamy.


LEMON ICING

Mrs. J. T. Wilcox

Whites of two eggs beaten to a froth, one pound powdered sugar and one
lemon grated.


WHITE ICING AND FILLING

Mrs. De Vries

Cook together one and one-half cupfuls sugar and one-third cupful water
until it threads; let cool a little and break in the whites of two eggs
well beaten. Beat until cold and put between layers and on top.


MARSHMALLOW ICING

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

One cup granulated sugar; one-fourth cup water; stir until dissolved and
boil until it forms soft balls when dropped into cold water. One-half
pound marshmallows in double boiler with two tablespoonfuls hot water,
stir until melted; now pour hot syrup gradually into this mixture,
beating constantly, add flavor, beat until cold.


CHOCOLATE ICING

Mrs. E. G. Cooley

One cupful granulated sugar; one egg; three tablespoonfuls sweet milk;
two squares Baker's chocolate. Stir the whole egg, unbeaten, into the
sugar; add the milk and grated chocolate. Cook, stirring constantly, for
three minutes; flavor with one teaspoonful vanilla. Let cool before
putting on cake.


CHOCOLATE CREAM FROSTING

Miss Nora Edmonds

Beat the whites of two eggs; stir into them enough powdered sugar to
make a smooth paste; add one teaspoonful vanilla. Spread on cake. Melt
enough bitter chocolate to make a coating over this.


QUICK ICING

Miss Shay

Four tablespoonfuls butter creamed, add six tablespoonfuls sugar; spread
on cake, using a knife dipped in hot water to make it smooth.


BOILED ICING

Two cupfuls sugar, one-fourth teaspoonful cream of tartar and one-half
cupful cold water. Stir until it boils. When it just drops, beat in
seven teaspoonfuls to the stiffly beaten whites of two eggs; then boil
the syrup until it threads, add to the eggs, beating all the time.


FRUIT ICING

Into one-fourth cupful of orange, lemon or other strained fruit juice
rub as much sifted confectioner's sugar as will form a smooth, glossy
icing; it must be thick enough to be applied without running.


TUTTI FRUTTI ICING

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Mix with boiled icing one ounce each of citron, candied cherries,
seedless raisins, pineapple and almonds cut very fine.




COOKIES


WALNUT JUMBLES

One and one-half cupfuls of sifted pastry flour; one teaspoonful of
baking powder; one-half cupful of granulated sugar; one-quarter cupful
of butter; one-half cupful of shredded walnuts; one egg; one-quarter
cupful of milk.

Method: Sift flour, baking powder and sugar together, rub butter in as
for pie pastry. Beat egg well and add milk. Beat this into the flour,
then add nuts. Knead lightly and roll half an inch thick. Now strew
sugar over, press down with rolling pin and cut into small rings with a
doughnut cutter.


SPICE JUMBLES

Use the recipe of Walnut Jumbles with these variations: Take
three-quarters cupful of mixed chopped nuts, one teaspoonful of mixed
spices, cinnamon, cloves and allspice, and if need be add more milk if
dough gets too thick. Top may be strewn with chopped nuts also.


ANISE TEA CAKES

Four eggs; one pound of fine granulated sugar; one pound of sifted
pastry flour; one teaspoonful of fine anise seed.

Method: Beat eggs and sugar for at least half an hour, then beat in
gradually as much of the flour that is needed to be able to handle at
once. Take onto a floured board and using rest of flour kneed and roll
about half an inch thick and cut with small round cutters. Now brush
flat tins with melted wax, strew anise seed over and place the cakes
half an inch apart. Let stand over night, then bake a golden color. They
will look as though they were frosted.


CHILDREN'S SPONGE CAKES

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One and one-half cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking powder; one cup
sugar; two eggs broken in a cup and cup filled with milk or cream. Stir
all together in a mixing bowl, beat hard for five minutes and bake about
ten minutes in muffin pans.


FRENCH TEA CAKES

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One-half cup brown sugar; one-half cup butter; creamed; one-half cup
milk; one teaspoonful cinnamon; one cup Quaker oats; one cup flour; two
teaspoonfuls baking powder; two eggs and one cup of raisins. Bake in
muffin tins.


HOT TEA CAKES

Two tablespoonfuls butter; one-half cup sugar; one-eighth teaspoonful
salt; one egg; one and one-half cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking
powder; three-fourths cup milk; half teaspoonful vanilla. Mix in order
given and bake in muffin tins ten or twenty minutes.


LIGHTNING CAKE

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

One large cup flour; one large teaspoonful baking powder; one scant cup
sugar. Put two eggs in cup and fill up with milk. Put sugar, flour and
baking powder together, throw in milk and eggs; then add five level
tablespoonfuls of soft butter, vanilla, and then salt. Bake in gem pans.


AFTERNOON TEA CAKES

Mrs. W. N. Hurlbut

One cup butter; half cup sugar, beaten to a cream; two cups flour; one
teaspoonful baking powder; two eggs. Drop the mixture from a teaspoon
into a floured pan and bake in moderate oven.


BROWNIES

Mrs. W. N. Hurlbut

Two eggs; one cup sugar; half cup butter; half cup flour; two squares
melted Baker's chocolate; half cup chopped walnuts; one teaspoonful
vanilla. Beat butter, sugar and unbeaten eggs together. Bake on buttered
paper and cut while hot, in squares.


EGG ROLLS

Mrs. W. N. Hurlbut

One pint flour; two eggs; half teaspoonful salt; half cup milk; four
tablespoonfuls butter; three level teaspoonfuls baking powder. Sift
flour with dry ingredients; cut butter into flour with a knife, beat
eggs until light and add to milk. Add this to flour and mix lightly.
Roll out on floured board till three-quarters of an inch thick. Shape,
brush over tops with white of egg, and sprinkle with granulated sugar.
Bake fifteen minutes in quick oven.


SOUTHERN COOKIES

Mrs. T. D. McMicken

One cup butter; one and one-half cups sugar, creamed together; beat in
three eggs; one cup milk; three cups flour; two teaspoonfuls baking
powder; one cup chopped nuts; one-half cup raisins. Drop on buttered
tins.


OATMEAL MACAROONS

Mary Roberts

Three cups rolled Quaker oats; three teaspoonfuls baking powder; one
tablespoonful butter; one cup white sugar; two eggs; one-half
teaspoonful almond extract. Cream butter and sugar, then add eggs, well
beaten. Mix rolled oats and baking powder together, add to butter and
eggs. Drop one-half teaspoonful, about two inches apart, in well
buttered pan. Bake in moderate oven. If not quite stiff enough add more
rolled oats.


MACAROONS

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

One tablespoonful butter and one-half scant cup sugar creamed. One well
beaten egg; one and one-half cups dry oatmeal; one teaspoonful each of
salt and baking powder and two teaspoonfuls almond extract. Stir and
drop on well greased pans.


MACAROONS

Beaten whites of two eggs; one and three-fourths cupfuls granulated
sugar; two cups shredded cocoanut; one-half cupful chopped walnut meats;
two cupfuls corn flakes. Mix all together and drop on well buttered
tins. Bake until brown.


SOFT WHITE COOKIES WITH RAISIN FILLING

Mrs. M. A. Flanders

One and one-half cups sugar; three-fourths cup shortening; one egg;
one-half cup milk; one level teaspoonful soda dissolved in a little
milk; salt, nutmeg. Mix well one cup sugar (reserving one-half cup for
sprinkling on top of cookies before baking) with shortening, egg, milk,
soda, pinch of salt and a sprinkle of nutmeg and flour. Use enough flour
to enable to roll and cut.

Raisin Filling: One-half pound raisins; one-half cup water; one-half
tablespoonful butter; flour. Put raisins in a pan with water and butter
and as they come to a boil, thicken with a tablespoonful of flour, mixed
with a little water. Put one layer of cookies in baking pan, spread with
the raisin mixture, then place another cookie on top of each; sprinkle
with sugar and bake.


BUTTER COOKIES

Mrs. J. R. Kline

One pound butter; one cup sugar; two eggs; rind one-half lemon; juice of
one-half lemon; six cups flour; one teaspoonful baking powder; one cup
almonds chopped fine. Cream the butter; add the sugar, then the yolks of
eggs, slightly beaten. Add rind of lemon, and the flour well mixed with
the baking powder; then the lemon juice with only enough flour to
handle. Chill the dough, and when thoroughly cold roll. Cut with the
small biscuit cutter, brush with white of egg. Sprinkle a little sugar
on each cookie, also some chopped almonds. Bake in moderate oven a
delicate brown ten to fifteen minutes. Will keep for weeks.


ROCKS

Mrs. F. B. Woodland

One cup butter; one and one-half cups sugar; three eggs; two and
one-half cups flour; one pound dates, stoned and chopped fine; one pound
of walnuts, chopped a little; a teaspoonful soda dissolved in two
tablespoonfuls hot water; one teaspoonful cinnamon; one and one-half
teaspoonfuls allspice. Drop on buttered tins and bake. The dates measure
one full cup. The walnuts about two cups. These are stirred in the last
with part of the flour. Don't roll, but dip with a teaspoon.


OLD-FASHIONED SUGAR COOKIES

Mrs. C. W. Woodman

Two cups of sugar; one cup melted shortening; two eggs; one cup sour
cream; one teaspoonful soda; one teaspoonful nutmeg; a little lemon
flavoring; one teaspoonful baking powder in flour; one teaspoonful salt.
Flour enough to roll.


COOKIES

Mrs. J. A. Osborne

One and one-half cups sugar; scant cup sour cream; one-half cup butter;
one level teaspoonful soda and nutmeg; two eggs, beaten whites added
last; heaping teaspoonful baking powder in flour. Roll thick and
sprinkle with sugar.


FAVORITE COOKIES

Mrs. Earl Combs

One and one-half cupfuls of sugar; one cupful of butter; one-half cup of
sour milk; one level teaspoonful baking powder; one teaspoonful grated
nutmeg; flour enough to roll out, making it quite soft. Mix butter and
sugar, then add milk and soda, nutmeg and flour lastly. Roll thin and
put a little sugar on each cooky and bake in hot oven.


OATMEAL AND COCOANUT COOKIES

Mrs. T. C. Hollenberger

One cup light brown sugar; one-half cup shortening (scant); one egg; one
cup flour and one teaspoonful baking powder; one cup oatmeal and
shredded cocoanut mixed; a little salt and vanilla. This will be quite
stiff. Drop from spoon in small pats.


CORN FLAKE COOKIES

Mrs. S. Friedlander

Three cups corn flakes; one cupful flour; three-fourths cup shortening
(butter and lard); one-half cup raisins, chopped; two teaspoonfuls
baking powder; one teaspoonful cinnamon; two eggs; one cup sugar. Drop
with spoon on greased tins.


CORNFLAKE KISSES

Mary Roberts

Two eggs, well beaten; three-fourths cup sugar, beaten into eggs. Add
cornflakes until substance will hold shape when dropped from teaspoon,
on to buttered paper. Bake fifteen minutes in slow oven.


NUT KISSES

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

To the white of one egg, well beaten, add ten teaspoonfuls pulverized
sugar, a little ground cinnamon and cloves and a cup of chopped nuts;
flavor with vanilla. Put teaspoonful of mixture on bottom side of pie
pan and bake ten minutes in a moderate oven.


MERINGUE SHELLS

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Whites of four eggs beaten twenty minutes; one cup sugar; one
teaspoonful vanilla; one-half teaspoonful vinegar. Bake forty-five
minutes to one hour. Moderate oven.


CREAM PUFFS

Mrs. Paul Klein-exel.

One-half cup flour; one-half cup of boiling water; one-quarter cup
butter; two eggs; one-quarter teaspoon of salt. Add salt and butter to
water. When boiling add flour all at once, stirring constantly until
mixture leaves the side of pan. Remove from fire, add unbeaten eggs, and
beat constantly while adding one at a time.


MACAROON COOKIES

Mrs. W. D. ("Ma") Sunday

Four cups cornflakes; one cup shredded cocoanut; one cup granulated
sugar; one cup chopped almonds. Beat whites of four eggs very stiff, and
mix all together. Bake in a slow oven about twenty minutes.


HERMITS

Mrs. J. H. Shanley

Cream one and one-half cups of butter and two cups of brown sugar; beat
four eggs and add to butter and sugar; one level teaspoonful soda in a
tablespoonful of hot water; then add two and one-half cups flour; one
pound of dates (cut small) and about one cup chopped walnuts; flavor
with vanilla. Drop by spoonfuls on pan and cook for about 45 minutes.


ROCKS

Mrs. H. B. Rairden

One pound brown sugar; one pound raisins; one pound currants; one pound
walnuts; one-half teaspoonful each cinnamon and nutmeg; one-half cup
sour milk; one-half teaspoonful soda; three eggs; flour enough to make
stiff. Drop on well buttered tins and bake.


MARGUERITES

Mrs. W. L. Gregson

Make frosting from two tablespoonfuls of thick sweet cream and powdered
sugar; flavor; spread frosting over long salted wafers; sprinkle with
chopped nuts and bake in moderate oven. Allow to stand in dripping pan
until cool, to guard against breaking. Melted chocolate or pink fruit
coloring added to frosting makes variety. Dainty for afternoon teas,
etc.


CHRISTMAS COOKIES

Mrs. Adolph Holeman

One-half pound of butter; one-half pound of sugar; two eggs, beaten
separately; one pound of flour; one teaspoonful baking powder; one
teaspoonful vanilla. Roll out thin and cut spreading top of cookies with
the white of egg and sprinkle sugar over the tops before baking. These
will keep for months in a dry place.


OATMEAL COOKIES

Mrs. A. J. Atwater

One cup sugar; one cup lard; one cup raisins, ground fine; two eggs,
beaten light; two cups oatmeal dry; one-half cup cold water; dash salt;
one teaspoonful soda; sifted flour enough to make stiff dough.


OATMEAL COOKIES

Mrs. W. D. ("Ma") Sunday

One cup sugar; one-fourth cup lard; one-half cup butter; three eggs
beaten; one and one-half cups sifted flour; two cups dry oatmeal; one
teaspoonful cinnamon; one and one-half cups chopped, seeded raisins; one
and one-half teaspoonfuls soda, mixed with one tablespoonful vinegar.
Drop on greased pans. Bake in quick oven.


OATMEAL COOKIES

Mrs. Minnie E. Bodwell

Cookies: One-half cup of lard; one-half cup of butter; one cup of sugar;
two-thirds cup of sour milk; one level teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in
milk; two cups of oatmeal; two cups of flour. Filling: One-half pound of
dates put through chopper; one-half cup of white sugar; one-half cup of
cold water. Boil all together until thick; when cool and cookies are
warm, spread filling between two cookies; it is then ready to serve,
very nice.


LACE OATMEAL WAFERS

Mrs. F. T. Hoyt

One cup of sugar; one tablespoonful of butter; two eggs beaten
separately; two and one-half cups of uncooked oatmeal; two teaspoonfuls
of baking powder; 1 teaspoonful of vanilla; one pinch of salt. Mix well,
adding the stiffly beaten whites of eggs last. Drop a small teaspoonful
on greased pans, far apart, and bake in quick oven.


DROP CLOVE COOKIES

Mrs. C. E. Upham

Two cups sugar; one cup shortening; two eggs; one cup molasses; two
teaspoonfuls soda dissolved in little hot water; six scant cups flour;
one cup cold water; three teaspoonfuls salt; one teaspoonful cloves; one
teaspoonful cinnamon; raisins if wanted. Drop with a teaspoon.


DROP COOKIES (LIGHT)

Two cups of sugar; one cup of shortening; two eggs beaten light; one cup
of milk (sour); one teaspoonful each of soda, salt baking powder--the
latter well mixed with the four cups of flour--and grated nutmeg or any
desired flavoring. Mix well and drop in small teaspoonfuls upon a
greased pan. Allow room to spread. Bake in a quick oven.


PEANUT COOKIES

Mrs. L. Ficklen

One cup sugar; two eggs; two teaspoonfuls butter; one cup peanuts
rolled; enough flour with baking powder to make stiff batter.


CHOCOLATE COOKIES

Mrs. H. S. Mount

Cream one cup of shortening, one cup of brown cugar, one cup of white
sugar. Then add four squares (one-half of one-half pound cake), melted
chocolate, one-fourth cup milk, one-half teaspoonful of baking powder,
flour enough to roll very thin. Bake in cookie pans.


CHOCOLATE NUT COOKIES

Mrs. J. W. Moss

One tablespoonful grated chocolate; one cup chopped nut meats; one cup
seeded raisins; one cup sugar; one egg; two tablespoonfuls butter;
one-half cup milk; one and three-fourths cups flour; one teaspoonful
powdered cinnamon; one teaspoonful vanilla extract.


CHOCOLATE FINGERS

Three eggs; one-half pound of powdered sugar; one-half pound of sifted
pastry flour; two ounces of powdered chocolate. Method: Beat sugar and
eggs for half an hour, sift chocolate and sugar together, then stir into
the flour. Beat well, then with a pastry squirt form oblong cakes, size
of a finger on waxed tins. Set away over night, then bake as other
cookies in moderate heat. They have the appearance of being frosted
owing to the light components rising to the top during night. If you
have no pastry tube or squirt, form little round mounds by dipping up
portions with a small spoon dipped in cold water. When baking the above
cakes be sure to use only moderate heat. Remove cakes from pan as soon
as done and place in tin pails or cans as soon as cold. If kept in
closed tin small cakes will keep a long time and remain palatable.


DROP COOKIES (Dark)

One cup of brown sugar; one-quarter cup shortening; one egg; one-half
cup each of hot water and molasses; one teaspoonful each of soda, baking
powder, cinnamon, cloves and salt; one-half teaspoonful of ground
nutmeg, all sifted thoroughly with two and one-half cups of flour. Mix
well, drop in small spoonfuls upon a greased tin, and bake in a quick
oven. This makes a small batch.


GINGER SNAPS

W. B. McKinley (his mother's recipe)

Two cups brown sugar; two cups molasses; one cup lard or butter;
one-half cup sweet milk; one teaspoonful salt; two tablespoonfuls soda;
one teaspoonful cinnamon; one-half teaspoonful cloves; two
tablespoonfuls ginger; add flour enough to roll. Put molasses, lard,
sugar and spices on the stove, let get hot. When cool dissolve the soda
in the milk, add flour and milk alternately, roll very thin and bake.


GINGER BREAD

Mrs. A. P. Roberts

One cupful molasses; two cupfuls sour milk; three cupfuls flour;
one-half teaspoonful each nutmeg and cinnamon; scant half cupful sugar;
two eggs; one heaping teaspoonful ginger and a teaspoonful soda
dissolved in the sour milk.


SOFT GINGERBREAD

Mrs. T. C. Hollenberger

Two-thirds cup molasses, fill cup with sugar; one-half cup butter, fill
cup with hot water; two cups flour; two teaspoonfuls ginger; one-half
teaspoonful cinnamon; one teaspoonful soda, dissolved in a little of the
hot water; one egg.


GINGER BREAD

Mrs. Eustace

One cup molasses; one cup brown sugar; one-half cup butter and lard; two
eggs; two scant teaspoonfuls of soda in one cup of sour milk; three cups
of flour; one teaspoonful each of ginger and cinnamon; one-half
teaspoonful each of cloves and allspice. Bake slowly.


GINGER BREAD

Mrs. W. F. Barnard

Two-thirds cup molasses, fill up cup with granulated sugar; one-half cup
butter, fill cup up with hot water; two scant cups flour; one egg,
beaten light; one teaspoonful ginger; one teaspoonful cinnamon; one
teaspoonful soda. Bake in moderate oven about one-half hour.


COLONIAL GINGERBREAD

Mrs. Floyd E. Jennison

One cup molasses; one-half cup sugar; one-half cup shortening. Pour over
the above, one cup warm water in which one level dessertspoonful of soda
has been dissolved. Let mixture cool; then add two and one-half cupfuls
flour (sifted); one teaspoonful each of ginger and cinnamon and lastly
two well beaten eggs and one cup (or less) of English walnut meats.
Raisins may be added, if desired.


CHOCOLATE GINGERBREAD

One-half cup molasses; one tablespoonful each of melted butter and lard;
one-half cup brown sugar; one-fourth teaspoonful each of ginger and
cinnamon; one heaping tablespoonful grated sweet chocolate, mixed to a
paste with a little hot water. Blend the ingredients thoroughly, then
stir in one teaspoonful soda in one cupful of sour milk; flour to
stiffen. Bake twenty minutes.


CINNAMON STARS

Two tablespoonfuls of butter; one cupful of sugar; two eggs; one and
one-half cupfuls of sifted pastry flour; one teaspoonful of cinnamon;
one-fourth teaspoonful of baking powder. Method: Cream butter, sugar and
eggs until light, sift all dry ingredients together, then stir into egg
mixture. Take onto a floured board, using a very little more flour if
needed. Roll quite thin, then cut with a star cutter. Bake on waxed tins
in a very moderate oven.


CALIFORNIA COOKIES

Mrs. E. T. Clissold

One cup molasses; one egg; one-half cup milk; one cup chopped raisins;
one-half cup butter; one-half cup sugar; one-half teaspoonful each of
cloves, nutmeg and cinnamon; one teaspoonful soda. Drop in spoonfuls in
buttered tins. Bake quickly.


DOUGHNUTS

Mrs. H. P. Sieh

Two cups sugar; four eggs; one cup buttermilk; six tablespoonfuls hot
lard; one teaspoonful nutmeg, one of soda and one of salt. Flour to make
a good rolling dough. Cut and cook in hot lard.


MOLASSES SQUARES

Mrs. E. Oliver

One cup sugar; one egg; two tablespoonfuls shortening; three-fourths cup
molasses; one teaspoonful soda dissolved in molasses; one cup milk; two
and one-half cups flour (after sifting); one cup raisins; one
teaspoonful each cinnamon, cloves and one-half teaspoonful nutmeg. Beat
egg, add shortening, molasses, milk, spices and last the raisins
(floured). Bake in two shallow pans. Any desired frosting.


GINGER BLOCKS

Four tablespoonfuls of butter or butterine; one-third cupful sugar; one
egg; one-half cupful of golden drip syrup; one-half cupful of milk; one
and three-quarters cupfuls of sifted pastry flour; one teaspoonful of
baking powder; two teaspoonfuls of ginger. Method: Cream butter, sugar
and yolk; then add the sirup and beat hard. Sift dry ingredients
together, and then add, alternating with the milk. Whip white of egg and
fold in. Bake in square tins. When done cut into blocks and sift
confectioners' sugar over. To make the blocks of uniform size trim the
very outer edge of cake before cutting. These rims can be used for a
pudding some other day.


PUFF BALLS

Mrs. J. Dana Brown

One egg; three-fourths cupful sugar; one scant cupful milk; one and
one-half cupfuls flour; and one-half teaspoonful baking powder; pinch of
salt. Mix and roll out and cut with the smallest biscuit cutter and
dropped in hot fat.


DOUGHNUTS

Mrs. J. H. Shanley

Three eggs; one cup sugar; one cup sweet milk; three teaspoonfuls baking
powder sifted with three cups flour; spice and flavoring to suit your
taste. When these are put into the boiling lard they sink, but rise
almost at once and turn themselves. They never break apart when frying,
as they contain no shortening, yet they are sufficiently rich to satisfy
anyone.


DOUGHNUTS

Mrs. T. C. Hollenberger

Three eggs beaten very light; one cup sugar; four tablespoonfuls melted
lard, add to the eggs and beat all together. One teaspoonful salt and a
little nutmeg or lemon rind grated; one cup thick sour milk with
one-half teaspoonful soda dissolved in it; add flour with one heaping
teaspoonful baking powder sifted with flour--three cups, with enough
more to make a very soft dough.


DOUGHNUTS

Miss Shay

Two eggs, well beaten; add one and one-half cupfuls sugar; one-half
grated nutmeg; one cup milk; two heaping tablespoonfuls butter, melted;
two heaping teaspoonfuls baking powder sifted in the flour and flour
enough to make the dough roll easily, about three pints of flour.




PICKLES

          "_How Cam'st in Such a Pickle?_"
                                  --SHAKESPEARE.


SLICED PICKLE

Mrs. William H. Fahrney

One peck cucumbers; thirty small onions; four green peppers; two red
peppers; slice and soak over night in salt water. Soak cucumbers
separately, rinse in cold water. One-half gallon vinegar; two
tablespoonfuls mustard seed; one tablespoonful celery seed; six cups
brown sugar; one-fourth teaspoonful tumeric; one teaspoonful powdered
alum. Let the vinegar and seasoning come to a boil, add the onions and
peppers, cook five minutes; then add the cucumbers and cook five
minutes. Can hot.


MUSTARD PICKLE

Mrs. William Molt

One quart tiny cucumbers; one quart large cucumbers, cut or sliced; one
quart green tomatoes, cut in pieces; one large cauliflower, divided;
five green peppers, chopped fine; one quart button onions, cut up. To
four quarts of water add one pint salt and pour over the vegetables and
let stand twenty-four hours; then heat in same brine just enough to
scald; turn into colander and drain. Mix one-half cup flour; six
tablespoonfuls mustard; two tablespoonfuls tumeric, with enough cold
vinegar to make a smooth paste; add one cup sugar and enough vinegar to
make two quarts in all; boil this until it thickens and is smooth. Add
this to the pickles and cook until they are heated through, about
fifteen minutes; pack in Mason jars and seal.


MUSTARD PICKLES FOR TWO QUART JAR

Mrs. Wm. J. Maiden

Three tablespoonfuls Coleman's mustard; one-fourth cupful salt; piece of
horseradish root; fill jar with vinegar. Wash and wipe pickles and pack
in jar, then pour over the above mixture.


PICKLES

Alice H. Tolmie

Slice 25 small cucumbers with a large onion, put in salt brine and let
stand for three hours, then drain and boil in following syrup: One quart
vinegar, one pound sugar, one-half cup mustard seed, one tablespoonful
ginger, one teaspoonful each of celery seed and tumeric powder. Boil
five minutes and can.


MIXED PICKLES

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

One quart of small cucumbers; one quart of white onions; one quart green
tomatoes; two large cauliflower; soak in weak salt water over night;
scald in same brine and drain. Paste: Six tablespoonfuls dry mustard;
one tablespoonful tumeric powder; one and one-half cups flour; two cups
brown sugar; five pints vinegar. Add vegetables to paste; heat through
and seal in cans.


CUCUMBER PICKLES

Mrs. Samuel Friedlander

Twelve long cucumbers; five large onions, sliced and salted. Let stand
over night. In morning drain well. Boil three pints vinegar; one and
one-half pounds sugar; one red pepper, cut in strips; two tablespoonfuls
dry mustard; a tablespoonful whole white peppers; one tablespoonful
whole black pepper; two tablespoonfuls mustard seed. Boil until tender
and can hot.


CUCUMBER PICKLE

Florence Trainer

Two dozen large cucumbers, chopped fine and salted over night; one cup
salt; four large onions; two stalks celery; one red pepper; chop all
fine. Heat three cups cider vinegar; one cup water; two cups brown
sugar; three tablespoonfuls mustard seed; three tablespoonfuls ground
mustard; one tablespoonful celery seed; one-fourth teaspoonful cayenne
pepper. When hot, pour over chopped mixture and cook ten minutes. Then
bottle.


PICKLED ONIONS

Mrs. W. L. Gregson

Peel and drop in hot brine. The third day heat the brine again and pour
over them; the sixth day make a new strong brine; the tenth day drain
and pour scalding vinegar containing a very little ginger root over
them. Let stand on the stove until thoroughly heated through, but do not
cook; pour into jars and seal hot. A little alum in the brine makes them
firmer, and white wine vinegar aids in keeping them white, but malt
vinegar adds to the flavor.


TOMATO RELISH

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One peck ripe tomatoes, peeled, chopped fine and drained in jelly bag
over night; in the morning add two cups chopped celery, six large onions
chopped fine; two large green peppers (without seeds), chopped fine; two
cups sugar; half cup salt; two ounces white mustard seed; one quart
cider vinegar. Mix well and bottle; it does not require heating and will
keep for years.


OIL PICKLES

Mrs. A. C. Allen

One-half peck small cucumbers; one pint silver skin onions, slice thin
and place in stone jar alternately, sprinkling salt between. Let stand
over night; pour off brine and wash thoroughly; add the following: one
teacup olive oil, two tablespoonfuls white mustard seed, two
tablespoonfuls celery seed, four pepper corns and vinegar to cover.


OIL CUCUMBER PICKLES

Mrs. E. D. Gotchy

Cut one hundred small cucumbers into thin slices; put in earthen crock
in layers with salt for four hours; drain off liquor and mix with three
pints of sliced onions, three ounces white mustard seed, three ounces
celery seed, three ounces of ground white pepper. Dissolve small lump
alum in vinegar; add to it two cups olive oil; add white vinegar enough
to cover.


PICKLES FOR IMMEDIATE USE

Mrs. S. A. Power

Mix together one cupful each of salt and dry mustard; add it to one
gallon of good vinegar, spices of various kinds and a little sugar, if
liked, may be added. Drop the well washed cucumbers into this pickle
each day as they grow. These pickles will keep indefinitely.


DILL PICKLES

Mrs. W. T. Klenze

One hundred medium sized cucumbers; one small red pepper; one big bunch
of dill; some cherry leaves; ten quarts of water; one quart of vinegar;
two cups salt. Mason jars, two quart size. Lay cucumbers in salt water
over night (one-half cup salt to four quarts water). Boil water, vinegar
and salt; let cool over night. Drain cucumbers and place in jars in
layers between cherry leaves and dill. Pack cucumbers tight; add a small
piece of red pepper, cover with brine and screw down cover. Will keep.
One cup of mustard seeds and one cup of horseradish root, shaved fine,
may be added.


PICCALILI

Mrs. H. B. Rairden

One peck of green tomatoes; eight large onions; one cup salt; slice and
let stand over night. In the morning drain and add three quarts of water
and let come to a good boil, then drain well through a colander. Put
back in kettle and add two quarts vinegar; one pound of sugar; half
pound of white mustard; two tablespoonfuls ground pepper; two of
cinnamon; one of cloves; two of ginger; one of allspice and half a
teaspoonful of cayenne pepper. Boil all together until tender; it will
take from thirty minutes to an hour to cook. Stir it often to prevent
scorching. Seal in glass jars; add more sugar if liked sweeter.


BEET RELISH

Mrs. R. McNeil

One quart cooked beets, chopped fine; one quart cabbage, chopped fine;
one cup each of grated horseradish, chopped onion and sugar; one
teaspoonful salt; one pint vinegar. Heat vinegar, pour over all and
seal.


PEPPER RELISH

Sue C. Woodman

Twelve green peppers; twelve red peppers; ten medium onions; chop
together. Pour boiling water over and let stand five minutes; strain and
repeat. Three cups of vinegar; one cup sugar; two tablespoonfuls salt;
one-half cup mustard seed; cook thirty minutes. Bottle.


PEPPER HASH

Mrs. John T. Gilchrist

Nine sweet peppers; one large head cabbage; six large onions; chop fine
and add one-half cup salt. Stand over night and drain in morning. Add
two cups sugar; cup white mustard seed; one tablespoonful celery seed;
vinegar to cover. Do not remove pepper seeds and do not cook. Put in
earthen jar, covered with a plate.


OLIVE OIL PICKLES

Mrs. A. J. Atwater

Forty cucumbers, dill size, scrub and slice with rind; one-half cup
salt; a layer of cucumbers and a layer of salt in a crock; put weight on
top and let stand for two hours; pour off water and add ten onions, four
green peppers, sliced fine; two ounces mustard seed; one pint olive oil;
one ounce celery seed. Pack in jars and cover with vinegar.


UNCOOKED CHILI SAUCE

Mrs. Herman Vander Ploeg

One peck ripe tomatoes; two cups chopped onions; two cups chopped
celery; two cups sugar; one-half cup salt; four ounces white mustard
seed; one teaspoonful powdered mace; one teaspoonful black pepper; one
teaspoonful powdered cinnamon; four chopped green peppers; three pints
vinegar. Chop the onions and peppers, add tomatoes peeled and chopped;
sugar, salt, mustard seed, mace, pepper, cinnamon and vinegar. Seal and
if screw top jars are used, turn upside down overnight.


CANNED TOMATO SOUP

Mrs. Edwin Oliver

Fourteen quarts of sliced ripe tomatoes; fourteen stalks celery;
fourteen sprigs parsley; two bay leaves; twenty-one cloves; seven medium
sized onions. Boil until tender and strain. Then blend fourteen
tablespoonfuls each of butter and flour; eight tablespoonfuls salt;
sixteen tablespoonfuls sugar; one-fourth tablespoonful paprika. Cook
until the desired thickness; makes about eight quarts. If milk is used,
add soda.


CORN RELISH

Mrs. A. J. Langan

One dozen ears of corn, boil ten miutes, cut from cob; one head of
cabbage; four green peppers; four red peppers; one cup sugar; three
pints vinegar; one small box Coleman's mustard; one tablespoonful celery
seed; salt to taste; one teaspoonful tumeric. Mix well; boil twenty
minutes and seal.


CORN RELISH

Mrs. Samuel Friedlander

Twelve ears of corn, cut from cob; twelve green peppers; two red
peppers; two quarts ripe tomatoes; a head cabbage; one quart onions,
chopped all together; add one quart sugar; one-half cup salt; two quarts
vinegar; one ounce celery seed: one ounce mustard seed; one ounce dry
mustard; one tablespoonful tumeric. Mix and boil forty minutes. Seal hot
in air tight cans.


CORN RELISH

Mrs. R. Heidorn

Twelve ears corn; six cucumbers; six large onions; two stalks celery;
six green peppers; three red peppers; three tablespoonfuls salt; two
cups sugar; three tablespoonfuls dry mustard; three tablespoonfuls
flour; one-half ounce tumeric; two quarts vinegar; boil one hour and
seal hot.


CORN RELISH

Mrs. E. L. Phelps

Two dozen ears of corn, cut from the cob; six red peppers; six green
peppers; large head of cabbage; two tablespoonfuls salt; three cups
sugar; two quarts vinegar (diluted); one-half pound dry mustard; add
celery and onions as much as you like. Cook the salt, mustard, sugar and
vinegar together; add cabbage, celery and onions. Cook a little, then
add corn; let boil up and can air tight.


CORN SALAD

Sue. C. Woodman

Four large onions; one cabbage; four green peppers; one red pepper;
twenty ears of corn; one and one-half cups sugar; one-half cup salt.
Make paste of and pour on above; one-half cup flour; one-half
teaspoonful tumeric; three tablespoonfuls mustard; one quart vinegar.
Boil twenty minutes.


CHILI SAUCE

Mrs. R. Heidorn

Twenty-four ripe tomatoes; four white onions; three green peppers; four
tablespoonfuls salt; one of cinnamon; one-half of ground cloves and
allspice mixed; one teacup sugar; one pint vinegar; boil three hours,
seal hot.


CHILI SAUCE

Belle Shaw

One peck tomatoes; six large onions; four green peppers; two red
peppers; six tablespoonfuls white sugar; three tablespoonfuls salt;
three cups vinegar; two tablespoonfuls whole cloves; two tablespoonfuls
whole allspice; two stalks whole cinnamon; chop tomatoes, pepper and
onions, very fine; tie spices in two bags, loosely. Boil three hours,
slowly.


CHILI SAUCE

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

Thirty large tomatoes; eight onions (medium), three green peppers
chopped fine; two red peppers chopped fine; ten tablespoonfuls brown
sugar; three tablespoonfuls salt; two tablespoonfuls cinnamon; one-half
tablespoonful cloves; one quart vinegar. Peel and slice tomatoes, put in
kettle with remaining ingredients, cook slowly until thick, add vinegar
when nearly done.


SPICED CURRANTS

Mrs. C. A. Robinson

Four pounds of currants; one and one-half pints of vinegar; one-half
pint of water; pound of brown sugar; one tablespoonful cinnamon; one
teaspoonful cloves; one nutmeg. Boil slowly three hours.


NEVER FAIL CATSUP

Mrs. Minnie E. Bodwell

One gallon of ripe tomatoes, after having been boiled and strained; one
pint of vinegar; five tablespoonfuls of salt; two tablespoonfuls of
black pepper; three ounces of white mustard seed ground finely; one
teaspoonful of cayenne pepper; one teaspoonful of cinnamon; one-half
teaspoonful of allspice. Cook all together for four hours.


TOMATO CATSUP

Sue C. Woodman

Cut up one peck of tomatoes over night with one cup salt. Boil well and
strain. Add: One tablespoonful ground cloves; one tablespoonful
allspice; one tablespoonful mace; one tablespoonful white mustard seed;
one tablespoonful black pepper; one teaspoonful red pepper; one-half cup
sugar; one pine white wine vinegar. Boil down one-half. Bottle.


CURRANT CATSUP

Mrs. J. H. Ostrander

Clean and stew four pounds of ripe currants; add two pounds of brown
sugar and one pint of vinegar; boil steadily and slowly until thick; add
one teaspoonful each of ground pepper, cloves and cinnamon; boil for
five minutes longer. Bottle and seal.


VEGETABLES FOR WINTER SOUP

Mrs. C. E. Seaton

One peck ripe tomatoes; one head of cabbage; one bunch carrots; six
large onions; nine ears of corn; six stalks celery; two green peppers;
one large bunch parsley. Scald the skins off the tomatoes and cut in
rather large pieces; shred cabbage; peel and slice carrots; peel and
chop onions; cut corn from cob; cut celery as for salad; remove the
seeds from peppers, chop them and the parsley quite fine. Mix all
together and boil for one hour in a porcelain or agate kettle, stirring
often to prevent scorching; about ten minutes before it is done, add
salt to taste. Seal hot in glass jars. Potatoes may be added to the soup
in the winter.


SWEET WATERMELON PICKLE

Mrs. N. F. Swartwout

Remove the thin rind (green), also all of the ripe melon, using only the
white portion of the rind. Nine pounds fruit, three pounds sugar, one
quart vinegar. After soaking the rinds over night in strong salt water
and then rinsing in hot water; put the fruit, sugar and vinegar together
in preserving kettle and boil until tender. Skim out fruit and put into
the liquid a bag of spices and boil until a little thick; then pour over
the fruit. If there is not enough syrup to cover it add a little more
vinegar.





PRESERVES


          "_The best of families have their family 'jars.'_"


FOUR FRUIT JAM

Mrs. W. C. Thorbus

One quart cranberries cut coarsely; one cup sultana raisins; six ries;
one quart gooseberries; two quarts granulated sugar. Boil forty minutes
and put in jelly glasses.


CRANBERRY CONSERVE

Sue C. Woodman

One quart cranberries cut coarsely; one cup sultana raisins; six
oranges; soak raisins; cut up oranges; mix. Equal measure of sugar;
cook. Stir constantly.


RHUBARB CONSERVE

Mrs. John Ingram

Six pounds rhubarb; six pounds granulated sugar; one-half pound English
walnuts; six oranges, pulp and juice. Boil until proper consistency.


PLUM CONSERVE

Mrs. A. C. Allen

One box of blue plums; one pound of raisins, chopped; three pounds
sugar; juice of four oranges; rind of two oranges chopped. Boil the rind
in water until bitterness is gone. Cook for one-half hour.


HEAVENLY HASH

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

A five-pound basket of big blue plums; wash and seed them, put in
preserving kettle with one pint water; add (everything but the seeds of)
five oranges and five lemons, putting the skins through a meat chopper;
four pounds of seedless raisins, also put through the chopper; one pound
of walnut meats broken and lastly five pounds of sugar. Let boil until
quite thick, then put in glasses and when cold cover with paraffine.


PEAR CHIPS

Mrs. M. Evans

Seven pounds pear chips; seven pounds sugar; one-fourth pound candied
ginger; three lemons sliced; two oranges. Cook oranges and lemons slowly
before adding to pears; then cook slowly for two hours.


SUN COOKED STRAWBERRIES

Mrs. H. D. Sheldon

Use cup for cup sugar and fruit. Let sugar stand on fruit over night.
Drain juice and cook slowly until sugar is thoroughly dissolved. Add
fruit and heat through. Turn out on platters and stand in sun until
thick as desired. Pieces of glass over each platter helps cook more
rapidly. Seal as you would jelly in glasses.


HARLEQUIN JAM

Good Housekeeping

One orange; twenty-five peaches; twelve pears; twelve plums; one pound
white grapes; one-fourth pound almonds, blanched; three-fourths cup of
sugar to one cup of fruit. Cook two hours.


BLACKBERRY JAM

Two quarts blackberries; one and one-half quarts sugar; one cup water.
Cook well for half an hour.


APRICOT JAM

Mrs. Herman Vander Ploeg

One pound dried apricots; three pounds granulated sugar; one-half ounce
bitter almonds; three pints cold water. Soak the apricots in the water
over night (wash first), and in the morning boil until tender. Add sugar
and almonds blanched and boil another half hour, or until mixture sets.


YELLOW TOMATO PRESERVES

Mrs. T. B. Orr

Two quarts tomatoes; two lemons ground, use juice and all; four chopped
large sour apples; two and one-half cups brown sugar; two teaspoonfuls
cinnamon; one teaspoonful ground ginger; one-half teaspoonful cloves.
Cook slowly until thick. Put in jars.


TOMATO BUTTER

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Seven pounds large ripe tomatoes; four pounds brown sugar; one-half cup
vinegar; one teaspoonful each of ginger and cloves; one tablespoonful
cinnamon. Cover tomatoes with boiling water and let stand five minutes;
rub off skins and cut off stem ends. Slice into a porcelain kettle and
cook until soft; add sugar and stew until very thick; add spices and
vinegar and cook short time longer. Pour in quart Mason jars and seal
while hot. This is particularly good with meat or game.


EAST INDIAN PRESERVE

Mrs. George D. Milligan

Six pounds yellow tomatoes--small ones; six pounds sugar; one pound
raisins, large ones with seeds; put them in water until they plump up;
two ounces green ginger root (obtainable at a Chinese store); six lemons
sliced; put tomatoes in kettle and put on enough water to cover them;
then add the other ingredients and boil until thick.


QUINCE HONEY

Aunt Margaret

Peel and grate three large quinces and one tart apple. Make a syrup of
three pints of granulated sugar and one pint of water; have the syrup
boiling briskly; stir in the grated fruit and boil twenty minutes.


APRICOT MARMALADE

Mrs. J. G. Sherer

One basket of apricots; one pineapple; three oranges; five pounds cane
sugar. Peel oranges, scald peeling and scrape off white and then put all
through grinder. Boil all slowly one hour, stirring constantly or it
will stick.


APRICOT AND PINEAPPLE MARMALADE

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One large, or two small, pineapples, put through meat chopper with large
knife; one and one-half pounds apricots; weighed after they are peeled
and pitted; two pounds sugar; one-half pint water. Boil slowly for an
hour.


FIG MARMALADE

Mrs. John T. Gilchrist

Cut five pounds rhubarb into inch pieces. Add one quart of water and
cook as for sauce. Put one pound figs through a food chopper. Heat five
pounds sugar and add to hot sauce, then figs. Add juice of two lemons.
Cook slowly for about one hour, stirring often.


PEACH MARMALADE

Mrs. F. J. Macnish

Equal parts of peaches (run through a fine collander) and sugar, cooked
two hours.


PEACH MARMALADE

Mrs. J. H. Shanley

Nine medium sized peaches, cut small; one orange, chopped fine (with
skin); one cup sugar. Cook until it thickens, put in jelly glasses and
seal.


PIE PLANT MARMALADE

Mrs. T. B. Orr

Two quarts pie plant pared and cut in inch length pieces; four large
oranges, chopped (use juice); one-half pound almonds, blanched and
chopped; four pounds sugar; mix all together and let stand in bowl all
night. Cook slowly in enamel kettle until thick. Seal with paraffine in
glasses.


ORANGE MARMALADE

Mrs. T. M. Flournoy

Six oranges; three lemons, parboiled, and save the water; either put the
skins through the chopper or slice them very thin; add eight cupfuls
water, using that in which the fruit was boiled, and sixteen cupfuls of
sugar; let stand over night. Next day let it boil gently until it
jellies.


ORANGE MARMALADE

Mrs. C. B. Martin

One grapefruit; six oranges; two lemons (sliced like wafers); two quarts
of cold water; let stand over night. In the morning, boil slowly until
fruit can be pierced with a straw; add seven and one-half pounds
granulated sugar and boil until thick enough.


ORANGE MARMALADE

Miss Julia Hunt

Six pounds of pumpkin (after cut), cut one inch long, three-fourths inch
wide and one-half inch thick; cover with five pounds sugar; let stand
over night. Six lemons, juice and rind; two oranges sliced and the rinds
cut in small pieces; three-fourths ounce ginger, the preserved is best.
Simmer until the rind softens, then add to the pumpkin and boil until
the right consistency.


QUICK ORANGE MARMALADE

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Take one-third lemons and two-thirds oranges (eight oranges and four
lemons makes large enough quantity to cook up at one time and makes
twelve glasses). Take off the yellow part of the peel from one-half of
each; cut into small pieces and drop into the preserving kettle; take
off the white part of the peel, between the yellow part and the pulp; be
sure none of the white goes into the marmalade, as it makes it bitter.
Slice the fruit across in thin slices, and add it to the cut up peel;
put teacup of water to each whole fruit (oranges and lemons) and cook
until the fruit is soft. When cooked, add three-fourths cup of sugar for
each whole fruit and boil hard until it jells. The quicker it is cooked
the better, as long cooking, especially after the sugar is added, tends
to destroy the flavor and makes the mixture taste strong.


RHUBARB MARMALADE

Mrs. J. L. Putman

Boil for twenty minutes, four pounds of rhubarb cut into small pieces,
leaving the skin on. Add the juice of five lemons, the rind of which has
been sliced off thinly, boiled in a little water for about twenty
minutes or until soft; and chopped fine. To this add six pounds of
granulated sugar, one pound of blanched almonds, chopped or cut, and one
wine-glass of Jamaica ginger. Boil all together until thick.


RHUBARB MARMALADE

Mrs. John T. Gilchrist

Cut rhubarb very fine and to each cupful add the juice and pulp of one
orange, one tablespoonful lemon juice and one teaspoonful grated orange
peel and one and one-half cups sugar. Let stand until sugar is
dissolved. Boil rapidly until transparent.


SPICED RHUBARB

Mrs. John Ingram

Two and one-half pounds rhubarb; skin and cut in one inch pieces; two
pounds granulated sugar, mixed with one teaspoonful cinnamon; one-half
teaspoonful ground cloves; seven-eighths cup vinegar. Bring to boiling
point and simmer till thick.


SPICED RHUBARB

Mrs. John T. Gilchrist

Sprinkle two and one-half pounds sliced rhubarb with one pound of sugar
and let stand over night. Drain in the morning and add to the juice one
cup water and one-half cup vinegar. Put on, boil with a spice bag
containing one-half teaspoonful each of ground cloves, mace, allspice,
ginger and cinnamon. Boil until it makes a good syrup, then add rhubarb
and cook until thick.


SPICED CHERRIES

Mrs. C. A. Bowman

Take eight quarts of large red cherries (stoned), cover with cold
vinegar, let stand over night. Next day turn off all the juice in the
jar, measure the cherries and take equal parts of sugar and cherries.
Take one tablespoonful cloves, six sticks of cinnamon, pounded a little,
put in cheesecloth bag, put in jar with sugar and cherries. Stir every
few hours for several days until sugar is thoroughly dissolved. Put in
fruit jars.


SPICED GRAPES

Mrs. J. G. S.

Remove the skins from seven pounds of grapes, boil until soft and pass
through sieve. Boil four pounds of sugar and one quart of vinegar
together, add skins, boiled grapes, one tablespoonful powdered cloves;
two tablespoonfuls powdered cinnamon and boil all together for two and
one-half or three hours.


SPICED GRAPE JELLY

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

One peck of grapes; one quart vinegar; six pounds sugar; one ounce whole
cloves; one-fourth ounce stick cinnamon. Boil grapes, spices and vinegar
together until the grapes are tender. Press through sieve and boil the
juice thirty minutes. Add heated sugar, boil five minutes, testing to
see whether it has jellied. Cook longer if necessary. Pour into hot
sterilized jelly glasses and cover with wax.


CRAB APPLE AND DAMSON PLUM JELLY

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Four quarts of crabapples; one quart of damson plums. Wash fruit and put
on with cold water enough to cover. Let cook until soft, drain through a
jelly bag and return to kettle with an equal quantity of sugar. Boil
until it jells. This makes a tart jelly which tastes like currants.


QUINCE AND CRANBERRY JELLY

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

Three large quinces; one quart of cranberries. Wash and quarter the
quinces, removing the seeds; pick over and wash the cranberries and put
them in the preserving kettle with the quinces; add cold water to nearly
cover fruit; cook slowly until soft. Allow juice to drip through a jelly
bag. Boil twenty-five minutes and add an equal quantity of heated sugar.
Boil five minutes, skim and put in heated glasses. Seal.


MINT JELLY

Mrs. W. C. Thorbus

Two bunches of fresh mint; one pint boiling water; one-half box gelatin,
soaked in one-half cupful cold water; one-half cupful lemon juice; one
cupful sugar. Crush mint and steep in water one-half hour; soak gelatin
in cold water and add to mint; add sugar and lemon juice. Strain and
color with Burnette's leaf green paste.


AMBER JELLY

Mrs. M. Evans

One grape fruit; one orange; one lemon; after washing fruit, slice very
thin, rejecting only seeds and tough inner pulps of grape fruit. Cut
slices in halves and quarters, measure and add two and one-half times
the quantity of water and set aside for twenty-four hours. Then boil
gently for fifteen minutes, and set aside another twenty-four hours. Add
sugar, measure for measure, to fruit and juice and boil until it
jellies, which will be for one hour and a half or two hours. Before
cooking dissolve the sugar through the fruit and juice. Then do not stir
at all while the process of cooking is going on. The rinds should be
transparent and the jelly a clear amber hue when done.


QUINCE AND CRANBERRY JELLY

Mrs. George K. Spoor

Four pounds quince; two quarts cranberries; cook until mushy; then
strain for juice and add one cup sugar to every cup of juice. Boil
fifteen minutes. This makes a beautifully colored jelly.


PICKLED PEACHES OR PEARS

Mrs. J. A. Kaerwer

One quart vinegar; two quarts water (eight cups); four pounds sugar
(nine cups); put stick cinnamon and five cents worth of cloves in bag
and boil fifteen minutes. Peal fruit and pour hot syrup over fruit and
let stand over night. Drain syrup off fruit and reboil syrup. Pour hot
on fruit a second time. The third morning boil syrup again twenty
minutes, and then boil fruit in syrup. Can and seal.


PICKLED PEACHES

Mrs. N. L. Hillard

For ten pounds of peaches take five pounds of light brown sugar, one
ounce whole cloves, one ounce cinnamon stick and one pint vinegar; let
it come to a boil and pour over the peaches; let stand until next day;
pour off liquid; reheat and pour over fruit again; the third day reheat
the liquid and put in the peaches, a few at a time, and boil; then put
in jars and seal.


ROSE APPLES

Mrs. C. E. Jones

Peel and core six small apples. Put into a saucepan with one cupful of
sugar, one and one-half cups of water and five cents worth of red
cinnamon drops. Boil gently until apples are tender and a pretty pink
color. Remove carefully to a dish and let the syrup continue boiling
until it jellies. Pour over the apples. Serve as a garnish or in glass
sherbet cups and top with whipped cream.


MINCE MEAT

Mrs. T. B. Orr

One-half beef tongue chopped fine; six large sour apples; one quart of
wine; one cup molasses; juice of one large orange and grated rind; two
lemons, that is, juice and grated rind; two pints granulated sugar; one
pint currant jelly; two tablespoonfuls cinnamon; one tablespoonful salt;
one-half teaspoonful black pepper; two nutmegs; one large cup suet
chopped fine, cooked; two pounds seeded raisins; one cup chopped citron;
brandy enough to make moist. Use cold, strong coffee if brandy is
objectionable.


MINCE MEAT

A. E. Loring

One quart bowl each of chopped lean beef and of chopped apples; two
quinces chopped fine; one-half bowl each of suet and molasses; one and
one-half bowls each of brown sugar; raisins; currants; one-half bowl of
candied lemon and orange peel chopped fine; one-half bowl of citron
chopped fine, grated rind and juice of two lemons; one glass jelly; one
pint of boiled cider; one pint of sweet cider; four level teaspoonfuls
cinnamon; one level teaspoonful cloves; one-third teaspoonful white
pepper; three teaspoonfuls salt and one grated nutmeg. Allow meat to
cool in the water in which it was cooked; remove all membrane from suet
and cream it with your hand; chop meat, add suet, apples, quinces,
molasses, sugar, raisins, currants, orange and lemon peel, citron, lemon
juice, jelly and cider; heat gradually and let it simmer three hours.
When cool add the spices and if desired, brandy to taste.


MINCE MEAT

Mix together one cup chopped apples; one-half cup raisins, seeded and
chopped; one-half cup currants; one-fourth cup butter; one tablespoonful
molasses; one tablespoonful boiled cider; one cup sugar; one teaspoonful
cinnamon; one-half teaspoonful each of cloves and grated nutmeg; one
salt spoon mace. Add enough stock in which meat was cooked to moisten;
heat gradually to boiling point and simmer one hour; then add one cup
chopped meat and two tablespoonfuls currant jelly. Cook fifteen minutes.


GREEN TOMATO MINCE MEAT

Mrs. Ada Woods

One peck green tomatoes, wash well and cut off blossom end; put through
meat chopper; put on stove and pour over them boiling water and scald;
drain this water off, put back on stove and repeat the process. After
they have been scalded and drained three times, add one peck of apples,
washed, cored and quartered and put through the meat chopper; five
pounds sugar; two pounds raisins; one and one-half pounds beef suet; two
tablespoonfuls salt; three tablespoonfuls cinnamon; one teaspoonful
cloves; two teaspoonfuls nutmeg and one teaspoonful allspice. Cook one
and one-half hours, stirring constantly as it burns very easily; add
three cups vinegar and seal while hot.


MINCE MEAT

Mrs. J. P. Cobb

One-half pound suet; five pounds stoned raisins; three pounds dried
currants; one and one-half pound citron; six pounds sugar; one and
one-half pints molasses; six pounds round of beef; one-half peck sour
apples; one quart boiled cider; one quart California brandy; one pint
California sherry; three nutmegs; one-half cup cinnamon; one-fourth cup
ground cloves.


MINCE MEAT

Mrs. Elizabeth Iglehart

Six pounds round beef chopped fine; eight pounds chopped apples; four
pounds raisins with seeds; four pounds currants; one and one-half pounds
suet shredded; two and one-half pounds sugar; one-half pint alcohol; two
quarts cider; two quarts water; one nutmeg grated; four heaping
teaspoonfuls cinnamon; one heaping teaspoonful cloves; six heaping
teaspoonfuls allspice; two pounds chopped cooked figs; one pound chopped
citron; one pint good whiskey. Mix meat and fruits thoroughly, then add
the liquor.





BEVERAGES


          _Then said the Judge, "A sweeter draught
           From a fairer hand was never quaffed."_
                                            --WHITTIER.


GRAPE JUICE MINT JULEP

Midlothian Country Club

One teaspoonful powdered sugar; enough water to dissolve sugar; a dozen
sprigs of mint; put in bottom of glass; fill glass with fine ice and
pour white grape juice over that to nearly fill glass, serve with slices
of orange, pineapple and sprigs of mint on top.


GRAPE JUICE

Mrs. R. C. Foster

To ten pounds of New York Concord grapes add three pints of boiled
water. Cook and strain. Put in one pound of granulated sugar. Let stand
over night to clear. Strain in the morning, bring to a boil and skim.
Have jars, or bottles, hot, and bottle immediately.


GRAPE JUICE LEMONADE

Mix the juice of two lemons with half a cup of granulated sugar, then
stir in one pint of grape juice; continue to stir it until the sugar is
dissolved, add enough cold water to make a quart of liquid; turn into a
pitcher in which there is a piece of ice. Add a few thin slices of lemon
from which the seeds have been removed, and a few maraschino cherries.
Serve with an extra supply of lemon and pineapple, cherries and sprigs
of fresh mint, that each glass may be decorated.


MULLED GRAPE JUICE

Wash and pick over one cupful of seedless raisins; set over the fire
with two cupfuls of cold water and four sticks of cinnamon; simmer very
slowly, never reaching a hard boil, for three-quarters of an hour. Add
to them one quart of grape juice, and let this become scalding hot, take
from fire, add juice of a lemon and serve hot.


GRAPE JUICE

Mrs. E. Lewis Phelps

Wash and stem four pints of blue grapes. Have a gallon jug scalded and
drained; put in grapes and cover with a syrup made of two pounds of
sugar and eight cups of water; fill jug with boiling water; cork
tightly. Following morning drive cork in tighter and cover with wax.
Will be ready to serve in three weeks.


GRAPE JUICE

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

Ten pounds of grapes; three pounds of sugar; one cup water. Put the
grapes and water in the preserving kettle, heat until pulp and seeds
separate. Strain through jelly bag. Then add sugar to the juice heated
to boiling point, then pour into hot sterilized bottles and seal. When
serving add crushed ice.


GRAPE JUICE HIGHBALL

Put a piece of ice in each glass; rather more than half fill the glasses
with grape juice, then fill with charged water (from a syphon).


CHERRY JULEP

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Cook one pint of red cherries, stoned, in one-half cupful sugar syrup
until soft; cool and add one-half cupful cider; one-half cupful
maraschino and a few sprigs of mint. Crush mint cherries, fill tall
glasses with shaved ice and mixture alternately and stir, without
touching glasses with hands, until they are well frosted. Garnish with a
slice of pineapple and a sprig of mint dipped in powdered sugar.


GINGER ALE PUNCH

Miss Agnes Sieber

Add one bunch of mint to juice of five lemons and one cupful sugar;
bruise mint and let stand several hours on ice. Squeeze through cloth
and add one lemon and one orange cut in thin half slices and two pints
of ginger ale; add ice and one pint ginger ale. Garnish with mint.


MINT PUNCH

Cook one cupful sugar with two cupfuls water, grated rind of an orange
and a lemon, a piece of stick cinnamon and twelve cloves. Cool and
strain, add juice of three lemons and four oranges; one bunch of fresh
mint leaves and two drops of oil of spearmint. Place on ice for two
hours. Strain again and add one-fourth cupful preserved ginger, cut in
dice. Color green and add ice and one pint club soda. Garnish with mint.


STRAWBERRY PUNCH

Mash one quart strawberries, add juice of one-half pineapple, one lemon,
two oranges and two cupfuls sugar cooked in five cupfuls water. Place on
ice and strain into pitcher filled with ice and add whole strawberries
and any fruits in season.


CHOCOLATE MILK SHAKE

One-fourth cup finely crushed ice; two tablespoonfuls chocolate syrup;
one-half cup milk; one-fourth cup apollinaris water or soda water from
syphon. Put ice in tumbler, add remaining ingredients, and shake until
well mixed. Serve with or without whipped cream, sweetened and
flavored.


GINGER ALE

Mrs. C. A. Carscadin

One and three-fourths pounds of sugar; one and one-half ounce whole
ginger; two and one-half ounces cream of tartar; one lemon sliced; seven
quarts of boiling water and two cents worth of yeast. Put the sugar and
spices in a stone jar; pour boiling water over them and let them stand
covered in a cool place for twenty-four hours. Then add the yeast,
dissolved in luke warm water, and let stand again for twenty-four hours.
Put in bottles, cork well and after three days it is ready for use.


GINGERADE

Mrs. W. L. Gregson

One quart of cold water, one cup sugar, one-fourth ounce white ginger
root, juice two oranges and one lemon. Put the water and sugar to boil,
add ginger root broken into small bits. Let it boil twenty minutes after
boiling begins, remove from the fire and add fruit juice. Strain and
cool. Serve with powdered ice and a preserved or sweet cherry in each
glass.


BLACK COW

Midlothian Country Club

Put fine ice in glass and nearly fill with sarsaparilla, pour cream
carefully on top of that and serve.


A DELICIOUS FRUIT CUP

Midlothian Country Club

Put one pint of water, one pound of sugar and the grated yellow rind of
one lemon on to boil for five minutes; strain and while hot slice into
it two bananas; one grated pineapple and one-fourth pound stoned
cherries. When ready to serve add the juice of six lemons. Put in the
center of your punch bowl, as guard, a block of ice; pour over it two
quarts of apollinaris, add the fruit mixture and at the last moment one
dozen strawberries and mix all together.


CHOCOLATE FRAPPE

S. Blanche Backman

Put a quart of rich milk in a double boiler, stir into it gradually
three-fourths of a cup grated chocolate and sweeten to taste. Boil five
minutes, stirring all the while; then pour into an earthen dish and add
a teaspoonful of vanilla and set on ice. Have chopped ice in the bottom
of the glasses; then fill the glasses within a quarter of an inch of the
brim. Put sweetened whipped cream on top. If desired the whipped cream
can be dotted in the middle with fruit jelly.


CREAMY COCOA

Stir together in a saucepan half a cup cocoa, half a cup flour, half a
cup granulated sugar and half a teaspoonful salt. Add gradually one
quart boiling water and let mixture boil five minutes, stirring it
constantly. Remove from fire, add a quart boiling milk, and serve. If
desired a spoonful whipped cream may be put in each cup before filling
with cocoa. (Flour should be sifted before measured.) The above recipe
will serve twelve persons.


CURRANT LEMONADE

Mrs. W. L. Gregson

One glass of currant jelly; one cup sugar; two lemons; beat the jelly
very thoroughly with the sugar and add the lemon juice and two quarts
water and a generous piece of ice.


ICED COFFEE

Iced coffee served with orange is also delicious. Add half cup orange
syrup to three cups coffee and shake in a shaker with a little chopped
ice. Turn into thin glasses and add a spoonful whipped cream.


COCOA EGG-NOG

Beat white of an egg to a stiff froth, adding tiny pinch of salt.
Sweeten, flavor with vanilla and put aside about two teaspoonfuls. Add.
yolk to the rest and beat well, then add enough rather rich cold cocoa
to fill tumbler. Stir well together and put the remainder of the beaten
white on top. Serve at once, and ice cold.


LEMON TRIFFLE

Two lemons; two oranges; twelve lumps loaf sugar; two teaspoonfuls
brandy; two teaspoonfuls Jamaica rum; a little grated nutmeg; one-half
pint double cream, whipped. Grate rind of one orange and two lemons and
squeeze juice of all on the sugar and let stand until dissolved. Stir
well and serve in glasses with a spoonful of cream on top. This serves
four persons.


RASPBERRY VINEGAR

Mrs. W. W. Backman

Mash six quarts of berries (red or black). Pour two quarts of cider over
the berries and let them stand all day and night. The next day mash six
more quarts of berries; strain first six quarts and pour over last six
quarts of berries and let stand another night and day; then strain all
again. To every pint of juice add one pint of sugar and boil about
twenty minutes; then bottle. When serving, use about one-third of the
raspberry vinegar to two-thirds water.


EGG-NOG

Beat separately the white and yolk of an egg. Stir a heaping teaspoonful
of sugar and a tablespoonful of grape juice into the yolk; pour into
tall glass, add the whipped white and fill glass with unskimmed milk.
Serve cold with light cakes or thin bread and butter.




SANDWICHES


          "_Would you know how first he met her?
            She was cutting bread and butter._"


SPANISH SANDWICH FILLING

One large onion; three carrots; two red peppers; two green peppers
(without seeds); two eggs, hard boiled; two sour pickles. Chop all the
vegetables and pickle very fine; squeeze dry in a cheese cloth, add the
chopped eggs and one-half cup mayonnaise.


LUNCHEON SANDWICH

Mrs. C. S. Junge

Fry two slices of bacon for each sandwich. Toast bread. Pour over the
first layer of toast a little of the bacon fat. In remaining fat stir a
tablespoonful flour, add a cup and a half of milk and cook until
creamed. On the slice of toast place a slice of cold roast beef, chicken
or veal, and on that two slices of tomatoes; then the slices of bacon.
Place on the second slice of toast and turn over all the creamed gravy,
and serve.


TASTY FILLING

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

One bunch of radishes, washed but with the skins left on and a bit of
the green stem; one Spanish onion peeled; chop together until very fine.
Make a highly seasoned boiled mayonnaise, mix with the radishes and
onion and spread thin slices of buttered bread; put a lettuce leaf over
the mixture and then another slice of buttered bread.


ANCHOVY SANDWICH

Mrs. Francis A. Sieber

Two tablespoonfuls creamed butter; one-half cup grated cheese; one
teaspoonful French mustard; one teaspoonful Tarragon vinegar; and
anchovy paste. Add one tablespoonful minced olives, pickles, salt and
paprika. Spread on bread.


CHICKEN AND BACON SANDWICH

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Mix equal portions of chicken, bacon and celery; add one teaspoonful
minced green pepper and a few drops of tarragon vinegar. Lay lettuce
strips across sandwiches and when serving, lay a slice of tomato on each
and cover with the minced chicken mixture. Top with a spoonful of
mayonnaise.


SANDWICH (CHICKEN AND HAM)

Miss Agnes Sieber

Mix one cup minced chicken with two-thirds cup minced ham; add four
tablespoonfuls each of chopped pickles, piementoes and creamed cheese,
mashed smooth. Add paprika and spread on bread.


BEEFSTEAK SANDWICH

Mrs. W. R. McGhee

Have a cut of tenderloin of beef for each sandwich; butter two slices of
bread and lay them side by side; broil the steak, seasoning well and lay
on one piece of bread; on the other place a slice of Spanish onion which
has been thoroughly chilled to make it brittle.


CHEESE, PECAN NUT AND PIMENTO SANDWICH

Cut Boston brown bread and white bread into thin slices and stamp into
rings with a doughnut cutter. Beat one-fourth cupful of butter to a
cream; gradually beat in half a cupful (measured light) of grated
cheese, half a teaspoonful paprika and one-fourth cupful sliced pecan
nut meats. Use this to spread the prepared bread; drop on the mixture
here and there thin slices of piemento, then press the two pieces
together.


CHEESE SANDWICHES

Mrs. Helen Armstrong

One hard boiled egg; one-half teaspoonful salt; one-fourth pound grated
cheese; one-half teaspoonful pepper; one-half teaspoonful mustard; one
tablespoonful melted butter; three tablespoonfuls lemon juice or
vinegar. Rub yolk of egg to paste and add salt and pepper, butter and
mustard; then add lemon juice to make right consistency. Spread between
thin slices of bread.


DREAM SANDWICHES

Mrs. W. L. Clock

One-half cup of pecan nuts chopped fine; one-half cup stoned raisins;
one apple; juice of one-half lemon; one spoonful sugar. Mix with a small
amount of cream and spread it on bread thin. It makes an excellent
filling for sandwiches.


HOT CHEESE SANDWICHES

These are particularly nice for Sunday evening teas. Slice the bread
very thin; put a thick layer of grated cheese between the two forms;
sprinkle with salt and a dash of cayenne pepper and press the bread well
together. Fry them to a delicate brown on each side in equal parts of
hot lard and butter and serve very hot.


HOT CHEESE SANDWICH

Mrs. W. D. Hurlbut

On a slice of bread, well buttered, place a fairly thick piece of yellow
American cheese; sprinkle with salt and paprika pepper; cover with
another slice of buttered bread and place under the blaze in the broiler
to toast; when one side is done turn over and toast other side. By the
time both sides are toasted the cheese is quite soft.


JANE DABNEY'S CHEESE SANDWICH

Mary S. Vanzwoll

One and one-half cups grated cheese; one egg; two tablespoonfuls cream.
Spread on bread and cover with a slice of bacon. Brown in a medium oven.


CHEESE AND NUT SANDWICHES

Mary Barwick Wells

Chop pecans, hickory nuts or English walnuts; mix with an equal quantity
of cream or Neufchatel cheese. Butter thin slices of bread and spread
with the cheese and nuts. Between the slices lay a heart-leaf of lettuce
dipped in mayonnaise dressing.


CUCUMBER SANDWICH

Mrs. F. E. Place

Peel and slice cucumbers like wafers; put on the ice several hours
before using. Mix with an oil mayonnaise and spread between thin slices
of bread.


FILLING FOR PIEMENTO SANDWICHES

Mrs. J. E. Kelly

Two tablespoonfuls sugar; one teaspoonful salt; one tablespoonful flour;
mix. Yolks of two eggs, beaten; one-half cup water; one-half cup
vinegar; one teaspoonful butter. Cook in double boiler till thick. Add
to: Three Eagle brand cream cheese; one small can pimentoes; one cupful
walnuts or pecans; grind pimentoes and nuts and cream into the cheese.


LAYER SANDWICHES

Five slices of Boston brown bread, put together with cream cheese
reduced with sweet cream or mayonnaise; cut down in half-inch slices.


OLIVE SANDWICHES

Chop one-third olives and two-third chicken livers that have been
thoroughly cooked and mashed quite smooth; mix with thick mayonnaise
dressing. Serve in white bread, ice cold.


EGG AND GREEN PEPPER SANDWICH

Six hard boiled eggs; one green pepper; two tablespoonfuls olive oil;
one tablespoonful ketchup; one-fourth teaspoonful salt and mustard;
cream. Chop eggs and pepper, mix other ingredients and add to chopped
eggs, moisten with cream and spread between thin slices of buttered
bread. Cut in fancy shapes and keep in damp cloth until ready to serve.


MAPLE SANDWICH

Judith Slocum

Put one cupful of finely shaved maple sugar through the meat chopper
with one cupful of blanched almonds, then mix to a paste with thick
sweet cream. Spread on slices of brown bread and white bread.


DATE AND NUT SANDWICHES

Remove the stones and scales from the dates and break them up with a
fork. Chop pecan meats fine and use twice as many dates as nuts. Mix
together and moisten with creamed butter, add a dash of salt. Spread
between thin slices of bread.


CARROT AND NUT SANDWICH

Peel and chop carrots very fine; allow a cup of minced nut meats to each
cup of carrots and mix with mayonnaise.




EGG DISHES


BAKED EGGS

Mrs. C. A. Bowman

Cover bottom of pan with fresh bread crumbs; drop eggs on them, being
careful not to break them; dot with butter and seasoning and bake.


OMELET

Mrs. E. Lewis Phelps

One and one-half tablespoonful flour; one and one-half tablespoonful
butter; blend over fire and add one cup of milk. (This should be thick
and stiff when cooked.) When about cold, add one cup grated cheese
(yellow American preferred); beat the yolks of seven eggs stiff, and
when cold fold in the beaten whites; add a little salt. Mince some cold
boiled ham, onion and green pepper for a center filling. Set the dish in
pan of water and bake.


EGG BALLS

Mrs. Ben Craycroft

Serve with salad. Rub the yolks of four hard boiled eggs to a paste; add
a dash of salt, same of pepper; six drops of Worcestershire sauce, and
one teaspoonful melted butter. Moisten with the beaten yolk of one egg
and shape in small balls. Roll in flour and saute in butter. Fry to a
delicate brown.


ESCALLOPED EGGS

Mrs. Ben Craycroft

Six eggs; two tablespoonfuls of cream to each egg; season with pepper,
butter and salt and sprinkle cracker or bread crumbs over the top. Bake
in rather quick oven.


ESCALLOPED EGGS

Make a force meat of chopped ham, fine bread crumbs, pepper, salt, a
little minced parsley and some melted butter. Moisten it with milk to a
soft paste and half fill patty pans with the mixture. Break an egg
carefully upon the top of each, dust with pepper, salt and sift some
very finely powdered cracker over it all. Set in hot oven and bake until
the eggs are well set (about eight minutes), and serve hot.


A SITTING OF EGGS

Mrs. Ben Craycroft

Take the number of eggs to be cooked and separate the whites and yolks.
Beat the whites to a froth, add a little salt. Butter a pan; then pour
in the whites; then dip the yolks around in the whites; put in oven,
bake two or three minutes and serve.


HAM OMELET

Mrs. Gorham

Chop fine cold boiled ham. Beat four eggs; add two tablespoonfuls milk,
salt and pepper to taste. Mix with ham and fry on hot griddle, dropping
a spoonful at a time. Serve hot. Any cold meat may be utilized in the
same way.


OMELET

Mrs. Edward E. Swadener

Four eggs; one-half cupful milk. Separate the whites of the eggs, beat
to a stiff froth; beat the yolks well and add salt, pepper and one-half
cupful milk. Fold in the beaten whites. Have the oven hot; have the
spider hot, put in a generous tablespoonful butter (bacon or ham
drippings may be used), and when it melts add eggs. Let the omelet
"set," then put it into the hot oven to brown. It should slip out of the
spider without breaking if enough butter (or substitute) has been used.
Have platter heated on which the omelet is to be served.


EGGS POACHED WITH ARTICHOKES

Mrs. Francis A. Sieber

Cover eight rounds of toast with eight artichoke fonds (cooked or
canned). Put a whole poached egg in center of each, and cover with brown
sauce seasoned with ham. Dust eggs with powdered parsley.


EGGS IN GREEN PEPPERS

Mrs. Louis Geyler

Chop one-half dozen hard boiled eggs; add one-half cup minced ham, and
fill a buttered dish lined with crumbs with alternate layers of eggs and
cream sauce, seasoned with salt, minced green peppers, parsley and
chives. Spread crumbs on top, dot with butter, and bake; or bake in
green peppers.


SPANISH EGG

Mrs. Harry H. Small

Blend two tablespoonfuls of melted butter and one tablespoonful of flour
in a chafing dish. Add one pint of milk and cook to a thick cream. Add
salt and paprika and a dash of cayenne pepper. Then add half a pound of
American cheese cut in very small pieces and cook until well blended
together. Have one large onion and one green pepper cut in chips and
fried as tender as butter, taking care not to brown the onion. Add to
the onion and pepper one-half can of tomatoes, cook for five minutes
together, and add to the cream sauce. Have six eggs boiled hard, slice
and add to the mixture. Serve on toast on hot plates.


EGGS IN BATTER

One egg; one and one-half tablespoonfuls thick cream; two tablespoonfuls
fine stale bread crumbs; one-fourth teaspoonful salt. Mix cream, bread
crumbs and salt. Put one-half tablespoonful of mixture in egg-shirrer.
Slip in egg and cover with remaining mixture. Bake six minutes in
moderate oven.


SCOTCH EGGS FOR BREAKFAST

Mrs. A. M. Studley

Boil six eggs twenty minutes. When cold, remove shells. Roll in sausage
meat about one-half inch thick all over; put in the ice box over night.
Then fry, turning all the time till brown. Serve on platter, cutting
them open, and garnish with Saratoga potatoes.


POACHED EGGS ON RICE TOAST

Put one quart of rice into one quart of boiling water, to which has been
added one teaspoonful salt, boil rapidly for fifteen minutes, then place
on back of stove and steam twenty minutes. When the rice has absorbed
all of the water press into a square mold or bread pan and set aside to
cool. When cold cut into slices, place in wire broiler and toast over
hot fire. Poach as many eggs as you have slices of toast and place an
egg on each slice. Sprinkle with pepper and salt and serve very hot.


EGGS DELICIOUS

Alice Clock

Six hard boiled eggs; one pint milk; one tablespoonful (heaping) butter;
two tablespoonfuls flour; one tin sifted peas. Mix the butter and flour
smoothly; slowly add milk while stirring constantly over slow fire,
until white sauce is nicely smooth. Season sauce to taste, with paprika
and salt; and add hard-boiled eggs, cut in halves. Pour over the whole
the sifted peas, and as soon as the peas are heated, being careful not
to stir, serve on rounds of toast. This amount will serve six people.


EGG RELISH

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One cupful of bread crumbs; one cup cream and five eggs. When the cream
has been absorbed by the crumbs and the eggs well beaten add pepper and
salt with a teaspoonful of chopped parsley. Fry as an omelet.


EGG GARNISH

Boil six eggs. Cut them into halves, and remove yolks. Fill the whites
with chopped cucumbers, over which a French dressing has been poured.
Serve these upon shredded lettuce.


A LUNCHEON DISH

Mrs. William E. Mason

Butter baking dish; drop in six eggs, whole; grate American cheese,
thickly. Sprinkle a little salt, pepper and small pieces of butter over
them and bake slowly. Serve in baking dish.


EGGS A LA BUCKINGHAM

Make five slices milk toast, and arrange on platter. Use receipe for
scrambled eggs, having the eggs slightly under-done. Pour eggs over
toast, sprinkle with four tablespoonfuls grated mild cheese. Put in oven
to melt cheese, and finish cooking eggs.


EGGS A LA GOLDENROD

Charlotte V. Thearle

Three hard boiled eggs, one tablespoonful butter, one tablespoonful
flour, one cup milk, one-half teaspoonful salt, one-third teaspoonful
pepper, five slices toast, parsley. Make a thin white sauce with butter,
flour, milk and seasonings. Separate yolks from whites of eggs. Chop
whites finely and add them to the sauce. Cut four slices of toast in
halves lengthwise. Arrange on platter and pour over the sauce. Force the
yolks through a potato ricer or strainer, sprinkling over the top.
Garnish with parsley and remaining toast cut in points.


EGGS A LA MARTIN

One cup white sauce, six eggs, one-fourth pound grated cheese. Break
eggs carefully into a well buttered pudding dish, cover with white sauce
and sprinkle cheese over all. Bake fifteen minutes in moderate oven.


EGGS A LA LEE

Mrs. Harry F. Atwood

Cover circular pieces of toasted bread with thin slices cold boiled ham.
Arrange on each a dropped egg, and pour around mushroom sauce.

Sauce: Clean one-fourth pound mushrooms, break cap in pieces, and saute
five minutes in one tablespoonful butter. Add one cup chicken stock and
simmer five minutes. Rub through a sieve and thicken with one
tablespoonful each butter and flour cooked together. Season with salt
and pepper.


EGGS A LA FRANCOISE

Poach two eggs in boiling water acidulated with lemon juice and slightly
salted. Arrange the eggs on rounds of toasted bread, pour over a tomato
sauce made as follows, and garnish with toast points.

Sauce: Put one large tablespoonful butter in the chafing dish (or
skillet), one teaspoonful minced onion, one tablespoonful minced carrot
and fry. With this blend two level tablespoonfuls flour and add one cup
of canned tomatoes sifted, and one-third teaspoonful beef extract.
Dissolve in one tablespoonful hot water, simmer and strain.


TO BOIL EGGS FOR AN INVALID

Have water boiling, pour over eggs and cover tightly; put on back of
stove and stand five minutes. The whites of the eggs will be firmly set
and the yolks soft.




CHEESE DISHES


          "_Wilt, please, your honor, taste of these._"
                                               --SHAKESPEARE.


CHEESE BALLS

Mrs. W. H. Hart

One and one-half cupfuls cream cheese; one-half teaspoonful salt;
one-fourth teaspoonful paprika; three eggs, whites beaten firm; cracker
crumbs. Add salt and paprika to cheese, then fold in whites and roll
into small balls; roll in cracker crumbs and fry in deep fat.


CHEESE SOUFFLE

Mrs. Max Mauerman

Two tablespoonfuls flour; two tablespoonfuls butter; one-half cup grated
cheese; four eggs; one pint of milk.

Method: Rub butter and flour together over fire; when they bubble, add
gradually hot milk. Remove from fire; add the beaten yolks; cool the
mixture; then add the beaten whites, stirring all together thoroughly.
Put in baking dish well buttered, bake in moderately hot oven for
fifteen or twenty minutes or until it sets like custard. Serve at once.


CHEESE SOUFFLE

Mrs. Frank Sessions

Break a slice of fresh bread about three inches thick into small pieces,
pour over it a cup of milk, let stand while you prepare the rest of the
ingredients. Grate enough yellow American cheese to make three heaping
tablespoonfuls; beat three eggs until light and frothy; add the cheese
and eggs to the bread, mix thoroughly and put in a buttered baking dish;
bake half an hour or until brown. Serve immediately.


FROZEN CHEESE

Rub two Neufchatel cheese to a paste, add one cup whipped cream,
one-half cup finely chopped olives, one-fourth cup finely chopped
pimentoes. Season with salt, cayenne, lemon juice or vinegar to taste.
Soften one teaspoonful granulated gelatine in one tablespoonful cold
water, dissolve over hot water, cool and add to cheese, mix well and
turn into one-half pound baking powder cans previously wet with cold
water, cover with a piece of white paper, adjust covers and pack in ice
and salt. Let stand for several hours. Serve with salad course with
toasted water crackers.


SUNDAY SUPPER MUSH

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One cup corn meal; one quart of milk, salted to taste. Cook in double
boiler. Just before removing, add one egg. Spread the mixture on a board
three-fourths inch thick. When cold, cut in shapes and put slice of
American cheese on top, put in buttered dish and set in oven long enough
for cheese to melt and brown.


CHEESE DELIGHT

Mrs. H. Clay Calhoun

One-half pound American cheese; two eggs, well beaten; salt and paprika
to taste. Cook in a double boiler until thick. Serve on round of bread
and toast in oven.


CHEESE RICE

Mrs. Ralph Wilder

Fill a baking dish with alternate layers of cooked salted rice and
grated cheese; moisten with milk and cover with bits of butter; add dash
of red pepper if liked. Bake to golden brown.


CHEESE STRAWS

Mrs. Elizabeth F. Pearce

One cupful grated cheese; salt and pepper to taste; two tablespoonfuls
melted butter; three tablespoonfuls cold water, and flour sufficient for
soft dough. Cut into strips. Bake in a quick oven until brown and
crispy.


CHEESE BALLS

Susy M. Horton

Beat two eggs very light, and just enough grated cheese to handle the
mixture, red pepper and salt to taste. Roll into balls, the size of a
walnut, dip in egg and cracker crumbs and fry in hot lard a delicate
brown. To be served hot with salad.


WELSH RAREBIT

Mrs. Harry H. Small

One pound of American cheese cut in dice; butter the size of an egg;
melt butter and cheese in a chafing dish, blending together until
smooth. Beat up one egg and stir into cheese, adding milk until the
right consistency. Add mustard salt and paprika and a teaspoonful of
Worcestershire sauce. Serve on thin slices of toast, on hot plates.


WELSH RAREBIT

One cup hot milk; one-quarter pound grated cheese; one-half teaspoonful
salt; one-quarter teaspoonful mustard; one teaspoonful flour; one
teaspoonful butter; one egg; dash of cayenne. Put the milk to heat. Mix
the grated cheese, flour, mustard, salt, cayenne and egg well beaten,
add milk when hot, a little at a time, to the mixture, stirring all the
time. Cook until smooth and very creamy. Take from heat and add butter,
stirring well. Serve hot on slices of toast. The milk should be added
slowly. Toast bread on one side only. Pour rarebit on untoasted side.


CHEESE WAFERS

Mrs. Helen Armstrong

Beat the whites of two eggs very stiff; add pepper and salt; mix in
gently half a cup grated cheese; spread lightly over salted wafers.
Sprinkle with cheese and brown in moderate oven.


CHEESE BALLS

Mrs. Fred L. Kimmey

Whites of three eggs; one cup grated cheese; one tablespoonful flour;
pinch of salt and red pepper. Form into balls, roll in cracker crumbs
and fry in deep fat. This makes fifteen small balls.




CANDIES


          "_A wilderness of sweets._"
                                     --MILTON.


FONDANT

Mrs. E. A. Thompson

Two and one-half pounds fine granulated sugar; one and one-half cups
water; one-half teaspoonful cream of tartar. Place in a saucepan, set on
back of stove. When clear let come to a boil until it reaches 242
degrees, or until it holds together when dropped into cold water. Take
from fire and cool. When lukewarm, beat until thick enough to kneed,
turn out on marble or platter and work until thick.


FONDANT

One pound white sugar and half cup water, stir over the fire until it
dissolves, no longer. Then boil, without stirring, until it makes a very
soft ball when tested in water (cold). Pour out on a platter and when
slightly cool beat until you have a creamy mass, then work and knead
with the hands until it is soft and smooth. Never boil but one pound of
sugar at a time no matter how much candy you intend making. Pack your
fondant all together in an earthen bowl and cover with a damp cloth
until the next day. Then shape into the desired forms. Use for all kinds
of French creams.


MEXICAN CARAMELS

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

One cup granulated sugar; one large cup milk or cream; one-fourth
teaspoonful soda. Caramel the sugar and add soda to milk warmed; after
caramel is dissolved add two cups of brown sugar; do not let boil until
sugar is thoroughly dissolved; then boil until it hardens when dropped
in cold water. Add cup of nut meats.


COFFEE CARAMELS

One cupful sugar and one-half cupful cream and one-quarter cupful strong
coffee. Stir constantly over a hot fire, and turn on a greased tin.


MAPLE CARAMELS

One cupful sugar (maple) and three-quarters of a cupful of cream, placed
in a saucepan. Stir constantly over a hot fire until it reaches the hard
boil stage. Remove from fire, and turn on a greased tin.


VANILLA CARAMELS

Two level cups "Coffee C" brown sugar; one-half cup corn syrup;
two-thirds cup cream; one cup chopped nuts. Boil sugar, cream and corn
syrup without stirring until hard ball forms when tried in cold water.
Add nuts and vanilla, remove from fire and pour at once into buttered
tin. Do not stir caramels. When cold, remove from pan in one sheet and
cut in squares. Wrap in wax paper.


CHOCOLATE CARAMELS

Put in a saucepan half a cupful each of molasses, white sugar and brown
sugar; a cupful of grated chocolate and a cupful of cream or milk. Stir
the mixture constantly over the fire until it reaches the hard-boil
stage. Then add a teaspoonful vanilla and turn it onto a buttered tin,
making the paste an inch thick. Mark it into inch squares and cut before
it is quite cold.


CHOCOLATE CARAMELS

Mrs. E. A. Thompson

Two squares chocolate; one cup sugar; one cup molasses; one cup milk;
one-half cup melted butter. Boil on the top of stove over a brisk fire
until it becomes brittle when dropped in cold water. Do not stir, but
shake the vessel while boiling. Pour into a buttered tin and check off
into squares.


VANILLA CARAMELS

One cupful sugar and three-quarters of a cupful cream, placed in a
saucepan. Stir constantly over a hot fire until it reaches the hard-boil
stage. Remove from fire, add a teaspoonful vanilla and turn on a greased
tin.


KARO CARAMELS

Boil one cup sugar, one cup Karo corn syrup, one-fourth cup water six
minutes, then add two tablespoonfuls butter, and cook to the soft ball
stage. Beat in a teaspoonful of vanilla extract or half a cup candied
cherries cut in halves; beat thoroughly and turn into a shallow buttered
dish. When cold cut in cubes and wrap in confectioner's paper.


ENGLISH WALNUT CANDY

The white of one egg, beaten stiff; add a pound of Confectioners' sugar;
stirring the sugar and egg till the mixture is stiff enough to roll into
little balls. Add vanilla, and press the balls of candy between the
halves of an English walnut.


COCOANUT CANDY

Two cups white sugar; one cup milk; one cup molasses; one-half cup
butter; try as molasses candy, and when done add one and one-half cups
cocoanut and one teaspoonful vanilla.


MAPLE CREAM

To one pound of maple sugar take half a pint cream. Cook until it
hardens in water. Stir frequently. Beat until cool.


CHOCOLATE CREAMS

Put three squares of chocolate in a dish over a tea kettle to melt. Boil
two cups of white sugar, one cup water, one teaspoonful of glucose until
stringy; beat until creamy; mold into the desired shapes and dip in
chocolate. Put on whole nuts if desired.


NOUGAT

One cupful almonds, chopped and placed in oven to dry, being careful not
to brown. Put into a saucepan two and one-half cupfuls powdered sugar
and a tablespoonful lemon juice. Place it on fire and stir with a wooden
spoon until it is melted and slightly colored. Let stand for a few
minutes, so it will be thoroughly melted, then turn in the hot almonds,
mix them together quickly, not stirring long enough to grain the sugar,
and turn it on to an oiled slab or tin. Spread it out in an even sheet
an eighth of an inch thick. While it is still warm mark off into
squares. Break into pieces when cold.


SUGARED ALMONDS

Put a cupful granulated sugar in a saucepan with a little water, stir
until it is dissolved, then let it cook to the boil stage without
touching except to test. Turn in half cupful of blanched almonds and
stir off the fire until the nuts are well covered with the granulated
sugar, but turn them out before they become a mass. Boil another cupful
of sugar and turn the coated almonds into it, and stir again in the same
way, giving them a second coating of sugar, but do not leave them in the
pan until they are all stuck together.


BURNT ALMONDS

Place a cupful of brown sugar into a saucepan with a very little water.
Stir until the sugar is dissolved. Let it boil a minute, then pour in
half a cupful of almonds and stir over the fire until the sugar
granulates and is a little brown. When the nuts are well coated, and
before they get into one mass, turn them out and separate any that are
stuck together.


MARSHMALLOWS

One-half box granulated gelatin soaked in three-fourths cup cold water
(scant); two cups sugar cooked with three-fourths cup boiling water
(scant) only until dissolved. Pour over gelatin, add flavoring and pinch
salt and let stand until lukewarm. Beat first with egg beater, then with
a spoon until stiff enough to spread in sheets. Pour into pans thickly
dusted with mixture of powdered sugar and little corn starch. When
chilled, turn on marble slab or platter and cut in cubes, roll in
powdered sugar mixture and serve.


MARSHMALLOWS

Soak four ounces of gum arabic in a cupful of water until it is
dissolved. Strain it to take out any black specks in it. Put the
dissolved gum arabic into a saucepan with half a pound of powdered
sugar. Place the saucepan in a second pan containing boiling water; stir
until the mixture becomes thick and white. When it is beginning to
thicken test it by dropping a little into cold water; when it will form
a ball remove it from fire. Stir into it the whites of three eggs
whipped to a stiff froth. This will give a spongy texture. Lastly,
flavor it with two teaspoonfuls of orange water. Turn the paste into a
pan covered thick with cornstarch; the layer of paste should be one inch
thick. After the paste has stood for a while turn it onto a slab and cut
it into inch squares; dust them well with cornstarch or confectioner's
sugar. As the paste is more or less cooked it will be more or less
stiff.


PEPPERMINT OR WINTERGREEN PATTIES

Mrs. E. A. Thompson

One pound confectioner's sugar; six large tablespoonfuls water; six
drops oil of peppermint or wintergreen; a little bit of cream of tartar
put into a cup with a bit of sugar and the oil. Boil until it ropes,
then remove from fire and stir in the cream of tartar, oil and the
sugar.


CHOCOLATE PEPPERMINTS

Mrs. A. H. Wagoner

Take two pounds confectioner's sugar and add enough water to make it the
right consistency to roll into balls. Flavor with peppermint and roll
out on waxed paper with a rolling pin. Cut out the peppermints. With
water in the under part of the chafing dish melt half a pound of Baker's
chocolate and dip the peppermint on the end of a fork. Set on waxed
paper to harden.


SEA FOAM

Two cups light brown sugar; one-half cup water; boil together until a
little dropped in cold water forms a soft ball. Remove from fire. Beat
in a deep bowl the whites of two eggs to a froth, add candy syrup,
one-half teaspoonful vanilla and beat in until it begins to stiffen.
Drop with spoon on waxed paper and press on a nut meat. Will keep moist
in a glass jar.


DIVINITY FUDGE

Mrs. A. Donald Campbell

Whites of two eggs, well beaten; two cups granulated sugar; one-third
cup Karo corn syrup boiled together with one-half cup hot water; boil
until syrup forms hard (not brittle) strands when dropped in cold water;
one teaspoonful vanilla. Pour the boiling mixture over whites of eggs,
beating constantly; beat mixture until pure white. Add nuts or cherries,
etc., which should be cut up before cooking syrup. Turn entire mixture
out on buttered platter; let stand an hour, or until hard enough to
cut.


DIVINITY CANDY

Two and one-half cups granulated sugar; one-half cup corn syrup;
one-half cup cold water; whites of two eggs beaten to a stiff froth.
Boil the first three ingredients until a little dropped into cold water
can be formed into a firm ball. When done pour over the eggs and beat
until stiff, then add one cup walnut meats. Spread in a buttered pan and
cut into squares.


OCEAN FOAM

One cup sugar; one-half cup corn syrup; one-half cup water. Boil mixture
until hard when dropped in cold water. Add stiffly beaten whites of two
eggs, beat until it stiffens and becomes foamy. Add one cup nuts and
vanilla to flavor. Pour into buttered tin.


FUDGES

Emily L. Wegner

Two cups granulated sugar; one cup milk; one-half teaspoonful butter;
two squares Baker's bitter chocolate. Put on sugar and milk, let it come
to a boil before adding butter and chocolate. Beat constantly. Cook from
fifteen to twenty minutes. This may be varied by adding chopped nuts or
grated cocoanut.


FUDGE

Boil together a pint of milk; a cup of granulated sugar; a cup of grated
chocolate and butter the size of an egg. When a drop of the mixture
hardens in cold water add a teaspoonful vanilla, beat until smooth and
creamy; spread in a buttered pan and cut into squares.


CHOCOLATE FUDGE

One cupful milk; two squares or ounces of chocolate; two cupfuls
granulated sugar placed in granite sauce pan. Let chocolate syrup boil
till it hardens, when a little can be dropped in cold water or on ice to
see if it is done. Then stir in a heaping tablespoonful butter and pour
the mixture at once on a well buttered tin. Nuts can be added to this if
desired.


CARAMEL FUDGE

Two cups granulated cane sugar; three-fourths cup milk; one-half cup
butter; one teaspoonful vanilla; one cup nuts. Place the butter, milk
and one and one-half cups sugar in one pan, and let it boil. In another
pan melt the half cup sugar, and when melted pour upon it the boiling
mixture. Remove from fire and beat until it thickens; add vanilla and
nuts. Pour on buttered platter.


PEANUT BUTTER FUDGE

Two cups confectionery sugar; two tablespoonfuls peanut butter; one-half
cup milk. When mixture starts to boil, stir constantly until it
thickens. Pour into buttered tin.


CREAM OF CARAMEL FUDGE

Boil two and one-half cupfuls brown sugar, one cupful cream. When hard
turn on a greased tin.


MAPLE FUDGE

Break into small pieces a pound of maple sugar and put it over the fire
with a cupful of milk. Bring it to a boil, add a tablespoonful of butter
and cook until a little dropped in cold water becomes brittle. Take from
fire, stir until it begins to granulate a little about the sides of the
pan, and then pour into a greased pan. Mark into squares with a knife.


MAPLE SUGAR FUDGE

Boil two and one-half cupfuls maple sugar, one cupful cream. When little
hard turn on greased tin.


COCOANUT FUDGE

Boil two and one-half cupfuls white sugar, one cupful cream. Add one
tablespoonful butter, and when hard pour on greased tin.


CANDIED ORANGE PEEL

Mrs. A. J. Langan

Take nice thick orange peel, soak over night in salt water. In the
morning take out peel, boil in fresh water until tender, then add sugar,
pound for pound, boil until the peel is clear and thick. Seal in glass
jars, and when wanted cut in long strips, roll in sugar and serve.


ORANGE OR GRAPE FRUIT STRAWS

Mrs. Harry Pagin, Valparaiso, Ind.

Take peeling of two large oranges, or grape fruit, or both, and cut with
scissors in narrow lengthwise strips. Cover with cold water, put on
stove and boil twenty minutes. Pour off water. Cover with water and boil
twenty minutes more. Pour off water. Cover with water and boil twenty
minutes more. Pour off water and add one cup sugar and one-half cup of
hot water. Let simmer until almost dry, taking care not to burn. Take
from stove and roll, a few at a time, in granulated sugar.


HONEY CANDY

Four tablespoonfuls honey, one pint white sugar, water enough to
dissolve sugar; boil until brittle when tried in water. When cool pull.


BUTTER SCOTCH

Mrs. R. A. Dandliker

Two cups sugar; two tablespoonfuls vinegar; two tablespoonfuls water;
four tablespoonfuls molasses; one-half cup butter. Boil about fifteen
minutes, then add two teaspoonfuls vanilla. Cook till it hardens in
water, do not stir. Pour into buttered pans.


THREE MINUTE BUTTER-SCOTCH

Use three-fourths cup sugar, one tablespoonful water, butter size of an
egg, one-half tablespoonful vinegar. Boil until brittle; pour on
buttered plates.


WALNUT MOLASSES BALLS

One cup New Orleans molasses; cream of tartar size of a pea; three cups
white sugar; one-half cup water. Boil mixture slowly until soft ball
forms when tried in cold water. Add butter size of an egg and boil until
brittle when tried in cold water. Add one-half teaspoonful soda and
remove from fire. Spread three cups black walnut meats thickly on well
buttered tin and pour candy over same. When cool knead into balls.


MOLASSES CANDY

Put into a saucepan one cupful of brown sugar, two cupfuls of New
Orleans molasses and a tablespoonful each of butter and vinegar. Mix
them well and boil until it will harden when dropped in water. Then stir
in a teaspoonful baking soda, which will whiten it, and turn it into a
greased tin to cool; when it can be handled, pull it until white and
firm. Draw it into sticks and cut into inch lengths.


MOLASSES KISSES

One level cup sugar; two cups molasses; two level teaspoonfuls corn
starch; one-eighth teaspoonful soda. Mix sugar and corn starch
thoroughly and beat in molasses. When well blended heat slowly, stirring
constantly. When mixture forms hard ball if dropped in cold water,
remove from fire, add soda and pour into buttered pan. When cool, pull
until straw colored, cut and wrap in waxed paper.


CREAM TAFFY

Two cups sugar; one cup water; two tablespoonfuls vinegar; one
teaspoonful cream tartar. Cook until brittle; pour into buttered pan.
Then cool enough to handle; pull until white.


PEANUT CANDY

Put into a saucepan three-fourths cup corn syrup, three-fourths cup
sugar, a large piece of butter, and one and one-half tablespoonfuls of
vinegar. Boil until a little dropped into cold water becomes brittle.
Then add one pound salted peanuts. Spread into buttered pan and cut into
squares or oblongs.


STUFFED DATES

Take some fondant, small pieces of walnuts, almonds, bits of date, a few
raisins, a small piece of citron; mix well; if not wet enough when
molded add a few drops of water and lemon juice. Take the seeds from the
dates and fill with this mixture. Roll in granulated sugar.


OLD-FASHIONED TAFFY

Put into a saucepan two and one-half cupfuls of sugar and one-half
cupful of water. Stir until it is dissolved. Then wash the sides of the
pan and let it boil without touching a few moments, and add a
tablespoonful butter and let boil until it will crack when tested in
cold water. Add a teaspoonful vanilla and turn in onto a tin to cool.
Mark it off into squares before it becomes cold.


PUFFED RICE CANDY

Helen Collins

One cup granulated sugar; one-fourth cup water; one-fourth cup molasses;
one teaspoonful butter; one drop oil of peppermint. Boil sugar, water,
molasses and butter until it forms a hard ball when dropped into cold
water. Remove from fire, add peppermint, stir and pour over one package
of puffed rice, stirring until rice is coated.


PEANUT CANDY

Fill a small square tin half an inch deep with shelled peanuts, leaving
the skins on. Boil some sugar until done and pour it over the nuts, just
covering them. Cut into squares before it becomes cold.


PEPPERMINTS

Two cups sugar; one-half cup water; one-half teaspoonful cream of
tartar; seven or eight drops of oil of peppermint. Boil until a drop of
syrup on tip of fork looks like a fine hair. Remove from fire, add cream
of tartar and peppermint, and stir until creamy. Drop on waxed paper.


AFTER DINNER MINTS

Two level cups sugar; one-fourth teaspoonful cream of tartar; one-half
cup boiling water; three drops peppermint. Boil sugar, water and cream
tartar until dissolved. Let boil without stirring until it forms soft
ball when dropped in cold water. Set aside to cool. When lukewarm add
peppermint and beat until creamy. Drop from spoon on wax paper or marble
slab. If preferred, use checkerberry or creme de menthe.


POP CORN BALLS

Twelve quarts all white grains pop corn, warm and pour over this in a
large dishpan the following syrup while hot: Half cup molasses or corn
syrup; half cup sugar; three tablespoonfuls water. Boil until it crisps
in cold water. Stir with a spoon all the candy thoroughly through the
corn. Butter fingers, then press with hands into balls.




WEIGHTS AND MEASURES


Ten eggs equal one pound.

One quart of flour equals one pound.

Two cupfuls of butter equal one pound.

One generous pint of liquid equals one pound.

Two cupfuls of granulated sugar equal one pound.

Two heaping cupfuls of powdered sugar equal one pound.

One pint finely chopped meat, packed solidly, equals one pound.

Four saltspoonfuls equal one teaspoonful.

Three teaspoonfuls equal one tablespoonful.

Sixteen tablespoonfuls equal one cupful.

Four tablespoonfuls salt equal one ounce.

One and one-half tablespoonfuls granulated sugar equal one ounce.

Two tablespoonfuls of flour equal one ounce.

A piece of butter the size of an egg equals about one and one-half
ounces.

One pint of loaf sugar equals ten ounces.

One pint of brown sugar equals twelve ounces.

One pint of granulated sugar equals sixteen ounces.

One pint of wheat flour equals nine ounces.

One pint of corn meal equals eleven ounces.

Use two teaspoonfuls of soda to one pint of sour milk.

Use one teaspoonful of soda to one cupful of molasses.

One-half teaspoonful cream of tartar with one teaspoonful baking soda
equals two teaspoonfuls baking powder.




TIME REQUIRED

For Cooking the Following Meats and Vegetables.


Beef, sirloin, rare, per pound, eight to ten minutes.

Beef, sirloin, well done, per pound, twelve to fifteen minutes.

Chickens, three or four pounds weight, one to one and one-half hours.

Duck, tame, from forty to sixty minutes.

Lamb, well done, per pound, fifteen minutes.

Pork, well done, per pound, thirty minutes.

Turkey, ten pounds, three hours.

Veal, well done, per pound, twenty minutes.

Potatoes, boiled, thirty minutes.

Potatoes, baked, forty-five minutes.

Sweet potatoes, boiled, forty-five minutes.

Sweet potatoes, baked, one hour.

Squash, boiled, twenty-five minutes.

Squash, baked, forty-five minutes.

Green peas, boiled, twenty to forty minutes.

String beans, one to two hours.

Green corn, from twenty to thirty minutes.

Asparagus, fifteen to thirty minutes.

Spinach, one to two hours.

Tomatoes, one hour.

Cabbage, forty-five minutes to two hours.

Cauliflower, one to two hours.

Dandelions, two to three hours.

Beet greens, one hour.

Onions, one to two hours.

Beets, one to five hours.

Turnips, forty-five minutes to one hour.

Parsnips, from one-half to one hour.




HOUSEHOLD HINTS


When peeling onions, if you will hold the onions under the running cold
water, there will be no discomfort experienced.

Put a thimble over the end of rods and you can easily run it through
your curtains, or an old glove finger will answer the purpose if thimble
is too large.

To mark a hem in linen, remove thread from the machine and run the goods
through the hemmer as though stitching; you will find a perfect hem
turned down.

For removing odor of onions from hands, use celery or powdered celery
seed.

A handful of salt rubbed around sink will help remove all grease and
keep it sweet and clean.

A tiny pinch of soda will sweeten cream slightly soured.

To remove bread or cake from pans, apply wet cloth to bottom of pan.

Tack a piece of asbestos on end of ironing board for iron stand.

Burn a piece of camphor gum to rid house of mosquitoes.

To break glass evenly, tie a string around the glass, saturated with
kerosene, then fill with cold water as high as the string; set fire to
the string, and glass will snap at point of string.

If a silver spoon is placed in a jelly glass the boiling jelly can be
poured in without the least danger of breaking the glass.

To cream butter and sugar easily when butter is hard, warm the sugar
slightly.

For angel, sunshine and all sponge cakes, add the cream of tartar to the
eggs when half beaten, and if soda is called for, add it to the flour.

Lime water and linseed oil is an excellent application for burns.

To caramelize sugar: Put in a smooth granite saucepan or omelet pan,
place over hot part of stove and stir constantly until melted and of the
color of maple syrup. Care must be taken to prevent sugar from adhering
to sides of pan or spoon.

To renovate food chopper and sharpen its knives, grind a piece of sand
soap through it.

Before using new tinware, if you will rub it well with lard and heat it
thoroughly in oven, it will not rust.

To remove paint from window pains, rub with baking soda.

To remove match scratches from painted woodwork, rub with slice of
lemon, then with whiting, and wash with soap and water.

In making pancakes, two tablespoons of snow stirred in quickly is equal
to one egg.

Two apples placed in your cake box will keep the cake moist.

If in cooking you have accidentally put too much salt in anything, a
small amount of brown sugar will counteract it.




[Illustration]

          _C. Henning_
          _Exclusive Furs_

          _220 Stewart Bldg._
          _108 N. State St._
          _Chicago._

       *       *       *       *       *


B. L. CHANDLER & CO.

Hairdressers and Wigmakers

_Importers and Manufacturers of Hair Goods_

          First Class Work
          Scalp Treatment
          Hairdressing
          Facial Massage
          Shampooing
          Manicuring

          =Tel. Wentworth 3663=                    =6314 Harvard Ave.=
                         (Directly Under "L" Station)

       *       *       *       *       *

Don't Worry ... _about the_ Flavor or Color. _Just before serving
Gravies. Stews. Soups. Etc. add a dash of_

=_Kitchen Bouquet_=

_You will find that it imparts a wonderfully rich brown color and
delicious flavor and appetizing relish that can be obtained in no other
way._

          WRITE FOR FREE SAMPLE    The Palisade Manufacturing Co.
                                        West Hoboken, N.J.

       *       *       *       *       *

ENGLEWOOD STATE BANK

63rd Street and Yale Avenue

=OUR AIM=

          To conduct a bank of the highest character in
          every respect.

          To take the greatest care in the protection of our
          depositors.

          To make the fullest possible response to all of
          the banking requirements of our customers.

          To extend never-failing welcome and courtesy to
          all--men, women and children--who for any purpose
          enter our bank.

          Our banking office is a clean, comfortable and
          pleasant place to enter and transact business.

          We have thousands of satisfied customers and we
          invite other thousands.

=OFFICERS=

          FRANK H. TINSLEY, President
          BRYAN G. TIGHE, Vice-President
          E. W. STANSBURY, Cashier
          E. E. HART, Assistant Cashier
          W. M. GOLDSBERRY, Assistant Cashier

       *       *       *       *       *

          For GOOD Things to
          EAT
          Trade at the
          Metropolitan Grocery Co.
          63rd and Harvard Ave.

Phone: Normal 6153

       *       *       *       *       *

          _THE WHITE FRONT_

          _Grocery and Market_

          _Now Located Permanently_
          =_Corner 63rd and Stewart Avenue_=

          _Where you will always find_
          _THE BEST IN GROCERIES AND MEATS_

          =_Telephone: Wentworth 582_=

       *       *       *       *       *

          =Our Place of Business=
          =Our Exclusive Styles=
          =Our Merchandising Methods=

          The service rendered by intelligent sales people,
          are the topic of conversation where women are
          gathered together.

Come and see our

          =Ready to Wear=
          =Dresses, Suits and Coats=

          =Gordon-Torrance Company=
          Third Floor, Tower Building
          Michigan Ave. and Madison Street

       *       *       *       *       *


USE

MORTON'S SALT

[Illustration: IT POURS]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

You will appreciate the additional savor Morton's Salt will add to your
favorite recipe.

          _Convenient_
          _Sanitary_
          _Economical_

          Morton Salt Company
          Chicago

       *       *       *       *       *

          Washers that Wash

          CENTRAL     _Judd Co_
          2692

          Vacuum Electric Washers
          Gas Heated

          HORTON IRONERS (Mangles)
          1326 Stevens Bdg. 17th State St.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Phones: Central 2690, 2692
          13th Floor, Stevens' Building

[Illustration]

The "Easy" is a Double-Vacuum Gas Heated Electric Washer and is rightly
named, for it is

          Easy to understand.
          Easy to operate.
          Easy to clean.
          Easy to move about.
          Easy on the clothes.
          You may "wash while you cook"

       *       *       *       *       *


_Society Stationery_

_of Every_

_Description_

BARNARD & MILLER

_Phone_

_Franklin_

562


_PRINTERS_

          Year Books
          Annual Reports
          Booklets
          _and_
          Announcements

_SERVICE and QUALITY_

_Our Specialty_

          172-174 NORTH LaSALLE STREET
          CHICAGO

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

          PHONE CALUMET 3565
          ADAMS' LAUNDRY
          2331-2333 Indiana Ave.

          Catering to the Better
          Trade

          Hand Work   Domestic Finish
          CHICAGO

       *       *       *       *       *


          =Barnard
          &
          Miller=

          =_Printers · Chicago_=






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STEVENSON MEMORIAL COOK BOOK ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

