








[Frontispiece: "He had a sudden flashing sense of being in a net that
was softly tightening."]




THE

STRANGE CASES OF

DR. STANCHON


BY

JOSEPHINE DASKAM BACON


AUTHOR OF

"THE INHERITANCE," "THE MEMOIRS OF A BABY,"

"THE MADNESS OF PHILIP," ETC.




NEW YORK AND LONDON

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

1913




COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY

JOSEPHINE DASKAM BACON

  Copyright, 1908, by Charles Scribner's Sons.
  Copyright, 1909, 1910, by Harper and Brothers.
  Copyright, 1911, 1913, by the Crowell Publishing Company.
  Copyright, 1911, by the Curtis Publishing Company.


Printed in the United States of America




TO

M. A. T.

WHO WATCHED MANY OF

THESE STORIES IN THE MAKING

               J. D. B.




CONTENTS


  THE KEY
  THE CHILDREN
  THE CRYSTAL
  THE GOSPEL
  THE GYPSY
  THE WARNING
  THE LEGACY
  THE MIRACLE
  THE UNBURIED
  THE ORACLES




THE KEY

The young doctor stamped vehemently up the marble steps, to warm his
feet, and once in the warm, flower-scented halls, let a little shiver
escape him.  The butler was new--he was always new, the doctor
thought--and actually didn't know him.

"Mrs. Allen is at bridge, sir, with a party: she asks to be excused,"
he began mechanically.

(_"That's good!" Stanchon felt tempted to say, "and I hope the girls
are out, too!"_)  As if in answer to this indiscretion, the new butler
droned on:

"Miss Alida is at her riding-lesson and Miss Suzanne is--is engaged----"

(_"Now, what particular infernal idiocy is Suzanne at, I wonder?"
Stanchon pondered, still smiling lightly at the butler and warming
himself at every breath._)

"Mr. Edmund is--I think he could be found, sir," the voice went on.

(_"I don't doubt it," Stanchon agreed mentally, "at the side board, no
doubt; a nice time of day for a lad of twenty to be hanging about the
house!"_)

But all he said was:

"I am the doctor.  I called to see Miss Mary."

"Oh!"  Even this new butler assumed a look of burdened intelligence; he
leaned toward the visitor, "Oh, yes, sir--Miss Mary.  I understood that
it wouldn't be possible for Miss Mary to see anybody, sir, but I
suppose, the doctor----"

"Certainly," said Stanchon curtly.  "Please send word to her nurse that
I am here."

"Yes, sir," but the man hesitated, even as he took the hat held out to
him, "yes, sir, but--but ... it isn't Dr. Jarvyse, is it, sir?"

A slow, dark red spread over Stanchon's forehead.

(_"So they've sent for Jarvyse--well, I might have known.  Nice,
tactful crowd, aren't they!"_)

He scowled slightly and set his jaw.

"No, I'm Dr. Stanchon," he said.  "Dr. Jarvyse is coming later, I
suppose.  Kindly let Miss Jessop know that I am here, will you?  I
haven't much time."

The man sped swiftly down the hall, after depositing his hatless charge
in a blue satin reception-room, and Stanchon stared, unseeing, at the
old Chinese panels and ivory figures that dotted its walls and tables.
The strong odour of freesias and paper-narcissus hung heavy in the
room; the roar of the great, dirty, cold city was utterly shut away and
a scented silence, costly and blue and drowsy, held everything.

Presently the nurse stood before him, smiling, and he saw that her
usual modish house dress was changed for the regulation white duck and
peaked cap of her profession.

"What's all this?" he asked, and she shrugged her broad shoulders.

"She told me to put it on to-day.  'You're really a nurse, you know,
Miss Jessop,' she said, 'and if I require one, it might as well be
known.'  Of course, I had it here, so I got it right out.  Poor Miss
Mary!"

"I see they've sent for Jarvyse?"

She nodded uncomfortably.

"Then it's all over but the shouting, I suppose?"  Again she shrugged.
The fatalism of her training spoke in that shrug, and the necessity for
taking everything as it comes--since everything is bound to come!

"H'm..." he meditated deeply, and all the youth went out of his face,
suddenly: he might have been forty-five or fifty.  At such times the
nurses and the other doctors always watched him eagerly; it was
supposed that it was then that those uncanny intuitions came to him,
that almost clairvoyant penetration of the diseased minds that were his
chosen study.

"How is she?" he asked abruptly.

"Oh, very much the same, doctor.  I can't see much difference."

"But you see a little?"

She moved uncomfortably.

"I don't say that ... it's nothing she says or does--but--sometimes I
think she's a little more--a little less..."

"A little less normal?"

She rested, relieved.

"Yes, just that."

Across the broad halls came a wave of sudden sound: movement of
drapery, faint clashes of metallic substances and glass, broken
feminine cries and light, breathy laughter.  A difference in the air
became noticeable, new perfumes floated in to the little blue room,
perfumes and the odour of expensive, warm fur.

--"You don't mean to say that you discard from a strong suit--always?"

"My dear, I had nothing but that queen--nothing!"

--"And that's why, as Elwell says...."

--"And so he absolutely refuses to play with women!"

Evidently a door had been opened, somewhere.  The next moment brought a
new whiff of cold, fresh air and the sound of a motor, then silence
again, sudden and profound, from the street-side.  A deep, almost
dramatic voice silenced the confused babble.

"My dear, I'm frightfully sorry, but I simply could _not_ manage to get
here before!  Why weren't any of you at the lecture?  _Moyen Age_
house-furniture and decoration--terribly interesting.  It's a shame to
miss a thing like that.  Is my table all made up?  Never mind, I can
cut in any time.  Yes, Mrs. Allen, I know, but really, you ought not to
neglect the intellectual side, entirely, you know!"

The door closed instantly, and again they stood alone in the heavy
silence.  It was as if a curtain had been lifted swiftly on some
bustling, high-lighted scene and dropped as swiftly.  Only a strong,
heady scent floated in on them, troubling, suggestive, complicated.

"What is that?" Stanchon asked, sniffing.

"Oh, one of those new Russian perfumes," the nurse said.  "I hate them."

"Russian?" he looked puzzled.

"Don't you know it's a Russian season?" she instructed him.  "Dancers
and music and hats--those high fur ones--and perfumes?  And all that
Byzantine embroidery?  You must have noticed!"

"Oh!"  He considered thoughtfully.  "I _had_ noticed the perfumes.  But
I didn't know why it was....  Well, am I to see Miss Mary?"

"I don't know why not, doctor," she said.  "She always likes to see
you.  And I suppose you'll consult with Dr. Jarvyse, won't you?"

"I suppose so," he agreed, "though, of course, nobody's asked me.  Is
she going out, this weather?"

"No: I wish she would.  She says it tires her too much.  It's a pity
she hates the South so."

They walked to the tiny tapestried lift, beyond the curve of the great
stairs, and she pressed the ivory button that sent them up.  At the
fourth floor the car settled lightly and they stepped out.

"She's not speaking much," the nurse warned him, "but of course she
may, for you.  Very gloomy, for two days, she's been."

She knocked lightly at a door and entered without waiting.  The room
was very light, with bowls of cut flowers everywhere and a pair of
green love-birds billing eternally on a brass standard: they chirped
softly now and then.  A miniature grand piano filled one corner, and
the light fell richly on the tooled leather of low book-cases, and
slipped into reflected pools of violet, green and blood-red on the
polished floor.  A great tiger skin stretched in front of a massive,
claw-legged davenport, and in the corner of it, away from the cheerful,
crackling fire, a black-haired woman sat, tense and silent, her eyes
fixed in a brooding stare.  She was all in delicate, cunningly mingled
tints of mauve, violet and lavender; near her neck tiny diamond points
winked; magnificent emeralds edged with diamonds lay like green stains
on her long white hands.  In her dark immobility, among the rich, clear
objects scattered so artfully about the sun-lighted chamber, she had a
marvellous effect of being the chief figure in some modern French
artist's impressionistic "interior."  She gave a distinct sense of
having been bathed and dried, scented and curled, dressed--and
abandoned there, between the love-birds and the polished piano: a large
gold frame about the room would have supplied the one note lacking.

"Well, Miss Mary, and how goes it?" Dr. Stanchon said, sitting beside
her and taking her hand easily, since she failed to notice his own
outstretched.

She lifted her eyes slightly to his, moved her lips, then sighed a
little and dropped her lids.  She might have been a young-looking woman
of forty, or a girl of twenty-five who had been long ill or distressed.

"Come, now, Miss Mary, I hear you've given me up--wasn't I high priced
enough for you?  Because I can always accommodate, you know, in that
direction," Stanchon went on persuasively.

Again she raised her eyes, swallowed, appeared to overcome an almost
unconquerable lethargy of spirit, and spoke.

"It's no use, doctor, all that.  I've given up.  It's all one to me,
now.  Don't bother about me."

Stanchon looked genuinely concerned.  He had worked hard over this
case, and it cut his pride to have the great specialist, with his
monotonous inflexible system, summoned against his express wish.  That
meant they were all tired, disgusted, sick of the whole business.  They
were determined to be rid of her.

"I wish you wouldn't look at it that way, Miss Mary," he said gently.
"I don't believe you need give up--if you'll only make an effort.  But
it's fatal to give 'way: I've always told you that."

"Yes.  You always told me that.  You were always open and fair," she
said wearily, "but now you see it is fatal, for I _have_ given 'way.
Please go," she added nervously.  "I feel more like crying.  Ask him to
go, Miss Jessop..."

Her voice grew peevish and uncontrolled, and he bowed slightly and left
her.  It was too bad, but there was nothing to do.  Once or twice in
his brilliant career he had felt that same heavy hopelessness,
realized, to his disgust, that the patient's dull misery was creeping
over him, too, and that he had no power to help.

"Oh, well, you can't win out all the time," he said to himself
philosophically, "and it isn't as if she wouldn't have every comfort.
Old Jarvyse looks after them well: I'll say that for him."

The new butler met him as the lift reached the drawing-room floor.

"Mr. Edmund would like to see you a moment, sir," he murmured.
"He's--he's in the dining-room, doctor."

Stanchon turned abruptly and plunged into the great, dim leather-hung
apartment.  He always felt as if he were entering into some vast cave
under the sea, when he crossed the threshold of this room, and the
peculiar odour of the leather always caught at his breath and choked
him for a moment.  Edmund looked sulkier and more futile than usual,
even, and the cigarette that dropped from his trimmed and polished hand
had a positively insolent angle.

"Oh!  How do!" he said discontentedly.  "Been upstairs, I hear?"

"Yes," Stanchon answered briefly.

"Well, ... how about it?"

"I'm sorry to say your aunt is a little worse to-day; it may be,
probably is, nothing but a passing phase----"

"Ah, go on!" Edmund burst out.  "Phase, nothing!  She's as dippy as
they make 'em, Stanchon, and I'm through with it!"

The older man looked his disgust, but Edmund scowled and went on.

"After day before yesterday afternoon, I told Suzanne I'd come to the
end of my rope, and I meant it.  I suppose you heard about it?"

"No."

"Oh, Miss Jessop knows.  Upsetting a whole luncheon, and one the girls
had worked over, too, I can tell you!  Why, they had three reporters on
their knees to hear about that luncheon!"

"Really?" Stanchon inquired politely.

"Yes.  But Alida wouldn't let mother say a word.  And that was all
right, too.  And then what does Aunt Mary do but say she's coming?  And
mother weakened and said we'd have to let her, because either she is
all right or she isn't, and according to you, we're not to admit she
isn't--yet.  So she comes, and what does she do but insult two of the
biggest swells there, right to their face!  And when Suzanne tried to
carry it off, she just turns stubborn and never opens her mouth again.
Queered the whole thing.  Broke the women all up.  Suzanne says, never
again!  And I'm with her.  I had Jarvyse called in and he's going to
make his final decision today.  Of course, if he wants to consult,
we'll be glad----"

"Dr. Jarvyse and I will settle all that, thanks," Stanchon interrupted
coldly.  "I regret that your sisters should have been annoyed, but as I
explained to your mother, inconveniences of this sort would be bound to
occur, and the only question was----"

"The only question is," Edmund blustered, "are we to be queered in New
York for good by a woman who ought to have been shut up long ago!  It's
up to me, now, as the man of the house, and I say, no."

He dabbed his cigarette viciously into a wet ring on the silver tray
beside him and filled a tiny glass from a decanter; his hand shook.

Stanchon's mounting wrath subsided.  The boy became pathetic to him;
behind his dapper morning clothes, his intricate studs and fobs and
rings, his reedy self-confidence, the physician saw the faint, grisly
shadow of a sickly middle-age, a warped and wasted maturity.

"I'm sorry for you all," he said kindly.  "Don't think I don't
appreciate the strain ... your mother has tried her best, I'm sure.
And--and go slow on those cigarettes, Allen, why don't you?  They won't
help that cough, you know.  And you told me you'd cut out the Scotch."

"Oh, that's all right," Edmund assured him.  "I was seasoned in the
cradle, doc!  Remember the old man's cigars?"

Stanchon put on his gloves.

"Your father was a very strong man," he said quietly, "and a hard
worker.  And I've already reminded you that he didn't inhale.  And for
more years than you've lived, Allen, he worked out of doors.  I don't
want to nag at you, but just give it a thought now and then.  And let
me know if I can do anything for you, ever.  My regards to your
sisters."

As he paused at the curb, a short man in heavy motoring furs stumbled
out of a luxurious landaulet and would have gone down on the
treacherous pavement without Stanchon's quick arm.

"All right, doctor, all right," he smiled, as he braced himself for the
little man's weight.  "Glad I was here.  I've just left Mary--she's
getting a little unmanageable, I hear."

"Yes, yes," the little man panted, "she'll do better out of the family.
Yes, yes.  They often do, you know.  Position's perfectly anomalous
here, you know--constant friction."

"I see," said Stanchon.  "Let me walk up to the door with you--I've
practiced on the steps, once today.  You make it ..."

"Oh, clear paranoia," Jarvyse finished the sentence promptly.  "They go
right along, you know.  Perfectly typical.  Good days--yes.  Of course.
Everybody encouraged.  Come to a ladies' luncheon--fat in the fire
directly.  No keeping servants, you know.  All that sort of thing.
Ever show you my card-catalogue of women between thirty-eight and
thirty-nine?  No?  Ask me some day."

The younger man pressed the electric button and turned the bronze knob
of the outer door, wrought and decorated like some great public tomb.

"Thanks, I'd be interested," he said.

"You knew the brother, didn't you?" Jarvyse went on, breathing easier
in the warmth of the vestibule.  "Nothing out of the way there?"

"Absolutely not.  He had the constitution of a bull.  But I fear he's
not handed it on to his son."

"Ugh, no!  Nasty little cub.  Those families don't last.  Daughters
always stronger.  I give him fifteen ... eighteen years," the alienist
said placidly.

The inner door opened and Stanchon turned to go.

"Come up and see the patient," Jarvyse suggested, over his shoulder,
one glove already off.  "Pleased to have you, and so would she, of
course.  You'll find her much happier."

      *      *      *      *      *

But Miss Mary was not happier.  Freed of the contemptuous _brusquerie_
of Edmund, the thinly-veiled dislike of the girls, the
conscience-stricken attempts of her sister-in-law, she had felt for a
time the relief of a strain abandoned, the comfort of a definite
position.  They had come to see her, too, and their timid overtures of
interest, their obvious surprise at the ease with which this great
change had been effected, their frank amazement at the luxury and
silken routine in which they found her, had almost established
relations long since fallen out of use.  But the novelty had faded, the
visits grew fewer and shorter, the very telephone messages languished;
and as she sat brooding alone, in the few unoccupied half-hours that
the omniscient System left her, a slow, sure conviction dropped like an
acid on the clouded surface of her mind: she was alone.  She was no
longer a part of life as it was ordinarily lived.  She and the others
who shared that rich, tended seclusion were apart from the usages and
responsibilities of the World that was counterfeited there.  They were
unreal.  Through all the exercise and repose, the baths and
manipulations, the music and the silences, the courtesies and the
deprecations, the flowers and the birds that brought an artificial
summer within the thick walls, one idea clanged like a bell through her
weary mind: _This is not real_.

To Dr. Stanchon, who came in the intervals allowed by his work, she
seemed sadly changed.  It was not that her face looked heavier and more
fretfully lined; not that her voice grew more monotonous; not that she
seemed sunk in the selfish stupor that her type of suffering invariably
produces.  He had seen all this in others and seen it change for a
better state.  No; in Miss Mary the settled pessimism of a deep
conviction had an almost uncanny power of communicating itself to those
about her.

"She's in bad, that one," one of the gardeners said to him, on a windy
March day when he had hunted for her over half-a-dozen guarded acres,
and found her sitting in one of her heavy silences under a sunny ledge
of rock.

"She's quiet and easy, but she's one of the worst of 'em, in my
opinion."

And when she turned to him a moment later and said quietly: "Tell me,
once for all, Dr. Stanchon, do you consider me insane?" his voice
expressed all the simple sincerity of his eyes.

"Miss Mary, I tell you the truth--I don't know."

"But you know they'll never let me out?"

He braced himself.  "How can they, Miss Mary, when you won't
promise----"

"Why should I promise anything, if I'm not insane?  Would you promise
never to state your opinion in your own house?"

He shrugged his shoulders helplessly.

"You see!" he said gently.

Beyond them the gardener struggled with a refractory horse that refused
to draw his load of brush and dead leaves.  She stared at the group
dully: six months ago she would have flinched at the great clambering
hoofs and the man's danger.

"And even if I did give up and promise everything, do you believe I'd
get out, doctor?"

"I see no reason----"

"You don't need to lie to me," she interrupted.  "When I signed that
paper, they fooled me: it was for good.  It said six months--but it was
for good."

He felt a great sympathy for her.  It was hard, very hard.  And yet,
what they had been through with her!

"If only you hadn't refused to travel," he began.

"But I agreed to--I agreed to, last month," she cried, "even though I'm
never well travelling, I agreed to--and what happened?  Dr. Jarvyse
said it wouldn't be best for me!  And you did nothing..."

"How could I, Miss Mary?" he urged.  "You know the only reason I see
you so often is that I acquiesce and don't interfere.  The moment I
thought it would do any good----"

"You mean you're not sure, yourself!" she said keenly.

He sighed.

"You know I'm your friend," he said simply.

Her whole face changed.  An almost disconcerting brightness flashed
over it.  Through all the heaviness and fatigue and despair that had
yellowed her skin, dulled her eyes, and taken, it seemed, the very
sheen from her black hair, her lost girlhood flared a moment.  With the
inconstant emotion of a child she smiled at him.

"I know you are," she murmured confidingly, "and I'll tell you
something, because you are."

"What is it, Miss Mary?" he said, but he sighed as he said it.

"Do you see how I'm dressed?" she half whispered.  He looked,
uncomprehending, at the long light ulster she wore.

"Underneath, I'm in black," she said softly, "a whole suit.  I have a
little bag packed right under this rock, and I have ninety dollars in
my bag, here."  She tapped her waist, where a small shopping bag
dangled.  "And I have an umbrella.  I always sit near this gate."

"Why do you do such things, dear Miss Mary?" he said sadly.  "It does
you no good--please try to believe me!"

"I never did, until I had the dream," she answered calmly.  "This is
the third night I've had it.  I dreamed I was near some gate, and I
looked down, and right before me on the path I saw a key--a great,
brown key!  So I started to pick it up, and then I realised that I
wasn't prepared, that I had no money, and that I'd just be caught and
brought back.  Then I woke.  But I dreamed it over again the next
night, so I packed the bag and got it out here under this steamer-rug,
and asked for some money to buy presents when that embroidery woman
came from Lakewood.  And I got it, of course, and bought some.  She
said she was coming again.  So I got more.  Last night I dreamed it
again, and it looked like this gate, in the dream.  That's three times.
Suzanne has those dreams, you know--she's like me, Suzanne--and they
always happen.  So perhaps mine will.  I tell you, because you're my
friend.  And you would never have put me here."

Stanchon bit his lip.  A sudden disgust of everything seized him.

"No, I wouldn't have put you here--once," he said slowly, then rose
abruptly.

"Hi, there, hold him! hold him, you fool!" he shouted.  "Sit on his
head!"

The gardener's horse, beyond all control, now, was rolling furiously,
neighing and snapping.  The man clung to the reins, keeping his
distance, but as the animal gained his feet with a lurch, his finger
slipped and he, too, rolled over and over down the little slope to the
gravelled path.  Stanchon was after the horse before the attendant had
picked himself up and was calling him angrily.

"Don't be alarmed, miss," the man panted.  "The doctor and I can settle
him!" and staggering to his feet made off to the rescue.  As he ran,
something clinked and rattled about his boots, and a bunch of keys lay
quiet on the gravel.

Miss Mary rose instantly, walked to them and put her foot over them,
but the man was several yards away and Stanchon and the horse were
struggling towards the wagon.  Miss Mary stooped down and lifted the
keys; all had metal tags and the one in her hand read, _East Gate, by
shrubbery_.  She stepped to the ledge, drew out a fair sized black
hand-bag, tucked her umbrella under her arm and looked about her.  The
nearest gate, set in dense shrubbery, lay in a direct line with the
ledge, and as she slipped behind it the two men and the horse were
wiped out of her vision.  With her usual quiet, long step she reached
the gate, fitted the key, turned it and opened the gate.  She closed it
behind her, considered a moment, then tossed the keys back among the
thick, glossy rhododendrons.

"Just as I dreamed," she muttered, "but where is the carriage?"

She stood on the edge of a road she had never seen, a quarter of a mile
from the great wrought-iron entrance that had closed behind her half a
year ago, and looked vaguely about her, at the mercy of Fate.  And
Fate, that quaint old lady who holds you and me and Miss Mary in the
hollow of her hand, smiled and gave a tiny pat and a push to the shiny
little electric run-about of Miss Winifred Jarvyse, a handsome young
Diana, who had never seen the inside of the great walled estate next
her father's private grounds, so that she waved her hand cordially,
stopped out of pure good feeling for the absent-minded stranger in the
beautiful coat, and asked if she could drop her at the station!

"Why, yes, thank you," said Miss Mary, still vaguely.

"It's going to rain and I've no cover on," said Winifred.  "It's a pity
about your coat."

"I can turn it," said Miss Mary, and standing up for a moment she
slipped the sleeves of the ulster, shook herself slightly and sat down
a totally different woman.  So that when (such was the perfection of
the System) a quick call to the ticket office set the agent searching
twenty minutes later for a tall woman in a light tan coat, alone,
without luggage, he replied very truly that no such person had entered
his station.  Only a friend of Miss Jarvyse had come to the 2:15, a
lady in a dark plaid ulster with bag and umbrella, in Miss Jarvyse's
car.

"I hope you found your friends--er--doing well?" said Miss Jarvyse
delicately.

"Thank you, they were very well," said Miss Mary gravely.  And she took
the 2:15 for New York.

Nothing further than the immediate moment was in her mind.  To her
thought, long confused and fleeting, the dreamlike character of this
sudden change seemed natural and simple.  She had no plan of campaign,
no route of escape, no future.  Her mind, relaxed from the quick
decision that had cleared its mists in the moment of action, began to
dull and settle and fall into its old rut of mechanical despair, when
suddenly the voices of two women in the seat behind her grew louder and
rose above the jar of the train.

"And so she decided to get it over while he was in the hospital.  She
thought the dye would have to wear off gradually, but there's a place
on West Twenty-eighth Street--near Sixth Avenue, I think--where a
French woman guarantees to remove any dye, perfectly harmlessly, in two
hours.  So she had it done, and he was delighted.  My dear, she was
fifty, and the grey hair really was more becoming to her.  Everybody
thinks so.  But nobody knew her--I never saw such a change, at first.
If you know anybody who wants it done, just send them there.  Some
French name."

And just as Miss Mary was drifting off to that dull world of grievances
in which she dwelt habitually, a new idea, as strong and definite as
that which took her through the gate caught and held her, and she wrote
in a little leather book in her bag, "28th St. west, near Sixth."  Some
primitive instinct of caution directed her to a street car in
preference to a hansom or taxi-cab, and she found the French woman's
small, musty establishment with an ease that surprised her.  Her coat,
obviously "imported," the elegance of her bag and umbrella, the air of
custom with which she submitted to others' ministrations, brought her
quick service, and in less than the guaranteed two hours she left
Madame, whose very considerable fee she paid with gloved hands, thus,
through sheer inadvertence, concealing the one trace of her
identity--her massive and beautiful rings.  For no one of Dr. Jarvyse's
detectives could be expected to look at an iron-grey woman in black,
when searching for a black-haired woman in blue plaid.  And none of
them, not the great Jarvyse, nor her maid even, knew that Miss Mary had
dyed her hair for ten years!

As she stood by a little optician's, on one of the great avenues,
later, gazing fascinated at her strange reflection in a large glass
there, terrified at her daring, doubtful if her freedom could endure,
two errand-girls, peering in with her in the imitative New York
fashion, held her with an idle sentence.

"Did you know Miss Mahoney with those glasses?  I nearly fell over when
I seen her, honest!  She was awful cross--the boss himself cut her
dead!"

"Say, what do you think of that now?"

"An' they're only window-glass, too!  She told one o' the fitters.  She
can stare at the ladies better she says, when they try to beat her
down."

They moved on, but Miss Mary entered the shop.

"Can I get a pair of eye-glasses made of window-glass?" she asked him
simply.

"Certainly, madam," and one would have supposed that leaders of fashion
generally were wearing these articles, so swiftly and unsmilingly did
he produce them and adjust them to her strong, dark eyes.

"Wonderful how they change a person, though," he admitted.  "You
wouldn't believe it."

The price seemed very small to Miss Mary, whose last purchase in that
line had been a tortoise-shell lorgnette for her sister-in-law.

She had eaten very lightly at luncheon, for food was tasteless to her,
of late, and she had been so followed, tended and directed in all the
operations of life that she actually failed to recognise her sensations
as those of hunger.  But her unwonted exertions, the strain on her
flagging brain, the stimulus of this unprecedented day, all combined to
flush her cheek feverishly and she felt strangely weak.  For the first
time it flashed over her cleared faculties that she must go somewhere
and at once.  New York was too dangerous for her; she must leave it.

A very panic of terror seized her and she half expected to hear Dr.
Jarvyse's soft voice at her shoulder.  She started from the shop like
one pursued, and hurried foolishly on and on in an ecstasy of flight.
The streets were now dark, and Miss Mary, who had begun life in New
York with her own private hansom, felt singularly out of place in the
jostling crowd.

She stopped at the foot of an elevated railway station, and more
because she was pushed up the steps by the hurrying mass of humanity
that scurried like ants up and down, than for any other reason, climbed
wearily up.  As she sat pressed against a dirty man with a bundle, a
sudden inconsequent thought struck her, and she removed her gloves in a
leisurely way, took off her rings, dropped them into a roll of
chamois-skin in the large bag, added to them a diamond cross and
pendant from the lace at her neck and put on her gloves again.  The
dirty man stared at her.

Then she lifted her eyes to a large sign above the car-windows and the
sign read:

_Avoid the biting March winds.  You will find quiet, an even
temperature and perfect seclusion among the pines at restful Lakewood.
Take the ferry at 23d St._

So that when the guard announced Twenty-third Street, Miss Mary got up,
went down the stairs, tumbled with surprising facility upon a
cross-town car and made for the ferry.  And the dirty man went down the
stairs with her.

Fate put Miss Mary on just the right boat for a Lakewood Special, and
hunger cleared her mind to the extent of throwing her card-case over
the rail on the way across.  Her umbrella and ulster she had left
behind on the elevated train, not being accustomed to carry such
things, and they were found by a thrifty old lady in the
second-hand-clothing line, who annexed them silently and forever.  So
that when she arrived at the Lakewood Station and fell among the
cabbies and hotel touts she was the perfect type of the no-longer-young
spinster, unaccompanied, awkward and light of luggage, presumably light
of purse.  The cabbies left her therefore, unchallenged, to a lad as
shy and awkward as herself, who mumbled something about quiet,
reasonable rooms, and received her yielded bag with a surprise as great
as her own.

Miss Mary was by now almost light-headed from hunger and excitement.
At the slightest pressure she would have told her story to the first
interested stranger, and thus ended her adventure, most surely.  But
Fate led her to the door of one too full of trouble to heed Miss
Mary's.  To Mrs. Meeker she was a lodger certainly, a boarder
possibly--in any event, a source of income.  So long had she been
waiting for Miss Mary that she fairly snatched her bag from her and
pushed her up the faded, decent stairs into the faded, decent bedroom
with the cracked china toilet-set.  Any one, _any one_ would have been
welcome to Mrs. Meeker, and Miss Mary's quiet elegance and handsome
travelling-bag were far beyond her hopes.

"A real lady," she whispered to her nephew.  "Ask if she'd like a
little something on a tray, Georgie.  I could poach that egg, and
there's tea.  I won't say anything about a week in advance.  She looks
tired to death."

Miss Mary's famishing senses cried out loudly at sight of the meagre
tray, and as the egg and tea passed her lips a strange, eager sensation
was hers, a delicious, gratified climax of emotion: Miss Mary was glad
she was alive!  She savoured each morsel of the pitiful meal; she could
have wished it doubled; the cheap tea filled her nostrils with a balmy
odour; she was hungry.

And hardly had the food satisfied her when her eyelids fell, her head
dropped forward.  Approaching oblivion drugged her ere it reached her
and she dozed in her chair.  But some instinct forced her to her feet
as the landlady appeared, and fumbling in her bag for her card-case and
pocketbook, she held herself awake.

"I'd like to pay," she murmured, "and then I'll--I'll go to bed.  Will
you send some one, please?"

She meant some one to undress her, but Mrs. Meeker did not know this.

"It's--it's twelve a week, with board," she said, her eyes lighting at
the yellow bills in her lodger's hand, "and--oh, dear, yes, two weeks
is ample, Miss--Miss----"

"My cards are lost," said Miss Mary fretfully.  "I can't think where I
left them.  The man or somebody will know.  Ask----"

She started to say, "Ask the doctor," for her memory was swallowed,
nearly, by sleepiness, and a curious woman would have had her secret in
a twinkle.  But Mrs. Meeker was too thankful to be curious.

"Certainly, Miss--Miss----"

"Miss Mary," said the other, yawning, and the landlady repeated, "Yes,
Miss Merry.  Can't I help you, you being so tired and all?"

"And she stuck out her feet for her shoes, just like a baby," she
confided to Georgie, later.  "She went off before I got her undressed,
really; her folks ought to 've sent some one with her, worn out as she
was!  You go 'round the first thing in the morning and tell the agent
I've got a fine boarder, and more expected.  I feel real encouraged."

And all that night and all the next day Miss Mary slept dreamlessly,
for the first time in years without a drug to help her.

It did not seem unusual that Mrs. Meeker should have unpacked her few
things and laid them in the drawer of the battered bureau: some one
always unpacked her things.  And when, strangely weak and relaxed, she
lay for three days more and ate dutifully from the tray, dozing between
whiles, nobody questioned her.

On the fourth day she woke into a grey, despondent world again.  The
old angry, purposeless tears beset her and she felt that terrible
dumbness settling over her.  She had long ceased to fight it, now; she
only wondered what Mrs. Meeker would do with her.  But she never knew
what Mrs. Meeker would have done, for when the tired, drudging little
woman brought her breakfast tray she held it in dingily gloved hands;
she was dressed for a journey.

"My brother's down with a stroke," she said abruptly, "Georgie's
father, and wants to see me.  I'll have to nurse him, prob'ly, and I
s'pose his sending means he's friendly again.  It may just be I won't
need to come back, and I'm glad, of course, for I'm worth my keep to
him any day, and he'd ought to have took Georgie long ago.  I'll soon
know, and I'll write you, and what I wanted to ask was, would you be
willin' to wait till I find out?  It might be only temp'ry, and then
I'd be sorry to lose a boarder.  Will you stay till you hear, anyway?"

Miss Mary nodded dumbly.  She could not speak and she was ashamed that
she could not; _she had never been ashamed before_.

"That's good," said Mrs. Meeker quickly, "and the lady next door'll
give you meals.  I'll settle with her--Mrs. Palmer.  Her board's good,
and I'll only charge you five for the room.  That makes a month you've
paid for.  D'you see?"

Again, Miss Mary nodded.

"Then I'll get right off.  It's Philadelphia I'm going to, and I'll
write you as soon's I know.  But I count on you to stay."

"Yes, I'll stay."

Miss Mary forced the words harshly and it seemed that they would tear
her lips, so hard they came.  But they came, and they sufficed for Mrs.
Meeker, who went out of her solitary lodger's life as quickly as she
had come into it, for Miss Mary never saw her again.

On that day she dressed herself slowly, and with a certain clumsiness,
took her little shopping bag and bought, with economy and taste, a very
fair outfit of simple clothing for the seventy dollars she had gained
on the strength of the peddler of embroideries; she passed the
peddler's very shop on her way.  Underwear, a black dress, rubber
overshoes and a plain umbrella--nothing was forgotten.

"When my money is all gone, I will begin to sell the jewelry," she
thought, for she knew that she could live comfortably for the rest of
her life on less than the value of the emeralds and diamonds.  She did
her shopping in a public victoria and brought the parcels home in it:
it was her only extravagance that day.

As she got out at the door of the little faded house and paid the
driver, it occurred to her that she had left it unlocked during her
absence, and in her remorse over this and the bustle of going to the
strange dining-room for luncheon, whither she was summoned by a
slatternly waitress, she forgot completely that on this day she had
sworn to stay alone in her room, to conceal from strangers her malady
of melancholy dumbness.

"But I'm _not_ that way--I'm _not_!" she whispered to herself in
amazement, "why, I talked to the clerks all the morning!" And so she
had, and none of the dozen at Mrs. Palmer's table that noon remarked
anything further than that Miss Merry seemed a quiet, shy sort of
person with a tendency to vagueness and little idea of passing the
butter dish.

She sorted and arranged her purchases all the afternoon; the little
roll of chamois-skin she kept carefully in the wrist-bag which never
left her arm.

At dinner Mrs. Palmer took her aside and with the touch on her arm Miss
Mary's blood turned to water.  "She knows about me!" she thought and
nearly fell to the ground from weakness.

"I'm sorry I startled you," said Mrs. Palmer, "Mrs. Meeker said you
weren't any too strong, I remember.  I only wanted to say that I've
sent three more roomers over to your house--she'll be only too glad, I
know.  You don't mind, Miss Merry?"

"No.  I don't mind," she answered, and her heart gave a great pump of
relief.

"It'll be more comfortable at night, too," said Mrs. Palmer.  "That
makes the four rooms full, now, and I'll see that your room gets done
up every day with the others.  I presume we'll hear from her soon."

The next day she approached Miss Mary with an open letter in her hand.

"Mrs. Meeker's to live with her brother, now, he's paralysed," she
announced.  "She's sent me a check for the rent and you've paid
twenty-four dollars, I see.  I'm going over to pack up her stuff and
she'll sell me the rest reasonable enough.  I'm going to take her
house, too.  There's a new roomer comes to-day--I think I'll put him in
her old room.  Or if you," with a shrewd glance at Miss Mary, "wanted
to economise at all.  I'd rent you hers for four dollars and give this
gentleman yours.  And I'm usually paid in advance, so if you could make
it convenient----"

"I'll attend to it," said Miss Mary, "but I'll keep the room, I think.
I don't like change."

She went up to her room, and Dr. Jarvyse would have been amazed at the
easy quickness of her gait.  She had it all planned, now--the diamonds
should go first, and then she would buy some fruit and a plant for her
room.  She liked her room very much; she did as she pleased in it and
no one spied on her or suggested ways of passing the time.  Was it some
faint memory of her room as a girl, before her brother made his great
fortune, that found this dull, half-worn chamber so home-like and
soothing?  Every afternoon she dusted it, as the chambermaid suggested
most ladies expected to, and once she had turned the mattress and made
the bed, when the girl felt ill.  It gave her a sense of competence and
executive ability.

Now she went to the little chamois skin roll, unpicked the tight knots
carefully, opened it--and dropped on her knees.  The roll was empty.
On the compartment where the diamond cross had fitted, stretched a
soiled, streaked thumb mark; mechanically she sniffed it--it smelled of
tar.  The dirty fellow with the bundle who had followed her down the
elevated steps had smelled of tar, too, had Miss Mary remembered it.

Well, it was over.  She never had a moment's doubt.  She had no means,
she could not starve, nobody would keep her, and she must go back to
Dr. Jarvyse.  She groaned in anguish as she looked about her dear, safe
room and thought of the horrible luxury of that guarded prison, the
birds and the flowers and cruel kindness of those strangers who knew
every corner of her bureau, every word of her letters.  Still, it must
be.  The Allens would never take her back, and after this, she would be
watched as never before.  It must be.

She met Mrs. Palmer on the threshold of what she had begun to call her
home.  Mrs. Palmer looked worried and spoke sharply to the untidy
cleaning-woman behind her.

"Now, I do hope I can trust you," she said, "for I can't stay here to
watch.  Three new gentlemen for meals, and I have no table for them!
And this whole house to be cleaned!  And not a girl to be hired in the
town!  I wish I had another room--I could rent it this afternoon."

"You can have mine," said Miss Mary quietly.  "I have no money and I
must go."

Mrs. Palmer looked shrewdly at her.

"What made you think you had, before?" she said.

"I had some valuable jewelry--I expected to sell it.  It must have been
stolen before I got here.  I have nothing here to pay with, but I can
send it back to you from New York."

"Folks rich?" asked Mrs. Palmer.

Miss Mary nodded carelessly.  That people should be rich was nothing to
her, and the practiced landlady saw this in a twinkling: no
protestations could have proved so much.

"But you don't get on well, I s'pose," she suggested.

"No.  We don't get on well," Miss Mary repeated dully.

"I guess it's often so," said the other.  Her placid acceptance of
these facts was very comforting to Miss Mary.  She did not realise how
different she herself was from the vague, scared woman of a week ago;
nor how her quiet, well-dressed taciturnity impressed Mrs. Palmer.

"You find this agrees with you here, don't you?" the landlady asked,
tapping her teeth with a key, thoughtfully.

"Oh, yes, I like it here.  I would have liked to stay."

"Well, Miss Merry, how'd you like to stay and help me?" said the
landlady.  "To tell the truth, I've bit off more than I can chew, as
they say.  I never had such a run of boarders, and it's all the girl
can do to look after the other house.  What keeps my people is the
cooking, you see, and that I do mostly myself.  I'm not fit to talk to
the ladies and gentlemen, with my hair all stringy, and smelling of
cooking.  I know it well enough.  I had some thought of asking Mrs.
Meeker to go in with me and look after this house and take the head of
the table, and keep the books.  But you could do it, if you wanted, and
you'd look more--more--not that Mrs. Meeker wasn't a lady, of course,
but--well, some people look the part better than others."

Miss Mary's brain whirled.  The head of the table!  The books!  It was
impossible.  Why, the woman didn't realise that she was talking to
a--a--Patient, then!  (They were never called anything but Patients at
Dr. Jarvyse's.)

"I--I'm afraid I haven't the experience," she began tremulously.
"I--sometimes my head--I can't always talk to people----"

"Oh, you talk enough," Mrs. Palmer interrupted, kindly.  "That's just
what it is: some talk too much.  Mr. Swartout (that's the literary
gentleman in brown--the one with the grey moustache) said you were so
quiet and dignified.  You know you sat at the end, today, for
breakfast, and he said to me it would be pleasant if you kept that
place.  That's what put it into my head, really.  And I guess you've
had experience enough.  Miss Jenny, that went with you through the
store when you bought those clothes (I know her, you see) said she'd
never seen seventy dollars used with more judgment nor made to go
further.  I noticed what she said."  She nodded shrewdly, as one who
knew the world.

"Well, I don't want to urge, but will you or won't you?  I'd give board
and lodging and, say, twenty-five a month, till I could do better.  The
Palmer House has just got to the point where there'll have to be a
change, or it'll get second-class."

"Very well, I will try," said Miss Mary huskily, and in a moment she
was alone, for Mrs. Palmer was half across the side-yard.

"Just boss that woman, then, and see if she can get the house clean by
evening," she called over her shoulder.  "I leave her to you, Miss
Merry, and it's a weight off me, I can tell you!"

If Miss Mary had paused to think, she would have collapsed into tears
and sent for the doctor, but she could not stop, for the cleaning-woman
addressed her briskly.

"I suppose everything better come right out and get a good beating?"
she said, shouldering her mop; and Miss Mary controlled her quivering
lips, pressed her hands to her head, which must not, _could not_ fail
her now, and agreed.

Late in the afternoon Mrs. Palmer dashed over, her hair flying, her
dress untidy.

"Well, how'd you get along?" she began, but paused in the doorway of
the fresh, aired house, taking in, at one eagle glance, the white
curtains behind shining panes, the polished woodwork, the re-arranged
furniture.

"I guess that cleaning-woman met her match," she announced dryly.  "You
must be nearly dead, Miss Merry!  And all ready for dinner, too!  I've
had a clean table cloth put on, and what do you think that Delia said?
'I'll just rub out me apron an' press it off,' she said, 'for if
_she's_ to head the table, I can see she'll be particular!'"

Nothing could have kept Miss Mary up but the fact that her own room was
yet uncleaned.  The lust of soap and water had entered into her, and
she ate and answered and passed the butter dish like one in a dream,
looking forward with the last of her strength to sleeping in an
immaculate chamber.  And at half-past one in the morning, she did so.
The warm bath in the painted tin tub was a luxury she had never
imagined; as the sheets received her tired body, aching in every joint,
she tasted for the one moment before sleep blotted out consciousness
the ecstasy of earned rest after steady, worried toil, and it was very
sweet.  Privilege of the clumsiest hod-carrier, it was utterly new to
Miss Mary, and she in her innocence, thought it due to delight at the
prospect of board and lodging and, say, twenty-five dollars a month!

She did not know that she had hummed, unconsciously, during the
afternoon, a song of her early girlhood; nor that the blood, long
stagnant, that had raced through every vein as she stooped and beat and
lifted and cleansed, was driving the crawling vapours from that
mysterious grey tissue in her skull that had so long plagued and
confused her.

Nor did she know that the flowers on the table, the fresh chintz covers
for the worn lodging-house furniture, so recklessly provided by her,
the quick neatness of an apotheosised Delia and the gentle, reserved
welcome of the new housekeeper herself, were lifting the commonplace
boarding-house to a higher and still higher level.  She only knew that
she worked harder and harder and never wept nor shuddered nor looked
out of black apathy into a cruel tantalizing world, whose inhabitants
had evil thoughts of her and wished and worked her ill.

"It's just as I always say," Mrs. Palmer observed, one afternoon in
May, as, resting in frank gingham and enveloping apron, she permitted
herself the luxury of a cup of tea in Miss Mary's own room.  "What's
bred in the bones comes out in the blood.  I had a gift for cooking
since I was ten, and there's little I'll thank a French chef to tell
me, Miss Merry.  But I can't impress the boarders.  I never could.  And
I can't get the work out of servant-girls without screaming at
'em--never could.  And look at you!  Every man of 'em--that we
wanted--coming up two dollars a week, like gentlemen.  And all for the
privilege of having this house bachelor.  I thought they would.  And
every man Jack of 'em booked for November first again.  I tell you
what, Miss Merry, we'll paint both houses this fall, and I wouldn't
wonder, what with this spring being so backward and the season so long,
if we could paint and paper inside, right through, would you?"

"No," said the housekeeper, rocking gently, luxuriating in the
half-hour rest after a hard day on her feet with one servant gone.
"No, I wouldn't.  That would be nice.  I have something saved.  You can
take that."

"Look at you!" cried Mrs. Palmer.  "Saving on thirty a month!  We'll
pretty near go halves, Miss Merry, from next November.  What's bred in
the bone, as I said--you were born for the business!"

And the sister of Hiram Z. Allen, late Captain of Finance, blushed with
pleasure.

      *      *      *      *      *

It was in March of the next year, as she sat at her neat desk in the
little room they had made into an office when they created a sun
parlour out of the side verandah, that Delia, responsible head of three
maids now, ushered a gentleman in to her.

"The doctor, Miss Merry, that came yesterday about the rooms for his
patient in the cottage," said Delia softly.  "I can't seem to get the
name, ma'am."

"Very well," said Miss Mary and rose, plumper by eight or ten pounds
than she had been, dignified in black broadcloth, only enough of
reserve and weighing of her words about her to mark her off slightly
from the most of her sex and business.

"Miss Merry?  I am Dr. Stanchon, I have been recommended most
strongly----"

She swayed before him, then sank into her chair, grasping the arms.  He
looked courteously alarmed, stared, stared again, then snatched her
hand.

"It's not--it can't be--why, Miss Mary!"  She gasped and trembled.  The
year dropped off from her like a loosened cloak.

"Oh, Dr. Stanchon, don't, _don't_ tell him!" she moaned.

"Him? him?" he repeated.  "Why, Miss Mary, were you here all the time?
And your hair--you were ill?"

"It used to be coloured--you never knew," she murmured.  "I mean
Dr.--Dr. Jarvyse."

"But you are the one Swartout described to me--the one he's in love
with?  Miss Mary, it was wrong of you--I looked for months.  It was
cruel.  And when they found the emeralds and the cross----"

"Did they find them?"

"Why, certainly--the stones were all listed, you know.  Didn't you read
it in the papers?"

"I never see them," she said quietly.  She had gathered herself
together for what must be the struggle of her life.

"Will you tell him?  I can't go back.  I'd die first!" she cried.

"But why should you go back?" he asked in amazement.  "Surely you'll
let them know?  They gave up hope long ago.  You needn't go back to
them, if you're happy here, of course, and indeed, I wouldn't, Miss
Mary----"

"I don't mean go back _there_," she interrupted gently, "I mean to
the--to--Dr.----"

He stared.

"You know, of course, what's the matter," she said quietly, "but nobody
here does.  They think I'm--I'm like anybody else.  I don't mind any
more, since I've been so busy.  I haven't had time to worry over it.
But still, I know it.--And so I told Mr. Swartout it would be
impossible.  It wouldn't be right."

Stanchon seized both of her hands.

"For heaven's sake, Miss Mary, what do you think's the matter with
you?" he cried, his voice breaking in spite of himself.

"Isn't it so?" she queried wistfully.  "Do you really mean it?--But who
cured me, then?"

"If you are the wonderful person I've been hearing about all this time
from Swartout," Stanchon said, trying to speak lightly, his grey eyes
firm on her anxious brown ones, "I should say that working for your
living did it, Miss Mary!"

And it may be he was right: as a diagnostician he has been widely
commended.




THE CHILDREN

It all came over me, as you might say, when I began to tell the new
housemaid about the work.  Not that I hadn't known before, of course,
what a queer sort of life was led in that house; it was hard enough the
first months, goodness knows.  But then, a body can get used to
anything.  And there was no harm in it--I'll swear that to my dying
day!  Although a lie's a lie, any way you put it, and if all I've
told--but I'll let you judge for yourself.

As I say, it was when I began to break Margaret in, that it all came
over me, and I looked about me, in a way of speaking, for how I should
put it to her.  She'd been house-parlor-maid in a big establishment in
the country and knew what was expected of her well enough, and I saw
from the first she'd fit in nicely with us; a steady, quiet girl, like
the best of the Scotch, looking to save her wages, and get to be
housekeeper herself, some day, perhaps.

But when Hodges brought the tray with the porringers on it and the
silver mug, for me to see, and said, "I suppose this young lady'll take
these up, Miss Umbleby?" and when Margaret looked surprised and said,
"I didn't know there were children in the family--am I supposed to wait
on them, too?"--then, as I say, it all came over me, and for the first
time in five years I really saw where I stood, like.

I stared at Hodges and then at the girl, and the tray nearly went down
amongst us.

"Do you mean to say you haven't told her, Sarah?" says Hodges (and that
was the first time that ever he called me by my given name).

"She's told me nothing," Margaret answers rather short, "and if it's
invalid children or feeble-minded, I take it most unkind, Miss Umbleby,
for I've never cared for that sort of thing, and could have had my
twenty-five dollars a month this long time, if I'd wanted to go out as
nurse."

"Take the tray up this time, yourself, Mr. Hodges, please," I said,
"and I'll have a little talk with Margaret," and I sat down and
smoothed my black silk skirt (I always wore black silk of an afternoon)
nervously enough, I'll be bound.

The five years rolled away like yesterday--as they do now--as they do
now----

I saw myself, in my mind's eye, new to the place, and inclined to feel
strange, as I always did when I made a change, though I was twenty-five
and no chicken, but rather more settled than most, having had my
troubles early and got over them.  I'd just left my place--chambermaid
and seamstress--in a big city house, and though it was September, I was
looking out for the country, for I was mortal tired of the noise and
late hours and excitement that I saw ahead of me.  It was parties and
balls every night and me sitting up to undress the young ladies, for
they kept no maid, like so many rich Americans, and yet some one must
do for them.  There was no housekeeper either, and the mistress was not
very strong and we had to use our own responsibility more than I
liked--for I wasn't paid for that, do you see, and that's what they
forget in this country.

"I think I've got you suited at last, Sarah," the head of the office
had said to me, "a nice, quiet place in the country, good pay and light
work, but everything as it should be, you understand.  Four in help
besides the housekeeper and only one in family.  Church within a mile
and every other Sunday for yourself."

That was just what I wanted, and I packed my box thankfully and left
New York for good, I hoped, and I got my wish, for I've never seen the
inside of it since.

A middle-aged coachman in good, quiet country livery, met me at the
little station, and though he was a still-mouthed fellow and rather
reserved, I made out quite a little idea of the place on the way.  The
mistress, Mrs. Childress, was a young widow, deep in her mourning, so
there was no company.  The housekeeper was her old nurse, who had
brought her up.  John, who drove me, was coachman-gardener, and the
cook was his wife--both Catholics.  Everything went on very quiet and
regular and it was hoped that the new upstairs maid wouldn't be one for
excitement and gaiety.  The inside man had been valet to Mr. Childress
and was much trusted and liked by the family.  I could see that old
John was a bit jealous in that direction.

We drove in through a black iron gate with cut stone posts and old
black iron lanterns on top, and the moment we were inside the gates I
began to take a fancy to the place.  It wasn't kept up like the places
at home, but it was neat enough to show that things were taken thought
for, and the beds of asters and dahlias and marigolds as we got near
the house seemed so home-like and bright to me, I could have cried for
comfort.  Childerstone was the name of the place; it was carved on a
big boulder by the side of the entrance, and just as we drove up to the
door John stopped to pick some dahlias for the house (being only me in
the wagon) and I took my first good look at my home for twenty years
afterward.

There was something about it that went to my heart.  It was built of
grey cut stone in good-sized blocks, square, with two windows each side
the hall door.  To some it might have seemed cold-looking, but not to
me, for one side was all over ivy, and the thickness of the walls and
the deep sills looked solid and comfortable after those nasty
brown-stone things all glued to each other in the city.  It looked old
and respectable and settled, like, and the sun, just at going down,
struck the windows like fire and the clean panes shone.  There was that
yellow light over everything and that stillness, with now and then a
leaf or so dropping quietly down, that makes the fall of the year so
pleasant, to my mind.

The house stood in beeches and the trunks of them were grey like the
house and the leaves all light lemon-coloured, like the sky, and that's
the way I always think of Childerstone--grey and yellow and clean and
still.  Just a few rooks (you call them crows here), went over the
house, and except for their cry as they flew, there wasn't a sound
about the place.  I can see how others might have found it sad, but it
never seemed so to me.

John set me down at the servants' entrance and there, before ever I'd
got properly into the hall, the strangeness began.  The cook in her
check apron was kneeling on the floor in front of the big French range
with the tears streaming down her face, working over her rosary beads
and gabbling to drive you crazy.  Over her stood a youngish but
severe-appearing man in a white linen coat like a ship's steward,
trying to get her up.

"Come, Katey," he was saying, "come, woman, up with you and
help--she'll do no harm, the poor soul!  Look after her, now, and I'll
send for the doctor and see to madam--it's only a fit, most like!"

Then he saw me and ran forward to give a hand to my box.

"You're the chambermaid, Miss, I'm sure," he said.  "I'm sorry to say
you'll find us a bit upset.  The housekeeper's down with a stroke of
some sort and the madam's none too strong herself.  Are you much of a
hand to look after the sick?"

"I'm not so clumsy as some," I said.  "Let me see her," and so we left
the cook to her prayers and he carried my box to my room.

I got into a print dress and apron and went to the housekeeper's room.
She was an elderly person and it looked to me as if she was in her last
sickness.  She didn't know any one and so I was as good as another, and
I had her tidy and comfortable in bed by the time the doctor came.  He
said she would need watching through the night and left some medicine,
but I could see he had little hope for her.  I made up a bed in the
room and all that night she chattered and muttered and took me for
different ones, according as her fever went and came.  Towards morning
she got quiet, and as I thought, sensible again.

"Are you a nurse?" she says to me.

"Yes, Mrs. Shipman, be still and rest," I told her, to soothe her.

"I'm glad the children are sent away," she went on, after a bit.
"'Twould break their mother's heart if they got the fever.  Are the
toys packed?"

"Yes, yes," I answered, "all packed and sent."

"Be sure there's enough frocks for Master Robertson," she begged me.
"He's so hard on them and his aunties are so particular.  And my baby
must have her woolly rabbit at night or her darling heart will be just
broken!"

"The rabbit is packed," I said, "and I saw to the frocks myself."

There's but one way with the sick when they're like that, and that's to
humour them, you see.  So she slept and I got a little nap for myself.
I was glad the children were away by next morning, for she was worse,
the cook lost her head, and managed to break the range so that the
water-back leaked and John and Hodges were mopping and mending all day.
The madam herself had a bad turn and the doctor (a New York doctor for
madam, you may be sure!) brought out a handsome, dark woman, the
trained hospital nurse, with him.  Madam wasn't allowed to know how bad
her old nurse was.

So it turned out that I'd been a week in the house without ever seeing
my mistress.  The nurse and I would meet on the stairs and chat a
little, evenings, and once I took a turn in the grounds with her.  She
was a sensible sort of girl, not a bit above herself, as our English
nursing-sisters are, sometimes, but very businesslike, as they say, and
a good, brisk way with her.  She saw a lot more than she spoke of, Miss
Jessop did, I'll warrant!

"It's a good thing the children are sent away," I said.  "They always
add to the bother when there's sickness."

"Why, are there children?" says she.  "Oh, yes, a boy and a girl," I
answered, "poor old Mrs. Shipman is forever talking about them.  She
thinks she's their nurse, it seems, as she was their mother's."

"I wish they were here, then," says she, "for I don't like the looks of
my patient at all.  She doesn't speak seven words a day, and there's
really little or nothing the matter with her, that I can see.  She's
nervous and she's low and she wants cheering, that's all.  I wonder the
doctor doesn't see it."

That night, after both patients were settled, she came up to my room
and took a glance at the old lady, who was going fast.

"Mrs. Childress will soon have to know about this," she said and then,
suddenly, "Are you sure about the children, Sarah?"

"Sure about them?" I repeated after her.  "In what way, Miss Jessop?"

"That there are any," says she.

"Why, of course," I answered, "Mrs. Shipman talks of nothing else.
They're with their aunty, in New Jersey, somewhere.  It's a good thing
there are some, for from what she says when she's rambling, the house
and all the property would go out of the family otherwise.  It's been
five generations in the Childress family, but the nearest now is a
cousin who married a Jew, and the family hate her for it.  But Master
Robertson makes it all safe, Mrs. Shipman says."

"That's a queer thing," said she.  "I took in a dear little picture of
the boy and girl this afternoon, to cheer her up a bit, and told her to
try to think they were the real ones, who'd soon be with her, for that
matter, and so happy to see their dear mamma, and she went white as a
sheet and fainted in my arms.  Of course, I didn't refer to it again.
She's quiet now, holding the picture, but I feared they were dead and
you hadn't known."

"Oh, no," said I.  "I'm sure not," and then I remembered that I'd been
told there was but one in family.  However, that's often said when
there's a nurse to take care of small children (though it's not quite
fair, perhaps), and I was certain of the children, anyway, for there
were toys all about Mrs. Shipman's room and some seed-cookies and
"animal-crackers," as they call those odd little biscuits, in a tin on
her mantel.

However, we were soon to learn something that made me, at least, all
the more curious.  The doctor came that morning and told Miss Jessop
that her services would be no longer required, after he had seen her
patient.

"Mrs. Childress is perfectly recovered," he said, "and she has
unfortunately conceived a grudge against you, my dear girl.  I need
you, anyway, in town.  Poor old Shipman can't last the night now, and I
want all that business disposed of very quietly.  I have decided not to
tell Mrs. Childress until it is all over and the funeral done with.
She is in a very morbid state, and as I knew her husband well I have
taken this step on my own responsibility.  Hodges seems perfectly able
to run things, and to tell the truth, it would do your mistress far
more good to attend to that herself," he said, turning to me.

"It would be a good thing for the poor woman to have some one about
her, Dr. Stanchon," the nurse put in quietly.  "If there were children
in the house, now----"

"Children!" he cried, pulling himself up and staring at her.  "Did you
speak to her about them?  Then that accounts for it!  I should have
warned you."

"Then they did die?" she asked him.  "That's what I thought."

"I'm afraid not," he said, shaking his head with a queer sort of sad
little smile.  "I forgot you were strange here.  Why, Miss Jessop,
didn't you know that----"

"Excuse me, sir, but there's no sign of your mare about--did you tie
her?" says Hodges, coming in in a great hurry, and the doctor swore and
ran off and I never heard the end of the sentence.

Well, I'm running on too long with these little odds and ends, as I'm
sure Margaret felt when I started telling her all about it.  The truth
is I dreaded then, just as I dread now, to get at the real story and
look our conduct straight in the face.  But I'll get on more quickly
now.

Old Mrs. Shipman died very quiet in her sleep and madam wasn't told,
which I didn't half like.  The doctor was called out of those parts to
attend on his father, very suddenly, and Hodges managed the funeral and
all.  It was plain to see he was a very trusty, silent fellow, devoted
to the family.  I took as much off him as I could, and I was dusting
the drawing-room the day of the funeral, when I happened to pick up a
photograph in a silver frame of the same little fellow in the picture
the nurse had shown me--a dear little boy in short kilts.

"That's Master Robertson, isn't it?" I said, very carelessly, not
looking at him--I will own I was curious.  He gave a start.

"Yes--yes, certainly, that's Master Robertson--if you choose to put it
that way," he said, and I saw him put his hand up to his eyes and his
mouth twitched and he left the room.

I didn't question him again, naturally; he was a hard man to cross and
very haughty, was William Hodges, and no one in the house but respected
him.

That day I saw Mrs. Childress for the first time.  She was a sweet,
pretty thing, about my own age, but younger looking, fair, with grey
eyes.  She was in heavy crêpe and her face all fallen and saddened
like, with grief and hopelessness--I felt for her from the moment I saw
her.  And all the more that I'd made up my mind what her trouble was: I
thought that the children were idiots, maybe, or feeble-minded, anyhow,
and so the property would go to the Jew in the end and that his family
were hating her for it!  Folly, of course, but women will have fancies,
and that seemed to fit in with all I'd heard.

She'd been told that Shipman was away with some light, infectious
fever, and she took it very mildly, and said there was no need to get
any one in her place, at present.

"Hodges will attend to everything," she said, in her pretty, tired way;
"not that there's much to do--for one poor woman."

"Things may mend, ma'am, and you'll feel more like having some friends
about you, most likely, later on," I said, to cheer her a bit.

She shook her head sadly.

"No, no, Sarah--if I can't have my own about me, I'll have no others,"
she said, and I thought I saw what she meant and said no more.

That night the doctor and the legal gentleman that looked after the
family affairs were with us and my mistress kept them for dinner.  I
helped Hodges with the serving and was in the butler's pantry after
Mrs. Childress had left them with their coffee and cigars, and as
Hodges had left the door ajar I couldn't help catching a bit of the
talk now and then.

"The worst of it is this trouble about the children," said the doctor.
"She will grieve herself into a decline, I'm afraid."

"I suppose there's no hope?" said the other gentleman.

"No hope?" the doctor burst out.  "Why, man, Robertson's been dead six
months!"

"To be sure--I'd forgotten it was so long.  Well, well, it's too bad,
too bad," and Hodges came back and closed the door.

I must say I was thoroughly put out with the doctor.  Why should he
have told me a lie?  And it was mostly from that that I deliberately
disobeyed him that night, for I knew from the way he had spoken to the
nurse that he didn't wish the children mentioned.  But I couldn't help
it, for when I came to her room to see if I could help her, she was
sitting in her black bedroom gown with her long hair in two braids,
crying over the children's picture.  "Hush, hush, ma'am," I said,
kneeling by her and soothing her head, "if they were here, you may be
sure they wouldn't wish it."

"Who?  Who?" she answers me, quite wild, but not angry at all.  I saw
this and spoke it out boldly, for it was plain that she liked me.

"Your children, ma'am," I said, softly but very firm, "and you should
control yourself and be cheerful and act as if they _were_ here--as if
it had pleased God to let you have them and not _Himself_!"

Such a look as she gave me!  But soon she seemed to melt, like, and put
out her arm over my shoulders.

"What a beautiful way to put it, Sarah!" says she, in a dreamy kind of
way.  "Do you really think God has them--somewhere?"

"Why, of course, ma'am," said I, shocked in good earnest.  "Who else?"

"Then you think I might love them, just as if--just as if----" here she
began to sob.

"Why, Mrs. Childress," I said, "where is your belief?  That's all
that's left to mothers.  I know, for I've lost two, and their father to
blame for it, which you need never say," I told her.

She patted my shoulder very kindly.  "But oh, Sarah, if only they
_were_ here!" she cried, "really, really here!"

"I know, I know," I said, "it's very hard.  But try to think it,
ma'am--it helped me for weeks.  Think they're in the room next you,
here, and you'll sleep better for it."

"Shall I?" she whispered, gripping my hand hard.  "I believe I
would--how well you understand me, Sarah!  And will you help me to
believe it?"

I saw she was feverish and I knew what it means to get one good
refreshing night without crying, and so I said, "Of course I will,
ma'am; see, I'll open the door into the next room and you can fancy
them in their cribs, and I'll sleep in there as if it was to look after
them, like."

Well, she was naught but a child herself, the poor dear, and she let me
get her into bed like a lamb and put her cheek into her hand and went
off like a baby.  It almost scared me, to see how easy she was to
manage, if one did but get hold of the right way.  She looked brighter
in the morning and as Hodges had told me that Shipman used to do for
her, I went in and dressed her--not that I was ever a lady's maid, mind
you, but I've always been one to turn my hand easily to anything I had
a mind to, and I was growing very fond of my poor lady--and then, I was
a little proud, I'll own, of being able to do more for her than her own
medical man, who couldn't trust a sensible woman with the truth!

She clung to me all the morning, and after my work was done, I
persuaded her to come out for the air.  The doctor had ordered it long
ago, but she was obstinate, and would scarcely go at all.  That day,
however, she took a good stroll with me and it brought a bit of colour
into her cheeks.  Just as we turned toward the house she sat down on a
big rock to rest herself, and I saw her lip quiver and her eyes begin
to fill.  I followed her look and there was a child's swing, hung from
two ropes to a low bough.  It must have been rotted with the rains, for
it looked very old and the board seat was cracked and worn.  All
around--it hung in a sort of little glade--were small piles of stones
and bits of oddments that only children get together, like the little
magpies they are.

There's no use to expect any one but a mother or one who's had the
constant care of little ones to understand the tears that come to your
eyes at a sight like that.  What they leave behind is worse than what
they take with them; their curls and their fat legs and the kisses they
gave you are all shut into the grave, but what they used to play with
stays there and mourns them with you.

I saw a wild look come into her eyes, and I determined to quiet her at
any cost.

"There, there, ma'am," I said quickly, "'tis only their playthings.
Supposing they were there, now, and enjoying them!  You go in and take
your nap, as the doctor ordered, and leave me behind..."

She saw what I meant in a twinkling and the colour jumped into her face
again.  She turned and hurried in and just as she went out of sight she
looked over her shoulder, timid like, and waved her hand--only a bit of
a wave, but I saw it.

Under a big stone in front of me, for that part of the grounds was left
wild, like a little grove, I saw a rusty tin biscuit box, and as I
opened it, curiously, to pass the time, I found it full of little tin
platters and cups.  Hardly thinking what I did, I arranged them as if
laid out for tea, on a flat stone, and left them there.  When I went to
awaken her for lunch, I started, for some more of those platters were
on the table by her bed and a white woolly rabbit and a picture book!
She blushed, but I took no notice, and after her luncheon I spied her
going quickly back to the little grove.

"Madam's taking a turn for the better, surely," Hodges said to me that
afternoon.  "She's eating like a Christian now.  What have you done to
her, Miss Umbleby?"  (I went as "Miss" for it's much easier to get a
place so.)

"Mr. Hodges," I said, facing him squarely, "the doctors don't know
everything.  You know as well as I that it's out of nature not to
mention children, where they're missed every hour of the day and every
day of the month.  It's easing the heart that's wanted--not smothering
it."

"What d'you mean?" he says, staring at me.

"I mean toys and such like," I answered him, very firm, "and talk of
them that's not here to use them, and even pretending that they are, if
that will bring peace of mind, Mr. Hodges."

He rubbed his clean shaven chin with his hand.

"Well, well!" he said at last.  "Well, well, well!  You're a good girl,
Miss Umbleby, and a kind one, that's certain.  I never thought o' such
a thing.  Maybe it's all right, though.  But who could understand a
woman, anyway?"

"That's not much to understand," said I, shortly, and left him staring
at me.

She came in late in the afternoon with the rabbit under her arm and
there was Mr. Hodges in the drawing-room laying out the tea--we always
had everything done as if the master was there, and guests, for the
matter of that; she insisted on it.  He knew his place as well as any
man, but his eye fell on the rabbit and he looked very queer and nearly
dropped a cup.  She saw it and began to tremble and go white, and it
came over me then that now or never was the time to clinch matters or
she'd nearly die from shame and I couldn't soothe her any more.

"Perhaps Hodges had better go out and bring in the rest of the toys,
ma'am," I says, very careless, not looking at her.  "It's coming on for
rain.  And he can take an umbrella ... shall he?"

She stiffened up and gave a sort of nod to him.

"Yes, Hodges, go," she said, half in a whisper, and he bit his lip, and
swallowed hard and said, "Very good, madam," and went.

Well, after that, you can see how it would be, can't you?  One thing
led to another, and one time when she was not well for a few days and
rather low, I actually got the two little cribs down from the garret
and ran up some white draperies for them.  She'd hardly let me leave
her, and indeed there was not so much work that I couldn't manage very
well.  She gave all her orders through me and I was well pleased to do
for her and let Mr. Hodges manage things, which he did better than poor
old Shipman, I'll be bound.  By the time we told her about Shipman's
death, she took it very easy--indeed, I think, she'd have minded
nothing by that time, she had grown so calm and almost healthy.

Mr. Hodges would never catch my eye and I never talked private any more
with him, but that was the only sign he didn't approve, and he never
spoke for about a month, but joined in with me by little and little and
never said a word but to shrug his shoulders when I ordered up a tray
with porringers on it for the nursery (she had a bad cold and got
restless and grieving).  I left her in the nursery with the tray and
went out to him, for I saw he wished to speak to me at last.

"Dr. Stanchon would think well of this, if he was here.  Is that your
idea, Miss Umbleby?" he said to me, very dry.  (The doctor had never
come back, but gone to be head of a big asylum out in the west.)

"I'm sure I don't know, Mr. Hodges," I answered.  "I think any doctor
couldn't but be glad to see her gaining every day, and when she feels
up to it and guests begin to come again, she'll get willing to see them
and forget the loss of the poor little things."

"The loss of _what_?" says he, frowning at me.

"Why, the children," I answered.

"What children?"

"Master Robertson, of course, and Miss Winifred," I said, quite vexed
with his obstinacy.  (I had asked her once if the baby was named after
her and she nodded and went away quickly.)

"See here, my girl," says he, "there's no good keeping this up for my
benefit.  _I'm_ not going into a decline, you know.  I know as well as
you do that she couldn't lose what she never had!"

"Never had!" I gasped.  "She never had any children?"

"Of course not," he said, steadying me, for my knees got weak all of a
sudden.  "That's what's made all the trouble--that's what's so
unfortunate!  D'you mean to say you didn't know?"

I sank right down on the stairs.  "But the pictures!" I burst out.

"If you mean that picture of Mr. Robertson Childress when he was a
little lad and the other one of him and his sister that died when a
baby, and chose to fancy they was _hers_," says he, pointing upstairs,
"it's no fault of mine, Miss Umbleby."

And no more it was.  What with poor old Shipman's ramblings and the
doctor's words that I had twisted into what they never meant, I had got
myself into a fine pickle.

"But what shall I do, Mr. Hodges?" I said, stupid-like, with the
surprise and the shock of it.  "It'd kill her, if I stopped now."

"That's for you to decide," said he, in his reserved, cold way, "I have
my silver to do."

Well, I did decide.  I lay awake all night at it, and maybe I did
wrong, but I hadn't the heart to see the red go out of her cheek and
the little shy smile off her pretty mouth.  It hurt no one, and the
mischief was done, anyway--there'd be no heir to Childerstone, now.
For five generations it had been the same--a son and a daughter to
every pair, and the old place about as dear to each son, as I made out,
as ever his wife or child could be.  General Washington had stopped the
night there, and some great French general that helped the Americans
had come there for making plans to attack the British, and Colonel
Robertson Childress that then was had helped him.  They had plenty of
English kin and some in the Southern States, but no friends near them,
on account of my mistress's husband having to live in Switzerland for
his health and his father dying young (as he did) so that his mother
couldn't bear the old place.  But as soon as Mr. Robertson was told he
was cured and could live where he liked, he made for Childerstone and
brought his bride there--a stranger from an American family in
Switzerland--and lived but three months.  If anybody was ever alone, it
was that poor lady, I'm sure.  There was no big house like theirs
anywhere about--no county families, as you might say--and those that
had called from the village she wouldn't see, in her mourning.  And yet
out of that house she would not go, because he had loved it so; it was
pitiful.

There's no good argle-bargling over it, as my mother used to say, I'd
do the same again!  For I began it with the best of motives, and as
innocent as a babe, myself, of the real truth, you see.

I can shut my eyes, now, and it all comes back to me as it was in the
old garden, of autumn afternoons--I always think of Childerstone in the
autumn, somehow.  There was an old box hedge there, trimmed into balls
and squares, and beds laid out in patterns, with asters and marigolds
and those little rusty chrysanthemums that stand the early frosts so
well.  A wind-break of great evergreens all along two sides kept it
warm and close, and from the south and west the sun streamed in onto
the stone dial that the Childress of General Washington's time had had
brought over from home.  It was set for Surrey, Hodges told me once,
and no manner of use, consequently, but very settled and home-like to
see, if you understand me.  In the middle was an old stone basin, all
mottled and chipped, and the water ran out from a lion's mouth in some
kind of brown metal, and trickled down its mane and jaws and splashed
away.  We cleaned it out, she and I, one day, _pretending we had help_,
and Hodges went to town and got us some gold fish for it.  They looked
very handsome there.  Old John kept the turf clipped and clean and
routed out some rustic seats for us--all grey they were and tottery,
but he strengthened them, and I smartened them up with yellow chintz
cushions I found in the garret--and I myself brought out two tiny
arm-chairs, painted wood, from the loft in the coach house.  We'd sit
there all the afternoon in September, talking a little, me mending and
my mistress embroidering on some little frocks I cut out for her.  We
talked about the children, of course.  They got to be as real to me as
to her, almost.  Of course at first it was all what they _would_ have
been (for she was no fool, Mrs. Childress, though you may be thinking
so) but by little and little it got to be what they _were_.  It
couldn't be helped.

Hodges would bring her tea out there and she'd eat heartily, for she
never was much of a one for a late dinner, me sewing all the time, for
I always knew my place, though I believe in her kind heart she'd have
been willing for me to eat with her, bless her!  Then she'd look at me
so wistful-like, and say, "I'll leave you now, Sarah--eat your tea and
don't keep out too late.  Good-bye--good-bye..."  Ah, dear me!

I'd sit and think, with the leaves dropping quiet and yellow around me
and the water dripping from the lion's mouth and sometimes I'd close my
eyes and--I'll swear I could hear them playing quietly beyond me!  They
were never noisy children.  I'll say now something I never mentioned,
even to her, and I'd say it if my life hung by it.  More than once I've
left the metal tea-set shut in the biscuit box and found it spread out
of mornings.  My mistress slept in the room next me with the door open,
and am I to think that William Hodges, or Katey, crippled with
rheumatism, or that lazy old John came down and set them out?  I've
taken a hasty run down to that garden (we called it the children's
garden, after a while) because she took an idea, and seen the swing
just dying down, and not a breath stirring.  That's the plain gospel of
it.  And I've lain in my bed, just off the two cribs, and held my
breath at what I felt and heard.  She knew it, too.  But never heard so
much as I, and often cried for it.  I never knew why that should be,
nor Hodges, either.

There was one rainy day I went up in the garret and pulled the old
rocking-horse out and dusted it and put it out in the middle and set
the doors open and went away.  It was directly over our heads as we sat
sewing, and--ah, well, it's many years ago now, a many and a many, and
it's no good raking over too much what's past and gone, I know.  And as
Hodges said, afterward, the rain on the roof was loud and steady....

I don't know why I should have thought of the rocking-horse, and she
not that was always thinking and planning for them.  Hodges said it was
because I had had children.  But I could never have afforded them any
such toy as that.  Still, perhaps he was right.  It was odd his saying
that (he knew the facts about me, of course, by that time) being such a
dry man, with no fancy about him, you might say, and disliking the
whole subject, as he always did, but so it was.  Men will often come
out with something like that, and quite astonish one.

He never made a hint of objection when I was made housekeeper, and that
was like him, too, though I was, to say so, put over him.  But he knew
my respect for him, black silk afternoons or no black silk, and how we
all leaned on him, really.

And then Margaret came, as I said, and it was all to tell, and a fine
mess I made of it and William Hodges that settled it, after all.

For Margaret wanted to pack her box directly and get off, and said
she'd never heard of such doings and had no liking for people that
weren't right.

"Not right?" says Hodges, "not right?  Don't you make any such mistake,
my girl.  Madam attends to all her law business and is at church
regularly, and if she's not for much company--why, all the easier for
us.  Her cheques are as sensible as any one's, I don't care who the man
is, and a lady has a right to her fancies.  I've lived with very high
families at home, and if I'm suited, you may depend upon it the place
is a good one.  Go or stop, as you like, but don't set up above your
elders, young woman."

So she thought it over and the end of it all was that she was with us
till the last.  And gave me many a black hour, too, poor child, meaning
no harm, but she admired Hodges, it was plain, and being younger than I
and far handsomer in a dark, Scotch way, it went hard with me, for he
made no sign, and I was proud and wouldn't have showed my feelings for
my life twice over.

Well, it went on three years more.  I made my little frocks longer and
the gold fish grew bigger and we set out new marigolds every year, that
was all.  It was like some quiet dream, when I've gone back and seemed
a girl again in the green lanes at home, with mother clear-starching
and the rector's daughter hearing my catechism and Master Lawrence sent
off to school for bringing me his first partridge.  Those dreams seem
long and short at one and the same time, and I wake years older, and
yet it has not been years that passed but only minutes.  So it was at
Childerstone.  The years went by like the hours went in the children's
garden, all hedged in, like, and quiet and leaving no mark.  We all
seemed the same to each other and one day was like another, full,
somehow, and busy and happy, too, in a quiet, gentle way.

When old Katey lay dying she spoke of these days for the first time to
me.  She'd sent up the porringers and set out glasses of milk and made
cookies in heart shapes with her mouth tight shut for all that time,
and we never knowing if she sensed it rightly or not.  But on her
deathbed she told me that she felt the Blessed Mary (as she called her)
had given those days to my poor mistress to make up to her for all
she'd lost and all she'd never had, and that she'd confessed her part
in it and been cleared, long ago.  I never loved any time better,
looking back, nor Hodges either.  One season the Christmas greens would
be up, and then before we knew it the ice would be out of the brooks
and there would be crocuses and daffodils for Mr. Childress's grave.

She and I took all the care of it and the key to the iron gate of it
lay out on her low work table, and one or other of us always passing
through, but one afternoon in summer when I went with a basket of June
roses, she being not quite up to it that day, there on the flat stone I
saw with my own eyes a little crumpled bunch of daisies--all nipped off
short, such as children pick, and crushed and wilted in their hot
little hands!  And on no other tomb but his.  But I was used to such as
that, by then....

Margaret was handy with her needle, and I remember well the day she
made the linen garden hat with a knot of rose-colour under the brim.

"You don't think this will be too old, do you, ma'am?" she said when
she showed it to my mistress, and the dear lady was that pleased!

"Not a bit, Margaret," she said and I carried it off to Miss Winifred's
closet.  Many's the time I missed it after that, and knew too much to
hunt.  It was hunting that spoiled all, for we tried it....

And yet we didn't half believe.  Heaven help us, we knew, but we didn't
believe: St. Thomas was nothing to us!

Margaret was with us three years when the new family came.  Hodges told
us that Hudson River property was looking up and land was worth more
every year.  Anyway, in one year two families built big houses within a
mile of us and we went to call, of course, as in duty bound.  John
grumbled at getting out the good harness and having the carriage
re-lined, but my mistress knew what was right, and he had no choice.  I
dressed her very carefully, and we watched her off from the door, a
thought too pale in her black, but sweet as a flower, and every inch
full of breeding, as Hodges said.

I never knew what took place at that visit, but she came back with a
bright red circle in each cheek and her head very high, and spent all
the evening in the nursery.  Alone, of course, for I heard little quick
sounds on the piano in the drawing-room, and the fairy books were gone
from the children's book-shelves, and Margaret found them in front of
the fire and brought them to me....

It was only three days before the new family called on us (a pair of
ponies to a basket phaeton--very neat and a nice little groom) and my
heart jumped into my mouth when I saw there were two children in with
the lady: little girls of eight and twelve, I should say.  'Twas the
first carriage callers that ever I'd seen in the place, and Hodges says
to me as he goes toward the hall,

"This is something like, eh, Miss Umbleby?"

But I felt odd and uncertain, and when from behind the library door I
heard the lady say, "You see I've kept my word and brought my babies,
Mrs. Childress--my son is hardly old enough for yours--only four--but
Helena and Lou can't wait--they are so impatient to see your little
girl!"--when I heard that, I saw what my poor mistress had been at, and
the terrible situation we were in (and had been in for years) flashed
over me and my hands got cold as ice.

"Where is she?" the lady went on.

At that I went boldly into the library and stood by my mistress's
chair--I couldn't desert her then, after all those years.

"Where?  where?" my poor lady repeated, vague-like and turning her eyes
so piteous at me that I looked the visitor straight in the face and
getting between her and my mistress I said very calmly,

"I think Miss Winifred is in the children's garden, madam; shall I take
the young ladies there?"

For my thought was to get the children out of the way, before it all
came out, you see.

Oh, the look of gratitude she gave me!  And yet it was a mad thing to
do.  But I couldn't desert her--I couldn't.

"There, you see, mamma!" cried the youngest, and the older one said,

"We can find our way, thank you," very civil, to me.

"Children have sharp eyes," said the lady, laughing.  "One can't hide
them from each other--haven't you found it so?"

"Now what the devil does she mean by that?" Hodges muttered to me as he
passed by me with the tray.  He always kept the silver perfect, and it
did one's heart good to see his tray: urn and sugar and cream just
twinkling and the toast in a covered dish--old Chelsea it was--and new
cakes and jam and fresh butter, just as they have at home.

I don't know what they talked of, for I couldn't find any excuse to
stop in the room, and she wouldn't have had it, anyway.  I went around
to the front to catch the children when they should come back, and
quiet them, but they didn't come, and I was too thankful to think much
about it.

After about half an hour I saw the oldest one coming slowly along by
herself, looking very sulky.

"Where's your sister, dear?" I said, all in a tremble, for I dreaded
how she might put it.

"She's too naughty--I can't get her to leave," she said pettishly, and
burst into the library ahead of me.  My mistress's face was scarlet and
her eyes like two big stars--for the first time I saw that she was a
beauty.  Her breath came very quick and I knew as well as if I'd been
there all the time that she'd been letting herself go, as they say, and
talked to her heart's content about what she'd never have a chance to
talk again to any guest.  She was much excited and the other woman knew
it and was puzzled, I could see, from the way she looked at her.

Now the girl burst into the talk.

"Mamma, Lou is so naughty!" she cried.  "I saw the ponies coming up the
drive, and I told her it was time, but she won't come!"

"Gently, daughter, gently," said the lady, and put her arm around her
and smoothed her hair.  "Why won't Lou come?"

I can see that room now, as plain as any picture in a frame: the
setting sun all yellow on the gilt of the rows of books, the streak of
light on the waxed oak floor, the urn shining in the last rays.  There
was the mother patting the big girl, there was Hodges with his hand on
the tray, and there was me standing behind my mistress, with her red
cheeks and her poor heaving bosom.

"Why won't Lou come?" she asked the girl again.

"Because," she says, still fretful, and very loud and clear, "because
she is taking a pattern of the little girl's hat and trying to twist
hers into that shape!  I told her you wouldn't like it."

My mistress sprang up and the chair fell down with a crash behind her.
I turned (Hodges says) as white as a sheet and moved nearer her.

"Hat!" she gasped.  "What hat? _whose hat_?"

There seemed to be a jingling, like sleighbells, all through the air,
and I thought I was going crazy till I saw that it came from the tray,
where Hodges's hand was shaking so, and yet he couldn't take it off.

"The hat with the rose-coloured ribbon on it," said the girl, "the one
we saw as we drove in, you know, mamma.  It's so becoming."

"Sarah!  Sarah! did you hear?  Did you hear?" shrieked my mistress.
"She saw, Sarah, _she saw_!"

Then the colour went out of her like when you blow out a candle, and
she put her hand to her heart.

"Oh, oh, what pain!" she said very quickly, and Hodges cried, "My God,
she's gone!" and I caught her as she fell and we went down together,
for my knees were shaking.

When I opened my eyes there was only Margaret there, wetting my
forehead, for William had gone for a doctor.  Not that it was of any
use, for she never breathed.  But the smile on her face was lovely.

We got her on her bed and the sight of her there brought the tears to
me and I cried out, "Oh, dear, oh, dear! she was all I had in the
world, and now----"

"Now you've got me, my girl, and isn't that worth anything to you,
Sarah?"

That was William Hodges, and he put his arm over my shoulder, right
before Margaret, and looked so kind at me, so kind--I saw in a moment
that no one else was anything to him and that he had always cared for
me.  And that, coming so sudden, when I had given up all hope of it,
was too much for me, weak as I was, and I fainted off again and woke up
raving hot with fever and half out of my mind, but not quite, for I
kept begging them to put off the funeral till I should be able to be up.

But this, of course, was not done, and by the time I was out of
hospital the turf was all in place on her dear grave.

William had managed everything and had picked out all the little
keepsakes I should have chosen--the heirs were most kind, though Jews.
Indeed, I've felt different to that sort of people ever since, for they
not caring for the house on account of its being lonely, to their way
of thinking, made it into a children's home for those of their belief
as were poor and orphaned, and whatever may have been, the old place
will never lack for children now.

I never stepped foot in the grounds again, for William Hodges, though
the gentlest and fairest of men, never thwarted me but once, and it was
in just that direction.  Moreover, he forbade me to speak of what only
he and I knew for a certainty, and he was one of that sort that when a
command is laid, it's best kept.

We've two fine children--girl and boy--and he never murmured at the
names I chose for them.  Indeed, considering what my mistress's will
left me and what his master had done for him, he was as pleased as I.

"They're named after our two best friends, Sarah," he said, looking
hard at me, once.

And I nodded my head, but if she saw me, in heaven, she knew who were
in my heart when I named them!




THE CRYSTAL

In reviewing the matter dispassionately, it seems difficult to find
anybody (anybody, that is to say, to whom her career was or is of the
slightest interest) who omits to pronounce Molly Dickett's life an
egregious and shameful failure.  I should be sorry for any one, for
instance, who had the hardihood to address her mother on the subject,
for Mrs. Dickett's power of tongue is well known in and beyond local
circles; and since Eleanor married young Farwell, who stands in line
for cashier of the bank forty or fifty years from now, if all goes well
and a series of providential deaths occurs--indeed, ever since Kathryn
became assistant-principal at the high-school (because, as her mother
points out, a mere teacher's position, even in a high-school, may not
be much, but an assistant-principal may be called to consult with the
trustees any day and Kathryn has twice refused a college professorship)
since these family adjustments, I repeat, Mrs. Dickett's tongue has
grown steadily more incisive and her attempts at scaling the fortress
of Mr. Dickett's wardrobe more encouraging.

I believe it to be the simple truth to say that she literally never
mentions her second daughter, and that Molly sends her letters direct
to the factory to be sure that her father gets them--for Mrs. Dickett
is Napoleonic in her methods and would really, I am afraid, stop at
nothing.  Any woman who has borne three children and will learn to
drive an electric runabout at the age of forty-five, for the purpose of
taking her husband home from his office in it, is to be reckoned with,
you will agree.

The last time she is known to have referred to the girl definitely was
when she announced the theory that her unfortunate name lay at the
bottom of it all.

"Molly," she is reported to have said, "was named by her father--a
mistake always, I think.  The fact that Eleanor was baptised Ella has
little or nothing to do with it; there was never any 'Nellie' or
'Lelie' about it, and at sixteen she began of her own accord to write
it Eleanor.  Kathryn I named entirely myself--and after all, what can
Aunt Ella be said to have done for Eleanor?  A silver ring and a
bracelet when she graduated!  But it was always 'Molly Dickett' all
over the town!"

And it must be confessed that this was so, if, indeed, the confession
proves anything.  Nevertheless Mrs. Dickett cannot deny that for a long
time, up to the period of her plunge into outer darkness, Molly was
confessedly the flower of the family.  Eleanor was rather soggy, a
creature of inertia, chocolate caramels and a tendency to ritualism
which her mother could not have foreseen when she encouraged her
entering the Episcopal communion ("I don't mind candles so much," said
Mrs. Dickett, "but I must say I think it's very bad taste to call
yourself an American Catholic, when you can't help but feel that
Catholics should be foreigners").

Kathryn her mother pronounced "a very ordinary girl, very ordinary
indeed," up to the day when she was graduated, head of her class, at
the State normal-school.  She showed every sign, even after that, of
snapping at the bait of a middle-aged widower with three children,
simply because his hook was labelled _New York_; but when it became
known, as a result of herculean detective efforts on Mrs. Dickett's
part, that he employed but one servant, insisted upon the payment of
what he termed "spot cash" for every article purchased in his
establishment, and disapproved of the theatre, Kathryn yielded to
reason and henceforth consulted her mother at each successive stage of
her growing career until such consultation was frankly deprecated by
the fountain-head itself.

But Molly was neither soggy nor ordinary, being distinctly handsome in
a grey-eyed, black-haired, white-skinned way, a clever student, an
original conversationalist--in short, a personality.  Unlike the usual
victim to an older and a younger sister, she managed to get quite her
fair share of the family dignities and finances--was in fact accused by
her sisters of using undue influence in persuading her father to send
her to a woman's college.  It is most characteristic of her that at
this accusation she refused the favour, interested her teachers in her
cause so that they procured her a full scholarship at the college of
her choice, and actually completed a four years' course there with no
other means than her share of the twenty-five dollars yearly placed to
his daughters' bank accounts by their father since the birth of each.
On this slender sum, plus the accruing interest, eked out by college
journalism, which began to be mentionable in those years--the early
90's--strengthened further in the last terms by tutoring, did Molly
Dickett triumphantly assert her independence,  and I tell it of her at
this length so that none may throw "rolling stones" at her, in what
followed.  A young woman of eighteen who can set her course in solitude
and steer it alone, friendless, except for what friends her qualities
can make her, absolutely unaided but for her own exertions, for four
years, is not to be called lacking in application, I submit.  She got
out of that business just what there was in it, _and so_, she insists,
_she did at every stage of her subsequent history_.  Note this, for it
is important.

Here you see her, then, at twenty-two; handsome, accomplished,
independent, well-rated on her particular 'Change--one fairly hears
Dick Whittington's bells in the air!  Her mother, when Molly wrote home
the news of her appointment as under-reader in the office of one of the
new cheap magazines that began to appear with such frequency at about
that time, spoke of her with the typical respect of the dependent woman
for the wage-earner, and never dropped that note till the crash came.
Mr. Dickett was head clerk by now, with an appreciable advance in
salary; and Eleanor's wedding (it was in dressing the Roodscreen at
Christmas that young Farwell met his fate), with her sisters as
bridemaids, marked a distinct stage in the family's social career.  Old
Mr. Farwell, who had long been nursing his only son's bank position,
did the handsome thing for the young couple, and stomached, very
decently, what must have been his regret at the boy's choice--for we
all like our children to "look up and not down," as the motto suggests,
in these matters.  And he was paid for it, for Eleanor made a man of
the boy and a vestryman to boot, and quite won the old man's heart,
though he never loved Mrs. Dickett.

By the time Molly had been for two years at her post in _Slater's
Monthly_, Kathryn had moved back to her normal-school as
instructor--"and they paid well to get her, too," as Mr. Dickett
informed his stenographer confidentially.  She had been invited to
supper more than once, had the stenographer, in the old days, and there
had even been a little talk of Kathryn's acquiring this accomplishment,
once, but Mr. Dickett was far too wise to suggest her presence at the
half-past six dinner now-a-days.  He was far too wise, indeed, to do
anything that seemed likely to ruffle the increasingly easy currents
into which his bark had drifted of late.  In a vague way he had always
counted on supporting four women until three of them--or two, say, for
Kathryn was plain and rather managing--should marry; and lo and behold,
all three were off his hands in a twinkle, and there was a pretty
little nest-egg growing for little Henry (for Eleanor had been very
discreet about the first baby).

So now we arrive at the day when Molly left her desk in the ante-room
of Slater's, walked through the book department and the art offices and
encountered Miss Spinner, the little dried and spectacled reader of
forty-odd years, and centuries (or their equivalent) of magazine
experience.

"Miss Spinner," said Molly, "do you mind telling me what they pay you a
week?"

"Twenty-five," Miss Spinner replied promptly.  "Not at all.  Of course
I'd been fifteen years at Franklin Square, and it was all that
experience that made them offer me the three dollars raise.  So I left.
But, of course, there are five magazines now where there used to be
one.  In ten years I think there'll be ten.  So does Mr. Slater.  That
means competition, and that means that experience will always be worth
something to the new ones.  You started at fifteen, you see, and of
course I only got ten ...  Gracious, isn't that Mrs. Julia Carter
Sykes's voice?  Perhaps you'd better step out, my dear--Mr. Slater's
talking with that English prison man and said that he wasn't to be
disturbed if the Twelve Apostles came!"

Molly went with her swift, unhasty step (she had long legs) and
received Mrs. Julia Carter Sykes urbanely, as befitted the best paid
woman novelist of her country.  Occasionally she had the fancy to "trot
around to the office" as she called it: it was believed that she
"picked up types" there.  And Molly knew how to keep her waiting
without offending her, just as she knew how to dispose of the
illustrators, from the Great Moguls who came in cabs to scold about the
defects in half-tone processes, to the just discovered young genius who
waited an hour in the outside hall, his great pasteboard square between
his knees.

"You're much too pretty to be here, my child--do you like it?" Mrs.
Julia Carter Sykes remarked impertinently (she was supposed to believe
that her manner was that of the English Aristocracy, and asked the most
embarrassing questions of everybody with an income of less than fifteen
thousand a year).

"Not very much," Molly replied placidly.  "It's a little dull.  I'm
thinking of going into journalism.  Couldn't you give me some letters
to some of the editors?  I could do good special article stuff, I'm
sure."

"But certainly!" the novelist cried.  "You are too delicious!  I'll
write you a card to Hecht himself this moment--I'm dining with him
to-night--and I'll speak of you.  I'll tell him to send you to
interview me at 'Bonnybraeside.'"

"Thanks," said Molly laconically and rose to show the celebrity to Mr.
Slater's sanctum.  The English prison man, emerging, took in the
contrasted couple at a single glance, supposed them to be the whirlwind
editor's wife and daughter, from his greeting ("Come in, come in, my
dears, both of you!") and inquired of his wife, eight days later, how
she explained a woman of that type, "strung with sapphires, literally,"
and a daughter like a young duchess, with Irish eyes and a walk like
Diana's.  His wife could not explain it at all, and said as much.

Molly left Mr. Slater somewhat puzzled.  He raised her salary three
dollars, might have been pushed to five, but she merely smiled
deprecatingly.

"It isn't exactly that," she said, "but there seems no outlook,
somehow.  I don't think it's a very reasonable profession--if it is a
profession."

He exploded into the name of a great English novelist who held
precisely that position.

"Yes.  But I am not a great novelist, you see," said Molly, and cleared
out her desk with the swift thoroughness that characterized her.  She
put a clean sheet of green blotting paper on it before she left, and
washed out the inkwell herself.

"That stenographer spells worse and worse, remember," she remarked.
"I'll look in for any mail."

"Why, aren't you going to stay at a hundred-and-three any more?"

Miss Pinner spoke with concern: she knew that the boarding-house
recommended highly by Eleanor's rector (his sister had stayed there
while studying singing) was very tautly managed, in an unobtrusive way,
and that the sisters who directed it had a shrewd idea of the goings
and comings of their "guests."

"No," said Molly.  "I'll be out at all hours, maybe, and they wouldn't
like it.  Don't be worried--I'll look in now and then."

And so, for a year, she did, and they were all delighted to see her,
for few people likely to enter such offices can talk more amusingly
than Molly Dickett.  She had always used her material well, when it was
limited, and now, when it bumped into the Himalayas at one end  (her
famous Rajah of Bhutpore interview)  and rounded the hitherto
speechless promontories of Spud Connors' career, the champion
heavyweight of the world (she actually drew vivid metaphors from him
and he gave her a tintype of himself at eight years) the entire staff
gathered 'round her when she came, and Mr. Slater, under a temporary
financial cloud, wept literal tears because he could not afford to buy
her back to them.  It was, of course, the "Bonnybraeside" interview
that did it.  So cleverly was this column-and-a-half of chatty
sharp-shooting manoeuvred that Mrs. Julia Carter Sykes sent hundreds of
copies to her friends, while her fellow celebrities giggled among
themselves, and the publishers wondered exactly what the Public really
wanted, anyhow.  You couldn't tell, any more, they complained.

Just here began the little cloud on Mrs. Dickett's happiness.  For two
years the family were very proud of Molly, and Eleanor gave a tea for
her on one of her infrequent visits to them and got some people she
could never have hoped for otherwise on the strength of her sister's
celebrityship, for her Sunday morning column-and-a-half got to
two-thirds of the town's breakfast tables, and her picture was at the
head of it, now.  At twenty-five she was called (and probably
correctly) the second highest paid woman journalist in the country, and
she spoke familiarly of names that are head-lines to most of us and
bought evening gowns at "little shops" on Fifth Avenue.  She lived with
a red-haired friend, a clever illustrator of rising vogue, in a pretty
little apartment, and Mrs. Dickett dined there one night with a really
great novelist, a tenor from the Metropolitan Opera House and a young
Englishman whose brother was a baronet.  They had four glasses at their
plates and the maid's cap and apron were tremendously interesting to
Mrs. Dickett.  But when she learned the rental of the apartment, the
wages of the maid, the cost of Molly's black evening-frock and the
average monthly bill for Molly's hansoms, she no longer wondered that
her daughter was always poor.  She had never spent seventy-five dollars
for a single garment in her life, barring a fur-lined cloak, a
Christmas gift from her husband, and to drink crême-de-menthe at a roof
garden gave her a very odd sensation.  However, there was the baronet's
brother...

But at one of the songs at the roof-garden Mrs. Dickett drew the line,
and the entire British Peerage, embattled, could not have persuaded her
that it could possibly be the duty--not to suggest the pleasure--of any
respectable woman to listen to it.  As she put it later to the
red-haired girl and Molly, no unmarried woman could understand it and
no married woman would want to, a simple statement which they persisted
in treating as an epigram, to her annoyance.

"But nobody minded it but you, dear Mrs. Dickett," the red-haired girl
soothed her, "and it's all in how you take those things, don't you
think?  Of course, if you find it wrong, why then it is wrong--for you.
But really, I assure you, I simply paid no attention to it..."

"Then you must allow me to say that I think you should have!" Mrs.
Dickett snapped out.

"Oh, come, mother, a woman of twenty-five is to all intents and
purposes as capable of hearing--anything--as a married woman," said
Molly lazily.  "I'm not a school girl, you know."

"I know that," her mother replied shortly, and might have added that
Molly looked Kathryn's age--which she did, and Kathryn was twenty-eight.

She was, however, if anything, handsomer than when her cheek had its
fuller curve, for her eyes looked larger and her mouth had more
mobility: there was a stimulation in her tenseness.  Mrs. Dickett felt
a little troubled.

"Although, of course, Molly admitted that the creature had no character
and sang that sort of song purposely," she confided to her husband.

Imagine, then, her feelings when Molly's interview with the singer was
printed!  She began a severe letter to her--and ceased midway of the
first paragraph.  What possible hold had she over her daughter?  What
did she know of her friends and associates, and what, had she known and
disapproved, would it have mattered to Molly?  Since the day she won
her college scholarship at eighteen she had been independent,
financially speaking, and, though financial independence is not, of
course, everything ... but it would almost seem that it is!  There must
be some mistake here.  Mrs. Dickett chewed the end of her pen and
thought as hard as she had ever thought in her life.  Nonsense!  What
finally settles the thing is public opinion--Society.  If one's world
turns the cold shoulder, one retracts, capitulates, acknowledges that
the conventions are in the right of it.  Well; but Molly's world was
not the suburban circle of the Dicketts and her world applauded her;
she stood high in it; her interview with the unspeakable one was "a
great hit," in their jargon.  Molly, in short, applied different
standards, was in another class--was it, could it be, a Lower Class?
And yet, the baronet!

Mrs. Dickett tore her letter through.

It is quite true that they didn't see her for a year, after
that--eighteen months, if you except Kathryn's flying luncheon with her
at the time of the Convention of Associated Normal Schools.  Kathryn
then informed them that the red-haired girl had married her teacher and
left the apartment and that Molly lived alone there.

"I'm very glad," said her mother.  "I never liked that girl."

"She seems to have been a bad influence," Kathryn agreed
conservatively, and there, good, simple people as they were at heart,
it would have ended.

But here comes Eleanor upon the scene, Eleanor, with two boys, a
probable Warden for husband, and a father-in-law who has become very
respectably wealthy from long ago, almost forgotten investments in
Southern Railroads.  And George is the only son.  Eleanor wonders that
people can send their children to the public schools, and wishes that
Kathryn had married that college professor, even though his salary did
barely equal hers.

"Every woman ought to settle, you know--it's nonsense to discuss it."

"But I am settled, my dear," said Kathryn blandly, "and I'm not fond of
housekeeping.  You don't get any time for anything else."

"!!!" said Eleanor.

Mrs. Dickett here intervened with news of Molly, and Eleanor's eyebrows
lifted.

"You don't mean to say she's living alone there?"

Mrs. Dickett nodded uncertainly.

"Really, mother, I must say!  She must be crazy.  It's not right at
all, and I'm sure George wouldn't like it."

"She's nearly twenty-seven," Kathryn put in coldly.

"As if that had anything to do with it!  I'm going down to see her."

It was certainly unfortunate that she should have gone unheralded.  The
first wave of classical dancing had begun to lap the shores of New York
society, and Molly's paper had got the first amazing pictures, the
first technical chit-chat of "plastique" and "masque" and "flowing
line."  Behold Mrs. Eleanor then, tired and mussed with shopping,
dyspeptic from unassimilated restaurant-lunching (and a little nervous
at her task, when actually confronted with it), staring petrified at
Molly's darkened dining-room, where, on a platform, against dull velvet
backgrounds, an ivory, loose-haired, barely draped intaglio-woman,
swayed and whirled and beckoned.  A slender spiral of smoke rose from
the incense bowl before her: the odour hung heavy in the room.  Three
or four women (much better gowned than Eleanor) and a dozen men
applauded from the drawing-room; a strange-looking youth with a shock
of auburn hair drew from a violin sounds which it required no knowledge
of technique to feel extraordinarily poignant and moving.  All but the
dancer were smoking, and Molly sat on the floor (in copper-coloured
chiffon, too!) her hands clasped about her knees, a cigarette in an
amber holder between her lips and enunciated clearly,

"Bully!"

In describing matters afterward Eleanor referred to Molly's reception
of her as brazen.  There is no reason to believe that this word has any
relation to Molly's state of mind: she saw nothing to be brazen about.
When she said, "How lucky you dropped in today, sis!" she unaffectedly
meant it.

"Well, rather!" one of the young men replied.  "Won't you have
something, Mrs. Er--Oh, yes--Farwell?  Rhine wine cup, what?"

"No, I thank you," said Eleanor frigidly.  "May I have a few minutes'
conversation with you, Mary?"

"Not just now, I hope," said some one, "for she's going to dance again."

"In that case I will not trouble you," said Eleanor, rather
dramatically, one fears, and backed out to avoid the smoking violinist.
It was a little trying, and Eleanor should have had tact enough to let
the matter rest, but she was rather inelastic in her methods, and she
had come to New York with a Purpose.  So Molly disappeared with her
into the bedroom, and they had it out, with what result it is
unnecessary to say.

It was from that moment that a doubt as to whether Molly were an asset
or a liability slipped into the Dickett family.  It is improbable that
knowledge of the fact that "the disgusting foreign dancing woman" was
born and bred in Bangor, Maine, and had never been farther than a
stage-length from a vigilant mother, would have greatly affected their
judgment.  And almost certainly the fact that the baronet's brother had
asked her to marry him would only have irritated them the more--and
perhaps with reason.  Had he ever wanted to marry Molly?  Maybe; she
never said so.

And here one must pause, to consider the interesting subject of Molly's
Relations with Men.  It proved singularly lacking in richness.  To
state that she had lived four years (as she did, ultimately) on the
staff of the largest New York daily newspaper, hanging personally over
the "forms" many a time, among the printers, from 10 P.M. until 3 A.M.,
walking home with the milk-carts in the lead-blue morning; sitting in
the outer office of one of the greatest city editors for three of these
years; studying every "first night," every picturesque slum, every
visiting or indigenous notoriety at close range--to catalogue a life
like this, add that it was the life of a handsome, well-dressed,
high-spirited girl, and pretend that it was an existence unqualified by
male adjectives, would be the merest absurdity.

I hear that from the tiniest, most impudent printer's devil up to the
Dean of College Presidents, who became so interested in her during his
famous interview of "_After Democracy--What?_" that his wife asked her
to luncheon and she spent the day with them, every man she encountered
"swore by her," as they say.  In a novel, the editor-in-chief would
have married her and Eleanor would have been delighted; but in a novel
the editors-in-chief are handsome, athletic young bachelors (which
rarely occurs, as a matter of fact) or magnificent widowers whose first
marriages were tragic mistakes, so the emotional field is really clear.
Now Molly's editor-in-chief was, so far as is known, quite happy with
his wife, and his four daughters were not so much younger than Molly
herself.  It is true, the art editor of the Sunday edition was supposed
to be pretty far gone, but he was married, too, and even his
stenographer, who was furiously jealous, admitted that Molly never gave
him the slightest encouragement.  Such reporters as were free to do so
are generally credited with proposals in strict order of income (there
had to be some working system), but nothing but continued good feeling
ever came of it; and the French portrait-painter who spent three days
at the Metropolitan Art Museum with her out of the ten he vouchsafed
America, declared openly that she was perfectly cold, a charming,
clever boy in temperament--"absolutely insulated."  And perhaps she
was.  She always said that she knew too many men to take them too
seriously.  And yet when Kathryn remarked once that it was encouraging
to observe how women were gradually growing independent of men, Molly
laughed consumedly.  So there, as the great Anglo-American novelist
says, you are!

Living, as she did, alone, utterly unrestricted in her goings,
uncensored except by her own common-sense, one readily imagines that
there may have been scenes ... how could they have been avoided,
mankind being as it is?  But if her house was of glass, it was, by its
very nature transparent, and I do not see how any one who didn't
deserve it could have kept the consistent respect of the entire force
of _The Day_.

On her twenty-eighth birthday she came home from a very gay supper at a
very gay restaurant with a hard pain at the back of her neck and a deep
wrinkle from it between her eyebrows.  They had been harder of late,
these headaches, and lasted longer, and this one not only failed to
yield to the practised massage of her kindly housemaid, but baffled the
nearest doctor and left her, finally, a pallid, shaken creature, who
saw written on every wall in the little apartment, as she dragged
herself about it:

_I must not take any coal-tar preparation because my heart simply won't
stand it!_

"And let me tell you this, Miss Molly Dickett," said the great
specialist she had consulted as a matter of course (he ordered Trust
Magnates to Egypt and consulted at Presidents' bed-sides, and if Mrs.
Dickett had known that he never accepted a cent from Molly, what would
she have said?) "let me tell you this.  You think you're a very
remarkable young woman, don't you?"

"Don't you, Dr. Stanchon?" Molly retorted placidly.

He patted her shoulder and capitulated.  "But you ought to be spanked,
you know," he said.  "Now, listen.  For what was all this vitality and
endurance given you, my child?"

"If you mean twins," said Molly curtly, "I won't.  There are plenty of
women to have twins, doctor."

"But there are not plenty of women to have _your_ twins," said he.

She grimaced and blew a saucy kiss to him.

"I see why they all want you!" she told him.  "But, honestly, do
married women never have headaches?"

"There's no good being clever with me, child," he went on, a little
wearily (he seemed middle-aged beyond words to her).  "You are making a
great mistake and when you find it out, it will in all probability be
too late to remedy it, worse luck!  _That's_ the real harm of all this
Advanced Woman stuff: if you could only get it over before twenty-five!
But when you wake up, you're nearer forty, and then--what's the
difference?"

"I'll marry, then, maybe!"

"Dear child, it doesn't matter a continental what you do, then," he
said simply.

She gave a little shudder, in spite of herself.  He sounded so final,
and his eyes were so bright and deep.  She stared into them and,
somehow, lost herself--the eyes turned to bright points in space, and
Time seemed to stop, with a sort of whir like a clock that runs down...

"There, there!" his voice came roughly.  "None of that, my girl, none
of that!  You _are_ in a nice state!  Now, you march off on a vacation,
and take it on a boat of some sort--do you hear?  And, listen to me--if
I find a nice woman to go with you----"

"Oh!" she interrupted mockingly, "the famous Miss Jessop!  Now I _know_
you think I'm pretty bad!  You forget, doctor, that I've interviewed
Miss Jessop--or tried to."

"That's better," he retorted grimly.  "You hadn't much of a success,
had you, missy?  And would you like to know what the famous Miss Jessop
said about you?"

"Me?"

"Yes, you.  There are two sides to every interview, you know.  She
said, 'If you don't see Miss Molly Dickett in your office before a
year, doctor, I miss my guess.  She's a neurasthenic for you, all
right.'  So what do you think of that, eh?"

"I think she was impertinent," said Molly, weakly, "and you can tell
her so."

"Bosh.  Now go and lie down," he commanded shortly, and the interview
closed.

A vacation seemed a simple remedy, and she started out, bent on one,
with the kindest orders to make it long, accompanied by large credit;
but the promised renewal of vitality did not come, and the taste seemed
gone from everything.  The quaint and tiny little fishing hamlet she
had fixed upon as a good place for gathering "material" by the way,
proved all and more than she had been led to hope for, and when the
greatest north-easter that had blown for fifty years bruised and tore
the rugged little coast, she "wrote it up" as a matter of course--as a
bird-dog points or a carrier pigeon wheels for home.  And then Molly
Dickett received what was literally her first setback in ten years: the
City Editor sent her copy back to her!

"You're too tired, my dear girl," he wrote.  "Why not wait a bit?  Or
pad this out and point it up a little in the middle and send it to one
of the magazines.  Peterson covered it for us, anyway, at
Kennebunkport.  The cubs send you an officeful of affection, and we are
all yours truly."

But the "cubs" never hung over her desk again, for Molly never returned
to it.

"You see," as she explained to them gently, "I lost my nerve--that's
all.  If I hadn't sent the stuff, it would have been all right, later,
I suppose.  But I did send it, and I thought it was O.K., and if it was
as rotten as you said, why, how could I ever tell, again?  Anyway, I'm
tired."

They protested, but the City Editor shook his head.

"Let her alone," he said shortly.  "It's straight enough.  I've seen it
happen before.  She's gone too far without a check: I don't believe
women can stand it.  Let her alone."

And when the most talented of the cubs went next to interview Mrs.
Julia Carter Sykes as to her recently dramatized novel, he was referred
to her secretary--and it was Molly.

"For heaven's sake!" he said angrily.  "Are you insane?  Wasn't it true
that Slater offered----"

"Oh, yes," said Molly negligently, "but I'm tired of offices."

"I suppose you get time for writing your own stuff--on the side?" he
suggested awkwardly, but Molly shook her head.

"Writing seems bad for the back of the neck," she said, with a grey
flash out of the tail of her eye for the cub.

"We're getting ready for the sanitarium this morning--sun-baths and
Swedish Movement Cure and grape diet.  Of course you won't mention it,"
she said.  "She can't possibly see you--I do all the interviews
now--but if you come around to-morrow, after I get the house closed,
I'll give you a good one."

A solemn butler entered.

"If you will be so kind as to cast your eye over the table for the
ladies' luncheon, Miss Dickett?" he said weightily.

"There's two orchids short and no time for getting more.  And the salt
got into the mousse, I'm told by the cook--she wished to know if you
could suggest anything.  And one of the ladies has been detained and
cannot come--by telephone message.  Will you take her place, Miss
Dickett?"

"Yes," said Molly.  "Tell Mrs. Carter not to worry about the orchids,
Halsey; I'll arrange something.  I must go and dress, now--come
to-morrow," she added hastily.

"By George!" the cub gasped, and left, to electrify the office later.

"It's a darned shame," he ended, and the other cubs nodded sagely over
their pipes.

"With her talent, too!" they said...

You will have understood, of course, why Eleanor dropped Molly after
the unfortunate Greek dancer, but you may be surprised to learn of
Kathryn's attitude when she learned of the secretaryship.  It wasn't
dignified, she said, and she was greatly disappointed in Molly.

Kathryn was Dean of Women, now, in a co-educational college in the
middle west, and was spoken of as Dean Dickett in the college journal.
Of all her children Mrs. Dickett was proudest of Kathryn, because Molly
frightened her and Eleanor patronized her.  Eleanor was getting up in
the world a little too fast for her mother, nowadays, and knew people
Mrs. Dickett would never have dreamed of meeting in the old
days--people that she had grown used to the idea of never meeting, even
now that Mr. Dickett was in the Firm.  Eleanor's little girl went to
school with all the little girls on the Hill and was asked to attend
their parties.  Her name was Penelope, after George's mother, who had
never expected it--the name being so old-fashioned--and was
correspondingly delighted and had given her much jewelry already.

Eleanor, in so far as she mentioned Molly at all, had expressed her
opinion that to live with Mrs. Julia Carter Sykes was the most
respectable thing Molly had yet done, and added that there were
exceptional opportunities in more ways than one for the woman who held
that position--would perhaps even have called on her there, but Molly
never asked her to.  Kathryn, to her parents' surprise, developed a
stodgy but unblinking antagonism to her sister, for what she called
Molly's lowering of her sense of what was due to herself, and said
coldly that she had no doubt her sister's life was easier now, but that
it was un-American.

Un-American it may have been, but easier it assuredly was not.  Unlike
the factory-girls and clerks for whose benefit Mrs. Julia Carter Sykes
gave readings from her unpublished works, Molly's hours were not
limited, and her responsibility grew as her executive ability became
increasingly manifest.  The thousands of women to whom the celebrity's
manifold occupations, publicities, hospitalities and charities were an
endless wonder and discussion might have marvelled less had they been
able to follow Molly's crowded days and nights and peep through the
littered desk and scribbled calendar of her study.

To amusement and interest, succeeded fatigue and interest, and to
these, fatigue alone.  Each hurried, various day became a space of time
to be got through, merely, and Mrs. Julia Carter Sykes's heavy sigh as
she curled into her wicker-inset Circassian-walnut bed was no more
heartfelt than her secretary's.  If Molly had ever envied Mrs. Julia,
she had long ceased to, and indeed, on that final afternoon when she
laid her dark, braided head on her arms and cried on her desk, she felt
as sorry for the authoress as for herself.

Mr. Julia Carter Sykes (as many of his friends called him) sat opposite
her, biting his nails.  He was well dressed, fond of auction-bridge,
and travelled abroad in the interests of some vaguely comprehended firm.

"This will just about kill the madam," he said despondently.

"I'm sorry, Mr. Sykes, but I really must--I must," Molly gulped.

"It isn't money, is it?" he asked.  "Because though I'm not a popular
authoress or anything like that, I could----"

"Oh, goodness, no!" said Molly.  "It's not money at all.  Only I must
get away."

"We've never got on so well with any of the others," he went on
jerkily, "and she's certainly awfully fond of you--the madam is.  She's
taken you everywhere, I know, and all the dinners, and the car whenever
you----"

"Mrs. Sykes has been very kind," Molly broke in dully, "but--oh, it's
no use, Mr. Sykes.  It's got to be done, and putting it off only makes
her worse.  So I'm going to-morrow.  She'll feel better about it later."

"I hope so, I'm sure," Mr. Sykes responded doubtfully.  "She was pretty
bad when I left her.  That brain of hers, you know--it's a great
strain, they tell me.  Hard on us all, in a way."

Molly always smiled and sighed when she remembered him and the hunched
shoulders that leaned drearily over the tonneau.

"Where'll I tell him?" he asked, and she drew tighter the tight line
between her brows, sighed, tried to speak, and found her mind quite
utterly a blank.

"Where'll I tell him?" Mr. Sykes repeated, looking curiously at her.

To save her life Molly could not have remembered where she had arranged
to go!  A real horror caught her: was this the beginning of all the
dreadful symptoms that few of Julia Carter Sykes's admirers suspected
in their idol?  She must say something, and there flashed suddenly into
her mind, otherwise blank of any image or phrase, an odd occurrence of
the afternoon before, an occurrence she had been too tired to try,
even, to explain.

"Drive to the docks!" she cried sharply, and the chauffeur touched his
visor, and her life poised for twenty minutes on its watershed,
although she did not know it.

In the motor it came back to her, that twilight not eighteen hours
back, when in clearing out her desk ("the last desk I shall ever clear,
I swear!") she had happened on the little transparent glass ball, a
paper-weight, she supposed, and fingered it idly, void of thought or
feeling, after the last emotional storm with her celebrity.

As she looked into it, staring, her tired mind seemed to sink and sink
and submerge in the little clear white sphere till it drowned utterly,
and only a rigid body, its eyes turned into its lap, sat in the still,
dim room.

Presently, after what might have been hours or seconds, she seemed to
gather into herself again, but could not wrench her eyes from the
crystal ball, which looked opalescent now, and filmy, so that she
shaded her eyes mechanically with the black scarf of her dinner-dress,
to shut out the reflections of the room.  But they were not
reflections, for there was bright blue in the ball, blue and white, and
nothing of that sort was in the room.

She peered into the ball, and saw in it, clear and sharp and bright as
the little coloured prints that are pasted to the bottom of such
things, a tossing sapphire sea with little white-caps on it, a boat
with a funnel, and little boats lashed to the side, a white rail, a
tilted deck, and herself, Molly Dickett, in a striped blue and white
frock and bare head, leaning over the rail on her elbows beside a
broad-shouldered man with a cap such as officers on a boat wear.  The
waves actually danced and glittered in the sun.  _But the room was
nearly dark_, something whispered in her brain, and just then she had
dropped the shielding scarf, and gasped back to a sense of reality and
the ball was suddenly empty.

There had been no picture in the bottom of it, after all.

But on the bow of the little boat lashed to the side she had seen,
written in tiny, tiny letters just as the Lord's Prayer is written in
carved ivory toys of incredible smallness, the letters E-L-L-A, and
these letters had fixed themselves in her mind, they had seemed so
absurdly real and she had felt so absurdly sure of them.

"Which steamer, Miss Dickett?" the chauffeur inquired respectfully; all
the employees of the Julia Carter Sykes establishment respected Molly,
as well they might.  A sudden, happy irresponsibility flooded Molly's
tired mind, and she smiled into the man's face--the old,
not-to-be-resisted Molly Dickett smile.

"The name of the boat is _Ella_, Pierce," she said cheerfully, "and
it's a small boat, not a liner.  Look it up."

And as he disappeared she laughed aloud.

She was still laughing softly when he returned, looking worried.

"I think you must have told me wrong, Miss Dickett, didn't you?" he
began hurriedly, lifting out her small, flat trunk.  "It's the _Stella_
you mean, isn't it?  There seems to be a misunderstanding; they said
the stateroom was countermanded at the last minute, but the party's
name was Richards.  It's all right now, but we nearly lost it--they're
holding her for you.  There don't seem to be any more passengers--are
you sure there's no mistake?"

"Perfectly sure," said Molly, sober enough now.  "I'm very much
indebted to you, Pierce."

She gave him a tip that caught his breath, walked up the gang-plank of
the _Stella_, nodded easily to a severe official, and followed a pale,
neat stewardess to her state-room.

"Where is this boat going?" she asked of the pale stewardess, who
gasped and replied,

"South America, ma'am.  Didn't you know?"

"I may have forgotten," said Molly, and then sleep overcame her and the
days and nights were one for a long time.

The _Stella_ carried hides and fruit and lumber, and, occasionally, two
or three passengers, for whose convenience the company had fitted up a
stateroom or two, since the demand for these proved steady.  People, as
Molly learned from the stewardess (whose sole charge she was) for whom
a sea-voyage had been recommended for various reasons.  There had never
been more than five at a time and two was the average; one, very common.

The long, blue days slipped by, she ate and slept and lay in the
deck-chair that had been sent by the party named Richards, and spoke to
the stewardess alone, who was used to tired and silent charges, and
served her meals on a tray.

She was a quiet, refined woman with a hand often at her heart.  Molly
found her gasping in the companionway once, fed her quickly from the
little flask she pointed at in her pocket, and helped her to her berth,
as clean and comfortable as Molly's own.  This produced confidences,
and she learned that Mrs. Cope (every one called her that, she said,
and treated her most respectfully) had made her first voyage as
children's nurse to an English family bound for Rio, who had turned her
off on arriving at that port.  The stewardess on that trip proved
inclined to drink and sauciness, and at Mrs. Cope's suggestion they had
given her the post in her stead and she had kept it for five years.  An
easy berth, she said, good pay, good board, little to do and pleasant
people.  She ate alone, was practically her own mistress, and the
sea-air had saved her life, she knew.

This Molly could well believe, for she had come to count the days of
her ignorance of salt water for days of loss and emptiness.  The
mornings of wind, the nights of stars and foam, the hot blue moons,
sang in her blood and tinted her cheeks: she felt herself born again,
the crowded past an ugly nightmare.  She says that she had never, till
then, been alone with herself for ten years and that she had never had
time to find out what she really liked best in the world.  We must
suppose that she did at last find out, but it cannot be denied that the
discovery was unusual.

Mrs. Cope died at Buenos Ayres, suddenly, as she was serving Molly's
supper, and Molly, piloted by the first mate, for she knew no Spanish,
buried her there and put up a neat headstone over her grave: the
possible lack of one had been the poor woman's one terror, and she had
sent every cent of her wages to some worthless, mysterious husband
whose whereabouts nobody knew.  This took all Molly's money but so much
as was needed for her return trip, for it has to be confessed of her
that she never saved a penny in her extravagant life.

And now we see her speaking, for the first time beyond perfunctory
salutations, with the captain, a taciturn recluse of a man, furious
just now at some unexpected litigation connected with his cargo and
horribly inconvenienced by the loss of his stewardess.  Two ladies
waiting, literally, on the wharf, have been promised accommodation in
the _Stella_ by the owners, and there is not a decent, respectable
woman to be found on the whole coast of South America, to look after
them.

"Suppose you give me the job?" says Molly, quietly.

He looks her up, down and across, with an eye like a gimlet; she takes
the scrutiny cheerfully, as her duty and his due, offers him her clear,
grey eyes (her only reference for character) and her capable, trim,
broad-shouldered figure as security for fitness.

"I suppose you know your own business best," he says brusquely.
"You're engaged.  What name do you wish to go by?"

"My own," says she, "Molly Dickett."

So now, you see!  The secret is out, and you may observe her again
piloted by the first mate, scouting through the shops of Buenos Ayres
for a blue-and-white striped cotton frock, broad enough through the
shoulders.  Aprons she purchased and caps (larger caps than Mrs.
Cope's, who compromised on white lawn bow-knots) and high-laced,
rubber-soled, white canvas boots, only to be procured in English shops
for sporting-goods.  Their price caused the first mate to whistle.

"What's the idea of all this?" he demanded suddenly.  "Of course, you
know, you must be up to some game.  Your kind doesn't ship as
stewardess."

"What game were _you_ up to?" Molly replied quickly.  "Your kind
doesn't ship as first mate, does it?"

"What kind?" he said gruffly.

"The 'Dicky' kind," she answered.

He blurted out some amazed incoherence, and,

"Oh, I've seen Harvard men, before," she assured him pleasantly.

Molly took the best of care of her two ladies and accepted their
gratuities with a grave courtesy.  They confided to the captain, at New
York, that she seemed unusually refined for her position, and he
replied that for all he knew, she might be.

"We'll never see _her_ again," the first mate grumbled sourly, when she
stepped off the gangplank, and the captain shrugged his shoulders
non-committally.

They did, nevertheless, but her mother never did.  After that one
dreadful interview in the Dickett library (it had used to be the
sitting-room in her college days) when Eleanor had cried, and Kathryn's
letter had been read aloud, and Mr. Dickett had vainly displayed his
bank-book, and her mother had literally trembled with rage, there was
nothing for it but oblivion--oblivion, and silence.

"A stewardess!  My daughter a stewardess!  I believe we could put you
in an asylum--you're not decent!"

Mrs. Dickett's cheeks were greyish and mottled.

"Come, come, mother!  Come, come!" said Mr. Dickett.  "There's some
mistake, I'm sure.  If you'd only come and live with us, Molly--we're
all alone, now, you know, and Lord knows there's plenty for all.  It
doesn't seem quite the thing, I must say, though.  It--it hurts your
mother's pride, you see."

"I'm sorry," said Molly, sadly.  It is incredible, but she had never
anticipated it!  She was really very simple and direct, and life seemed
so clear and good to her, now.

"To compare yourself with that Englishman is ridiculous, and you know
it," sobbed Eleanor.  "What if he _was_ a cow-boy?  He didn't wear a
cap and apron--and it was for his health--and George is too angry to
come over, even!"

"It's for my health, too," Molly urged, trying to keep her temper.  "I
never was the same after I went on that vacation to Maine--I told you
before.  Life isn't worth living, unless you're well."

"But you could have the south chamber for your own sitting-room, as
George suggested, and do your writing at your own time," Mr. Dickett
began.

"I've told you I'm not a writer," she interrupted shortly.

"George would rather have paid out of his own pocket----"

"We'll leave George out of this, I think," said Molly, her foot tapping
dangerously.

"Then you may leave me out, too!" cried George's wife.  "I have my
children to think of.  If you are determined to go and be a
chambermaid, this ends it.  Come, mother!"

Mrs. Dickett avoided her husband's grasp and went to the door with
Eleanor.  It is hard to see how these things can be, but the cave-woman
and her whelpish brood are far behind us now, and Molly's mother was
cut to the dividing of the bone and the marrow.  The two women went out
of the room and Molly stood alone with her father.

"I'm sorry, father," she said quietly.  "I can't see that I should
change my way of life when it is perfectly honourable and proper, just
to gratify their silly pride.  You must realise that I have to be
independent--I'm thirty years old and I haven't had a cent that I
didn't earn for more than ten years.  I have never been so well and
so--so contented since I left college, really."

"Really?" Mr. Dickett echoed in dim amazement.

"Really.  And mother never liked me--never.  Oh, it's no use, father,
she never has.  I can't waste any more of my life.  I've found what
suits me--if I ever change, I'll let you know.  I'll write you, anyway,
now and then.  Good-bye, father.  Shake hands."

And so it was over, and she jumped into the waiting "hack" ("it was
some comfort," Eleanor said, "that she wore that handsome broadcloth
and the feather-boa") and left them.

Perhaps you had rather leave her, yourself?  Remember, she had dined
the brother of a baronet (and dined him well, too)!  And George Farwell
had never earned her salary on _The Day_.  Still, if you will stick by
her a little longer, you may feel a little more tolerant of her, and
that is much, in this critical civilisation of ours.

She leaned over the rail in her striped blue-and-white, and the first
mate leaned beside her.  The sapphire sea raced along and the milky
froth flew off from their bow.  The sun beat down on her dark head, and
there was a song in her heart--oh, there's no doubt of it, the girl was
disgracefully happy!

"A fine trip, won't it be?" she said contentedly, and drew a deep
breath, and washed her lungs clean of all the murk and cobwebs left
behind.

"Yes," said the first mate.  "My last, by the way."

"Your last?" she repeated vaguely.  "Your last?"

He nodded and swallowed in his throat.  "Shall I tell you why?"

"Yes, tell me why," she said, and stared at the ship's boat, lashed to
the side.

"I've told you about myself," he blurted out roughly, "and my family,
and all that.  It can't be helped--now.  We look at things differently.
A man either wants to be an attaché fooling around Baden, or he
doesn't.  I don't, that's all.  And I go bad in offices.  And I won't
take money from them--or anybody.  This suits me well enough.  Probably
I'm not ambitious."

"Then if it suits you," Molly began, but he put his hand over hers.

"It doesn't suit me to love any woman as much as I've loved you since
Buenos Ayres," he said, "and feel that to get her I must give up this
and settle down into a smelly office.  It doesn't suit me to find that
life is just hell without her, but to know that if I know anything
about myself I couldn't live any other way but this, and that no decent
man could ask a woman to lead the rolling-stone life that I lead--she
wouldn't, anyhow."

Molly's eyes were fastened on the bow of the ship's boat; her heart
pounded against the rail; she had never felt so frightened in her life.

And suddenly she became aware that she was staring at the letters
E-L-L-A, and they looked very tiny, like the letters of the Lord's
Prayer written in carved ivory toys, and something she had not thought
of since she first left New York flashed into her mind, and she
trembled slightly.  Then all the vexed and broken, many-coloured
fragments of her life clicked and settled into place, quietly and
inevitably, as they do in a child's kaleidoscope, and the final pattern
stood out, finished.  She smiled slightly and thinks that perhaps she
prayed.  Then,

"Why don't you give the woman a chance?" said Molly Dickett.

      *      *      *      *      *

Mr. Dickett pushed little Penelope gently off his knee and stroked a
whitening whisker.

"Molly's baby was a boy, mother--I know you'd want to hear," he said.

Mrs. Dickett was silent.

"Her husband's bought a third interest in the boat," he went on firmly,
"and she says he'll probably be captain some day."

"Indeed," said Mrs. Dickett.

"They've stopped carrying passengers and the rooms are fitted up for
them, quite private, she writes, and the boy weighed nine pounds.  I'm
thinking of going down to see them, when they get in to this country
again, mother.  Would you care to see her husband's picture?  He's a
fine looking chap--six feet, she writes."

"I don't care about it," said Mrs. Dickett, through thin lips.  "It is
a relief, however, to learn that she is no longer a chambermaid."

"Come, come, mother, the ship's boy did all the emptying, you know,"
Mr. Dickett urged tolerantly.  "It seems a roving sort of life, to us,
I know, and unsettled, but if they like it, why I can't see any real
harm..."

"Tastes differ," said his wife grimly--and so, God knows, they do!




THE GOSPEL

For the first few days of her stay there, she thought little enough of
the strangeness of the situation.  To think of it, to marvel at the
neat stillness, the quiet precision of all the domestic arrangements,
would have been to let her mind dwell on just what she had to avoid.
She was sick to her very soul of all that the words "domestic
arrangements" implied; sick with an actual spiritual nausea.  It was
honestly no exaggeration to say that she would gladly have died rather
than take the trouble to arrange the details of living.

So every morning she woke when her dreams ended and lay staring idly,
through the cross-bars of the primitive window-netting, at the swaying,
sinking, tree-tops, and the floating white above them, so white between
the blue and green; and then her breakfast came, fresh and chill and
shining, with a flaming nasturtium on the snowy linen; and then a
dreamy time, when thought ranged among stray lines of poetry and
memories of childhood; and then some one rubbed and kneaded and ironed
out her tired muscles and she slept again.  Sometimes foaming milk came
in a beaded brown pitcher that smelt of dairies; sometimes luscious,
quartered fruits, smothered in clotting cream, tempted a palate nearly
dulled beyond recall; sometimes rich, salted broth steamed in a dim,
blue bowl till she regretted to see the bottom of it.

And just at that time she was lifted into a long, basket chair and,
propped in lavendered pillows, looked dreamily into the hills and
pastures rolling out in front of her.  Cows wandered here and there,
birds swooped lazily through the June blue, the faintest scent of
grapevines hung on the wind.  But no human figures blotted the
landscape; only the faint, musical clash of distant scythes (a sound as
natural as the cawing and lowing and interminable twittering of the
busy animal world all around) spoke of men.

Then one day (it might have been a week's time) she caught herself
listening for sounds of household labour.  Where was the breaking, the
slamming, the whistling, the quarrelling, the brushing and the rattling
that these thin partitions ought to filter through?  Simply, it was
not.  A little faint, suspicious worry came to her: the house was a
tomb, then?  Did it have to be?  Was she as bad as that?

And when her tray came next, some kind of savoury stew, by now, with
fresh picked strawberries on a sea-green grape leaf, she looked
directly at the woman who brought it to the bed.

"How still this house is!" she said, and flushed with weakness, for it
was her first real sentence, and it occurred to her that only little
sighs of fatigue or groans of relief and halting exclamations of, "That
feels good," or "No more, thanks," had passed her lips.

The woman smiled.  She wore a straight gown of some cool stripe of
white and grey and her eyes were grey.

"We live in a quiet place," she said, and lifted the pillows higher.

But it seemed that after that--perhaps it was because she listened--she
began to hear faint sounds.  The clear falling of poured out water, and
the tinkling of dish on dish, now and then, and later, the soft murmur
of exchanging women's voices.

Another day she spoke of the freshness of her morning egg, and that
afternoon she leaned nearer the casement to catch the cluck of a
motherly hen with her brood, and smiled at the scurry of wing and feet
as grain was scattered somewhere.

It must have been at that time that the doctor came up to see her, a
big brown man, whose beard hid his smile when he chose, but nothing
could cover the keen, reading beam of the eye.

"I see you are doing well," he said.

"It is wonderful," she answered him, "but I am sure it is not the
world."

"The world is very large," he said, and went away.

"And I never asked about--about anybody," she murmured, her eyes
filling, "but I am sure they are all right, or he would have said!"

She was ashamed, afterward, to remember for how long she had thought
the woman who attended on her a servant.  And yet she did think her so
until the morning when it suddenly occurred to her that it was not
possible any ordinary servant should be so deft and self-contained at
once: servants were not so calm--that was it, so calm.  Even the best
of them were hurried and anxious, and if they were old and valued, they
got on one's nerves the more: one had to consider them.  Of course,
this was a trained nurse.  She had decided suddenly that she felt equal
to rising for her bath, and congratulated herself on discerning the
nurse in time, for now she could ask for help, if she needed it.

"If you will show me the bathroom," she said, "and will be there to
help me over the edge of the tub, in case I feel weak----"

"I will be there," said the woman, "but I must get it ready: the tub is
not high."

And when she stepped into the next room she realised, with a little
smile, how far she was from white porcelain and tiled walls.  On the
scrubbed deal floor there stood a white deal tub, clean as new milk,
round and copper bound.  Towels and soaps and sponges were there in
plenty, and great metal ewers full of hot and cold water, and nothing
else but one chair in all the scrubbed cleanliness.  The woman poured
the water over her as she crouched in the fragrant wooden pool and
dried her gently and quickly in towels pressed away in lavender, with
the deft, sure movements of one well practised in her business; but
when she lay, just happily tired from the new exertion, among the
fragrant sheets, a tiny shadow seemed about to haunt her sleep.  She
placed the little discomfort with difficulty, but at length expressed
it.

"That tub is very heavy, now," she said drowsily.  "Is there a man to
lift it?"

For the first time the woman smiled.  Till then she had been hands and
feet merely, tireless and tactful, but impersonal: now she smiled, and
her face was very sweet.

"I shall empty it," she said.  "I am quite strong.  Go to sleep, now."

Very soon again the doctor came, and at her quiet request gave her news
of husband, children and home; all well, it seemed, and smoothly
ordered.  Days of absolute stillness had broken the habit of insistent
speech, and many things that once would have said themselves before she
thought, now halted behind her lips and seemed not worth the muscular
effort.  But one thing she did mention.

"Ought not the nurses here to have more help?" she asked.  "Mine lifts
out my bath-water every day.  Are there not servants enough?  I could
pay for it..."

"There are no servants here at all," he said, "and there is nobody you
could pay more than you are already paying."

"Then they are all nurses?"

"There are no trained nurses here, if you mean that," he said.

"Then who--what is the woman who takes care of me?" she asked, vaguely
displeased.

"She is one of the daughters of the house," he said.  "She is no more a
nurse than her mother is a cook or her sister a laundress.  They do
what is to be done, that is all.  Each has done and can do the others'
tasks."

She felt in some way corrected, yet it was hard to say in what she had
offended.  But Dr. Stanchon was an odd man in many ways.  "All the
same," she persisted, "I think I had better have a nurse, now.  I shall
feel more comfortable.  Ask Miss Jessop if she could come out to me.  I
believe I could get along with her, now.  I'm afraid I was childish,
before."

But he only shook his head.  "The time for Miss Jessop has passed, dear
friend," he said quietly.  "No nurse ever comes here."

"Then this is a private house," she began again, "their own home.  And
I do not even know their names!"

"It is private because it is their own home--just that," he said.
"That is what a home is.  It is a simple fact, but one that seems not
to have been included in your education."

"Why, Dr. Stanchon, what can you mean?" she cried.  "My mother's
hospitality----"

"I mean that I do not consider an art museum a home, no matter how
highly the chef is paid," he said shortly.

"But there is the place on the Hudson----"

"That is a country club, nothing more," he interrupted.  "Your mother
dismissed a butler once, because, though he offered eight liqueurs to a
guest, the guest asked for a ninth and the butler had neglected to
order it.  I have attended her there for a really painful attack of
sciatica when none of her visitors knew that anything ailed her, though
she had been away from them for forty-eight hours."

"But that is mother's house, not mine," she protested, "and I do not
pretend to keep up----"

"You do not pretend to, because you could not do it," he interrupted
again.  "Your father is a multi-millionaire and your husband is not.
But it is your constant ideal, nevertheless, and your failures to
realise it, even in the degree to which you have tried, have sapped
your vitality to a point which even you can understand now, I should
suppose."

She looked doubtingly at him.

"Do you really mean, Dr. Stanchon," she began, "that this dreadful
attack----"

"'Attack'!" he muttered brusquely, "'attack'!  One would imagine I had
pulled you through pneumonia or peritonitis!  If, after constant
sapping and mining and starving-out the garrison, it gives way and
falls defeated, you choose to call the day of surrender a yielding to
an attack, then you have had an attack."

And again he left her abruptly, a prey to creeping, ugly doubts.  For
she had been very sorry for herself and the fatality that had stranded
her on the dreary coast where so many of her friends had met mysterious
wreckage.

"Has the doctor sent patients here before?" she asked her attendant the
next morning, when she sat, fresh and fragrant in her invalid ruffles,
at the window, watching the poultry yard, which somehow she had not
noticed before, and the cow browsing beside the brook where the white
ducks paddled, gossiping.

"Oh, yes, often," said the busy sister (she was Hester; the other was
Ann).  "We are never without some one.  So many people are ill in the
city.  Now I am going to clean your room, and perhaps you will feel
like stepping out on the balcony?"

Surprised, for she had not seen any such addition to the simple frame
house, she stepped through a window cut down somewhat clumsily, but
efficiently enough, and hinged to swing outward, onto a shallow, roofed
_loggia_ with vines grown from boxes on the sides and two long, low
chairs faced to the view of the hills.  In one of these sat a woman,
slender and motionless, whose glistening white wrapper seemed to melt
in the strong sun into the white of the painted wooden balustrade that
protected the balcony.  Flushed with an invalid's quick irritation and
resentful of any other occupant, for her raw nerves were not yet
healed, she was about to turn back hastily into the room when a second
glance assured her that it was only one of her own white wrappers
draped along the chair.  The face and hands that her vexed irritation
must have supplied amazed her, in retrospect, with their distinctness
of outline, and she trembled at her weak nerves.

From inside the room came the swishing of water and the sound of
scrubbing; soon the strong clean flavour of soapy boards floated out,
and the flick of the drops into the pail; from where she sat she could
see out of the corner of her eye the fluff of snowy suds that foamed
over the shining bucket as Hester rubbed the milky cake of soap with
the bristles.  Her strong strokes had a definite rhythm and set the
time for the stern old hymn-tune she crooned.  The listener on the
balcony obeyed her growing interest and turned her chair to face into
the room.  The kilted Hester, on her knees, her brow bound with a
glistening towel, threw her body forward with the regularity of a
rower, her strong, muscled arms shot out in a measured curve; on her
little island of dry boards she sang amid her clean, damp sea,
high-priestess of a lustral service as old as the oldest temple of man,
and the odour of her incense, the keen, sweet freshness of her
cleansing soap, rose to the heaven of her hymn.

"You sing as if you liked it," said the watcher.

"And so I do," said Hester.  "Things must be clean, and I like to make
them so."

"Why, you are doing just what we did in the gymnasium the year I went
there," cried the invalid, with the first real interest she had felt in
anything outside herself.  "We kneeled on the floor and swept our arms
out just like that!"

"If there were many of you, it must soon have been clean," said Hester,
moving the rug she knelt on deftly.  "Oh, we were not cleaning it,"
said the invalid smiling.  "It was only the same motion."

"Indeed?  Then why were you doing it?" Hester asked, turning her
flushed face in surprise toward the ruffled whiteness in the window.

She stared at the worker, but even as she stared she frowned
uncomfortably.

"Why, for--for exercise--for strength," she said slowly, and coloured
under Hester's smile....

Later in the day she moved out again upon the balcony, regretful for
the first time that no one of her own world could be there to talk with
her.  Hester, wiping bed, chair and mirror with the white cloth that
never seemed to soil, whipping the braided rag rugs below her on the
green with strong, firm strokes that recalled the scheduled blows she
had practised at a swinging leather ball, vexed her, somehow, and she
was conscious of a whimsical wish that her delusion of the white
wrapper stretched along the reclining chair had proved a reality.  The
soft grey shadows of early evening covered the little balcony, the
chairs were plunged in it, and it was with a cry of apology that she
stepped into a grey gown, so soft and thin that she had taken it for a
deeper shadow, merely, and had actually started to seat herself in the
long chair where the slender woman lay.  Her own body appeared so
robust beside this delicate creature's that pity smothered the surprise
at her quiet presence there, and the swift feeling that she herself was
by no means the frailest of the doctor's patients added to her
composure as she begged pardon for her clumsiness.

"I thought I was the only patient here," she explained.  "Miss Hester
and Miss Ann have a wonderful way of getting quiet and privacy in their
little house, haven't they?"

"Is it so little?" the stranger asked.  She felt embarrassed, suddenly,
and tactless, for she had taken it for granted that they were both of
the class to which the modest cottage must seem small.

"I only meant," she added hastily, for it seemed that at any cost this
gentle, pale creature must not be hurt, "I only meant that to take in
strangers, in this way, and to keep the family life entirely separate
requires, usually, much more space."

"But do they keep it separate--the family life!"

("Evidently," she thought, "they have not been able to give her a
private room, like mine, or perhaps she eats with them.")

"I think that is how they do it," the stranger went on, "by not having
any separate life, really.  It is all one life, with them."

"All one life..." the other repeated, vaguely, recalling, for some
reason, the doctor's words, "but, of course, in a larger establishment
that would not be possible.  With servants..."

"I suppose that is why they have no servants," said the stranger.

There was a soft assurance in the tone, soft, but undoubtedly there.
And yet what assurance should a woman have who did not find this house
small?  She discovered that she was still a little irritable, for she
spoke brusquely.

"People do not employ servants, I imagine, for the very simple reason
that they cannot afford to."

"Not always," said the other quietly.  "I have known Ann and Hester
many years, and there has never been a time when they could not have
afforded at the least one servant."

"Tastes differ, I suppose," she answered shortly.  "I should have
supposed that every woman would take the first opportunity of relieving
herself from the strain of household drudgery, which any ignorant
person can accomplish."

"Have you found so many of them to accomplish it for you?"

She flushed angrily.

"Dr. Stanchon has been talking about me!" she cried with hot memories
of her interminable domestic woes.

"Indeed not," said the grey lady.  "I knew nothing....  I only asked if
ignorant persons really accomplished their drudgery to any one's
satisfaction nowadays?  They used not to when--when I employed them...."

So she had been wrecked beyond repair, this shadowy, large-eyed thing!
She spoke as of a day long over.  The other woman felt ashamed of her
suspicion.

"No, indeed," she answered wearily, "that was an exaggeration,
naturally.  But they might, if they would take pains.  They are paid
enough for it, heaven knows."

"Ann and Hester are not paid," said the voice from the dim chair.
"Perhaps that is why they take pains."

The woman nodded fretfully.

"That is all very well," she said, "and sounds very poetic, but it
would be rather impractical for us all to do, on that account."

"Impractical?  _Impractical?_"

A hint of gentle laughter from the long chair.  "But it seems to me
that Ann and Hester are the least impractical of people--are they not?
They are surely less harassed than you were?"

("I must have been very sleepy: I don't remember telling her all about
it," thought the woman, "but she seems to know.")

"Yes," she said aloud, "I was harassed.  Nearly to death, it seems.  I
am hardly myself yet.  I suppose you have been through it all?"

"I have been through a great deal, yes."

The shadows deepened and a thin, new moon sank lower and lower.  The
grey figure grew less and less distinct to her, and before she knew it,
she slept.  When she woke, she was alone on the balcony, and the
sunlight lay in blue-white pools upon the floor.  For the first time in
her life she had slept alone under the stars, with no one to settle her
into her dreams or to attend on her when she woke from them, and
suspicion and displeasure darkened for a moment the freshest awakening
she could remember.  Had they really forgotten her?  No one seemed to
be coming, and after a quarter of an hour's impatient waiting she left
the long, couch-like chair, opened the door of her room and went with
quick determined steps down the narrow hall, down the stairs, straight
to the sounds of women's voices in the distance.  They led her through
a shining kitchen, where a patient, old clock presided, through a cool,
dim buttery into a primitive laundry, or washing shed, with deal tubs
and big copper cauldrons and a swept stone floor.  But no odour of the
keen cleanliness she had learned to connect with Hester's soap ruled
the wash-house this morning: a breeze from Araby the blest blew through
the piles of dewy crimson strawberries that heaped themselves in yellow
bowls, in silver-tinted pans, in leaf-lined wicker baskets, and brought
all the gardens of June into the bare, stone room.  Hester's quick
fingers twisted the delicate hulls from the scarlet, scented globes,
and near her, measuring mounds of glittering sugar, stood a broader,
squarer woman with greying hair, who smiled gravely at her, facing her.

"Here she is, now," said this woman, whom she guessed to be Ann, and
Hester, turning to her, added, as one who finishes a sentence, merely,

"And I was just getting ready a dish of strawberries for you.  Mother
has stepped out for your egg: the brown hen has just laid.  The rolls
are in the oven and mother has the chocolate ready.  I thought you
would be early this morning, you were sleeping so soundly."

"Early? early?" she repeated, taken aback by their easy greeting of
her.  "Why, what do you mean?"  And just then the clock struck seven,
deliberately.

"Why--why, I thought--then you did not forget--" she began, uncertainly.

"There is nothing like the open air for sleeping, when one is ready for
it," said Hester.  "Did you not notice the cover I threw over you?  You
must have gone off before it grew dark, quite."

"Oh, no, because I was with--" then she stopped abruptly.  For it
dawned on her that the other woman must have been a dream, since she
perceived that she was unwilling to ask about her, so faintly did that
conversation recall itself to her, so uncertain her memory proved as to
how that other came and went, or when.

"It was a dream, of course," she thought, and said, a shade resentful
still,

"I never slept--that way--before."

"It seems to suit you," said Ann briskly, "for you have never left your
room till now."

Then it dawned on her suddenly.

"Why, I am well!" she said.

"Very nearly, I think," Hester answered her.  "Will you have your
breakfast under the tree, while sister picks the berries?"

To this she agreed gladly and found herself, still wondering at the new
strength that filled her, under a pear-tree, in a pleasant patch of
shadow, eating with relish from Hester's morning tray.  Ann knelt not
far from her in the sun, not too hot at this hour for a hardy worker,
and soon her low humming rose like a bee's note from under her broad
hat.

"The wash is all ready for you, sister, on the landing," she called.
"Tell mother her new towels bleached to a marvel: they are on the
currant-bushes now.  I'll wet them down and iron them off while the
syrup is cooking, I think--I know she's anxious to handle them."

"Are you always busy, Miss Ann?" her guest inquired, for Ann's fingers
never stopped even while she looked toward the house-door.

"Always in the morning, of course," she answered, directly.  "Every one
must be, if things are to get done."

"But in the afternoon you are ironing, and Miss Hester tells me you do
a great deal in the garden.  When do you rest?"

"In my bed," said Ann briefly.

She was less sweetly grave than her sister, and it was easy to see that
her tongue was sharper.  She would not have been so soothing to an
invalid, but the woman under the pear-tree had her nerves better in
hand by now, and felt, somehow, upon her mettle to prove to this broad,
curt Ann that there were tasks in the world beyond her sturdy
rule-of-thumb.

"But surely every one needs time to think--to consider," she began
gently.  "Don't you find it so?"

"To plan out the day, do you mean?" said Ann, moving to a new patch.
"I generally do that at night before I go to sleep."

"No, no," she explained, "not the day's work--that must be done, of
course--but the whole Scheme, life, and one's relation to it..."

"I don't feel any call to study that out," said Ann.  "I haven't the
headpiece for it."

"No, but some people have, and so----"

"Have you?" said Ann.

She bit her lip.

"It is surely every woman's duty to cultivate herself as far as she
can," she began.  "Nobody denies that nowadays."

Ann was silent.

"Don't you agree with me?" the woman persisted.  "You surely know what
I mean?"

"Oh, yes, I know what you mean, well enough," Ann said at last.  "I
know you have to cultivate strawberries, if you want to get more of
'em--and bigger.  The question is, what do you get out of it?"

A flood of explanations pressed to her lips, but just as they brimmed
over, some quick surmise of Ann's shrewd replies choked them back.
After all, what had she got out of it?  What that she could show?  She
rose slowly and walked back to her room, where the bath, fresh,
uncreased clothes, and Hester's deft ministry waited ready for her.
Later, she lay again in the balcony chair, not so soothed by her little
pile of books as she had looked to be.  Beautiful, pellucid thought,
deep-flowing philosophies, knife-edged epigrams and measured verse lay
to her hand, but they seemed unreal, somehow, and their music echoed
like meaningless words shouted, for the echo merely, in empty halls.
She drowsed discontentedly and woke from a dream of the grey lady to
see her stretched in the companion chair, herself asleep, it seemed,
for it was only after a long doubtful stare from the other that she
opened her great dark eyes.

"And I almost thought I had dreamed of meeting you before!  Wasn't it
absurd?  I am only now realising how ill I have been--things were all
so confused...  I find that I can't even reply to Miss Ann as I ought
to be able to, when she scorns the effects of culture!"

"Does Ann scorn culture?" the grey lady asked in mild surprise.  "I
never knew that."

"She scorns the leisure that goes to produce it, anyway."

"Did you give her a concrete instance of any special culture?"

She moved uneasily in her chair.

"Oh--concrete, _concrete_!" she repeated deprecatingly.  "Must I be as
concrete with you as with her?  Surely culture, and all that it
implies, need not be forced to defend itself with concrete examples?"

"I'm afraid that I agree with Ann," said the soft voice in the shadow.
"I'm afraid that so far as I am concerned, culture needs just that
defence."

She tried to smile the superior smile she had mustered for Ann,
kneeling in her checked sunbonnet, but this was difficult, with a woman
so obviously of her own class and kind.  Still the woman was clearly
unreasonable, and she was able, at least, to speak forcibly as she
replied,

"Aren't you rather severe on the enormous majority of us, in that case?
We can't all be great philosophers or productive artists, you know, and
yet between us and Ann's preserved strawberries and Hester's scrubbing
there's a wide gulf--you must admit that!"

The stranger rose lightly from her chair and walked, with a swaying
motion like a long-stemmed wild flower, toward the home-made
window-door.  At the sill she paused and fixed her great eyes on the
stronger woman--stronger, plainly, for the frail white hand on the
china knob supported her while she stood, and she seemed to cling to
the woodwork and press against it as she sank into the shadow of the
eaves.

"A wide gulf, indeed," she said slowly, in her soft, breathless voice,
with an intonation almost like a foreigner's, her listener decided
suddenly, "a gulf so wide that unless you can cross it with some bridge
of honest accomplishment, it will swallow you all very soon--you women
of culture!"

She slipped across the sill and presently Hester's clear, firm voice
was heard in the narrow hall,

"Yes, yes, I'm coming!" and the balcony was drowned in the dusk, and
the woman on it yielded consciously to the great desire for sleep that
possessed her.  But before she drifted off, not afraid, this time, of
night under the sky, it occurred to her dimly that Hester's other
patient must come through her own room whenever she used the little
_loggia_.

"What is she--an anarchist? a socialist?" she thought.  "I must surely
ask Hester about her.  'You women of culture,' indeed!  What does she
call herself, I wonder?"

That next morning as she waited idly for bath and breakfast, the
stranger possessed her thoughts more and more.  Only in such an
absolutely unconventional place, she told herself, could a completely
unknown woman appear (in her own apartments, really) and discuss with
her so nonchalantly such strange questions.  In many ways this delicate
creature's words seemed to echo Dr. Stanchon's, and this seemed all the
more natural, now, since she was so obviously still his patient.
Hester had said that he sent many there--this one was perhaps too frail
ever to leave them, and felt so much at home that no one thought to
speak of her.

A healthy hunger checked these musings, and more amused than irritated
at such unusual desertion, she bathed and dressed unaided and went down
to the kitchen.

"They will soon see by the way I keep my temper, now," she thought,
"and my strength, that I am quite able to go back.  I really must see
how the children are getting on."

Following the ways of her last journey through the house she found the
kitchen, where an oven-door ajar and a half-dozen small, fragrant
loaves in the opening showed her that though empty, the room was
deserted only for a housewife's rapid moment.  She sat down therefore
beneath the patient old clock, and waited.  Soon she heard a quick,
bustling step, unlike Hester's lithe quietness or the heavier stride of
Ann, and knew that the little old lady who entered, fresh and tidy as a
clean withered apple, was their mother.  She had a pan of new-picked
peas in one arm and a saucer of milk balanced in the other hand,
plainly the breakfast for the sleek black cat that bounded in beside
her.  This she set carefully on a flagstone corner before she noticed
her visitor, it seemed, and yet she did not appear startled at company,
and showed all of the younger women's untroubled ease as she explained
that a message from Dr. Stanchon had called them both away suddenly,
very early.

"It was perhaps some other patient in the house?" the guest suggested
curiously, with a vivid memory of the grey lady's frail white hand and
breathless voice.

"Perhaps," said the old woman equably, and tied a checked apron over
the white one, the better to attack the peas.

From the shining pan she tossed the fairy green globes into the rich
yellow bowl of earthenware at her side, with the quick ease of those
veined, old hands that outwork the young ones, and her guest watched
her in silence for a few minutes, hypnotised, almost, by the steady
pit-pat of the little green balls against the bowl.

"And when do you expect them back?" she asked finally.

"I don't know," said the old lady, "but they'll be back as soon as the
work is over, you may depend--they don't lag, my girls, neither of 'em."

"I am sure of that," she assented quickly.  "They are the hardest
workers I ever saw: I wonder that they never rest, and tell them so."

"Time enough for resting when all's done," said the old lady briskly.
"That was my mother's word before me and I've handed it down to Ann and
Hester."

"But then, at that rate, none of us would ever rest, would we?" she
protested humourously.

"This side o' green grave?" the old lady shot out.  "Maybe so.  But
podding peas is a kind of rest--after picking 'em!"

"And have you really picked all these--and in the sun, too?" she said,
surprised.  "I trust not for me--I could get along perfectly..."

The old lady jumped briskly after her loaves, tapped the bottoms
knowingly, then stood each one on its inverted pan in a fragrant row on
the dresser.

"Peas or beans or corn--it makes no odds, my dear," she cried
cheerfully.  "It's all to be done, one way or another, you see."

An inspiration came to the idler by the window, and before she had
quite caught at the humour of it, she spoke.

"Why should you get my breakfast--for I am sure you are going to?" she
said.  "Why shouldn't I--if you think I could--for I don't like to sit
here and have you do it all!"

"Why not, indeed?" the old woman replied, with a shrewd smile at her.
"Hester judged you might offer, and left the tray ready set."

"Hester judged?" she repeated wonderingly.  "Why, how could she,
possibly?  How could she know I would come down, even?"

"She judged so," the mother nodded imperturbably.  "The kettle's on the
boil, now, and I've two of the rusks you relished yesterday on the
pantry shelf.  Just dip 'em in that bowl of milk in the window and slip
'em in the oven--it makes a tasty crust.  She keeps some chocolate
grated in a little blue dish in the corner and the butter's in a crock
in the well.  The brown hen will show you her own egg, I'll warrant
that."

Amused, she followed all these directions, and poured herself a cup of
steaming chocolate, the first meal of her own preparing since childish
banquets filched from an indulgent cook.  And then, the breakfast over,
she would have left the kitchen, empty just then, for the mistress of
it had pottered out on one of her endless little errands, had not a
sudden thought sent a flush to her forehead, so that she turned
abruptly at the threshold and walking swiftly to the water spigot, sent
a stream into a tiny brass-bound tub she took from the deep window
seats, frothed it with Hester's herb-scented soap, and rinsed and
dipped and dried each dish and cup of her own using before the old
woman returned.

"It is surprising how--how _satisfactory_ it makes one feel, really,"
she began hastily at the housewife's friendly returning nod, "to deal
with this sort of work.  One seems to have accomplished something
that--that had to be done...  I don't know whether you see what I mean,
exactly...."

"Bless you, my dear, and why shouldn't I see?" cried the other,
scrubbing the coats of a lapful of brown jacketed potatoes at the
spigot.  "Every woman knows that feeling, surely?"

"I never did," she said, simply.  "I thought it was greasy, thankless
work, and felt very sorry for those who did it."

"Did they look sad?" asked the old worker.

In a flash of memory they passed before her, those white-aproned,
bare-elbowed girls she had watched idly in many countries and at many
seasons; from the nurse that bathed and combed her own children,
singing, to the laundry-maids whose laughter and ringing talk had waked
her from more than one uneasy afternoon sleep.

"Why, no, I can't say that they did," she answered slowly, "but to do
it steadily, I should think..."

"It's the steady work that puts the taste into the holiday, my mother
used to say," said the old woman shortly.  "Where's the change, else?"

"But of course there are many different forms of work," she began,
slowly, as though she were once for all making the matter clear to
herself, and not at all explaining obvious distinctions to an
uneducated old woman, "and brain workers need rest and change as much,
yes, more, than mere labourers."

"So they tell me," said Hester's mother respectfully, "though of course
I know next to nothing of it myself.  Ann says it's that makes it so
dangerous for women folks to worry at their brains too much, for she's
taken notice, she says, that mostly they're sickly or cranky that works
too much that way.  Hard to get on with, she says they are, the best of
'em."

"Indeed!" she cried indignantly, "and I suppose to be 'easy to get on
with' is the main business of women, then!"

"Why, Lord above us, child!" answered the old woman briskly, dropping
her white potatoes into a brown dish of fresh-drawn water, "if the
women are not to be easy got on with, who's to be looked to for it,
then; the children--or the men?"

She gathered up the brown peelings and bagged them carefully with the
pea pods.

"For the blacksmith's pig," she said.  "We don't keep one and he gives
us a ham every year....  Not that it's not a different matter with you,
of course," she added politely.  "There's some, of course, that's
needed by the world, for books and music and the like o' that--I don't
need Hester to tell me so.  There's never an evening in winter, when
all's swept and the lamp trimmed and a bowl of apples out, and Ann and
I sit with our bit of sewing, that I don't thank God for the books
Hester reads out to us.  One was written by a woman writer that the
doctor sent us here for a long, long time--poor dear, but she was
feeble!

"She worked with the girls at everything they did, that she could, by
doctor's orders, and it put a little peace into her, she told me.
You've a look in the eyes like her--there were thousands read her
books."

The guest rose abruptly.

"I never wrote a book--or did anything," she said briefly, and turned
to the door.

"You don't tell me!" the old mother stammered.  "Why, I made sure by
your look--what made ye so mortal tired, then, deary?"

"I must find that out," she said, slowly, her hand on the knob.
"I--must--find--that--out!"

And on the balcony she paced and thought for an hour, but there was no
calmness in her forehead till the afternoon, when alone with Hester's
mother, for the daughters did not return all that day, she worked with
pressed lips at their tasks, picking Ann's evening salad, sprinkling
cool drops over Hester's fresh-dried linen, brought in by armfuls from
the currant-bushes, spreading the supper-table, pressing out the
ivory-moulded cottage cheese and ringing its dish with grape-leaves
gathered from the well-house.

So intent was she at these tasks, that she heard no footsteps along the
grass, and only as she put the fifth chair at the white-spread table
(for the old mother had been mysteriously firm in her certainty that
they should need it) did she turn to look into the keen brown eyes of
the wise physician who had left her weeks ago in the bed above them.
He gave her a long, piercing look.  Then,

"I thought so," he said quietly.  "We will go back to-morrow, you and
I--I need your bedroom."

Through the open door she caught a quick glimpse of Ann and Hester half
supporting, half carrying up the stairs a woman heavily veiled in black
crêpe; Hester did not join them till late in the meal, and went through
the room with a glass of milk afterward.  No one spoke further of her
presence among them; no one thanked her for her services; all was
assumed and she blessed them for it.

The doctor passed the evening with his new patient, and when she
mounted the stairs for her last night she found her simple luggage in
the room next hers: there was no question of helping her to bed, and
she undressed thoughtfully alone.  The house was very still.

Her window was a deep dormer, and as she leaned out of it, for a breath
of the stars, she saw Dr. Stanchon stretched in her chair on the
balcony, his face white and tired in the moonlight.  In the chair near
her, so near that she could touch it, lay the frail creature in the
grey dress, black now at night.

"It is his old patient!" she thought contentedly, remembering with
vexation that she had absolutely forgotten to ask the house-mother
about her and why she had not appeared; and she began to speak, when
the other raised her hand warningly, and she saw that Dr. Stanchon
slept.

Why she began to whisper she did not know, but she remembered afterward
that their conversation, below breath as it was, was the longest they
had yet had, though she could recall only the veriest scraps of it.
For instance:

"But Mary and Martha?" she had urged, "surely there is a deep meaning
in that, too?  It was Martha who was reproved...."

"One would imagine that every woman to-day judged herself a Mary--and
that is a dangerous judgment to form, one's self," the other whispered.

"But to deliberately assume these tasks--simple because they clear my
life and keep me balanced--when I have no need to do them, seems to me
an affectation, absurd!"

"How can a thing be absurd if it brings you ease?"

"But I don't need to do them, really, for myself."

"For some one else, then?"

It was then that another veil dropped from before her.

"Then is that why, do you think, people devote themselves to those low,
common things--great saints and those that give up their own lives?"

 "I think so, yes."

"It is a real relief to them?"

"Why not? ..."

She fell asleep on the broad window-seat, her head on her arms, and
when she woke and groped for her bed in the dark, the balcony was empty.

There was no bustle of departure: a grave hand-shaking from the
daughters, a kiss on the mother's withered, rosy cheek.

"Come back again, do," said the old woman and the doctor commented upon
this as they sat in the train.

"That is a great compliment," he said.  "I never knew her to say that
except to a long-time patient of mine that stayed a long time (more's
the pity!) with them.  'Come back,' said Mother to her.  'Come soon,
deary, for the house will miss your grey dress so soft on the floor.'
They would have cured her if anybody could."

"Then you don't consider her cured?" she said with a shock of
disappointment.  "I am so sorry.  But it is surely a wonderful
place--one can't talk about it, but I see you know."

"Oh, yes, I know," he said briefly.  "I saw you would pull through in
great shape there.  This patient I spoke of used to tell me that the
duty of her life, here and through Eternity, ought by rights to be the
preaching of the gospel she learned there.  Well--maybe it is, for all
we know.  If I could have cured her, she would have been a great--a
really great novelist, I think."

"If you could have--" she gasped, seizing his arm, "you mean----"

"I mean that I couldn't," he answered simply.  "She died there.  I
dreamed of her last night."




THE GYPSY

Very early in the last century, while Napoleon still reigned over
Europe and the people went journeys in post-chaises through England,
John Appleyard, the only son of a thriving Sussex farmer, met, while
walking across one of his father's fields, a troup of gypsies camping
under a hedge.  Among them was a dark young woman, very lovely, with
straight, heavy brows and a yard of thick blue-black hair, which she
was drying in the wind at the moment, having washed it in the brook.
John looked at her hard, walked by, turned, looked again, and stood
staring so long that a surly gypsy father slipped a fowling-piece into
his elbow and approached him menacingly.

"My daughter, young sir," he said shortly, "may sleep in a wagon and
not eat off chayny plates as the like o' you do, but I'll have none
eying her like that, be who he may, for she's a good girl, she is, and
the best man that walks is none too good to be her husband!"

"Am I good enough?" says John Appleyard, quietly.

And as a matter of fact he married her in the parish church in three
weeks' time, and his mother cried herself sick.

It was no use trying to live at the farm, after that, for the
neighbours smiled and pointed, and the old farmer was scandalised at
his new relatives, and though he had nothing against his handsome
daughter-in-law personally, felt himself a marked man and counted the
spoons every night.  So John, who had never loved farming, compounded
for half the outlying land, which he sold very shrewdly, left his only
sister the farm, shook hands all 'round and sailed with Lilda, his
wife, for the United States of America.

On the voyage he made friends with the captain, who took a great liking
to him (and had no dislike, the passengers said, for Mistress Lilda),
and put him in the way of business with a thriving grain-merchant of
Boston, Massachusetts, whom, after twenty prosperous years, he bought
out, and founded the house of Appleyard.  He had fondly hoped that this
house should outlast the century, but his only son was no merchant, and
all for the sea and its constant change and chance, and John was too
sensible to blame the lad's roving soul to any one but Nature.  So with
a sigh and a thrill of how his old father must have felt, he bought a
fine trading-packet for young John and established his daughter's
husband (she was a steady, prudent girl) as his partner and heir.

John II did wonderfully well and found himself at fifty the owner of
the most flourishing packet line in the States, with his only son
prize-man at Harvard University and a daughter who nearly whitened his
hair by her mad plan for acting in public on the stage.  The son went
early into buying and selling on 'Change, and was a weighty bank
president by the time his daughter had finished her schooling.

This was a trifle more elaborate and thorough-going than most girls of
twenty could boast at that time, and for three reasons.  First, because
she had a brilliant mind and great powers of concentration; next,
because John III was not a little vain, in a quiet way, of all his
Greek and Latin and historical research; and had plenty of leisure for
imparting them; last, because his son--and only other child--had been a
disappointment to him in that line, not only failing to repeat his
father's brilliant college record, but proving actually slow at his
books and decidedly averse to study, though a steady, competent
accountant and investor.

So Lilda, named for her great-grandmother by John III's lady (who,
being of Knickerbocker descent, laid great stress on family names),
added to the somewhat doubtful accomplishments of a fashionable
finishing school a great part of what her own daughter, years later,
learned at the then popular woman's college.  Nor was other and more
practical lore neglected, for her maternal grandmother, a notable
_hausfrau_ of the old school, taught her, in two long summers at her
great country estate on the Hudson River, all the household arts and
duties that girls of her own age were beginning to despise.  So that
when, after a brilliant début in New York and a winter season there in
which her wit and beauty, to say nothing of her horsemanship and
exquisite dancing had made her the belle of that critical metropolis
(not too large, then, for one reigning toast), she married one of the
country's most prominent young lawyers, already suggested for high
posts abroad, it was felt that America would honour both herself and
whatever Court should receive these two young fortunates from her hands.

There is a picture of her in the Court dress in which she made her bow
to Queen Victoria, standing at the foot of a Roman stairway of
yellowish marble, near a fountain, her baby boy clinging to her hand.
Under the blue-black of her heavy hair, her cheeks are tinted like
wall-ripened peaches; her strong, curved figure is just the Flora and
Juno of the ancient city's statuary.

There is still whispered, in a few old New York houses that have kept
their white marble and black walnut, the audacious story of Lilda
Appleyard's falling-in-love.  It was at the Philadelphia Centennial of
'76, whither her father had taken her for a long visit, for its
educational influences.  He used to say that women had little chance of
acquiring practical information of the large and comprehensive order,
and that no one would ever know without a trial what of all that sort
their brains could or could not take in.  The progress of the world, he
said, was no greater than the progress of its homes, "and that," he
used to wind up, "is no more nor less than the progress of their women."

So Miss Lilda studied the progress of all three at the Centennial, and
took sage notes in a little red morocco book, and the proud banker read
them in private for years afterward to his friends.  But she was not
engaged in this interesting occupation by night as well as day, you may
rest assured.  Many a ball and high tea did Philadelphia's ladies offer
their visiting friends, and there was not one of any consequence that
failed to beg the honour of Miss Lilda Appleyard's company.  And her
luggage was by no means limited to the little red morocco book!

A party from New York had come in a special train to Philadelphia for
three days at the Centennial, and the occasion was seized by the wife
of an army officer to give a large ball in her great house in
Germantown.  All visiting Knickerbockers who might expect to be asked
anywhere were asked to attend this ball, and Lilda's maid assured the
hotel chambermaid that she never had known her young lady so hard to
suit.  And finally, after three different trials, to pick out that
strange black mousseline-de-soie!  She looked like pictures of
foreigners, to tell you the truth, her young lady did!  Of course, her
grandmamma's pearls would make anything dressy, and there's no denying
the black made her arms and neck look like ivory--but to snatch up that
flame-coloured scarf her grandpapa had brought from India, and knot it
over her shoulder at the last minute!  It was downright outlandish.
Mrs. Appleyard would never have liked it.

She had a high, staglike carriage of the head, and as she was rather
tall, she looked over most of her girl companions.  Halfway through the
dance she raised this dark head a little higher and stared.

"Who is that man?" she asked abruptly.

"Elliot Lestrange," the girls told her, "but he doesn't care for women.
He's very proud."

"I should like to meet him," she said simply.

They tittered and teased her, but after all, she was a belle, and Mr.
Lestrange was sent for.  The young dancing man who undertook the
message told freely how Lestrange had said,

"Oh, hang it all, I'm not dancing to-night!"

"But she's Miss Appleyard, of Boston and New York--she's a beauty!"

"Then she must have plenty of beaux, Clarke, without me!"

So young Mr. Clarke took his little revenge (for after all, he had used
his dance with the dark beauty for this stupid errand and resented it),
and in presenting the chilly hero, said maliciously,

"Here is Mr. Lestrange, Miss Appleyard--but he says you must have
plenty of beaux without him!"

"That is just it," returned the calm Lilda, looking straight at the
grey eyes that faced her under the thick honey-coloured hair
(Lestrange, though of Huguenot descent, was curiously blonde).  "I have
_not_ enough beaux--without Mr. Lestrange!  Will you have the next
waltz, Mr. Lestrange--Mr. Clarke's, I believe it is?"

"Thank you, yes, and this schottische, too, if I may," says Lestrange.
The young people standing about said that they never took their eyes
off each other from the moment she spoke to him, and that they swung
into the dance like automatons, leaving her lawful squire, a young
Philadelphian, irate and ridiculous.

"These may be New York manners," he said sourly, "but they would never
do in a _civilized city_!"

His opinion was a matter of indifference to the couple.

They are supposed to have talked very little, but danced frequently
together.  As the young ladies were putting on their capes and cloaks,
just before the dawn, one among them shrieked suddenly across the room.

"Why, Lilda! where is your flame-coloured scarf!  You've lost it!"

"I gave it away," she said briefly.

They gasped.

"Good heavens!" said another.  "He'll be proposing before you know it!"

"He proposed at twelve," Miss Appleyard said placidly, "and I accepted
him.  Will you be maid-of-honour, Evelyn?"

No one had ever told her of John I and his gypsy.

They had a wonderful wedding-tour among the Italian lakes and came back
after a three months' honeymoon to the solid "brown stone front" of the
period, which, furnished from cellar to attic, had been John's wedding
gift to his daughter.

"Well!" some gossip had cried, "it's big enough, in all conscience!
But I suppose Mr. Appleyard was thinking of the size of Elliot's
family."  (He was one of eight children and had nine uncles and aunts.)

"None of us has ever had but two," said Lilda calmly, "and the
Appleyards don't change, papa says."

And as a matter of fact little Elliot Lestrange never had but one
contestant for nursery rights--his fair-haired, gentle sister.

"I wonder which of the children will be the 'wild one'?" Lilda asked
her husband one night, as they sat opposite each other in the great,
high-ceilinged dining-room.  They were, for a marvel, alone, and unlike
the ordinary quiet jog-trot couple who welcome any casual stranger to
break the monotony of five years of table tête-à-tête, they delighted
in this happy chance that recalled their honeymoon meals together.
They were so much sought after, and Lestrange's position required so
much and such varied entertaining, that they could not remember when,
before, the attentive coloured butler had had but two glasses to fill.

Lestrange looked admiringly at his handsome wife.  Never had he ceased
to bless the day he married her.  He was a proud man, conventional and
ambitious to a degree, and at moments during his short betrothal period
he had felt threatening chills of doubt when away from his enchantress
as to the wisdom of such a feverishly short acquaintance, such a
sudden, almost dramatic alliance.  Never for a moment would he have
been satisfied with the standing of an ordinary lawyer; the career he
had set before himself needed a larger background than any one city,
even his country's metropolis, could offer, and in his future the
position and qualities of his wife would count enormously.  Money,
breeding and beauty he had always told himself he must marry, but to
win brains and a loving heart into the bargain was more than even he
could have expected, and he admitted the justice of his friends'
half-earnest jealousy.

To-night he raised his glass gallantly and drank to her bright dark
eyes, noting with pleasure that she had remembered to have her new gown
of the filmy black material he fancied so much!

"Why should either of them be 'wild,' dearest?" he asked.

"Papa told me once, when I was a child, that every Appleyard that he
had ever heard of had two children, a son and a daughter," she said
thoughtfully, "and one of them was always staid and steady and--oh,
well, looked up to in the community, you know, and the other always
flighty and ... unusual, to put it mildly.  And certainly, as far back
as _I_ can remember, it has been so.

"There was Aunt Adelaide.  Grandpapa found her one day acting in a play
in the town hall in the little village where they went for the
summer--right on the stage with all those travelling actors.  She
actually wanted to go with them!"

"Absurd!" said her husband, selecting and peeling for her a specially
fine peach.

"But grandpapa himself," she went on thoughtfully, "threatened to go as
a common sailor before the mast, rather than be tied down to
business--papa showed me a letter he wrote once; he said it was
sickening to him to think of putting up the shutters every night and
heaping up money in a strong-box."

"How about your great-grandfather?" he asked idly.  "I don't know about
him," she said, "except that I am named for my great-grandmother.  They
were the first Appleyards to come to this country, you know."

"I know," he said politely.  He himself traced his ancestry to a cousin
of Henry of Navarre, and was furiously proud of it, though wild horses
could not have dragged from him an allusion to it.

They dipped into the heavy crystal finger bowls in silence.  Then, as a
sudden curious idea struck him,

"But how do you account, on that theory, for your own generation?" he
asked.  "Certainly no one could call Johnny wild?"

"Poor old Johnny!" she said, laughing, "no, indeed!  The wildest step
he ever took was to put type-writing machines in the bank!"

"Then, is it you?" he demanded, and smiled gravely, for her dignified
young matronhood was his pride.

"It may come out in me later," she threatened, "for Appleyards don't
change, you know."

But old Mr. Appleyard, who perhaps knew more instances of the tradition
than he imparted to his daughter, died peacefully at seventy-two, the
accepted Appleyard age for that process, convinced that he, at last,
had produced two steady children: he was a little worried about his
grandson, young Elliot, who displayed a freakish talent for composing
and performing music for the violin, and an unfortunate preference for
the society of professional musicians, of which his mother seemed
almost culpably tolerant, not to say proud.  The arts were rising,
socially, in that generation, and Elliot was actually excused from an
examination in ethics for the purpose of attending a concert by the
Boston Symphony Society.

By this time, of course, they had returned from their European period.
It had been a brilliant ten years, and Mrs. Lestrange had met most
royalties and all travelling Americans of any consequence--all with the
same gracious dignity, the same delicate balance of charm and reserve
that delighted foreigner and compatriot alike.  Her portrait was
painted by a great German, her bust was modelled by a great Frenchman,
the words of a little lullaby she had composed for her baby girl was
set to music and made famous through Europe by a great Italian.  Queen
Victoria complimented her on her devoted personal care of her children,
and sent her an autographed _carte de visite_, as they were still
called then, framed in brilliants.  The silver trowel with which she
laid the foundation stone of her school for instructing the
peasant-girls of her adopted country in the simple household arts is
still a bone of contention between her two proud children.  A duke
stood godfather to her little Wilhelmina and Royalty herself
embroidered at least one frill of the baby's christening robe.

When the children were twelve and fourteen, however, the family
returned; papered, painted and decorated the house anew from top to
bottom, and settled down to the task that had brought them back--the
bringing up of their boy and girl in an American tradition.  If Mrs.
Lestrange ever missed the polish and variety of European social life,
if she found the "Anglo-mania" (just then so fashionable in New York) a
little shallow and unconvincing, she never showed it.  Handsome and
serene, a trifle more matronly than women of her age appear to-day,
perhaps, but none the less admired for it, she moved through her duties
of household, nursery, ballroom and _salon_, omitting nothing,
excelling in all.

No charity bazaar, no educational exhibition, no welcoming of
distinguished foreigners, no celebration of the arts, was complete
without Mrs. Elliot Lestrange.  For her son's sake she patronized music
extensively, for her daughter's, she sat through endless balls and
garden parties.  By the time they were both married, her dark hair was
powdered with silver.

"What a beautiful old lady mamma is going to make," Wilhelmina said to
her brother, who had made a flying visit across the Atlantic and left
the old Italian villa where he made music all day among the birds and
orange-trees, to see his sister's baby son.

"You think so?" he answered quickly, with his darting, foreign air.  "I
am myself far from certain."

"Why, Elly, what do you mean?" she cried, looking up a moment from the
lace-trimmed bassinet.  "What a thing to say!"

He laughed indulgently.

"Oh, you know everything I say always shocked you, Sister Mina," he
said.  "What a joy it must have been to you and father when I left
these Puritan shores for good!"

"No, no," she began, but he tapped her lips.

"Yes, yes!" he contradicted.  "Even to marry an opera singer, you were
glad to see me go!  But about mamma: I suppose you mean that she will
sit in a Mechlin cap and knit, with a blue Angora cat on the rug beside
her, and hear this little lady in the bassinet here say her lessons?"

Something very like this had been in Wilhelmina's mind and she admitted
it.

"Well," young Elliot said, reflectively, "all I can say is, I don't
think so.  There's something about mamma that you can't be sure of."

"Why, Elly, what do you mean?"

"I can't explain it exactly," he said, "but she's very deep--mamma.
Father doesn't understand her, you know."

"Now, Elliot, that is rank nonsense!" his sister contradicted.  "You
remind me of that nurse Dr. Stanchon sent up when mamma had that fit of
not sleeping last year.  She and mamma got on famously, from the first;
she stayed out of doors all night with her till mamma got to sleeping
again.  She was used to it--the nurse, I mean--and didn't mind, she
said, she'd been doing it in the Adirondacks.

"I remember asking her why she thought mamma should have insomnia--for
there was nothing whatever on her mind, and they say that's the cause,
you know.  She gave me the strangest look.

"'Are you sure your mother has nothing on her mind?' she asked me,
'your mother's very deep, you know!'

"'What nonsense, Miss Jessop!' I told her.  'Mamma's as open as the
day!'"

Elliot laughed.

"Sensible woman, your Miss Jessop," he said.

"Oh, I don't know.  She was very decided, certainly, and easy in her
ways.  More so than I quite like in a trained nurse.  I will say for
her, though, that the out-of-doors idea was hers.  Though father was
quite alarmed about it."

"That's what I say.  Father doesn't understand her."

"Oh, Elly, how can you?  Every one says there never were two people so
suited to each other.  There's not one wish of father's she doesn't
carry out, and never has been."

"I don't say not," he agreed, "but that merely shows what a good,
clever wife she is.  That doesn't say he understands her.  He certainly
never understood me, I know; Uncle John didn't either."

"But you were always--always--_queer_, you know, Elly," she explained
deprecatingly.

"Was I?" he questioned lightly.  "Mamma understood me, all the same.
So perhaps she's 'queer,' too."

"Nonsense," Wilhelmina said briefly.  "Mamma is like anybody else, only
a great deal cleverer."

"Maybe, maybe," he repeated thoughtfully.  "But she always gives me the
impression of having something up her sleeve.  She said a strange thing
to me after my little girls--the twins, you know--were born.  She was
holding them out in the orange grove, and saying such sweet things to
Maddelina, and then she turned to me suddenly and said,

"'Have I been a good mother to you, Elliot?'

"'Why, madre, you've been perfect,' I said.

"'Is there anything more you think I could ever do for you?' she asked.

"'Honestly, dear, I don't think there is,' I said.

"'That's all I wanted to know,' she said, and sailed the next day....
What's the matter?  How strange you look!"

"It's only that she said just that to me, last week," Wilhelmina told
him, "and left the next day for New York.  But I supposed it was to get
back to father.  She depends so on him."

"Do you really think so?" he asked curiously.

But every one agreed with Wilhelmina--perhaps because Wilhelmina very
seldom said anything that any one was likely to disagree with--and so
every one was much surprised at the comparatively short time that Mrs.
Lestrange spent in retirement after her husband's sudden death.  He had
not the Appleyard habit of living to be seventy-two, it appeared, and
succumbed to pneumonia, following fatigue and exposure.

His wife's hair turned quickly to an iron-grey, soon after, but she
moved steadily on among the many educational and philanthropic schemes
with which she had begun to fill her time after her daughter's
marriage.  Organized charity was developing rapidly, just then, and
Mrs. Lestrange's clear common sense, executive ability and knowledge of
European institutions of the sort made her, with her wealth and
leisure, a leader on New York boards and councils.

It was noted that the year after her widowhood found her less
frequently in the public meetings, less willing to organise new centres
of work, more determined to avoid presidencies and chairmanships.  For
this she gave as an excuse the frequent trips abroad, which seemed to
have no special purpose and displeased Wilhelmina, who frequently
offered her a home in Boston.

"I cannot understand why she refuses," said Wilhelmina, on the occasion
of Elliot's last flying trip to America.  "The children would love
their granny to be with us, and she could have her own sitting-room.
Can't you persuade her, Elly?"

"I'm afraid not," he answered absently.  "You know she's winding up all
those boards and trade-schools and hospitals and things?"

"And a good thing, too," said his sister.  "Mamma's done enough for the
community.  She ought to settle down.  And you see she's going to."

"So that's the way it looks to you, Mina?" he asked, looking
searchingly into her pale blue eyes, and shrugging his shoulders
slightly.

"Gracious, Elliot, if you know so much more about mamma than I do, why
don't you ask her to live with you and Maddelina?" she suggested
sharply.

"It wouldn't do any good--she'd never think of it," he answered simply.

"Well, of course, she and Maddelina..."

"Exactly," he agreed with his teasing foreign smile.

"And I'll tell you another thing," she went on; "all these sudden trips
about the country and to Europe--what is the sense?  Mamma will be
fifty in a few days, and anything might happen----"

"Oh, nonsense, Mina," he laughed at her.  "Mamma is stronger than
either of us, and you know it."

"Of course she's never been ill," his sister admitted.  "But all this
travel makes her nervous, just the same.  She's not like herself.  Why,
yesterday, we drove out through the suburbs--she seems to want to be
out doors all the time, you know--and under a big tree there was a camp
of those horrid gypsies.  The horses were unhitched, and the dirtiest
children playing all about, and they were cooking over a fire.  Nothing
would do but we must stop the horses--the new bays, you know, and they
hate anything queer--and mamma actually made quite a visit among them!
They were English gypsies, from Sussex, they said.  One of the women
ladled out some mess or other from the great pot and mamma actually ate
it.  And it was odd, too, but they wouldn't take any money.

"'Not from you, lady, not from you!' they said.  The woman put her
hands behind her back."

"That _was_ odd," said Elliot.

"Yes.  And as we drove off she looked after them and said the strangest
things.  'Could any one be happier, do you think?' she said, and
afterward: 'Life seems so unwrinkled, somehow, when one sees it lived
that way!'"

"And what did you say to that?" asked her brother.

"Why, of course, there was nothing to say.  I only said that I couldn't
conceive how any educated woman could be happy without a bath-tub."

He chuckled.

"Of course you did," he murmured.

"That's what mamma said," she sighed.

"What?"

"Why, she looked at me so queerly and said, 'Of course you would say
that, Mina!'"

"Do you know what I've come over for?" he asked abruptly.

"On business, I suppose," she answered idly.

"Yes.  Uncle John sent for me, to ask if I had any idea of mamma's
intentions.  And then there were papers to sign."

"Papers?" she looked alarmed.

"Yes.  I think you might as well know.  But we're not to discuss it
with her, understand.  She's disposing of all her property."

"Why, Elly!"

"It's divided into thirds.  One-third to me, one-third to you, and the
other third cut up into servants' legacies, one or two charities and
enough for herself to give her a hundred pounds a year."

"Pounds?"

"It's in English securities.  It looks as if she meant to live in
England.  Uncle John asked if he might tell us, and she said only on
condition that we didn't discuss it.  She meant to travel for some
years, she said, and she had arranged to have us notified immediately
in case of any accident or difficulty.  She expected to write
occasionally, too, she said.  You know how mamma is--she simply
hypnotised the old gentleman."

"Why, Elly! you don't think her mind..."

"Bosh!  Her mind's better than ours will ever be!  Uncle John went to
Dr. Stanchon about it and he said that mamma was in perfect health,
good for twenty-five years more----"

"She always says 'twenty-two,'" Wilhelmina interrupted.

"--And that she was not to be bothered or crossed in any way.  He said
that at her age women often took odd fancies, and that with a woman so
capable and determined as mamma, the best thing was to give her her
way.  'Mind you, now, Appleyard,' he said, 'your sister consulted me
long before you did, and whatever she does I justify in every way!'"

"Well, of course, with mamma, there's nothing else to do," sighed
Wilhelmina, "but--five hundred dollars a year!  Why, it's impossible!
She can't travel on that!"

"No, but she can't starve, either," said Elliot, philosophically, "and
everybody was always telling her she could have earned her own living
in a dozen ways--perhaps she's going to do that."

"Oh, Elly!" cried poor Wilhelmina.  He turned to go, then picked up a
small blue-print from the top of a pile on a camera.

"What's all this?"

"Oh, that's one of the photographs the children are always taking
nowadays.  That one--why, that's one of mamma and the gypsies, that I
told you about!  See, there's the gypsy woman handing her out the soup.
They get very clear prints, now, don't they?"

"But what an extraordinary likeness!" he exclaimed.  "Isn't it
remarkable!"

"Oh, you mean mamma and the gypsy," she said indifferently.  "Yes, the
children both noticed it at once.  The other gypsies did, too, I'm
sure, from the way they pointed and stared.  Well, she always was that
dark type, you know.  Would you like to keep it?"

"Thanks, if you don't mind," he said, and put it carefully in his
pocketbook.  "It's better of mamma than any of the professional ones."

      *      *      *      *      *

Nobody who attended the great dinner-party given for Mrs. Elliot
Lestrange on the occasion of her fiftieth birthday will forget it
readily.  It was as much a public as a private function, and around the
great hotel dining-room used for the occasion stood many different
tables for many different classes of people.  Between the party of
girls trained years ago in her trade-school and the long table of
boards of directors of different movements in which she had long been
prominent, sat the entire cast of one of the theatrical successes of
the season, the play being openly founded on one of the dramatic
incidents of her life as a diplomat's wife, a generation ago, in
Europe.  The old composer of her famous cradle-song shared with the
publisher of her "Letters from an Attaché's Wife," and the prima-donna
she had discovered and educated, a merry little Italian table where her
musician son made the proud fourth.  A party of old pupils from the
convent school where she had spent a year surprised the room with the
valedictory verses she had written for the class, and at her
bridesmaid's table only one was lacking--the saucy maid-of-honour,
Evelyn, of thirty years ago!

A goodly fraction of what was just about to be known as the famous
"Four Hundred" of New York society chattered and stared at the poets
and novelists from Boston; and, for the sake of future memories,
Wilhelmina's children and the olive twins from Florence gazed curiously
from under their governesses' wings at the lights and roses and jewels
and tinted glass that made the great room a scented fairyland to their
round eyes.

At every table was a vacant chair, and to each of these she moved in
turn for the space of one of the courses of the elaborate dinners of
the end of the nineteenth century, a majestic figure in black velvet,
frosted to the waist with her grandmother's wonderful point-lace, her
shoulders, firm and creamy still, twinkling with her father's wedding
diamonds, her neck soft under her husband's birthday pearls.

It was said of her on that night that she was the one person in the big
room who could have been perfectly at ease at every table there, and
the pride of the children as she took her nuts and coffee among them
was delightful to witness.

"You have, indeed, lived every moment of a rich life, Signora," said
the composer to her, in Italian, as he sat again after their graceful
bows on the rendering of his now almost classic lullaby by the great
singer.  "Is it not so?"

"It may be, _Maestro_, but there is, after all things, and for all
people, a rest at last," she answered gravely.

Her son, who was dressing them one of his inimitable salads, looked up
sharply at this, though the others only smiled.

"And you start on your travels, it appears, after this triumph?" the
_Maestro_ inquired.

"To-morrow," she said.

"And may we know..."

"I go alone," she answered, smiling.

About each of her ecstatic granddaughters' necks she gravely clasped
her pearl or diamond chains, as they stood at the foot of the stairs in
her brownstone house long after midnight; in each grandson's hot,
astonished palm lay a glittering ring or bracelet, "For your wife, some
day!"

"How strangely mamma is acting," Wilhelmina complained to her brother.
"I suppose she is excited by all this?"

"She appears perfectly calm to me," he answered.  "I have always told
you, Mina, that you have a tendency to call any one excited who does
anything that you don't expect."

Their mother sat in silence in her room while her maid, a faithful
mulattress of many years' service, undressed her.

"Is that little tin box where I can get it?" she asked at last, when
all was done.

"Yes, madam."

"Are the house-keys here?"

"Yes, madam."

"Then I shall not want you any more.  You have always been all that I
could wish, Ella, and I shall miss you.  Take this, to remember me by,"
and the woman stared at the watch and chain in her hand.

"But--but--when you come back, Mrs. Lestrange, shan't I--shan't I----"

"If ever I come back, yes.  But Miss Wilhelmina will make a good home
for you.  Good-night."

Amazed, the woman closed the door, and the house lay in darkness, but
for one lighted room--the room of its mistress.

Mrs. Lestrange went to a wardrobe, dragged out a small tin trunk, no
larger than a leather case, opened it with a key from a private drawer,
and turned out the contents.

These were two sets of plain, warm underclothing, some stout boots, a
heavy skirt and jacket of coarse dark blue stuff, a mackintosh, a cheap
wooden brush and rubber comb.  A sensible wallet for her hand and a
canvas bag on a belt under the clothes which she put on quickly, held
some notes and gold.  She fingered the coarse, plain handkerchiefs, the
brown Windsor soap, the stout cotton umbrella, lovingly.  Over her
thick iron-grey hair, twisted firmly into a plain knot behind the ears,
she pinned a small round hat with a twist of cheap ribbon around it,
slipped her hands into a pair of new cotton gloves, took a seat by her
window overlooking the Central Park, and sat silently for an hour.  Her
eyes were fixed on the shadowy bulk of the trees in the park; her hands
were still on her lap: she waited.

Soon the air grew vaguely grey, then white, then a pearly pink.  The
trees came out clear, the city sparrows and robins chirped.  The milk
carts rumbled loud, and here and there, even in that wealthy quarter, a
few early workers crossed the park paths.  It was day.  She rose, tied
a thick green veil over her hat and face, lifted the tin box by its
handle and opened her door softly.  In that house it was still
midnight.  She went quietly down the corridor, through a service hall,
down some narrow stairs, through the warm kitchen, clean for the new
labour of the day, then took out a key from her wallet, turned it
gently and stepped into the area-way.  This had an iron gate and a
second key opened it: once through and the last gate locked, she put
her hand through the bars and slipped both keys under the metal frame
laid out ready for the milk bottles.  No one was in sight.  Alone in
the street, she gave one comprehensive, quick glance at the great
sleeping house, and drew a long, deep breath that seemed to stretch the
very depths of her lungs--one would have almost thought she had not
really breathed for a long time.

Then she turned her back, and grasping the box and umbrella strongly, a
plain, sturdy, middle-class figure of a travelling working-woman, she
walked to a car-line, lifted her box beside her, and sitting between a
negress with three children and a plumber's bag with a kit of tools,
made her way to the downtown wharves.

Here all was activity: the day was well along for these labourers, and
she had to push her way to reach the officer who would let her board
the steamer.

"Second class," she said briefly, producing her ticket.

He ran down a list quickly.  "Number sixty-three," he said, "Mrs.
Stranger."

"Yes," she answered, and still carrying her box, went in the direction
he indicated.

It was not a large steamer and not very swift, and for ten days the
sturdy figure lay inert on her chair, silent and absorbed.  She had no
book, no friend, no knitting.  Silently she sat and stared at the
purple horizon-line, silently she ate, silently she bestowed the modest
gratuities that brought her what little assistance she needed.  Her
only social act was the nursing of the two sisters who shared her
cabin, and this was done so quietly and competently that they were
certain she was a professional nurse on her vacation.

One of the sisters, a head clerk in a great department store, offered
her a newspaper on the third day out.

"It's old," she said, "but you may like to look it over.  That's Mrs.
Elliot Lestrange in the picture.  That was a grand banquet she had.
I'll bet she was proud, with all that fuss made of her!  Isn't she a
lovely lady?"

"It is handsome lace," Mrs. Stranger agreed.

"My, it's a fortune!  I've waited on her.  She's fine--so aristocratic,
but no airs.  I'd never have been here, but for her, maybe.  She and
the other League ladies got us our vacations, they say, at our place,
and she started the lending fund so those that need it can get the
third week, by borrowing.  That gives us the trip both ways, you see.
She must have a grand life--Sister says there's no house she couldn't
go into here or the other side, and every hour of the day is planned
out for her by a secretary she keeps.  Sister says she wonders when she
ever has a moment to herself."

"Perhaps she will have--some day," said the other woman quickly.  "I
agree with your sister, that she needs it."

"Sister says you look like her," the clerk went on, with a laugh.  "The
hair and eyes, she says.  Of course, I see what she means, but,
gracious--if you could have seen her the day she came in last winter!
A sable wrap to her knees, and her hair all waved, and besides, her
figure was different--much taller."

"All dark women with thick grey hair resemble each other, more or less,
I think," said Mrs. Stranger.

When she walked down the landing plank to the Tilbury dock, Mrs.
Stranger stood for a moment, scanning the little crowd that waited on
the water's edge.  She appeared to expect some one, for her tin box lay
at her feet, and she stood negligently by it, her head raised rather
haughtily for a woman of her general appearance.  Suddenly she smiled
oddly, drew again that deep-lunged breath of relief, stooped and picked
up the box, and carried it unassisted to the great train-shed.

From London she travelled south and west, and beyond purchasing at
Salisbury a warm red-hooded cape bought nothing and transacted no
business except for a brief cablegram to New York despatched from
London, signed with initials only, and a telegram to a small town in
the south of England.  On arriving at this town, she waited fully an
hour at the little station, but if the time were wasted, she did not
seem to feel the waste annoying, for she sat comfortably on a bench,
her box and umbrella at her stout-shod feet, her eyes placidly on the
distance.  A stray dog attached himself to her and laid his black head
on her umbrella; she made no motion to drive him away.

About noon a red-faced teamster drove into the square before the
station, looked about inquiringly, caught her eye and dismounted.

"Name o' Stranger?" he asked gruffly; she nodded.

"Have you the wagon?" she asked.

"Horse ain't none too fond o' they engines," he responded.  "He's
waiting by the Crown and Stirrup--will you step across?"

By the little sleepy inn stood a roomy, covered cart drawn by a solid
middle-aged bay, with heavy brass tips on his high collar.  The vehicle
had evidently been freshly painted, for the red and black twinkled in
the sunlight and the harness looked strong and new.  As Mrs. Stranger
lifted the back curtain and threw a quick, keen glance around the
interior she smiled briefly.  Rows of tins, coppers and kettles hung
there; bales of cotton prints, notions and such lay on narrow,
fenced-in shelves on the sides; a sort of bunk filled one-half, covered
with a neat patch-work quilt, and thick waterproof curtains' were
rolled in readiness all around.

"There's oats in the box and a nose-bag," said the carter, "but there's
good cropping all about.  Will that be your pup, Missis?"

"If no one else claims him," she said brusquely, and examined the horse
carefully, foot by foot.  All seeming to suit her, she took a small
canvas bag from her wallet and handed it to him.

"Count it, please," she said and the carter with much biting and
inspection of each gold piece, signed a receipt and handed her,
formally, a new stout whip.

"You'll wet the bargain, I hope," the interested landlord suggested,
and Mrs. Stranger having ordered a quart of his best ale, and gravely
taken a glass, the carter finished the rest with due ceremony.

She mounted the seat deftly, nodded all 'round, and drove off at a
steady jog through the village, the dog under the cart.

"_That's_ no new hand," said the landlord.  "It's well you provided a
good animal, carter!"

"First letter showed me I'd best do so," said the carter briefly.  "A
tidy bit of savings she had, for a woman."

"She'll earn as much more, _I'll_ lay.  There's money on the road, as
much as ever there was, for them as knows the business and don't
drink," said the landlord.  "She'll be one of that gypsy sort, by her
looks."

Mrs. Stranger drove steadily along through the countryside.  The road
lay clear before her, the emerald grass and the white may of the hedges
smelled sweet from a week's rain, the clap-clap of the big bay's feet
and the birds' twitter were the only sounds.  She was between two
villages, and only a straggling farm or two at either side broke the
distant view; a grey church tower caught the sun far away.  The
driver's eyes never left the road, as became a good driver, but they
seemed to be turned inward, too, and to see more--or less--than that
empty road offered to the ordinary sight.  One would have said that
something other than the present unrolled before those absorbed brown
eyes under the straight, dark brows, but whether it was the past or the
future was not shown.  Either was full enough, probably, in the case of
Mrs. Stranger.

Shortly after noon she began to study the roadside more carefully and
soon, pausing by a particularly lush, green spot, she dismounted, led
the horse off from the road and quickly traced the green area back to a
tiny bubbling spring.  Unharnessing the horse deftly, she fastened him
to a pointed iron picket she took from the cart and drove firmly into
the ground, lifted out a little portable tin oven which she propped
between two rocks, kindled a fire from some dried fagots tied below the
axle-tree, and taking a slice of fresh beef from a stone crock on the
seat, cut it slowly into small pieces with an onion and a yellow turnip
from the crock.  She filled a small iron pot at the spring, dropped in
the meat and vegetables, set a potato to bake in the ashes and measured
out a little coffee from a cannister.  While the stew simmered, she
watered and fed the horse, threw a bone to the dog, and then spread her
red cloak on the ground, sat on it, and resumed her inward
contemplation.  When the savoury fumes smelled rich enough, she threw a
pinch of pepper and salt into the pot from another small cannister,
poured boiling water from her kettle over the coffee, cut a slice from
a fresh cottage loaf, ladled her stew out on a new tin plate, and ate
and drank with a sort of eager deliberation, inhaling at intervals the
aroma of the coffee and the cooking food.  When a generous plateful had
vanished, she gave the anxious dog the rest, cut herself a block of
orange-coloured dairy cheese and ate it with a handful of small
biscuits from a square tin.  Then, leaning against the great rock from
under which the spring gushed, she took from her ample pocket a small
worn volume, opened it at random, filled and emptied her lungs with a
third great breath, like only two others in her life, and began to read.

The book's title page read, "Compensation, and Other Essays, by R. W.
Emerson," and on the fly leaf was written in a firm, masculine hand,
"L. L. from her father, Boston, 1870."

The horse grazed quietly, the dog rested a grateful head on her skirt,
the spring trickled on, and the woman read--if that can be called
reading where the eyes wander inward after every sentence.

After a little of this she was disturbed by a thick-set, middle-aged
farmer rattling by in a springless cart.  At sight of her he stopped,
stared, but not too curiously, got out and addressed her:

"Peddler's goods, I see," he said.

She nodded.

"Had you any thoughts o' going up Endover way?" he inquired, "it's out
o' way, somewhat, but my wife was wishing only yesterday for some
cooking ware, and but that you need to make village by dark----"

"I do not need to, unless I choose," she assured him; "my time is my
own."

"Ay, is it?" he said.  "There's few trades can say that, these
days,--is that why you gypsies take to this one, maybe?"

"Maybe," she said, smiling gravely.

"You're new to these parts, I think," he went on, "though there'll be
plenty o' your kind before summer's gone--few as thrifty to look at,
though.  I'll lay your cloth's not rotten."

"That's true," she said, rising and beginning to wash her simple
cooking pots.  "Which turn for Endover, farmer?"

"First to the left after Appleyard's woods," he began, and at her start
and cry of "Appleyard?" he explained, "Why, yes, it's hard to change
old names.  Appleyards ran out when I was a boy, but the name sticks.
Hundred years ago, an old farmer Appleyard owned most o' what you'll
see from here.  My granny knowed one of 'em well; a well-to-do woman
she was, and her husband got all the land, or near it, account o' the
brother's running away to foreign parts."

Her brown eyes held him and he warmed to his tale.

"You've heard all this, maybe?" he hazarded.

She shook her head.

"I knew there was such a family, once, somewhere about these parts,"
she said, "but I did not know just where----"

"Why, it was just here," he went on slowly, looking around, "here and
no other spot, whatever, Mrs. Peddler.  Here's what granny called
'Gypsy's Spring,' 'account of their always searching the best water,
you see--like yourself.  Gypsy Spring in Appleyard Lower Field, she'd
tell us, and there was where he met the gypsy and the land changed
hands and the name ran out."

"Who met the gypsy?" she asked, her eyes large and mellow on him.

"Who?  Why, young John Appleyard, Mrs. Peddler, and married her, and
off with them both!  They're all for roaming, you see--_you_ know.
'But she'll be back, sooner or later,' my granny used to say: 'Come
spring, back she'll be, if not him; for there's two things certain and
they won't change, my time or yours,' she said.  'An Appleyard must own
a good horse, and a gypsy woman must come back.'  But, you see, for
once my granny was in the wrong of it, for 'twas a full hundred years
ago, what I'm telling ye, and they never came."

A slow, satisfied smile crept over the peddler woman's firm lips.  Her
eyes rested on the great, browsing bay; her strong sea-browned hand
caressed the watchful dog's head; the odour of the may in the hedge
filled her nostrils.  Life spread before her.

"No, farmer, your granny was right," she said gravely, "gypsy women
always come back."




THE WARNING

Weldon leaned forward slightly in his chair, his hands loose between
his knees, and faced the president steadily.  The moment had come.  All
his rehearsals of it, all his tremours, all his incredulities must end
here.  He felt a distinct surprise at his collected coolness, his
almost amused grasp of the situation.  Except for the tense, guarded
muscles that a month's racking, overworked strain had left conscious of
their possible trickiness, he was absolutely himself.

And yet, what had the doctor warned him?  To be very cautious when he
felt so especially clear-headed and calm, after days of strain--yes,
just that.  And when he had expostulated, "But, my dear Stanchon, how
foolish!" had not the doctor replied, "All right, old man, but didn't
you tell me that it was always after such little exaltations"--he had
shrugged impatiently at the phrase--"that you were subject to these
strange dozes you describe?"

"Not exactly dozes," he had objected.  Dozes, indeed!  Those months and
years of experiences that raced by--and one woke with a start, to
realise that the clock was still striking!  It was this, too often
repeated, that had sent him against his will to the rising specialist:
he remembered so well the dark, sympathetic eyes of the office nurse
who had brought him the much-needed stimulant after he had yielded to
one of the curious fits at his very first consultation.

After he had passed out from the inner office with echoes of that
futile order to cease all business for six weeks (to stop, _now!_ to
leave with the fruit almost in his hand!) and commands as to a southern
sea-trip stimulating his taut, trembling nerves, he had sunk for a
moment into a chair near the door, just to rest his head in his hands a
bit and dream of the future, and the nurse had appeared from a misty
somewhere and stood beside him.

"I wouldn't be discouraged, Mr. Weldon," she had said kindly.  "Your
case is not so uncommon--really.  He has cured much worse."

"You're very kind, Miss--Miss Jessop," he had answered gratefully (her
rich, brown colouring was so restful, her hand on his shoulder so firm
and deftly powerful).

He had thought of her all the way home.

Now, curiously enough, perhaps because the president's desk was placed
in the same position as Dr. Stanchon's desk had been, he thought of her
again, irrelevantly.  That was the trouble--not to be irrelevant!

The president's careless glance conveyed just such a tinge of critical
surprise as the occasion called for: he toyed with a slender
tortoise-shell paper-cutter.  The pendulum of the sombre, costly
grandfather clock behind him swung tolerantly, silently; the murmur of
the bank beyond them was utterly lost behind the heavy double doors and
forgotten behind the bronze velvet curtains.  The president's voice
sounded on--he seemed to Weldon to have been uttering pompous
platitudes since time began.  His voice was as meaningless as a
cardboard mask: how could people pay attention to him?  Weldon wondered
irritably.

"...Nor has it ever been my policy to render myself inaccessible to
my--my corps of assistants.  No.  Not in the slightest degree.  Our
interests..."

Here Weldon's mind slipped softly from its moorings and drifted off on
seas that soon grew tropic: should it be Bermuda, after all?  Oleanders
and a turquoise bay--what a relief to pavement-gritted eyes!

"Nevertheless, trivial, inconsequent interviews between one in my
position and those of my--my corps of assistants who may so far forget
themselves as to seek them, must always be deplored.  They tend only to
weaken..."

And yet this man had a reputation for cleverness--nay, it was no empty
reputation.  Did not Weldon know what he could do, know better than any
living man?  And yet, how he babbled!  Hark, here was his own name.

"You inform me, Mr. Weldon, that you have been ten years in the employ
of the bank, a gratifying but by no means unusual record.  Our cashier,
you know, is now in his twenty-third year, if I am not mistaken.  Yes.
Was it to inform me of this only that you requested this interview?"

"No," said Weldon wearily, for the president's voice hit like a dull
hammer on his ear.  "No, it was not for that."

"I trust, Mr. Weldon, that your mention of the fact that your salary is
two thousand dollars was not intended in any way ... was not, in short,
to be regarded in the light of..."

"No, no, no," Weldon murmured impatiently, trying to shake off a
compelling drowsiness that threatened him.

"Because in that case ... in that case ... it was, I remember, only
upon Mr. Bingham's urgent recommendation that it was made two thousand.
The post has never carried but eighteen hundred.  But your exceptional
work, according to Mr. Bingham ... I am glad to hear it is not a
question of salary.  I never discuss..."

Again Weldon's mind slipped off, and this time groves of palms hovered
between the grooved Corinthian pillars of the president's office, palms
and frosty coral wreaths.  To breathe that languid, blue-stained air!

"... May I ask, then, Mr. Weldon, for what purpose you have requested
this interview?"

Consciousness returned with a flash and Weldon straightened in his red
leather chair.

"I have been waiting for some time the opportunity to tell you, sir,"
he said coolly, and the angry start that greeted this positively
strengthened him.  It was a natural start, at least.

"Mr. Deeping," he continued, with only a little catch of the breath,
"what you describe as my 'exceptional work' has led me to request this
interview.  I believe it to be in many ways exceptional.  During Mr.
Russell's illness I assisted Mr. Bingham, and after his recovery I
continued this assistance in other ways.  Mr. Bingham has perhaps
intrusted me with more responsibility than was in every respect
wise--certainly with more than he realised.  I was enabled to give him
some opportune help on the occasion of the last inspection, and this
gave me a fairly general survey----"

"One moment, Mr. Weldon."

The president glanced at the clock and laid the paper-cutter down with
a decisive motion.

"Let me suggest to you that whatever assistance you may have rendered
Mr. Bingham (for which, by the way, I consider you have received ample
compensation), you rendered it entirely of your own volition and on
your own responsibility.  It is quite your own personal affair.  I
could not for a moment consider----"

Weldon's taut control snapped short under these booming syllables.

"Damn it all!" he cried fiercely, "shall we talk here all night?  This
should have been over long ago.  Listen to me, if you can.  I have been
for a month convinced that there is something vitally wrong in this
bank.  In the beginning I couldn't tell why.  Some men have an instinct
for false figures, a sort of scent for rotten conditions, I suppose.
I'm one of them.  I've been working at it for a month.  And now I know."

The president laid the paper-cutter gently down again, and Weldon
realised that he must have picked it up.  As it touched the polished
desk one half of it was seen to be at the least angle from the other:
it was in two parts.

"And now you know, Mr. Weldon?" he repeated quietly.  "You surprise me.
What do you know?"

Weldon smiled approvingly at him.  There was stuff in this babbler,
this hypnotist, this phrase-maker.

"I know that one of the cleverest frauds in the history of banking has
been accomplished in this bank, Mr. Deeping, and I know by whom and how
it has been accomplished.  I know how Mr. Bingham has been used in the
matter and how ignorant he is of the tool he has been.  I know how
completely the directors have been deceived and how ably the books have
been doctored.  I know precisely where the discrepancies are and how
great they are."

"You have been very diligent, Mr. Weldon," said the president gently.
"I presume you to have the proofs of all you assert?"

Weldon put his hand into an inner pocket and drew out a slip--a small
slip--of paper.

"You must, of course, have a memorandum by which to check this," he
said a little huskily, but meeting the older man's eyes steadily, "so I
made it as condensed as possible.  You will understand it, however, I
am sure."

Without a moment's hesitation the president put out his hand and took
the slip.  Weldon touched his thumb and it was like an icicle.  For a
brief space he studied the close, tiny figures, then he raised his eyes
from them.

"You are to be congratulated, young man," he said, pausing slightly
between his words, "on the possession of a very keen mind and abilities
far from ordinary.  I believe you said you had no assistance in all
this?"

"I did not say so," Weldon replied, "but it is true."

"And no confidants, I infer?"

"Absolutely none."

"It would be idle," said the president, "to assume ignorance of your
motive in obtaining this interview."

Weldon bowed in silence.

"I will merely inquire of you what guaranty I have, in case I arrange
for the purchase of this slip from you, that the terms will be final?"

"Only my word to that effect," said Weldon composedly, "which I do not
think I have broken since I was eighteen.  Also the fact that I intend
to leave the country--finally, to the best of my belief."

"But you must have a duplicate of this slip?"

"None.  I have a mass of rough memoranda, from which I could after some
trouble reconstruct it, but this I should destroy.  After that, unless
I had free access to the bank, I should be helpless.  And in six
months, barring accidents, you will be able to set everything straight:
you have left the way open admirably."

The president folded the list small, and pushing aside the tail of his
frock-coat, put the square of paper into his hip pocket--an odd
selection, it seemed to Weldon.

"And where did you say you were going?" he inquired, in his perfunctory
voice.

"I did not say," Weldon returned, marvelling at the man's control, "but
I am going south somewhere."

"No," said the president quickly, still pushing the list deep into his
hip pocket, "you are not.  You are going to die, Mr. Weldon," and
something shone in his hand on the flap of the pocket.

His elbow was crooked back; his muscles were those of an elderly man,
not quite coordinated with his tongue.  In a breath, a space too short
for thought, Weldon flung himself across the gap between them and drove
his head and shoulders straight at the rounded, broadcloth vest: under
his impact the elaborate swivel-chair slipped, swayed, crashed to the
ground, and they went down together, Weldon's weight on the bent arm.

He raised himself cautiously, hands pressed on the fat shoulder under
him.

"The old fox!  The old fox!" he muttered aggrievedly.  "Shoot me, would
he?  Murdering old fox!"

There was no heaving in the heavy body under him, but he was not to be
easily hoodwinked now--he had had a taste of the man's mettle.  He held
his breath and listened: the clock ticked tolerantly, wealthily; the
flames flickered in the open, sea-coal fire; there were no other sounds
at all.

Reaching with infinite care around the relaxed, portly body he felt for
the hip pocket and drew out the small revolver, then sprang quickly
backward.

"Get up, Mr. Deeping!" he said softly, "get up, sir, some one may come."

But it seemed that for once the president was indifferent to
appearances, for he did not move, but lay as he had fallen, with one
bent arm.  Weldon walked over to him and lifted the coat-tail from his
face.  Then he perceived that it was improbable that Mr. Deeping would
ever get up again.  His face had long been a mask, but never had it
been coloured in this way, and Weldon knew that the artist responsible
for that tinting never worked on any subject but once.

Between two ticks of the clock, it might be, Weldon saw himself leaping
to the window, pouring water from the inner lavatory, calling for
brandy, loosening the collar.  So vivid was this vision that it seemed
he must be doing all this, actually, and he stood vacant-eyed, staring
at the dead man.  Once he tried to take a step, but his very muscles
seemed paralysed, and a voice, steady as the clock, seemed to tell him:

"How senseless!  The man is dead.  Dead.  You know it.  Let him alone.
Think what to do.  How can you escape?  Think!  Think!"

Suddenly his mind cleared and he laughed shortly, with relief.  He had
felt literally guilty.  But he had not killed the president.  It was
the president who would have killed him.  What had he done but protect
himself?  If the shock of his defensive lunge had done for Mr. Deeping,
how could he help that?  The man's time had come, that was all.  And it
was a quick death, a good way.  He moved toward the body again and
tried to lift it, but had not the strength.  He could not do it
decently.  The revolver was still in his hand, and with a quick
exclamation he pushed it into the hip pocket again, considered a
moment, took it out, felt for his folded list at the bottom of the
pocket, got it, and restored the revolver.  Moving toward the little
mirror in the lavatory, he straightened his tie, wiped his face, then
stood, thinking, between the body and the door.

Curiously enough, the figure on the floor hardly disturbed his
consciousness.  It was difficult for him to take Mr. Deeping seriously,
even in death.  He had, always been an absurdity; posturing,
phrase-making, repellant.  Death conferred a dignity, he had supposed,
but death had not done this for the president.  Another time-worn
superstition, that: humanity had invented so many.  Suppose all those
old ideas should turn out, on the event, to be as threadbare, and
empty?  Remorse, for instance?  Would one dishonesty, one violent break
with the canons of honour, never repeated, _oh, surely never repeated!_
tincture all the future with a slow, spreading black drop?  If so ...
but why imagine it?  It was unlikely.  A whip in the closet to frighten
the timid children....

He shook himself briskly.  A clever business, to stand philosophising,
with a dead man in the room, and all his work to do!  Now, what was the
next step?  To see the directors?  There was Webb; would he be clever
enough for Webb?  And yet, if Webb had not been able to detect the
frauds that juggled along under his nose, how should Webb be a match
for him, who had thus detected them?  It would certainly be to Webb's
interest to keep this quiet till they could straighten it all out.
Then they could divide what the president would have got.  And nobody
would be a penny the poorer.  It was absurd to call it a crime--if the
event proved successful.  And it would be more than absurd to refuse
him the reasonable amount he would ask for: their gain would far exceed
his, even if five of them should divide the whole.

Stop a moment!  Suppose he could confront them with Deeping's own
memoranda?  Suppose he should control the material the president must
have had ready, in case ... why, he must have an incredible sum by him,
all ready at a moment's notice, something he could convert in an hour
into cash, before he fled.  He kept the revolver: he would have kept
this.  He was ready for anything.  His pockets...

Weldon pushed aside the coat flap, but his hands refused the further
motions.  To go through another man's pockets!  And yet Deeping had
done worse than this: what sums had he not twisted and turned, added
and subtracted, borrowed and replaced?  But not an actual pocket.  No,
no.  He cursed himself for a weak fool, but the pockets he could not
touch.  The spirit indeed was willing, but the flesh, tyrant after
years of honest, deep-indenting habit, travelled its accustomed grooves
and would none of such muscular innovations.  Well, he must take his
chance with the Board.  He flung open the door and seized a
brass-buttoned official of many years' inferior but faithful service.

"Run," he muttered, "run, Henry, for Mr. Dupont!  Mr. Deeping has had
some sort of stroke.  Get him and call a doctor quickly--don't make any
row now about it, you understand.  I'll stay here."

The man touched his cap and hurried off and Weldon stood nervously by
the door.  A minute passed, two minutes.  Suddenly he turned, slipped
the ornate brass bolt above the Yale lock, stepped quickly to the dead
man's side, and went with rapid, tactful fingers from one pocket to
another.  The clock ticked leisurely, and unconsciously he muttered,
counting the strokes,

"Seven, eight, nine ... he must have them here...."

A low knock at the door caught his strained ear.  His hand held a thick
time-table; _New York, New Haven and Hartford_ stared him in the face.
The leaves fell apart as his hand for the first time shook, and between
them--ah! there they were!  "Memoranda, etc.," was written on the top
paper.  Thrusting the slender sheaf into his pocket, he threw the
time-table on the desk and drew the bolt slowly, peering out between
the bronze curtains with caution.

"How is he--gone?" whispered Dupont, the dead man's brother-in-law,
tiptoeing across the room.  "Heart, I suppose.  Henry's called the
doctor, but he said he guessed it was no good, from your face.  Nobody
has an idea of it--you managed very well, Mr. Weldon."

He glanced at the body and said a few perfunctory words.

"Well, well, we all have to go.  Sixty-one, I think.  Has any one sent
for Webb?  I think Webb should be sent for."

Weldon glanced curiously at the mild, unimportant brother-in-law.  He
was always thought of and mentioned in his capacity of brother-in-law.
Why should he think of Webb?  Common-sense answered, why not?  Webb was
immeasurably the head of them all.  Opening the door to discover if
there were yet any disturbance in the bank, he confronted Potter, a
fat, red-faced, many-millioned man, who puffed excitedly by him.

"Terrible thing, isn't it, Dupont?  Great shock to you.  Naturally.
Has--has Webb been informed?  Quite right, quite right."

He dropped into a chair and wiped his pink, fat forehead, looked once
sharply at the body on the floor, then obstinately at his knees.  He
appeared very excited to Weldon; more so than the death of his
associate could properly explain, perhaps?  No, no: what folly!
Probably it made them all feel rather shaky--overfed, weak-hearted old
fellows, all of them.  They saw their end.

A soft tap on the door followed, and as the two older men looked with
one accord at Weldon, he pushed aside the portières and admitted Mr.
Fayles, a thin, aristocratic, iron-grey man, who made himself one of
them without a word.  Stepping to the body he looked a moment, then
sank into the chair Weldon had occupied during his interview, fitted
his gloves into his top hat, dropped it beside him, and with an
extraordinary convulsion of countenance buried his face in his hands.
After a moment's annoyed contemplation of his motionless figure, Weldon
met Dupont's eyes inquiringly.  The brother-in-law shook his head, no
wiser, evidently.  Weldon gestured imperiously toward the fat man, and
Dupont tiptoed over to him, whispering hoarsely, "I didn't know he was
so attached to Edward, did you, Potter?"

Potter pressed his puffy hands together till they streaked red and
white.

"Good heavens!  Good heavens!" he burst out, "this is awful!  Where can
Webb be?"

Dupont stared, then shrugged his shoulders vaguely and returned to his
seat.  "I really didn't know he was so attached to Edward," he murmured
to Weldon confidentially.

They sat in silence.  The president's great bulk stretched among them
like some sleeping, foreign animal in a zoological garden.  It was like
a funeral; the funeral of some associate, attended with perfunctory
punctiliousness.  The blow was financial, not human: it was the death
of so much bank stock.

Another knock.  Again Weldon, recognised master of ceremonies now,
opened the door, this time for the doctor.  It was the president's own
doctor; Weldon wondered why it was that important men's doctors were
always to be got so quickly.  Did they have a secret call in the event
of a bank president's death?  What would happen in case one were called
from the birth, say, of another bank president's son?  Imagine the
doctor's state of mind ... he shook himself to dissipate such idiotic
thoughts: his mind worked as the mind of one in a worried, hurried
dream.

"Good-day, gentlemen, a sad errand for me," said the doctor gravely.
"Ah, yes, a little more light, please?  Ah, yes.  Instantaneous, of
course.  Half an hour, forty minutes, I should say?  Ah, yes.  I
supposed so.  Any one present ... any shock or excitement?"

Weldon spoke briefly.  He had been discussing bank matters with Mr.
Deeping.  He had mentioned a few of the matters in discussion when Mr.
Deeping had put his hand into his pocket, appeared to sustain some
stroke, slipped back in his chair, and fallen dead-weight on the bent
arm.  Just as they saw him.  It was impossible to move him, except to
free him from the chair.  He appeared to have died instantly.  It had
been made known immediately.

"Ah, yes," said the doctor.  "Just as I expected.  I warned him of it.
Not a month ago.  A great loss to the community, gentlemen.  All the
arrangements, now ... Mr. Dupont, I suppose you ... or if you had
rather that I...."

"If you would, please," said the brother-in-law gratefully, "I am bad
at that sort of thing--I--my head----"

"Ah, yes.  Perfectly natural.  I will have the body removed, then, as
soon as possible----"

"Not till Webb gets here!" Potter broke out, twisting his hands
convulsively, "wait for Webb.  I insist on Webb!"

The doctor stared.

"Mr. Potter, I believe?" he inquired courteously.  Then turning to the
others generally, "Do I understand that there is any reason----"

"No reason at all," Dupont interrupted irritably, "not the least.  Webb
will be informed, fast enough.  If you are kind enough, doctor----"

It was obvious that he dreaded the chance of any personal
responsibility.  What a rabbit of a man he was!  Weldon remembered
suddenly that a night watchman had been dismissed for saying that Mrs.
Dupont blew her husband's nose for him!  One could almost believe it.
Hear him, now.

"Mr. Fayles will, I am sure, agree with me----"

"With you?  With _you_?"

Mr. Fayles's voice was hollow, tortured.  His face was wet.  He turned
his red-rimmed eyes on the man before him.

"What in God's name are you?" he said ferociously.  "Wait for Webb, of
course."

His head went back in his hands and they stared at one another.
Fayles, the cold aristocrat.  Fayles, the unruffled!  The doctor's
glance settled finally on Weldon, as a possible clew to the situation.

"This is--this is--we make every allowance, of course," he began, "for
such an unsettling occurrence.  Of course.  Mr. Webb, of course, would
naturally ... and yet I hardly like the idea ... it seems..."

There was a strange sense of tension in the room, not to be accounted
for by that dead creature on the floor.  No, there was something else.
Weldon with difficulty repressed a smile.  That fool of a
brother-in-law knew nothing, clearly.  Potter was merely irritable and
at sea generally, he was sure.  He could swear that whatever alarmed
Potter alarmed him only through Fayles, whose collapse was
unprecedented.  Did Fayles know?  Impossible.  Fayles stood for
old-fashioned, delicate scruples, finical standards.  "As straight as
Joseph Fayles," they said.  And yet, why....  He remembered that he had
not yet answered the doctor.  How his thoughts ran away with him!

"Mr. Webb's connection, of course," he murmured, "principal director,
you might say, made it natural to lean on him ... to depend ...
undoubtedly he would have been notified.  Probably if the doctor were
to send for the body, Mr. Webb would have got there before, and his
colleagues be satisfied.  They depended on his judgment to such an
extent..."

The air of the room seemed to tighten round them.  That doctor was no
fool.  He must feel something--what, how much?  He pursed his lips.

"Just as you like, of course," he said briefly.  "It would seem that
there can be very little difference in judgment as to the expediency of
burying a dead man, however.  If that is what you mean.  I will do as
this young man suggests.  These matters, of course, have a certain
formality.  There are precedents....  Ah, yes.  Good-day, gentlemen."

He looked toward the door, which Weldon, in his capacity of master of
ceremonies, opened for him, and passed out, drawing a deep breath as he
crossed the threshold and hurrying, it seemed to Weldon, down the
corridor.  Did he want to be rid of them?  It seemed so.

There they were.  All the directors but Webb.  All that counted, that
is.  One would imagine it a meeting of the board.  Then why was he
here?  Suddenly he lost himself in a great yawn, and realized that he
was dying of sleepiness.  Neither last night nor the night before had
he closed his eyes.

"As there seems nothing more for me to do, gentlemen," he said
abruptly, "I think I will go now.  There is no more assistance----"

"Wait for Webb," cried Potter nervously, "wait, won't you?  I--I insist
on it!"

One felt really sorry for this rich, fat man.  How ludicrously he
resembled his caricatures!

"I really wish you would wait for Mr. Webb, Mr. Weldon," Dupont assured
him, "it would be a great convenience.  You could tell him just how it
happened, you know.  Just.  You see, your being there, you know...."

"Of course I will stay, if you desire it," Weldon answered gravely,
wondering if he could keep awake.  His eyeballs fairly dragged down.
The tall clock's tick confused itself with his thoughts: _one, two!
one, two! one, two!_  Suppose he were to run now, with the "memoranda,
etc.," and take whatever Mr. Deeping had been going to take?  That was
folly, if the rest didn't know.  Then he would be a common criminal.
If they did know, then he could leave his memoranda slip and they would
understand and make up the sum amongst them.  Let Webb and Potter fork
out, for once.  Let them bleed the depositors.  _One, two! one, two!
one, two!_ Why not? why not? why not?  His eyes fairly closed for a
second.

But a soft click of the door opened them.  There was no knocking here.
The curtain moved and Mr. Webb was in the room.  Involuntarily they
rose to meet him, and Fayles for the first time took his hands down.
Tall and unnaturally thin, his sallow cheeks framed in lank, sandy
hair, his eyes turned down, it was hard to realise that this almost
slouching fellow held the attention of the shrewd in these matters as
the certain head of them all, when the present great leader should have
dropped his sceptre.  But this was the Webb in whose labyrinthine
meshes the cartoonists delighted to picture the unhappy flies of their
country's financial system; this was the weaver whose warp was of
railroads and his woof the unhappy populace, in yet other pictorial
fancies.  This was that Webb before which many patient Penelopes had
sat through many Sunday editions, dressed in stars and stripes, a
sorrowing, perplexed America, and gaped to find it unwoven by day,
though thick patterned with rich promises in the evening.

"All over, is it?" he said in his dry, sceptical voice, "too bad, too
bad."

His eye shot out from its heavy lid and took them all in.  It lingered
on Weldon.

"This the young man with him at the time?  Sudden shock, eh?"

Weldon told his story again.  They had talked of business.  The
president had put his hand in his pocket.  Handkerchief, probably.  Had
experienced some shock and fallen, dead-weight, on his bent arm.  As
you see him now.  Unable to lift him.  Notified Mr. Dupont immediately.
Nothing more.

"Dear, dear!" said Mr. Webb.  "As quickly as that!  Hard on you.
Nothing handy, I suppose; only window up and water and such things?"

For the life of him Weldon could not help the slow red in his face.  He
glanced at the window: it was locked.  For Heaven's sake, why lie?  He
was no murderer.  And yet--any one, _any one_ would have opened that
window.

"I did what I could," he said in a low voice, "but it was plain that
Mr. Deeping was dead.  He never drew another breath."

"No brandy about, I suppose?" pursued Webb.

But Potter interrupted.

"For Heaven's sake, Webb," he implored, "let all that go!  He's gone.
You know he never touched a drop of anything.  Of course there was no
brandy."

"Of course," Weldon interrupted, relieved.  Every one knew the
president's views on that subject; he had forgotten them.

"Of course," repeated Mr. Webb softly and glanced again at the window.
An intense irritation flared up in Weldon: this man flicked him on the
raw with every syllable.

"If you have no further use for me, gentlemen," he began, but Webb
waved his thin, small-boned hand negligently.

"One moment, Mr.--Mr. Weldon, I think?  What business did you say you
were discussing with my poor friend?"

Mr. Fayles took a quick step and grasped his colleague's arm.

"For God's sake, Webb," he muttered huskily, "look at us!  Where are
we?  What's to be done?  They've sent for the body by now."

Potter seized the other arm.

"Will you tell me what all this means, Webb?" he blustered, "what's the
matter with Joe Fayles?  Is it possible that--is anything----"

Webb's lids lifted and the snake-like swiftness of his glance at Fayles
was not lost on the others.

"If Mr. Fayles," he began slowly, "has occupied himself in spreading
the disquiet he has endured since he discovered (and imparted to me)
the fact that my poor friend here carried a revolver about with him, he
has done a mighty foolish job.  That's all I have to say."

Even Dupont was alarmed now.  It was with a grim amusement that Weldon
watched them all.  Dupont suspected Potter, was staring malevolently at
him and chewing his slight moustache nervously.  Potter never took his
eyes from Fayles, whose clutch on Webb was the anguished clutch of the
drowning man that has caught at sea-weeds.  They seemed to Weldon like
actors in a play, and he was the spectator.  He observed them from his
red plush seat, almost despising them for the entertainment they gave
him.  How absurd they were, with their dead president and their
suspicions.  They were mad to get at the pockets--he knew!  But they
hadn't the nerve.  And Webb, crafty old Webb, was holding them in like
dogs on a leash.

"Did he really carry a pistol?" he said gently, "let's see."

He leaned over the body.

"I wonder why he wanted the pistol pocket?" he went on casually, "any
idea, Mr. Weldon?"

A tiny, fine chill tingled at Weldon's heels and flew up to his hair.
He had a sudden flashing sense of being in a net that was softly
tightening.  In an agony of regret he wished that he had not that sheaf
of "memoranda, etc."  It was suddenly clear to him that he had stolen
them.

"I have no idea, sir," his tongue answered stolidly.

"No, ... of course not," said Mr. Webb thoughtfully.  "Well, gentlemen,
I can't see the need for any more discussion.  This is very
deplorable--a great shock.  He was very methodical and no doubt
everything is in easy shape...."

They drew close to him and Weldon, though he caught the murmur of
voices, distinguished nothing but the steady notes of the clock: _one,
two! one, two!_  His head nodded a trifle and for one blissful second
his eyelids fell.  The clock began to strike eleven.  _One!_ he
struggled, but it was too sweet.  _Two!_  He became dimly conscious of
a rustling and movement by him.  _Three!_ there was a light touch on
his arm and Webb stood near the chair he had dropped into.  The others
must have gone.

"You seem exhausted, Mr. Weldon," he said quietly.

"I--I have missed my sleep lately," Weldon stammered, trying to control
the motions of his mouth, his voice striking his own ear as mechanical,
far away, laboured.

"Exactly," said Webb suavely.  "And now, Mr. Weldon, _how much do you
expect for those papers_?"

      *      *      *      *      *

Weldon drew his chair across the broad verandah in an aimless,
leisurely way, anchored it in the shadow of a wicker table laden with
cool glass pitchers and iced fruits, and sank into it, sighing
restlessly.  The pillars of coral that supported the verandah roof
framed, each pair of them, an oblong of sapphire bay; vivid masses of
pink oleanders hedged the foreground; the tremulous sapphire crawled
softly over a creamy crescent beach.  In the pleasant noon stillness
the mild whine of a patient puppy, broken by the chuckles of some young
human thing, rose on the air.  Jars of sweet flowers sent out their
almost tropical odours with each tiny, invisible wind current: they
seemed to puff it into his face.

A great green and flame-coloured parrot, hung head downward in his
yellow cage, began suddenly a mechanical, dry litany:

"_Mañaña! mañaña! mañaña!_"  It was like a clock--passionless, regular,
meditative.  Weldon shrugged his shoulders distastefully; he had never
been able to conquer his dislike of steady, measured sounds.  It was an
unreasonable weakness, but incurable.  He twisted uneasily in his white
flannels as the bird droned on,

"_Mañaña! mañaña! mañaña!_"

"Be still, Chico, be still, sir!"

A fair, finely grown boy took the coral steps two at a bound and
threatened the parrot.

"Daddy, keep him quiet, won't you?  He frightens my white mice awfully.
Why do mice hate parrots?  Do you know, daddy?"

Weldon's face cleared and he threw his arm over the slender shoulders.

"I don't know, Pippo, I can't guess," he said.  "Where's your mother?"

"Just beyond you," and the boy slipped away to his pets, grudging the
time for her kiss in passing.

She stood softly behind the wicker chair and laid her hand on his
forehead.  Her lips were only a little smoother.

"Still troubled, dearest?" she asked him in her pleasant voice.  "Still
dreaming?"

She was very dark, with reddish lights in her thick, low-growing hair,
and brown, broad eyebrows.  Under them her eyes shone, a frank, dark
brown; she bore a curious likeness to that nurse he had seen in the
doctor's office, so many years ago.  How strange that a passing fate
should have set his ideal of dear and loving women forever!  She had
even the same small dimple at the left of her mouth.

She slipped to the floor beside him and laid her head in her wifely way
against his knee.

"I'm so sorry it bothers you, Phil," she murmured, her cheek against
his hand.  "One would think you were a superstitious boy, you silly!
Hear baby--he's playing so dearly with those puppies!  He pats them and
then pinches their tails so slyly!  Oh, Ted!  Oh, baby!  Call to mummy!"

From the balcony above a shrill crow drowned the complaint of the
puppies.

"Doesn't he say it plainly!" she cried, flushing a beautiful
mother-rose.  "And he is so strong, Phil!"

He caressed her absently.  Ten years gone, and a dream had swept those
years to one side as one would draw a bronze curtain, had opened the
past as one would open a heavy mahogany door!  All night a tall, carved
clock had ticked, ticked through his dreams, _one, two! one, two! one,
two!_  A sinister, sandy face had mocked and probed him, a fat, animal
face had irritated him, a pale, haunted face had pleaded with him.  He
had tossed himself awake, had listened thankfully to the soft breathing
beside him, had kissed the fragrant braid across his face, and sunk
again into heavy, sultry nightmare, doomed to live that shameful day
through every clock-tick.  And now his brain was cloudy with it.  His
hand lay listless on her shoulder.

A five-year-old girl, lovely as a tea rose, stood doubtfully in the
cedar-wood door, poised for flight either way, sucking in the dimple at
the left of her mouth.  Running at his call she flew into his arms and
dropped her buttercup head on his shoulder.  For the first time he
smiled, and the wise wife slipped quietly away and watched them from
the door, guessing at their murmurs, counting their kisses.  Later she
disturbed them reluctantly.

"I want to say you are not at home," she said, "but I daren't quite do
that, for he is from the States, dear, and it is important business.
His name," dropping her eyes to the white rectangle in her hand, "is
Webb.  Shall I send him out here?"

Weldon put the child down from his knees and half rose.

"Yes," he said, clearing his throat, "send him out here.  And keep the
children away."

So this was it.  It had not been for nothing, that dream.

The tall, lank figure was before him, the ironical smile drooped on the
tight lips.  Ten years had left him as they found him, but for a
thought of grey in the sandy hair.

"Sit down," said Weldon briefly, "what is it?"

"You've put on a little weight, I see," said Webb, nodding at the
proffered chair, "but that's only proper in the president of a bank, I
suppose.  You've done well, Mr. Weldon."

Weldon bowed.

"You did not come to Bermuda to tell me this, Mr. Webb, I think?"

"No," said Webb, "I didn't.  Ten years ago, Mr. Weldon, you called me a
mind-reader when I had put two and two together once or twice, put
myself in your place for ten minutes, complimented you by assuming that
your course had been what mine would have been, and spoken to you
accordingly.  Can't you do a little mind-reading on your own account,
now?"

"I confess myself unequal to it," Weldon said coldly.

Webb nodded indulgently.

"All right," he returned, "we'll take it that way, if you want to.  Mr.
Weldon, I don't know if you read our papers down here at all?"

"I have never opened an American newspaper since I left the country,"
said Weldon briefly.

"I see.  I suppose you know that Blickenstern's dying, though?"

"Yes," Weldon answered indifferently, "we all know that, of course."

"Yes.  Well, Mr. Weldon, I'm supposed to inherit his shoes.  It's not
much to you, of course, but a lot to me--and to a lot of other people,
too.  Now for something you don't know.  In just about five days, Mr.
Weldon, we're going to break through the crust and drop into the
biggest panic since '93.  That and Blickenstern's death--he must go
soon, now--and this fearful railroad business--I won't bore you--will
put me into a bad hole.  A worse hole, I don't mind telling you, Mr.
Weldon, than Blick's successor can afford to get into.  It's all a
matter of balance now; pretty fine balancing, too, for the next week.
In six weeks there'll be enough for most of us, but just now--well,
there'll be dozens of us in the Street who'll be grateful for ten
thousand in cash around the corner.  Think of it--ten thousand!  Now
I'll be short.  I need some money--not stage money, Mr. Weldon, real
money!  I wouldn't take Blick's name on paper for what I want this
week--and getting it or not getting it means the top of the heap for
me, or three years' fight for it.  I can't afford three years.  I
wasn't a bank president at forty, you know."

"You mean you want the ten thousand pounds you gave me?"

"Just so.  I want fifty thousand dollars, Mr. Weldon--for six weeks.  I
hate to do it, honestly.  Nothing but this infernal panic could have
driven me to this.  But I'm helpless.  And it's worth millions to me to
have no one suspect it.  I can't touch a penny elsewhere--it's all tied
up.  I must be able to produce it without any fuss, or disturbing the
jack-straws a particle.  There's no use in going into the details."

"No use at all," said Weldon stiffly, "for it will be impossible for me
to lend you such a sum, Mr. Webb, impossible.  I have paid well for my
position here."

"And a good move, too," said the other heartily.  "You stand well,
Weldon; none better."

"I have never been what you would call ambitious," Weldon went on, more
passionately, now.  "When you yourself asked me why I demanded no more
than the ten--the fifty thousand, you remember my answer.  I knew that
it would buy me a good, respectable interest out here, assure me of a
position I had every capacity to sustain honourably and efficiently,
and give me the leisure and climate that I wanted.  I shall never be a
rich man--by your standards.  I don't care.  I thought my brains and
initiative were worth what I asked, and you agreed with me.  I promised
utter silence and have kept my word.  You promised the same and have
broken yours.  I can do nothing for you, even if I wished to.  I'd
rather not discuss it further."

"_Mañaña! mañaña! mañaña!_" the parrot shrilled.  It still hung head
down in the shining cage.  Weldon could have wrung its neck.  It was
worse than a clock.  Webb sighed regretfully and raised his heavy lids.
As the old snakish glance reached him Weldon felt the old net-like
sensation, the old baffled rage.

"I'm sorry, Weldon, but I can't let it go.  It's no use--you can't
afford it.  It's all like a house you build out of cards, you see, and
you can't slip out one without the whole thing caving in.  Whatever I
pull out I have to explain.  How do you suppose I got you your fifty
thousand, back there?  You know I've never had much money--to call
money.  It's brains--what you call mind-reading, you other
fellows--that I've matched against the rest of them.  And I've got them
where they're afraid of me.  I can't drop back.  Listen to me, Weldon!"

He drew his chair close and talked low and steadily for five minutes.
The air seemed to grow dense; the rustling hiss of the foam on the
creamy beach was the hiss and flicker of a sea-coal fire; the grotesque
shadow of the wicker chair, black on the white verandah floor, was the
spread, silent bulk of a dead man.

The low voice ceased.

"How about it, Weldon?" it added abruptly, "can you afford that?"

Weldon pushed away his chair roughly.  "Come down to my room at the
bank," he said.

Hours afterward he dragged himself into his bedroom, an older man by
ten years than when he had quitted it.  His body seemed heavier, his
face hollower, with pinched lips and sunken eyes.  The man who waited
on him stared openly and mentioned the doctor, only to receive a curse
for his pains--the first he had ever heard from his master.

In the late dusk his wife found him asleep in a long chair with an
empty decanter beside him and heavy rugs dragged up to his chin.  They
tried, both of them, to make that nervous chill account for the change
in him, but she watched him narrowly and he felt her eyes day and night.

Something tolled like a bell in him and never stopped for a moment:
_six weeks! six weeks! six weeks!_ all his waking movements went to
that intolerable rhythm; he was like a man under a gallows, with a
reprieve coming to him, at the mercy of all the elements.  It was
observed at the bank that he worked harder and longer and much alone:
they said the American blood was coming out at last, and smiled at each
other.

"Only mind you don't engage us in speculations, old man," said one of
his colleagues jocosely, "'safe and sound,' you know!  Look at the
States--a pretty mess that!"

Weldon turned on him in a fury of anger.

"Speculation! speculation!" he cried harshly, "you know that I hate it
like hell!"

They were genuinely anxious about him.

One morning he found his wife in his dressing-room, white-faced over
something in her hand.

"Philip!  Philip!" she whispered and clung to him.

He put the shining little steel-eyed thing behind him.

"My dear, don't be foolish," he said quietly, "if I have my reasons for
wishing a certain sort of protection for a few days, will you make me
regret my sparing you?"

"You--you mean the bank?" she gasped.

"What else could I mean?" he said steadily, and in some quaint woman's
reasoning she was appeased.

At the end of three weeks the strain eased a little.  He read a letter
from Webb with a grim smile, bought an American newspaper, and passed
an entire day away from the bank.  His wife held her breath as she
watched him, but affected not to notice the change, and he blessed her
for it: his nerves were raw.  Two days, three days went by.  He sent
out for another newspaper and later in the day raised the tiny salary
of the page who had brought it to him.  In the cool of the afternoon he
rode with his wife, the boy on a shaggy pony beside them, and kissed
her as she turned in the saddle in the shadow of the dusk.

"You are the best wife a man ever had," he said, looking deep into her
honest brown eyes, and she galloped away from him to hide her happy
tears.

The next day he told the servant to bring the parrot cage back to the
verandah, where the little daughter liked to have it, and grimaced
tolerantly at its strident cry:

"_Mañaña! mañaña!_"

Life is as it is, he thought, and can we hope to change it because we
change?  Surely not.  Everything had its price, and he had really never
paid the price of that ten-years-old bargain till now--he acknowledged
it.  Out of that blue-stained air the messenger of fate had dropped and
taken his toll of youth and candour and elasticity, and departed again,
and now the weight was slackening from his chest and there were but
fourteen days to wait.  The next day he found a second letter from Webb
on his desk.  To relieve him from needless anxiety, said the great
financier, he wrote to inform Mr. Weldon that six weeks had proved too
wide a margin and he promised himself the pleasure of a complete
settlement six days from the date of writing.  Weldon stared at the
letter head: it had been three days on the way--that meant in three
days--by the next boat!  The letter was grave, but subtly jubilant.
The railroads were subdued.  Blickenstern was dead, the country hailed
his successor.  A foundation of millions lay firm beneath his feet.

The president left his bank early and went home on horseback to
luncheon.  His wife saw the husband of many days ago and asked no more
of life, but sang among her flower jars.

"Will you come up to Government House this afternoon, dear?  It's weeks
since you've been," she said, and he smiled and promised.  "I've a new
frock," she confided shyly, like a girl, "and I think you'll like to
see it--now."

"I'll be back before four," he told her, "a little late, but I promised
one of our young fellows an appointment."

She pouted as she had done in her courtship days.

"A young man!"

"I can't disappoint him, sweetheart.  Youngsters feel those things.  He
wants more money, and I really believe he's worth it."

As he entered his private room something struck him disagreeably.  He
glanced about--a sea-coal fire burned in the tiny English grate.  He
scowled and touched a bell.  Asked to explain, the page confessed that
he had promised Mrs. Weldon to put a fire there whenever any dampness
should threaten, and that to-day being noticeably damp he had kept his
word.  The president nodded and the lad made his escape.

In another moment a slender young man entered, with a discreet knock,
and faced him.  He seemed unaccountably excited--even blustering, for a
young man in his position.

The president took out his watch and counted the ticks to quiet his
irritation.  We must be kind to the young ones--promotion means so much
to them.

"Let us look at all this a little quietly," he said, softened already,
"believe me, I want to satisfy every reasonable claim.  It is to my
interest----"

He caught his breath.  Something in the young man's attitude as he
faced him, level eyed, hands between his knees, a contemptuous smile on
his hard young face, smote him to the very marrow.

"What is he thinking of me?" flashed through him.  The answer came like
the shot from a cannon.

"Is it to your interest to satisfy every reasonable claim on the ten
thousand pounds you borrowed from the bank last month, Mr. Weldon?"

The soft lines faded from his face and two grey streaks grew around his
mouth.  The ticking of the watch in his hand rose and swelled and
filled the room--_one, two! one, two! one, two!_

So this was the end.  Never a night of honest sleep again.  Never a
free swell of the chest.  To go down in sight of land, to drop just
outside the fort!  _All over!  All over!  All over!_

The young man was still talking, quickly, definitely enough, but it
grew blurred as it reached his brain.  He found his tongue, dry and
stiff in his mouth, asking questions mechanically?

Did any one know of this?

No, only the young man.  He was not inclined to be rapacious.  He had
an interest in a bank in Gibraltar, and two thousand pounds would
establish him there.  He had thought it might be worth the president's
while to put him in the way of two thousand pounds--considering
everything.  Promotion was slow in Bermuda ... dead men's shoes....

The tongue in Weldon's mouth asked, calmly enough, how he was to be
protected against further demands.  The young man explained very
clearly.  The president had managed thoroughly well: in a few days the
recent transaction would be a ripple under water.  But during those few
days ... he smiled disagreeably.

The fire whistled in the grate; the bank was utterly still.  They were
alone in it.  In one second of time, years and the future itself
wheeled before Philip Weldon's sunken eyes.  So the black drop _had_
lasted, after all, and would tint his life as long as that life lasted
on earth ... and longer?  Anything was possible.  Must the sordid drama
play itself eternally, through the years and countries, till the final
ripple hit the southern-most port of refuge?  Would this young man sit
before a sea-coal fire in Gibraltar, one day, frozen, his life and
honour nipped at the root by the triumphant hound who had tracked down
his one fault?  Before God, it was _his_ only one!  He was white beside
some others who lived and died respected.  Prove the contrary, any one!

_One, two! one, two! one, two!_  That watch.  Either he was going mad
or it could be heard in the street outside, it shouted so.  Who was he,
anyway--Deeping or himself?  Who was that young man?

Suddenly his head cleared.  He moistened his lips and leaned forward,
the watch crystal shivered in his grasp.

"And you are going----"

"To Gibraltar," said the young man briskly.  "I am glad that you----"

"No," said Weldon thoughtfully, "I am afraid you are not going to
Gibraltar.  You are going to die."

He pushed his hand back into his pocket and felt the precious hard
little object there.  His finger clasped it, when a heavy blow sent him
reeling in his chair.  A pain like a knife cut through his heart and he
fell heavily backward on his bent arm.

      *      *      *      *      *

His eyes opened.  He drew a deep breath.  A tall, carved clock in the
corner struck, and a man, a lank, sandy man beside him, seemed to have
said something, for his voice was in the air.

"He must have had some papers--if there is anything wrong--good God,
Webb, what shall we do?"

This was a slender, foppish man, iron-grey.  Weldon sprang to his feet,
pulling his right arm from behind him, wide, wide awake now.  He was
free!  He was free!

The clock struck again.

Thrusting his hand in his coat he drew out a sheaf of papers and
pressed them upon Webb.

"Here, gentlemen," he cried breathlessly, "are the papers you want!
And here," he threw a small folded slip on the floor, "is an
explanation that may help you with them.  I wish you good-day."

To get out!  To get out!  He burst through the portières and the door,
as four men, uniformed, with a black stretcher between them, entered it
from without.  In the moment of his withdrawal from them he saw, as one
sees a stage group from his red plush seat, Potter, panting and
terrified, Fayles, anguished, Dupont dazed and suspicious, their eyes
fixed on Webb, who, calm as in his own office, ran over the sheaf with
his snake-like eye.  Even as he nodded shrewdly, the stretcher was in
the room and the group dissolved.

Weldon found his hat in his hand; he polished it furiously as he strode
down the corridor.  He threw himself on the outside door and as he
opened it, he heard through the unclosed door of the private room the
great clock strike eleven.  With a shudder he plunged across the
threshold, out, out into the clean, free air.




THE LEGACY

Of course, it doesn't make any difference to me whether anybody
believes this or not.  It's only because Dr. Stanchon asked me to, that
I'm writing it, anyway.  And nobody needs to get the idea that I think
I'm a writer, either: I'm not such a fool as all that.  But there's not
a nurse in the place who wouldn't lie down and let the doctor walk over
her, if he wanted to--and he knows it, too.  Not that he's cocky about
it, though.

"You know I'm no magazine muck-rake, doctor," I said as I got out of
the motor (he had taken me up through the Park to Morningside and back,
while I was telling him), "and I'll probably be a little shy on style."

"Style be damned," he said.  "You're long on facts, and that's all I
want, my dear.  And don't for heaven's sake work in any of that
C----r's rot on me!"

I had to laugh, really, at that, because he was so funny about it.  I
took care of Mr. C----r, the novelist, when he had his appendix
removed, and he used to dictate a lot to me, and Dr. Stanchon always
insisted that my charts were made out in his style, after that.  But of
course they weren't.

"Just tell it as it happened, you know," he said, "and in your own
language.  I'd like to keep it."

And of course anybody can do that.  Although Mr. C----r told me once
that that was the hardest job he ever tackled.  He said he could write
like his heroes easy enough, but not like himself.  But he was always
joshing, that man.

"Why, Miss Jessop," he used to say to me, "if I could write like
myself, I'd have won the Nobel prize any time this last ten years!"

But he wrote awfully well, I always thought.  Hardly a patient I had
that year, but if I offered to read, they'd say:

"Oh, well, what's the last C----r's?" and when I got to the parts I'd
taken for him (I learned stenography before I took up nursing) it used
to give me a queer sort of feeling, really!

It was Dr. Stanchon that got me the case.  He 'phoned me to drop in at
the office, and a patient of mine took me around in her car: I'd been
shopping with her all the morning.  She had just invited me to go out
to her country place for a few days, and I was quite pleased with the
idea, for I was a little tired: I was just off a hard pneumonia case
that had been pretty sad in lots of ways, and I felt a little blue.
It's an awfully funny thing, but nurses aren't supposed to have any
feelings: when that poor girl died, I felt as bad as if it had been my
own sister, almost.  She was lovely.

But when the doctor asked if I was free, of course I had to say yes,
though my suit-case was all packed for the country.

"That's good," he said, "for I specially want you.  It's nothing to do,
really, and you'll enjoy it, you're such a motor-fiend.  There's a
family I'm looking after wants a nurse to go along on a tour through
the country--New England, I believe.  They've got a big, dressy car,
and they expect to be gone anywhere from two weeks to a month, if the
weather's reasonably good."

"What do they want of a nurse?" I said.

"Oh, they just want one along, in case of anything happening," he said.
"They can afford it, so why shouldn't they have it?"

Well, that sounded all right, and yet I got the idea that it wasn't the
real reason, somehow.  I don't know why.  Those things are queer.

Of course, there was no reason why it shouldn't be so: I spent a month
on a private yacht, one summer, just to be there in case of sickness,
and nobody wanted me all the time we were gone, for a minute.  As a
matter of fact, the lady's maid took care of me the first three days
out!

But I never happened to be asked on a motor-trip in that way, and it
seemed a little different.  For of course you could pick up a nurse
almost anywhere, if you wanted one, on that sort of a tour, and every
place in the tonneau counts.

"Isn't there anything the matter with any of them?" I asked.

"What a suspicious lot you nurses are!" he said, with his queer little
chuckle (all the young doctors try to imitate it in the hospital).
"The daughter's a little nervous, that's all.  It's for her they're
taking the trip, to give her a change."

"Now look here, Dr. Stanchon," I said, "I'm here to tell you that I
don't want any of your old dope cases, and I might just as well say so
first as last.  That last young man of yours was about all I wanted.
He was a sweet creature, wasn't he?"

This probably sounds very fresh to you, but everybody knows me: I speak
right out, and if you want me, you have to stand it!  And the way I
slaved over that boy, and he getting morphine from his valet right
along--it was simply disgusting.

"It's nothing like that--nothing at all," said he; "don't get so
excited!"

"Oh, very well," I said, "then I suppose it's melancholia.  Not for
mine, if you please.  Perhaps you remember that charming woman that
jumped out of the window?  I'm no clairvoyant, and that was enough for
me, thank you."

"You're getting saucy, Jessop," he said, "but it's not melancholia.
But you certainly had a hard time with that one."

And I should say I did.  The foxy thing was as good as gold for three
weeks, minded everything I said, fairly ate out of my hand, and got us
so that we all believed she did better for me alone than when I had
help handy.  Of course I kept my eye on her, but nevertheless, the
other nurse just above gave up the job, and used to be off learning
French from the governess they had, most of the time.  So when madam
got us where she wanted us, she tied me to the door knob and jumped out
of the window before my eyes!  And I can tell you, the thirty dollars a
week that would get me on a case like that again, never left the
Treasury!

"I assure you it's not that at all," he said.  "It's a case of nerves,
that's all."

"Nerves! nerves!" I repeated (I _was_ pretty snippy, I suppose).
"That's all right for the family, doctor, but what's the matter with
her?  I've got to know, haven't I, some time?"

"Well, I must say you nurses are getting to be the limit," he said.
"The truth is, I spoil you.  But there's something in what you say, of
course.  Now here's the whole business.  This girl, and she's a sweet,
lovely girl, too, had a maid, that was a sort of nurse, I believe, when
she was a child, and had seen her grow up, and was very much attached
to her, and all that.  Like all those old servants she was pretty well
spoilt, I imagine, and seems to have had the girl under her thumb.  She
always slept in the room with her.  Now; the maid had bad headaches and
used to take all sorts of proprietary remedies for them--coal-tar, of
course, and probably had weakened her heart with them.  Anyway, she
waked the girl up one night with her troubles and the girl gets up and
gives her an overdose in the dark, and the maid's dead in her bed in
the morning."

"Oh, I see," I said, trying to make up for my nasty attitude about that
suicidal woman.  "So she's blue about it, and thinks she's to blame.
An automobile trip will certainly do her a lot of good."

"Well, there's a little more to it than that," he said.  "As a matter
of fact, she's a very sensible sort of girl and she knows she's not to
blame, really.  Of course it was pretty rough, but then, the maid had
no business to expect her to wait on her, and she ought to have given
careful directions about the dose, anyhow.  She might have gone off any
time, and the girl knows it.  But the night of the funeral, after the
girl was in bed, what does she see but the maid sitting on the foot of
the bed, looking at her!  Of course she was overwrought nervously.
Only the trouble is, this was three months ago, and she swears the
woman comes every night.  She knows it's hallucination, optical
delusion, anything you like, and she tries to treat it as such, but
she's beginning to break down under it, and I don't know what to do.
They've travelled, they've had her in a sanitarium, they've tried
auto-suggestion--no use.  She's all right through the day, but at
night, in any bedroom, under any circumstances, this thing appears and
she just has to go through with it till morning."

"Why doesn't she have some one sleep with her?" I asked.

"It doesn't make the slightest difference," he said.  "One week she had
a bed between her father's and mother's, but it was just the same, and
of course they got pretty bad, out of sympathy.  They'd spend two or
three ordinary fortunes to cure her--but it's one of the cases where
money doesn't talk, unfortunately.  So there we are.  It came over me
last night that I'd like to have you try what you can do with her."

"But, heavens and earth, what good will I be?" I said.  "Am I a
ghost-catcher?  I never knew it."

"No," says he, "but I'm sorry for the ghost that would run up against
you, Jessop--honestly, I am!"

"Much obliged, I'm sure," I said, "but why doesn't she take her sleep
in the daytime?  That would fool the ghost from her point of
view--wouldn't it?"

I'll never forget the look he gave me.  "Listen to me, my girl," he
said, running out his jaw in the way he does when he's in dead earnest
and means you to know it, "listen to me, now.  If that young woman ever
takes to living by night and sleeping by day, on that account, _she's a
gone goose_!"

"What do you mean?" said I.

"I mean it's all up with her, and she might as well engage a permanent
suite in Jarvyse's little hotel up the river," he says, very sharp and
gruff.  "I've staved that off for a month now, but they can't see it
and they're bound to try it: Jarvyse himself half advises it.  And I'll
risk my entire reputation on the result.  If she can't fight it
out--she's gone."

He waited a moment and put out his jaw.

"_She's gone,_" he said again, and I felt creepy when he said it, and I
tell you I believed him.

"Well, I'll try my best," I said, and I went on the case the next
morning.

As soon as I saw her I got the idea of her I've always had since:
that's me, all over.  I went to a palmist's once with a lot of the
other nurses and that's the first thing he said to me.

"It's first impressions with you, young woman," he said.  "Take care to
trust 'em and act on 'em, and you'll never need to count on the old
ladies' home!"

Well, as soon as I saw Miss Elton she put me in mind of one of Mr.
C----r's heroines, looks and clothes and ways, and all, and I've never
changed my mind.  Her things were all plain, but they had the loveliest
lines, and she always looked as if she'd been born in them, they suited
her so!  Her hair was that heavy, smooth blond kind that makes a Marcel
wave look too vulgar to think about, and her eyes and complexion went
with it.  And with all her education she was as simple as a child:
there were any number of things she didn't seem to know.  She took to
me directly, her mother said, and I could see she liked me, though she
hardly spoke.  She had big rings under her eyes and seemed very tired.

She got a nap after lunch--only two hours, by the doctor's orders--and
it did seem a shame to wake her, she was off so sound, but of course I
did, and then we walked for an hour in the park.  I didn't talk much at
first, but I saw that she liked it, and so gradually we got on to
different subjects, and I think she was entertained.  She seemed
interested to hear about the nurses at the hospital and some of the
funny things that happen there, and I could see that she was trying to
keep her end up--oh, she was all right, Anne Elton was, and no mistake!
There was nothing morbid about her: she was trying to help all she
could.

When I came down for dinner there was a young man with them, a
handsome, dark fellow, and he talked a great deal with me--I could see
he was trying to size me up, and it was easy to see that he was pretty
far gone as far as Miss Elton was concerned, and didn't care who knew
it.  We must have seemed a strange party to any one who didn't know the
ins and outs of the thing--only the five of us in that big dining-room
with the conservatory opening into it; the mother, one of those
stringy, grey New York women, that always wear diamond dog-collars,
worried to death and nervous as a witch; Mr. Elton--he was Commodore of
the New York Yacht Club at that time--fat and healthy and
reddish-purple in the face; young Mr. Ferrau (he was from an old French
family and looked it, though a born New Yorker) and me in my white
uniform and cap next to Miss Elton, all in white with a big rope of
pearls and pearls on her fingers.  She could wear a lower cut gown and
look more decent in it than any woman I ever saw.  All her evening
dresses were like that, perfectly plain, just draped around her, with
long trains and no trimmings: her skin was like cream-coloured marble,
not a mark or line or vein on it, but just one brown mole on the right
shoulder blade, and that, as her mother said, was really an addition.

Nobody talked much but Mr. Ferrau and the old gentleman--there's no
doubt he had been a gay old boy in his day!--for I never do talk when I
dine with the family, and the mother was too nervous for anything but
complaining of the food.  The Lord knows why, for it beat any French
restaurant I ever ate in, or Delmonico's either, and Mr. Ferrau and I
got quite jolly over how they put soft-boiled eggs into those round,
_soufflée_ sort of things with tomato sauce over them, without spilling
the yolks.  Then they asked if I'd play bridge a bit, and though I
don't care for games much, I learned to play pretty well with my
morphine-fiend and his mother, so of course I did, and the old
gentleman and I played the young couple, and Madam Elton crocheted,
sitting up straight as a poker on a gold sofa.

It always makes me laugh when I read what some persons' ideas are of
how rich people amuse themselves.  The nurses are always jollying me
about my rich friends and playing the races and champagne suppers and
high-flying generally, and I often wish they could have seen us those
evenings at the Eltons, playing bridge--no money, mind you, and
Apollinaris at ten!  The Commodore had to have ginger-ale, the ladies
hardly ever drank, and I never take anything but water when I'm on a
case, so Mr. Ferrau had all the champagne there was at that dinner.  At
ten the masseuse came and rubbed Miss Elton to sleep, and I got into my
bed next hers before she went off, not to risk disturbing her.  There
was a night lamp in her bath and I could just make out her long braid
on the pillow--the pillow cases had real lace insertions and the
monograms on the sheets were the most beautiful I ever saw.

I went off myself about eleven, for I was determined to act perfectly
natural: I knew I'd wake if anything was wrong.  And sure enough: all
of a sudden I began to dream, a thing I seldom if ever do, and I
dreamed that my suicidal case was clambering over me to jump out of the
window, and woke with a start.

Miss Elton was sitting up in bed staring at me, breathing short.

"Can I do anything for you?" I asked quietly and she gave a sort of
gasp and said,

"No--I think not, thank you.  I'm sorry to bother you, but the doctor
told me to."

"Why, of course," said I, "that's what I'm here for.  Do you see
anybody?"

I didn't say, "Do you think you see anybody?" for I never put things
that way.

"Yes," she said, "she's there--Janet."  I glanced about, and of course
there was no one, and I tell you, I felt awfully sorry for her.  It was
all the worse that she was so pretty and calm and decent about it: I
didn't like that a bit.

"Where is she?" said I.

"Right on the foot of the bed," she answered, in that grim, edgy kind
of way they always talk when they're holding on to themselves.  Oh, how
that morphine boy of mine used to begin!

"Excuse me, Miss Jessop, but would you mind assuring me that there's
nobody crouching under the bed?" he used to say.  "Of course I know
there's not, but there appears to be, and I'd be obliged if you'd look!"

If I went under that bed once, I went fifty times.

"Why, to tell you the truth, Miss Elton, I don't see a thing," I said.
"Shall I turn on the light?"

"No--not yet," she said.  "The doctor said to hold out as long as I
could.  Would you mind putting your hand there?"

"Not a bit," said I, and I pawed all over the foot of her bed.  Finally
I got up and sat there.

"What happens now?" I asked her.

"She just moves up and sits farther out," said she.

I couldn't think of much to say to that, she was so quiet and hopeless,
so I waited awhile and finally I said,

"Would it help you any to talk about it?"

"Oh, if you didn't _mind_!" she cried out, and then the poor thing
began.  It makes me tired, the way people treat a patient like that.
There was that girl just bottled up, you might as well say, because
they all thought it would make her worse to talk about it.  Her father
pooh-poohed it, and her mother cried and asked her to send for their
rector, and even Dr. Stanchon slipped up there, it seemed to me, for he
advised her not to dwell on it.  Not dwell on it!  Why, how could she
help it, I'd like to know?

"What I can't understand," she'd say, over and over, "is her coming,
when it hurts me so.  Why, Janet loved me, Miss Jessop, she loved the
ground I walked on, everybody said!  And she knows--she must know--that
I wouldn't have hurt her for the world.  Why should I?  She took care
of me since I was six years old--sixteen years!  She said to put in
those powders in the box and I put them in.  How could I know?"

"Of course you couldn't know," I said, "she knows that."

"Then why does she do this?" she asked me, so pitifully, just like a
child.  "Why does she, Miss Jessop?"

"Well, you know, Miss Elton," I said, "you wouldn't believe me if I
lied to you, now, would you?  And so I must tell you that I don't think
she _does_ do it: none of us do.  It's just your idea.  If Janet's
there, why don't I see her?  You're overstrained and excited and you
feel that she might not have died----"

"Ah, but I didn't feel that the night she came!" she broke out, "truly
I didn't.  Dr. Stanchon and all of them said I was very brave and
sensible.  He talked to me and made me see: if Janet had been sleeping
with one of the maids and waked her up and told her not to turn on the
light because it hurt her head, but just to give her the powders in the
box, that maid would have done it.  I can see that."

"Of course," said I.

"I didn't blame myself--really," she went on, and suddenly she looked
straight to the foot of the bed.

"Janet," she said, "the doctor said never to speak to you, and I never
will again, but I must, this once.  Janet, _do_ you blame me?  Are you
really there?  Why do you come this way?  You're killing me, you know.
I can't sleep.  You shouldn't have taken that strong medicine, and the
doctor told you not to, you know, yourself.  Won't you go, Janet?  Not
to please Nannie?"

Really, it would have melted a stone to hear her.

She was still a moment and then she began to cry and whimper, and I
knew that it had made no difference.

"She won't go--she won't go," she said, crying, "not even for Nannie!"

Well, I talked to her and read to her and stroked her head, and by two
o'clock or so she was off for an hour, and I got a nap myself.  But
from three till nearly five she was awake again, and I had to light up
the room; she said she hardly saw her then--only felt her, and that
wasn't so bad.

I don't know that anything different took place for a week after that.
We went through the same business every night, and I took a nap every
afternoon when she did.  She told me, what I wasn't much surprised to
hear, that she and Mr. Ferrau were engaged--or just about--when this
precious Janet died, and that now she wouldn't hear of it and had
refused to marry him till she was well again.  And I must say I think
she was right.  Of course the old gentleman didn't see it that way, and
we had many a discussion about it, he and I.

"God Almighty, Miss Jessop, my dear," he used to say to me, "you know
as well as I do--I'm speaking, of course, to a woman of practical sense
and experience, and therefore I speak plainly--you know as well as I do
that the day after the wedding all this will be done for!  We'll never
hear of that damned Janet nonsense again.  Now, would we?"

"Well, Commodore, maybe not, but you can't tell," I'd say.  "It's a
good bet, but--it's a bet, after all.  It would be awkward if it didn't
work out, you know."

"Oh, bosh, bosh!" he'd burst out, and roll off to the Yacht Club.
People that live in big houses like that, I've noticed, always have to
go out to get a little peace, they say, and privacy.  It's funny.

The weather was bad, so we didn't go on the motor trip at all, and that
was just as well, for if we had, I should never have gone up to the
hospital that day and never seen old Margaret.  She was an old darky
woman that used to come in to clean the wards when they were short of
help, and all the nurses knew her, because she used to tell fortunes
with cards and a glass ball she looked into--pretty fair fortunes, too.
I've known of some awfully queer things she told different nurses that
were only too true.  She always liked me because I used to jolly her
up, and I stopped to speak to her, and she asked me where I was working.

"Oh, a grand place on the Avenue, Margaret," I told her, "marble stairs
and a fountain in the hall."

"What's the sickness, honey?" she asked, for those darkies are always
curious.

"The patient's got a ghost, Margaret," I said, just to see what she'd
say, "and I'm sorry to say we can't seem to cure her."

"Co'se you cayn't cure her," says she, "no stuff in bottles for that,
honey!  What the ghos' want?"

"Nothing at all," said I.  "It just sits on the bed and looks."

"Laws, honey, Miss Jessop, but that yer kine's the wors' of all," says
she, staring at me.  "She'll jes' have ter leave it onto somebody else,
that's all."

"Why, can you do that?" I asked.

"Sure you can do it," she says.  "Was it one that loved her?"

"They all say so," said I.

She struck her hands together.

"I knew it--I knew it!" she cried out.  "It's always that-a-way.  My
ole mudder she had that ha'nt fer ten years, and it was her half-sister
that brung her up from three years ole!  She'll jes' have ter leave it
onto some one."

"Well, I'll tell her so," said I, just in joke, of course.

"You do," says she, solemn as the grave, "you do, Miss Jessop, honey,
an' she'll bless you all her life.  You get some one ter say they'll
take that ha'nt off her _right w'ile it's there, so it hears 'em_, and
w'ile there's a witness there ter hear bofe sides, an' you hear to me,
now, she'll go free!"

"I'll certainly tell her, Margaret," I said, and I went on and never
gave it another thought, of course.

We went up to the Elton's camp in Maine all of a sudden, for Miss Elton
got the idea she'd feel better there, and though it was cold as
Greenland, it did seem for a little as if she got a bit more sleep.
But not for long.  We slept out on pine-bough beds around a big fire,
for that made more light, and that precious Janet seemed to be fainter,
but she was there, just the same, and the poor girl had lost eighteen
pounds and I felt pretty blue about it.  It didn't really look as if we
got ahead any, as I told the doctor, and she hardly spoke all day.  I'm
not much for the country, as a rule, it always smells so damp at night,
but the Lord knows I'd have lived there a year if it would have helped
her any.

Then came the night when Mr. Ferrau ran up to see how she was getting
along.  It was too cold for Madam and the Commodore, so we were there
alone except for a gang of guides and servants and chauffeurs and
masseuses.  She had a bad night that night, for she got the idea that
this lovely Janet was sitting up nearer and nearer to her, and she had
it in her head that when she got to a certain point it would be all up
with her.  And when I told the doctor that, over the telephone, all he
said was:

"Too bad, too bad!"  So I knew how _he_ felt.

Well, she got talking rather hysterically for her, and I began to wish
somebody else was around, when Mr. Ferrau jumps out of his door in the
bachelor quarters and dashes over to us in a heavy bathrobe, white as a
sheet.

"For God's sake, Miss Jessop, _do_ something!" he said, but I just
shrugged my shoulders.  There was nothing to _do_, you see.  She was
all bundled up in a seal-skin sleeping-bag with a wool helmet over her
head; her eyes certainly looked bad.  I just about gave up hope, then.
The moon made everything a sort of bluish-white and we all must have
looked pretty ghastly.

"I think I'll give her a little codeine," I said.  "Just stay here a
moment, will you?"

He knelt down by her bunk while I began to unwind myself from all the
stuff you have to get into up there.

"Oh, Anne, my dearest, dearest girl," he said, "if only I could take
this instead of you!  If only I could see her, and you not!"

"Would you--would you, really, Louis?" I heard her say.  "You _do_ love
me, don't you?  But that would be too dreadful.  I couldn't allow that
to happen."

"Heavens, my dear girl, I'd take it in a minute, if I could!" he cried.
"Oh, Anne, do try to look at it in that way--try to give it to me!
Perhaps if you used your will-power enough for that----"

"That can't be, Louis," she said, "this is just my fate.  I must bear
it--till it kills me.  But if it could be, I'll tell you this: I
_would_ give it to you, dearest, for you are stronger, and maybe a man
could fight it better."

I was off to the main camp then, but when I got back with the codeine
she was asleep with her head on his shoulder, and he kneeled there till
four without moving--he was game, that Mr. Ferrau, and no mistake!

She slept right through till eight, and I left them together all day,
as much as I could, and I let her off her nap, she begged so.  I could
see from the solemn way she talked that she was saying good-bye to him,
as much as he'd let her.  She told me that as soon as it began to get
on her brain, really, and she got worse (we always called it "getting
worse"), she was going up to Dr. Jarvyse's place, and he wasn't to see
her at all.

"I want him to remember me--as I was," she said.  It certainly was
tough.  I used to cry about it, when I was alone, sometimes.  You get
awfully fond of some patients.

He stayed the next night, too, and I took my regular nap from ten to
one.  I could nearly always count on that, and I'd got so I woke the
moment she did.  I was fast asleep when I felt her touch me, and I
woke, feeling scared, for she almost never did that.

"What is it?" I said, half awake.  "Is she coming nearer?"

"Miss Jessop, dear Miss Jessop, she isn't here at all!" she said,
shaking and crying.  "I've been awake an hour, and she hasn't come
to-night!  Oh, _do_ you think, _do_ you----"

"Yes, I do," I said, though I was pretty excited myself, I can tell
you.  "I believe you're getting better, Miss Elton, and now I think
I'll have Miss Avidson rub you, and see if we can get through the night
all right."

The Swedish woman put her right to sleep, working over her head, and we
never opened our eyes till nine.  One of the guides told me that Mr.
Ferrau had been called to the city early, and had left quietly, not to
disturb us, but we were both so delighted and yet so anxious not to be
delighted too soon, that we didn't notice his going much.  She ate
three good meals that day, besides her tea, and we walked five or six
miles--I wanted to wear her out.  And that night she slept right
through!

We waited one night more, to be certain, and then I 'phoned the doctor.

"Hurray!" he yelled, so I nearly dropped the receiver.  "Bully for you!
Keep out for a week and then move in--with a light.  Drop the light in
another week.  Then I'll send 'em all off to Beachmount."  This was
their Long Island place.

Well, it all worked out perfectly.  She gained nine pounds in three
weeks, and I don't know when I've been so pleased.  The old people came
up to see her, and I spent most of my time convincing them that it was
no case for tiaras and sunbursts, as I never wore them.  Mrs. Elton
really looked almost human.  She cried so that I finally had to take a
little string of pearls.  They were small, but all matched, and she
said I could wear them under my blouse and I could always sell them.
You'd have thought that I'd cured the girl, when, as I told them, the
thing had just run its natural course, and her youth and good sense and
the outdoor life had done the rest.

Of course, there was no more use for me, and I went right off on a big
operation case--a very interesting one, indeed.  I promised to come to
the wedding, if I possibly could; she told me she would be married just
as soon as Mr. Ferrau wished, she felt she'd made him go through so
much in the last four months.  And it seemed that he _had_ felt the
strain more than they thought, for her mother told me that just as Anne
recovered, he seemed to give way and got very nervous and had gone off
on a yacht with some of his college friends to the south somewhere.  I
was rather surprised not to see him at the house, and so was Miss Anne,
I thought; but he sent the loveliest flowers every day and telegrams,
and of course they were working on the trousseau and pretty busy,
anyway.

I couldn't get to the wedding, after all, for my patient was taken to
Lakewood and simply refused to let me off, which was rather mean of
her, for I could have run up for the afternoon as well as not.  But
that's what you have to expect, if you go into nursing, and you get
used to it.

Mrs. Elton called me up once at the hotel, to see if I couldn't get
away (they were going to send the car for me if I could), and I asked
if Mr. Ferrau was all right again.

"Really, Miss Jessop," said she--and I could just see how she must have
looked, from her voice--"really, my dear, I am terribly, _terribly_
worried about Louis.  He looks frightfully, so pale and nervous and run
down.  And he simply _won't_ see a doctor, and when I earnestly begged
him to consult Dr. Stanchon, he flew out at me--he really flew out!"

"What can it be?" said I.  "What does Miss Elton think?"

"Why, how can she know, my dear?" says the old lady.  "Only he assures
her that it will be all right once they're married, and begs her so not
to put it off, that she won't, though I don't entirely approve, myself.
Really, you'd scarcely know Louis, Miss Jessop."

It did seem too bad, but then, those things will happen, and I just
thought to myself that probably there was more to that southern trip
than the old lady knew, and let it go at that.  The doctor says that
all the nurses have dime-novel imaginations--but where do we get them,
I'd like to know, if not from what we see and hear?  The Lord knows we
don't have to invent things.

Miss Elton was dreadfully disappointed that I couldn't be there for the
wedding, and promised me they'd stop a minute at the hotel on their
wedding journey and see me.  They were going on a motor trip, nobody
knew just where, and Lakewood would only be a few miles out of their
way.  Wasn't that nice of them?  But it was just like both of them.  So
I was quite excited, of course, and when it poured rain all day, and
got worse and worse, I did feel so sorry for them and never expected
they'd leave town.  But, lo and behold, about five o'clock didn't the
boy bring up their cards, and for a wonder my patient was decent and
said she wouldn't want me till next morning--she had her own maid with
her and really didn't need me but once a day.

I ran down to one of the little reception rooms--I must say I like
those big hotels--and when I saw them I nearly collapsed, for though
she was looking perfectly beautiful and well as could be, poor Mr.
Ferrau certainly did give me a shock.  He was all tanned, well enough,
but as thin as a rail, and dreadful around the eyes.  And yet he looked
very happy and seemed quite glad to see me.

"Isn't she looking magnificent?" he asked me, and I said--I just have
to say right out what I think--"Yes, she is, but I can't say the same
for you."

"Oh, I shall be all right--after a bit," he said, turning red and not
meeting my eyes.  "Just let me get away with Anne for a while, and
you'll see."

They insisted on my having tea with them, and I couldn't help but think
that she didn't realise how bad he looked and acted: his hand shook so
that his tea-spoon jingled.  And yet he was as straight as a string, I
was sure.

It kept on pouring so dreadfully that they gave up the idea of going on
anywhere, and he engaged a suite at the hotel for that night, and I
said good-bye to them, then, for they were to have their dinner served
by themselves and I knew they'd want to get off quietly in the morning.
My patient kept her word and didn't bother me, and I listened to the
music for a while and then went up to my room and wrote some letters.
About ten I put my boots outside the door and happened to notice the
boots opposite and saw that they were Mr. Ferrau's--they were patent
leather, with rather queer cloth tops.  So I knew that they had the
suite opposite ours; there were only those two for the one little hall.

I couldn't seem to sleep that night at all.  I kept dreaming about that
suicide of mine, even when I did sleep, and finally I put on my wrapper
and decided to take a few turns up and down the corridor.  I opened the
door softly and stepped out--and ran right into Mr. Ferrau!  He was
stalking along in a bathrobe, his arms spread out, and tears rolling
down his cheeks, and he was chattering to himself like a monkey.  His
eyes rolled, and I could see he was just on the verge of a regular
smash-up.

"Why, Mr. Ferrau, what's the matter?" I asked.

He stared at me like a crazy man.  "You here!" he said.  "For God's
sake!  Go up to her--go to Anne--I'm all in," he said.  "Oh, Miss
Jessop, it didn't work!  It didn't work!"

He pointed to his door, and I went through the private dining-room and
the sitting-room and a dressing-room and a big marble bath, and there
she was, crying like a baby in one of the beds.

"Why, Miss Elton--I beg your pardon, Mrs. Ferrau--what _is_ the
matter?" I said, running up to her and taking hold of her hand.  "Are
you ill?"

She only sobbed and held on to me and suddenly something struck me and
I said, "You haven't seen Janet again, have you?"

"No, no--but I wish I had!  I wish I'd never stopped!" she gulped at
me.  "Oh, Miss Jessop, _Louis sees her_!  He sees her all the time;
that's what makes him look so ill!  Ever since she stopped coming to
me, he's seen her, and he never told."

"For heaven's sake!" said I.

"She sits on the bed, but she doesn't look at him--he only sees her
profile.  He walked twenty miles a day--he did boxing and fencing and
riding--it was no use--he thought when we--when--he hoped if we were
married--oh, Miss Jessop, she came just the same!"

"For heaven's sake!" I said again.  It wasn't very helpful, but I
simply couldn't think of anything else.  She was so pretty and sweet,
and he was so plucky, and who would have supposed it would have got on
his nerves so!

Her night gown was solid real lace, and the front of it was sopping wet
where she'd cried, and the top of the sheet, too.

"I gave her to him, and he won't give her back--I can't make him!" she
went on, gasping and sobbing.  "I begged him on my knees, but he
wouldn't."

"And don't you see her?" I asked.

"No, no, I can't!" she cried.  "I try, but I can't."

"Well, that's something, anyway," I said.  "You wait till I go and
speak to him again, and put some cold water on your eyes, why don't
you?"

For it just occurred to me that maybe I could do something with him,
after all.  He was leaning against the window at the end of the
corridor, and I never like to see excited people near windows, after my
suicide woman, so I sprinted along till I got to him.  But I really
don't believe there was any need for it--he wasn't that kind.

"See here, Mr. Ferrau," I said, "do you really believe that Miss
Elton--I beg your pardon, Mrs. Ferrau--really gave that old Janet ghost
to you?"

"Believe it? _believe it_?" he said, staring at me out of his red eyes.
"No, I don't believe it, Miss Jessop--I know it!  I tell you I see the
damned thing, in a brown dress, on the edge of my bed every night!"

"Well, then," I said, "do you think you could give it to anybody else?"

And just at that moment, and not before, I remembered old Margaret!

"Why--why, I never thought of that," he said.  "I--I wouldn't put any
one else through such a hell, though----"

"Oh, come, now," I said.  "Maybe they wouldn't think it was so bad as
you do, Mr. Ferrau."

"But who would--oh, it's too crazy!" he said, half angry, but all
broken up, so he didn't much care how it sounded.

"Oh, lots of people," I told him.  "Why, you might easily find some one
with an incurable disease, you know, that hadn't long to live and
wanted money----"

Of course, this was all nonsense, but anything to humour people in his
condition--it's the only way.  And what do you think?  He turned around
like a shot and stared at me as if I'd been a ghost, myself.

"That might be possible," he said, very slowly; "it's just possible I
know ... excuse me, I'll go in and speak to my wife a moment!"

He left me there and in a few minutes he came for me again, and I went
into their parlour.  She had on a beautiful pale rose negligée all
covered with lace and her braids were wound around her head: she'd
wiped her eyes.

"Would you perhaps play a little bridge with us, Miss Jessop?" says he,
trying to keep calm.  "We think we'd better have some one with us."

So there we sat till four in the morning, playing three-handed bridge,
and if anybody knows of a funnier wedding-night, I'd like to hear of it!

I suppose anybody would have thought us all crazy if they could have
seen us, the next night, sitting, all three of us, by the bed of that
queer old man that lived in old Greenwich Village.  (My patient let me
off, for I told her it was a case of a young bride and groom, and she
was delighted to oblige the Eltons.  She told me she should call on
them after that!  She was a climber, if there ever was one, that woman.)

He was an old valet of Mr. Ferrau's father, and Mr. Ferrau was
supporting him till he died in a little cottage there.  He had angina
and was likely to go off any minute, and the Lord knows what Master
Louis paid the old monkey--I'll bet it was no thirty cents!  He only
talked French, but I could see he thought Mr. Ferrau was crazy--he
looked at me so queerly out of his little wrinkled eyes and nodded his
head as if to say, "What a pity all this is!  But we must humour him."

Mrs. Ferrau told me afterward that her husband promised him solemnly to
take Janet back if he couldn't stand her--and he would have, too, and
don't forget it!  He was a game one.  But the old fellow just kept
saying:

"_Bon, m'sieu, bon, bon!_" and kept reaching for his envelope.  He was
only afraid they'd change their mind, you see.

Then Mr. Ferrau lay down on a cot next the old fellow's--he was kept
very clean and neat by the woman that boarded him--and I stayed in the
room while Master Louis gave that darned old Janet away.  He insisted
that I should witness it, and to tell you the truth, when I remembered
what black Margaret had said about having a witness, I _did_ feel
rather queer, for a moment.  But of course they were all crazy--as
crazy as loons--so far as that one thing went.  You see, it was what
Dr. Stanchon calls an _idée fixe_.  They had to be humoured.

Mrs. Ferrau and I went out, then, and walked up and down for an hour
through the village with the chauffeur behind us, a little way, and I
really thought I'd be dippy myself, before long, if I had to pretend to
be serious about it much longer.  It's no wonder to me the doctors in
asylums get touched themselves, after what I went through with those
two.

In just about an hour he came dashing out and pushed us into the car.
We didn't need to ask him--he looked ashamed, but oh, so different!

"Let's get back to town," was all he said, and I never mentioned it to
him again, any of it.  Of course, a sensible fellow like him _would_
feel too ridiculous; knowing he had that silly idea in his head, yet
not being able to get over it without such childishness--I felt sorry
for him.

I know that they didn't go back to Lakewood, for her maid packed up
there, and a week after that the old lady wrote me from Long Island
that they'd gone for a honeymoon tour in the car through Southern
France, so I knew that father-in-law's valet hadn't gone back on his
bargain.  I never knew what that old monkey made on it, but Mrs. Ferrau
told me he was going to leave it to the Catholic church in Normandy,
where he was born.  I hope it did some good.

I went up to Greenwich that summer with a little boy who had
tuberculosis of the spine (the sweetest little fellow, and so clever!)
and on one of my afternoons out with him I stopped at the old cottage
where the valet lived, just to ask after him.  The woman there told me
he had passed away about ten days after I was there before.

"In the night?" I asked, more for something to say than any real reason.

"No, in his sleep, in the afternoon," she said.  "He didn't sleep much
at night, after his young gentleman came, I noticed.  He seemed to have
bad dreams.  He'd be praying away and clicking those rosary beads half
the night, sometimes.  But he went out easy, at the last.  I learned a
little French when I was lady's maid to a party, once, so I could get
along pretty well with him.  But I couldn't make out about those
dreams, exactly; they seemed to be about something brown, with its back
to him, on the bed.  But he was pretty contented by day, when he was
awake; he kept telling me of all he was leaving to his church."

... When you think about it, it was queer, wasn't it?




THE MIRACLE

"And are they all really insane?"

He looked at me curiously.

"'Insane'?" he repeated, "'really'?"

He was very young, but very clever, and I had known his mother well and
listened to his letters from school many a time; she was intensely
proud of him.

"I tell you what it is, aunty," he began, selecting a cigarette with
the deft manual gesture of a born surgeon (he was only twelve years
younger than I, and his phenomenal record of almost impossible
accomplishment made him seem far older than his years; but we kept to
the habits of his perambulator days, when I had been tremendously
pleased with the title).  "I tell you what it is, aunty--I'm hanged if
I know!"

He peered slit-eyed through the clouds of smoke, and I waited eagerly
for what would come; when his eyes took on that look the boy seemed to
me, frankly, inspired.  Twenty-three years (he had finished Harvard at
nineteen) appeared so pitifully inadequate to account for him!  One was
forced to the belief that he had directly inherited that marvelous
"intuition" of his: that it was actually part of his famous father's
experience--for he was Richard Stanchon's only son.

"Of course, you know," he said quietly, "I see what they mean--most of
'em.  I always do, somehow.  And the more you do that, the less insane
they get to seem to you.  It's only you and I, a little warped, a
little exaggerated.  My idea is that fewer and fewer of them will be
sent to places like this, and more and more put out among families--oh,
don't shiver, aunty, there's nothing to shiver at, I assure you.

"Look here--do you see that tall girl in the blue silk shirtwaist?"

I saw her--she was reading _Punch_ before the big library fire (it was
furnished like a wealthy private club, the library), and just because
she was so calm and high bred and Madonna-faced, I flattered myself
that I could jump in the right direction.

"Does she murder babies?" I asked resignedly.

"Not at all," he replied, with a tiny grin for my cleverness, "not a
bit of it.  She only insists on taking five baths a day and never
touching any washable thing that's been handled.  She wears five
changes a day and cleans the piano keys before she plays--plays very
well, too."

"But--but, is that all?"

"Every bit."

"Then why must she come here?"

"Oh, well, there are practical complications, of course.  She thinks
most people are pigs, and says so.  Then her family is nervous--I
notice most of them come from very nervous families--and they simply
couldn't rub on.  She shampoos her head every day.  It's my firm
belief, aunty, that if some steady-going German-American family without
any nerves would give her two rooms and a bath and put up with her for
a few months, she'd be all right.  Honestly, as it is, she's fretting
herself crazy.  She's no fool, you know."

"Heavens, Will!  Why, I can perfectly understand----"

"Of course you can.  Not mother, though.  Mother won't hear about
her--and the joke of it is, you know, aunty, mother takes her three
tubs a day all summer and never shakes hands in warm weather!"

I gasped.

"But, Will, this is awful!  Why, we're all on the verge, if you look at
it that way!"

He shrugged and put out his hand to a heavy-faced, ordinary woman of
the well-groomed New York type.

"Good afternoon, Miss Vint--let me present you to my aunt, Mrs. Ba--oh,
come, now, aunty's a woman of the world and she's married, too.
There's no reason on earth why you shouldn't."

"But, doctor, you know what I am----"

"I know," he said kindly, and the real sympathy in his boy's eyes
struck moisture into my own, "I know.  But you're living it down--no
woman could do more."

"Really?" she begged, her features working, "really, doctor?  Heaven
knows I try!"

"And you never slip back.  _You never slip back!_" he said slowly and
emphatically.  "Just think what that: means, Miss Vint!"

We nodded at each other and she hurried off, almost smiling.

"She looks no more insane than I do," I suggested, and again he
shrugged.

"There's where it is," he answered quietly; "she's just a little over
the line, that's all.  She's Levi B. Vint's daughter, you know."

"Really!"

"I'd hate to think what she pays a week.  What she's really worrying
about, I believe, is the old man's money.  She insists he was all
right, you know, and all this exposure business, though it couldn't
shake her trust in the old scoundrel, got on her nerves and she got
worrying over herself.  Everybody argued with her--the whole Vint gang
are a set of bronze mules, you know--and finally she arrived at a
definite _idée fixe_: I'm sure it could have been prevented.  Anyway,
she thinks she's--she's all sorts of a bad lot, you know.  She won't
speak to the girls here--not even to the maids.  She says she might
corrupt them."

"How absurd--I mean how sad!  But she's so healthy; she'll soon
recover?"

"I don't know," he said briefly, and something scared me in his voice.
"She's a very hard case.  A bad age."

We walked in silence through a long glass-walled hall, a sort of
conservatory, with palms and caged canaries chirping and trilling.

"I hate those birds!" I cried nervously; he stopped and looked
thoughtfully into me--it was no less than that.

"That's interesting," he said abruptly, "I don't like 'em, either.  And
you're one of the best-balanced women I know.  Mother, too--she doesn't
care for them.  No--nor Beatrix."

Beatrix was the hardy young woman who contemplated marrying him--a
tremendous venture, it seemed to me!

"But they seem to like 'em here.  The crazier they are (there's nobody
bad here, you know) the more they like 'em, ...  Did you know mediums
and spiritualists and all that sort can't live without 'em?  I never
heard anybody mention it, but it's so.  When I went over to Lourdes,
last year, I made a point of looking up the families of the people that
had the visions, and they all kept larks in cages----"

I saw he was following some train of thought and kept silence.  At
length he shrugged his shoulders.

"But that isn't what I asked you out for," he began.  "I thought you'd
be interested in seeing--Oh, Mrs. Leeth, how are you?"

"Very well, thank you, doctor."

A busy, quiet, elderly woman, plainly dressed, cut across our path
through the long conservatory.

"Everything all right to-day?"

"Everything, I think, thank you, doctor."

There was nothing to remark about her until she lifted her eyes, and
then the curious, intense depth of them (like a dog who could speak, I
thought), held me almost breathless with sympathy.  She looked,
somehow, as if she had gone through more than would be right for her to
tell.

"Poor creature," I said as she disappeared through a baize door.  "Tell
me about her.  What is her trouble?"

"She has none that I know of," he replied quietly.  "She's the
housekeeper."

"Good Heavens, Will!  I think I should go mad myself, if I lived here!
How does one tell them apart?"

"I don't think one does, always," he remarked placidly.  "I sometimes
think that accounts for a good deal!  There's a man, now--see that
fussy little fellow getting out of his motor coat?  That's Jarvyse."

"_The_ Jarvyse?  The great specialist?"

"That's it," he grunted with a disrespectful grin.  "From my point of
view, you know, aunty, he might about as well stay in, now he's here.
I wouldn't go too near him, if I were you--he'll say you're a
paranoiac, if you mention your prejudice against free silver or thick
soup at dinner or steam heat.  Everything's been paranoia with him
since 1902.  It's just as much an _idée fixe_ as anybody's here.  If
you object to anything he says, he diagnoses you immediately.  You
couldn't build asylums fast enough to hold all Jarvyse's paranoiacs!
That's why I'm here, by the way; the case I want you to see is really
father's.  But he loses his temper so, when he meets Jarvyse, that he
sends me up, instead.  The old boy doesn't bother me--'Morning, doctor."

We stepped into a noiseless lift and he ran it to the fourth floor.  At
the end of the corridor an open door showed a pleasant little interior;
a window full of red geraniums, goldfish in a globe, an immense grey
cat by a little Franklin stove with brass balls atop, and in the centre
a round old-fashioned mahogany table piled high with various household
linen.  We walked directly into this little home-like picture--a great
relief after the lavish publicity of the immense halls--and as I
greeted the housekeeper, who stood by the heaped table (with an actual
note of apology in my voice for having mistaken her!) I noticed a
little elderly man, a vague pepper-and-salt effect, sitting by a
business-like desk in the corner, his hat and stick on the chair beside
him, a book and pencil on his knee.

"Good morning, Mr. Vail, I rather hoped you might be here; let me
present you to my aunt, Mrs.----"

"Good heavens!" I almost said it aloud, for the vague pepper-and-salt
took on familiar lines suddenly, and the matter-of-fact little features
scattered so indistinguishably, as it were, though the boyishly round
face became obviously one with the much-photographed trader-prince; it
was Absolom Vail, the multimillionaire!  When had he...

"Mrs. Leeth used to be Mr. Vail's housekeeper for many years," my young
doctor's voice sounded reprovingly (had my jaw dropped?) "and he often
looks in on her like this."

"Oh!" I recalled the hat and stick and breathed again.  Not that I had
any interest in the old gentleman, but he seemed a sort of public
character, he and his "old stocking savings-bank," his "millions for
deposit, but not a cent for speculation," his "every penny earned in
honest trade," and all the rest of it.

"Never forgot an old friend yet," he chirruped, and the housekeeper
smiled gravely.  It was very decent and kindly and quite what one would
have expected; I remembered that every employee always received a
personally selected gift at Christmas and that he had stood godfather
for seventeen (or was it twenty-seven?) children of labourers, born on
the great eight thousand acre estate on the Hudson.

My boy listened a moment to a call from the house-telephone, turned on
his heel and swung hurriedly down the corridor.  I appeared to have
been abandoned.

The housekeeper's lips moved silently as she fingered the napkins on
the further corner of the table; it was unnecessary, evidently, to
include her in the social situation, though she would be perfectly
capable of the inclusion if it should be thought best.

"I had the pleasure of meeting your daughter in London last spring, Mr.
Vail," I said.

"Minnie?" he inquired, his shrewd little eyes on me.

"I think so--the Countess of Barkington."

"Yes, that's Minnie.  Well, Minnie's a good girl, I guess.  I haven't
seen her much lately.  Not for some years, but once or twice.  Ever see
Irene?"

"I don't think so.  She married----"

"She took an Italian.  She's a countess, too--contessa they call it
over there.  The Contessa di Abbriglia.  Hannibal, her husband's name
is--always seemed like a Newfoundland dog's name, to me.  He hasn't any
such amount of land as Barkington, but the family's older, I believe.
Hannibal's old enough, anyhow.  How old was the count, Mrs. Leeth, when
Irene married him?"

"Miss Irene was twenty-one, Mr. Vail, and Count Hannibal was forty."

"You knew them both?" I asked her, caught by a sudden curiosity to see
those deep, secret brown eyes once more.  The famous Absolom was just
what I had supposed he would be, neither more nor less; the most
interesting thing I could see in him was this simple, friendly kindness
to an old retainer.

"I dressed both the young ladies for their weddings," she replied
quietly.

"It must be very pleasant to you--these talks of old times," I hazarded.

"It is," she answered.

I thought of a number of remarks suitable to one or both of my old
companions, but they all, somehow, seemed banal and excessive as I
marshalled them to my lips.  A quaint, almost hypnotic quiet rose like
the tide around us: all seemed said and agreed to.  A tiny fire
flickered on the Franklin hearth; the iridescent fan-tailed fish bent
and flattened and glided in the translucent globe; an old clock ticked
restfully somewhere.  The two elderly friends there--for they were
friends; one felt it.  And why not?  They were from the same class,
undoubtedly, the hardware king and the housekeeper, the solid
bourgeoisie that is essentially alike in all countries and
centuries--these two friends exhaled an atmosphere of contented trust
in each other and what life had left for them that spread like a
visible cloud, a sort of sunset autumn haze, quite through the little,
homely room, and took me under it, with them.  No wonder he liked to
come there: it did not require much imaginative faculty to infer that
neither Barkington nor di Abbriglia had been able to offer such an
asylum to their father-in-law....

Asylum!  How unconsciously I had fitted the original sense of the
kindly old word to its technical uses!  Asylum: that was what it was, a
refuge, a shelter, a little back-water in the great whirlpool of
overstrained, nervous modern life.  And Absolom Vail had found one
here, it seemed.  For he was unmistakably at home here; this was not
the first nor the second visit, that was plain.  Such atmospheres do
not grow from casual encounters.

We exchanged comfortable, old commonplaces from time to time, while
Mrs. Leeth sorted, and the hardware lord actually jotted down her notes
as to necessary darning and replacing, in a worn red account book--it
was almost too quaint for belief!  He chuckled at it a little, but not
much; it was, after all, such a practical, sane sort of interlude in
all the horrid, morbid confusion that the place, with all its
conservatories and old mahogany and spacious vistas, necessarily
included.  They were more than common normal, this simple, middle-class
pair, on their friendly little housekeeping island, with this
treacherous sea of pain and revolt forever lapping at the edges.

I don't remember how he got to telling me of his early life, but I
believe it is a habit of all that sort, and Absolom was no exception to
his class and stratum.  I was particularly impressed by one little
incident, the foundation, really, of his fortune--if any event can be
selected in those lives which seem destined to exhibit the farthest
possibilities of accumulation.

"I had just exactly one hundred dollars," he said (he had the
characteristic superstitious reverence for set sums, even decimal
multiples of the national symbol) "that I'd saved up as carpenter's
assistant in Greenwich, Connecticut.  I took it out of the savings-bank
and I came to New York with a clean shirt and a tooth brush and my old
mother's Bible, packed in a little basket with some boiled ham and
bread.  I looked out a verse just as I stepped onto the train--what do
you think it was?"

"I have no idea, Mr. Vail."

"No.  You wouldn't have.  Well, it was this: _Blessed shall be thy
basket and thy store.  D'you see--basket_!  And I always intended to
keep a store."

He fixed me triumphantly with his twinkling Santa Claus eyes.

"It's in Deuteronomy," he said.

"The coincidence must have seemed very comforting to you," I suggested
gravely.

"It did.  It did," he answered, "and from that moment on, I never had a
doubt.  Barkington didn't care much for that story, though--he says
that the old fellows that translated the Bible away back in some king's
time--King----"

"King James," said the housekeeper quietly.

"Yes, King James.  Well, he says that they didn't mean that kind of a
store.  Maybe not.  But it did the job for me, that verse, just the
same."

The whole incident seemed very characteristic, very national, somehow,
and I reflected gently upon it as we sat in silence, broken only by
Mrs. Leeth's practical, dry voice as she announced:

"Greek Key, Irish weave, spring, 1908, six dozen, fair order.

"Thistle pattern, fall, 1906, four dozen, eight darned, ten badly worn."

It seemed that I had been there a long time....

At length I heard Will's quick, nervous step, and as it neared the door
I rose, really reluctantly, and met him.

"I am quite in the doctor's hands," I said, "and I see that he thinks
it time for me to leave.  Good-bye, Mr. Vail"--he put his hand out for
his gloves and cane--"if you are going, too, perhaps, can I take you
back in town with me?  I motored out."

"I'm afraid you can't," he replied, with his twinkling smile, "because
I'm one of the ones that don't get out!"

I stared at him blankly.

"'That don't get out'!" I repeated stupidly.  "_That don't get out_?
Why?"

"Because I'm insane," he said placidly.

      *      *      *      *      *

I don't pretend to any unusual share of equanimity, and it was not till
we were back in the shelter of my own home, with the comfort of my own
tea-tray before me and my own little applewood fire snapping on the
hearth, that I brought myself to discuss the matter with Emily's boy.
He had come back with me and we were going to the opera together later.

"I suppose that was what you wanted me to see?" I said abruptly.

He nodded.

"Just that.  I wanted your idea.  It's one of the most interesting
cases--with all its complications--I ever knew.  Father's turned it
over to me, practically.  He knows all about it."

"But, Will, the man's as sane as I am!"

"How much did you talk with him?"

"Quite as much as with hundreds of other people!"

He smiled thoughtfully.

"Talk much with Mrs. Leeth?"

"Oh, yes--she seems much more ordinary than her eyes, doesn't she?"

"What did she say?"

"Oh, just commonplaces--I don't recall anything special...."

"Well, try, won't you?  What _were_ the commonplaces?"

I applied myself to recollection.  What, after all, _had_ she said?  As
a matter of fact, beyond her linen tabulation I could not recall more
than a dozen words.

"Anyway," I remonstrated, "she makes you feel as if she talked!  She
doesn't seem silent."

"No," he admitted thoughtfully, "that's true.  But she never talks.
She hardly speaks to the servants--they're all under her, you know--but
they all seem to know what she wants.  I've tested lots of them: the
cook, the laundresses, the furnace man, the steward--and when they come
to consider, they can't recall a dozen words a day.  But they always
insist, at first, that she gives them detailed orders and criticises
them constantly.  It's funny."

"Oh, well," I broke in impatiently, "never mind her!  Tell me about Mr.
Vail--how long has he been there?"

"He's been there six months!" Will announced triumphantly, suppressing
a delighted smile at my amazement.

"Six months!  And nobody knows?"

"Nobody but the family.  Oh, he gets out, now and then: I or one of the
doctors goes with him and he puts in a day at the office.  Everybody
thinks he's travelling or taking electric light baths for his liver or
Roentgen rays for his lungs or osteopathy for a cold in the head--Lord
knows what!"

"A day at the office?  But how can he, if he's insane?"

"He's not too insane to make money."  His smile was deliberately
intended to intrigue me, I thought.

"He's no more insane than I am!" I cried.  "Who put him there?"

"The Countess of Barkington--primarily.  Abbriglia agreed, but _they'd_
never have done it alone--Irene's too fond of the old fellow."

"Do you mean to say----"

"Oh, don't get excited, aunty--he committed himself.  Nobody roped and
gagged him."

"But what doctor----"

"Two besides me."

"Besides you?  Why, Will!"

"Oh, I didn't say that I recommended him to an asylum.  Not at all.  If
he had fought it, I could have found reasons on the other side."

"Like a corporation lawyer!"

"Oh, well...."

He began rolling cigarettes; they were his one weakness.

"The question is," he said slowly, "what is insanity?  Medical
insanity's one job, legal insanity's another....  Suppose your butler
was convinced of the fact that he was Napoleon: would you care a
continental, provided he buttlered as per contract?  So long as he
didn't shout, '_Tête d'armée!_' as he passed the salad, what would you
care?  It's quite possible that he has some such delusion, for all you
know."

"Of course, I see that."

"There was that old nurse of ours--Esther, you know?  To the day of her
death she swore that the druggist on the corner of Hartwell Street was
Charley Ross--the child that was abducted long ago.  You couldn't argue
her out of it nor laugh her out of it--she said she had a feeling.  She
brought us up in it, you know, and for years I believed that he was
Charley Ross and regarded him with veneration.  She was a perfectly
good nurse, just the same.  But that idiotic fancy was part of her
life--strengthened with every year of her life.  It was an _idée fixe_."

"Well?"

"Well.  Esther died a poor woman, but if she had left fifty thousand
to--to a home for blind mulattoes, say, the first thing her nephews
would have brought forward was that idea of Charley Ross."

"Brought forward?"

"To break her will.  They would have said that it proved her mentally
incapable."

"But it doesn't, Will, does it?"

"That's just as you see it.  She wasn't incapable of looking after us
and dressing mother and doing the marketing and keeping the accounts
and making all her own clothes and some of ours.  But if you ask me if
she had a perfectly normal mind, I should have to say no."

"I see, Will."

I was extremely interested: I seemed to see, glimmering far off, what
we were getting to, and it was gripping, absorbing.  But I had no idea
what we really were getting to--not then.

"Now, we'll take another case," he said, at another cigarette.

"I was at Lourdes last year, as you know, studying the Pilgrimage.
Curious thing.  Not an atom of proof, you see, that anybody was ever
cured of a headache there.  Not even sense enough to use the immense
suggestive power that's massed there to do real good to neurasthenics
and hysterics--in fact, they try to bar them.  They prefer goitre,
which is _not_ cured by dirty baths, unfortunately.  The people who go
away from there think they were cured from this, that and the other;
whole business founded on a perfectly authenticated case of _dementia
praecox_--as much a pathological condition as gout or insomnia.  I
interviewed a prize case; she appeared before their bluff at a
scientific council and presented affidavits of cure from consumption, a
year previous.  I examined her later.  It was--as the man
said--interesting if true, but the trouble was, it wasn't true, for she
was nearly gone, then.  I gave her three months, and she died, I took
pains to learn, in ten weeks.  Well: that was her delusion.  Was she
sane?"

"She was misinformed--mistaken."

"Quite so--but she _knew_ she was cured, remember.  She felt it.  The
rest of us didn't.

"Now let's go a step farther, if you don't mind.  Beatrix tells me that
the Almighty God, the creator of the universe, is the father of the son
of a young Jewess, and sacrificed his son in order to save the world.
This seems to me fantastic, frankly.  But mind you, aunty, though I
know that druggist wasn't Charley Ross, and though I know that the
miraculous baths of Lourdes didn't cure poor Marie Tremplin of her
tuberculosis, I can't say that what Beatrix assures me she knows about
the Deity isn't so!  It appears to me quite incapable of demonstration,
but maybe it all happened as she says.  Only I don't believe with her
that she _knows_ it.  I say she _believes_ it.  If it helps her, as she
says it does, to be the good and lovely girl she is, all right.  It
might help Parrott to stand straight to think he was Napoleon.  All
right."

"That's pragmatism," I suggested.

"Oh, well," he said, with one of his curious old smiles, "they call it
different things different years, I suppose."

He drew himself up, and I could see something was coming.

"Now, aunty, attend to me.  I couldn't put Beatrix in an asylum for
what I and many, many others consider _her_ delusion, could I?"

"Why, Will, of course not!"

"No, nor Marie Tremplin."

"Equally of course not.  She has a right to her miracle, legally, I
suppose, as well as Beatrix."

"Precisely.  Well, here comes along Absolom Vail, and says _he's_ had a
miracle, too.  He hasn't millions of people behind him, like Beatrix,
nor thousands like Marie, nor even half a dozen, as our old Esther
had--she converted all the servants and us children.  He has only
one--himself.  A poor miracle, perhaps, but his own.  And Barkington
lands him in an asylum.  The day of miracles is over."

"Why, Will!  Why, Will..."  I murmured.  I seemed to feel myself on the
edge of something very big and cloudy and confusing, but very
necessary, somehow, to be understood.  The trap he had led me into so
neatly had fastened softly, but with almost an actual click, upon me.

"What--what _is_ his miracle?" I inquired, in a subdued voice.  I was
beginning to feel a little afraid of this boy of ours.

"I had hoped he'd tell you himself.  He will, if you ask him....  We
ought to go and dress, oughtn't we?"

There was no more to be got out of him that night: he was passionately
fond of music and had no mind to lose the prelude to _Tristan_.

But through all that evening the big, shadowy something he had stirred
up in my mind grew and grew and troubled me increasingly.

"A poor miracle, but his own..." it haunted me.  I went up with him
again in two days' time, as he had expected me to, I have no doubt.

In the little room with the gold fish and the Franklin grate everything
was the same except that the piled linen on the table was new: it was
being listed and stamped.  And at the little desk in the corner, his
gloves and stick beside him on the floor, sat Absolom Vail, the
hardware king, in a pepper-and-salt suit.

"I brought my nephew up with me and thought I'd look in for another
little chat, Mr. Vail," I said.  The housekeeper lifted her
unfathomable eyes to mine for a moment, then dropped them.

"Six dozen snow-drop twenty-eight inch breakfast napkins," she said
quietly, but my mind received--I cannot explain how--a totally
different impression from what the sound of these words conveyed.
Afterward, I realized that I thought suddenly of the sea, great clouds,
unheard of, enormous fish, and myself driving like the wind across
high, tumbling waves ... it was extraordinary.  I had been literally
lost in her eyes.

"Always glad to see the doctor's friends," he chirped, and soon, as
Will had said, he was talking.

It was all very simple--simple and pathetic and typical enough.  The
hall bedroom, the rising clerk, the new branch in Kansas City, the
young, fresh wife, the little story-and-a-half frame house, the bigger
one on a better street, the partnership, the two daughters, the private
school, the invention of the new time-lock, the great factory, the
Trust, the vice-presidency, the clear head in the panic, the board of
directors, the mass of capital, the amazing power.

"And of course we brought the girls up very different from what we'd
had."

"Of course."

The old epic of America; the wonderful, cruel destiny of its sons and
daughters ... I seemed to see them, climbing, climbing, their dainty
feet on the bent, grey heads of the human stairway love had built and
thrift had mortared and habit had hardened there!

"It was all right while mother was with us," he went on.  "I used to
get home late after one of those big dinners, and she'd be sitting up
and warm me a little soup or something on the alcohol lamp (she'd never
touch electricity, mother wouldn't) and I'd get my coat off and sit
awhile; she'd send the servants to bed.  Minnie never liked that, but
while mother lived, Minnie didn't have so much say.  Not but that
Minnie wasn't a good girl and a good daughter, for a minute, mind you!
Wasn't she?"

He turned to his old housekeeper.

"Miss Vail had a very fine mind," she said quietly, "a great deal of
faculty."

"That's it--faculty," he repeated contentedly.  "But Irene was easier
to get along with.  A good deal easier.  You said you'd never met
Irene?"

"I never had that pleasure."

"She was married over in Italy.  The Queen of Italy asked for it to be
that way, and with mother gone, I didn't see it mattered much, though
Minnie didn't like it.  But the Queen was Hannibal's godmother.  She
was at the wedding.  We didn't think, when Irene used to lie in her
little crib in the front bedroom in Kansas City, sucking on that rubber
doll, that a queen would be at her wedding, did we?"

I looked out of the window for a minute, frowning a little in the
effort to adjust my ideas to the surprise of the Vails' having had a
housekeeper in those early days.  When I turned my face to the room
again, Mrs. Leeth was gone.

"Minnie got me to give up the business, and after a while I did.  So
long as I was working for mother and the girls, I'd never have stopped,
but with them gone, and the rest I had to take, after the pneumonia, I
sort of let things slide.  What's the use?  There's Vint, now--he kept
at it till he died.  No one to do for, really--his girl had all her
mother's money, too, and she gives it all to foreign missions, anyhow.

"She's here, you know.  Thinks she's--well, I guess I couldn't tell a
lady just what she thinks she is, poor thing!"

"I see why she's here, Mr. Vail; but tell me, why do you stay here?" I
cried suddenly; the quiet, sensible little man forced it out of me,
fairly.

He looked whimsically up at me--I sat higher in my chair than he.

"Didn't the doctor tell you?" he asked quietly.

"No, he said you would, perhaps."

"Well, I don't mind.  It happened when she died."

"Mrs. Vail?"

"No, Mrs. Leeth."

I jumped--I couldn't help it.

"Wh--what?" I gasped.  What a horrible thing--like a bomb thrown into
the quiet room!

"Yes," he said placidly, "sounds queer to you, doesn't it?  Well, it is
queer, I guess."

It was with the greatest difficulty that I held myself to my chair.  My
throat went perfectly dry, suddenly, and if I did not scream, it was
merely because I have a fairly strong will and a horror of making a
scene.  The little room had turned dreadful to me, all at
once--dreadful and unnatural; Absolom Vail, in his pepper-and-salt, a
nightmare.

He seemed to read my thoughts and put his hand out reassuringly.

"Oh, I don't think she's dead, _now_!" he explained, "I'm not so crazy
as all that comes to!  Goodness, no!"

"Oh...," I faltered, soothed in spite of myself by his kindly smile.

"No, no.  It was this way."

He leaned forward slightly and tapped the arms of his chair
rhythmically.

"After mother left me, there wasn't much to keep going for, you see.
Then Irene, she went off, and though she was mighty kind about it, and
there'd always be a room for me, and all that, and I liked Hannibal
well enough, still, I'd never be happy in Italy.  Hannibal saw it
himself.  In a good many ways Hannibal used to see what I meant, now
and again--funny, wasn't it, with him so foreign?  You'd have thought
Barkington, now ... but that's neither here nor there.

"Well, we stayed in the house together, Mrs. Leeth and me, and we got
on very well.  She knew all mother's ways, and we used to talk about
her, evenings, and she as good as gave me her promise she'd never leave
me while I wanted her.

"Then I had pneumonia.  We had three trained nurses, but I guess
there's no doubt she pulled me through.  She was up all the nights.

"Irene and Hannibal came right over--it seems they cabled.  Irene was
expecting to have her baby, too, and it was in March, the worst time to
cross the water.  But she came.  And Hannibal listened to the doctors
and the nurses and then he turned to Mrs. Leeth--'How do you find Mr.
Vail to-day?' he said.

"'He'll live, sir,' she said, and he said, 'All right,' and that was
all there was to it.  There was always something about Hannibal ...

"Then _she_ came down.  Pleurisy.  I'd been South and got back, and I
was well enough, you understand, but when they told me that they
couldn't save her, something turned right over inside me, and I knew I
couldn't bear it.  It was too much--everything just slipping away from
me, one by one, and me all alone--no, I wasn't good for it, that's all.
I suppose it sounds dreadfully weak to you, but there it is: I wasn't
good for it.

"I was sitting by her bed, looking at her, thinking of all the old days
she could remember with me, and the girls she'd seen grow up, and
mother, and all, and all of a sudden she opened her eyes and she knew
me.  She was sinking fast, but she knew me for the first time in days.

"'Mrs. Leeth,' I said, 'it's no use.  If you go, I'll go too.  I can't
stick it out alone!  Must you?' I said.  'Must you?  Isn't there any
way?'

"'Wait!' she sort of whispered to me, 'wait!  There'll be a way, Mr.
Vail--a way'll be found!'

"And then her eyes closed.

"I just sat there, staring ahead.  I was too miserable to notice
anything different about her, though I knew she was very still.

"By and by one of the nurses came in very soft and lifted up one of her
hands--I had mine over the other.  She was a nice girl, that nurse--we
both liked her real well.  Dr. Stanchon--the old doctor, not the boy,
here--brought her, and he said to me, 'Now, Mr. Vail, here's the best
nurse in New York: trust her.'  And we did.  She looked sharp at me,
Miss Jessop did, and listened over her heart, then she put her cheek
down to the lips.

"'Why, she's gone!' she said.  'Mr. Vail, when did it happen?'

"And then she called the doctor and he said yes, she was gone.
_That's_ why I say Mrs. Leeth died."

He looked calmly at me and I found to my surprise that during this
story I had grown as calm as he and had quite forgotten, in my sympathy
for the little man, just why he had begun to tell it.  It was most
perplexing.  The room had taken on its homely comfort again: the horror
had disappeared.

"So I sat there.  The doctor said to let me stay, if I felt so.  And I
just saw my whole life pass right by me like pictures in a book--if you
see what I mean.  I saw Min when she graduated and Irene playing tunes
to her mamma and me on the piano, and the day the new gold furniture
came in, and Mrs. Leeth leading me by the hand out of mother's room
after I'd sat all day and all night by her....

"And I looked at the face lying so quiet there, and while I looked, it
sort of shook--more like when you throw a little pebble into a
pond--and the eyes opened.  And I knew mother was looking at me.
That's all."

Poor, lonely little man!  How could I have felt afraid of him?  It was
not difficult to see how it had been.

"Then she--Mrs. Leeth--had not really died at all, had she?" I said
hastily, only to bite my lips at my tactlessness.

But he smiled tolerantly.

"That's what they said," he answered quietly.  "It was very
interesting, they said.  The doctor was pretty hard on Miss Jessop, I
thought.  But I guess they always lay it off on them.

"They were all so excited about it, they didn't seem to notice what had
happened.  And by and by I saw they never would notice it, anyway.  I
just spoke a little about it to Irene and it frightened her, so I kept
quiet.  She said she saw Mrs. Leeth was different, somehow, but it was
the sickness, she thought.  They had to go right back.  He wanted the
baby to be born in Italy.  That was all right, of course."

"And Mrs. Leeth--what did _she_ say?"

"Oh, she was never one to talk, Mrs. Leeth.  She talks less than ever,
now.  I don't know as I put it very clear to you: it's a pretty hard
thing _to_ put clear."

He looked appealingly at me.

"Of course, of course," I said soothingly.  "Those things are not to be
set down in black and white."

"That's just it.  When I say that mother looks out at me from her eyes,
it seems to be more what I mean.  I seem to have 'em both by me, if you
can see....  And when I look in her eyes, I understand it all--and I
can wait," he added simply.  "You've noticed her eyes?"

I nodded.

"Does she ever speak...?"

"I couldn't make you see what I mean very well, about that," he said
contentedly.  "She just looks at me.  It's all plain, then.  Maybe
that's how we'll all do, in the next life.  Don't you think so?"

I found my way to Will's office through a mist of tears.

"Well, what about it?" he asked abruptly.

"I think it's one of the most touching things I ever heard."

"Believe it?"

"Why, Will!"

"Oh!  Then you don't blame me any more for committing him?"

"Certainly not.  What else could you do?"

"Um-m-m.  That's what Minnie, Countess of Barkington, said.  She put it
stronger than that.  When a man of that age spends half of his time in
the housekeeper's room, sorting linen, she suggested, there's something
wrong.  We shall certainly question the will--if he alters it."

"Alters it?"

"In favor of Mrs. Leeth, of course.  The fair Minnie hasn't lived among
the English aristocracy for nothing."

"Why, Will, how ludicrous--you mean that she suspects----"

"Certainly she does.  And very hard-headed of her, too.  Stranger
things have been."

"But one has only to look at them!"

"That's what Irene thought.  But not Barkington.  He suggested an
asylum.  The doctor called me in.  (The doctor, by the way, swears the
woman died, aunty.  'Only, of course, she couldn't have,' he always
adds.)  To everybody's surprise Absolom agrees quietly, immediately.

"'I wouldn't have Irene worried, as she is now, for anything,' he said.
'I never meant to leave Mrs. Leeth a penny more than the thousand a
year mother and I always planned, but if Minnie can't believe me, all
right.'

"Now, here's an odd thing, aunty.  No one of that family ever heard of
this place, including Absolom himself.  Precious few people know about
it, anyhow, you see.  It pays every one not to.  Well.  Mrs. Leeth is
dismissed, arrangements made, I take him in a motor out here.  We walk
through the hall, and the first person we meet here--Mrs. Leeth.  New
housekeeper.  It seems the old one died of heart failure overnight.
Dr. Jarvyse finds this one, by great good luck just out of a job.
Highly recommended by Mr. Absolom Vail.  Never occupied just this post,
apparently, but Jarvyse feels perfectly certain she's just the woman
for it.  I don't know how he knew it, but she certainly is.  Best woman
we ever had."

"How perfectly extraordinary!  Was Mr. Vail surprised?"

"Not at all.  He just smiled politely, and neither of 'em has ever
discussed it."

"What did the Countess have to say?"

"Oh, she was furious, till I pointed out that we couldn't have the
woman in a safer place, because every employee signs a bond on
entering, never to receive by bequest or otherwise a penny from any
patient.  We all sign."

"What does the Italian Count think of it all?"

"Hannibal?  He's all right, Hannibal.  He and I and Barkington had a
little session in this very room about a fortnight ago.  I was saying
something about the question of Mr. Vail's insanity.

"'Question?' says Barkington.  'Question?  Why there is no question!
As a man of science, Count Hannibal, you know as well as I do----'

"'But I am not a man of science, my dear fellow--I'm a Roman,' says
Hannibal, grinning away (those Italians speak wonderful English, you
know).  'Very odd things happen in Rome, now and then, my good
Barkington!'"

I looked at him steadily.  He sat surrounded by his mysterious electric
machines under shining glass domes, among costly leather-bound volumes
whose very titles questioned the foundation of reason; telephones and
telegrams ready to hand upon his orderly desk.  And it seemed to me
that he smiled mockingly at me behind his baffling eye-glasses.

"I don't understand you, Will," I said slowly, "you seem to be leading
me to ... do you mean me to understand that you believe that Mrs.
Vail's--spirit--entered--came back ... do you mean you think Mr. Vail
is right, all the time?"

"Not at all," he returned promptly.  "I acknowledge no such conditions.
I know nothing of spirits nor what they do.  I do not know that there
are any.  I study the human brain: when it ceases to respond to nervous
stimuli, I cease to study it, that's all."

"Then why do you--why do you look at me..."

He struck his fist on the table.

"I look at you," he cried, "because you amaze me so, you people who
assume that you know all about the human brain, where I leave off!
Granted your premises, yours and Trix's and the Barkingtons', why
_don't_ you believe him?  I should.  Look at that woman's eyes!  Try to
talk to her!  Do you suppose we haven't tried?  Ask Jarvyse what he's
got out of her!  Get something out of her, yourself!  Then ask
yourself: _if what Absolom says is so, how would she act differently
from the way she does act?_

"God!  I wish I _could_ believe him!"

He struck the desk again, and it seemed to me that behind his glasses
he scorned me for the nondescript I was.

I went quickly out of the office into the corridor.  I would find Mrs.
Leeth and have it out with her.  I would--she stood directly in front
of me.

"Oh--how do you do!" I stammered.  Her hands were full of cut flowers.

"How--how do you feel about Mr. Vail?" I demanded brusquely.

The ordinary, stocky, black-dressed figure raised its head slowly; the
eyes met mine.

And suddenly I knew that the flowers in her hands were hyacinths,
hyacinths and damp fern and mignonette.  It grew and grew and
surrounded me with a penetrating cloud of rich perfume, perfume and
old, sweet memories that cut and soothed at once.  I thought of the
lily-of-the-valley bed under my mother's window, and her brown, brown
eyes held mine and she--my mother, back again and smiling--filled my
heart so full that I stood drowned in the old days and listened for the
school-bell and the other children's voices!

It seemed that it had all been a mistake, a long mistake, and she had
been there all the time.... I cannot tell you how sweet and certain it
all was.

And then I knew the odour for what it was--hyacinth.  Hyacinths in a
round, spaded bed, with a robin singing near, and myself picking a
stalk, and the man stepping up behind me that had blotted out all the
other men, who were mistakes and slipped away ... and yet we would not
begin again, my dearest!  No, no, there is plenty of time!

And just as I was swimming back, staring at her eyes, it came over me
that there had been hyacinths on the piano, almost overpowering in the
dusk of the room that will always be nearest to me--I hope I may lie
there, dead.  I was playing Chopin, and life looked so rich: the boy
was not born yet.  I said, "If he should die"--but of course I couldn't
believe that he would.  And then--and then it was as if he had _not_
died, after all, and I saw that this had been a mistake, too!  It was
so calm, so simple--no shock at all.  Why had I never known?  And all
this while the girls and I had kept flowers on that tiny, tiny grave!
I must tell his father....

She dropped her eyes to the hyacinths and I put my hand on a chair to
steady myself.  My cheeks were all wet.

"Mr. Vail seems very contented," she said.  "Of course, I am accustomed
to looking after him."

She stepped quietly through an open door, the keys jangling softly at
her belt.

      *      *      *      *      *

I went South with my husband for a fortnight, and on my return Will
dined with us.

"By the way," he said, "were you surprised at Vail's death?"

It was three days' news and I had forgotten to mention it.

"He never was the same after the pneumonia, and he worried about his
daughter Irene.  She came through all right, though.  Well, he was over
sixty."

"How--what became of Mrs. Leeth?" I asked eagerly.

He smiled oddly.

"Nobody knows.  She's never been seen since the funeral."

"Never been seen?  But who is the housekeeper, then?"

"Oh, they've got another.  Never'll be Mrs. Leeth's equal, though.  She
left on the first of the month."

"But when she was paid off, didn't anybody inquire?"

"She never was paid off," he said quietly.  "She never came for her
money."




THE UNBURIED

The talk shifted at length--as it inevitably must--to women, and the
unalterable and uncharted mystery of their mental currents: the jagged
and cruelly unsuspected reefs that rear suddenly under rippling
shoal-water, the maelstrom that boils just beyond the soft curve of the
fairest cape.

"There's no good asking 'why,'" said the great doctor slowly, "you
might as well ask, 'why not.'  They're incomprehensible.  For thirty
years I've studied them.  Thirty years...."

He leaned forward over the table weightily.  The others unconsciously
bent toward him.

"Once I thought it was spasmodic--unrelated," he went on thoughtfully,
counting his words, it seemed, "but not now.  No.  I believe there is a
law--a big law--they follow, an orbit so extended that any examples one
may collect count for too little to help.  They seem to vary..." he
stared at the siphons and rings of wet on the table.

Outside the club windows the rain fell, glistening and grey; it was
making for dusk and the black stream of hansoms and umbrellas were
homeward bound.  They motioned away the servant who had come to turn on
the lights in their corner.

"There are influences," Stanchon began again, abruptly, "currents ... I
don't know--they feel them more than we do.  And they exert them more,
too.  We admit one and doubt the other."

He squeezed a half lemon into his glass with a beautiful, firm-wristed
wrench, extracted the pips with one deft circuit of the spoon, and
poured rock candy into the acid.  Over this he dropped in silence a
measured amount from a squat foreign bottle at his elbow and filled the
glass from a carafe of distilled water.

"It's a queer thing altogether--I don't know what makes me think of
it," he began, "and I wouldn't have dared tell it when it happened.
Now I can tell anything--I suppose--being sixty and an eminent
alienist.  Lord!  Times goes and goes, and just as you get to where you
could use it to advantage--well, the young ones need the room.

"Nervous!  What are nerves, anyhow?

"Sometimes I think I know ... a little ... but the time is so short, so
short!"

He drank half his glass.

"There comes a time," he said abruptly, "when you first discover what a
gnat in a whirlpool you are.  I mean that after you've done everything,
played perfectly fair and followed all the rules, arranged your
combinations and observed the reasonable results for so long that you
begin to think you've got hold of the System--something happens, and
it's all upset again--flat anarchy.  We get it different ways, I
suppose.  As if a runner bumped into a brick wall on the home-stretch
... strange!

"I was in one of those little cities--Detroit, Cleveland--it doesn't
matter.  I've lived in both.  It's a good size for a doctor--I got all
kinds--and I learned fast, there.  Nice people, too.  I always had an
eye for real estate, and what I made, I put into that.  I had a good
horse, and as I drove about I kept my eye on the property and the way
the town was growing.  One day I noticed that an oldish looking,
comfortable sort of house, a little off from the centre of things, was
for sale, and it struck me suddenly that there was a pretty good sort
of house to own.  It had trees around it and nice paths and a neat
little new stable, and there was something in the long, low lines of
it--no gingerbread or 'Jim Fisk' business or bands of coloured
paint--that appealed to me.  It attracted me--you see?  Good God!

"I saw the agent and he put a price that surprised me.  But the owner
wanted to leave town immediately and had made it very low, to get the
cash.  He'd had hard luck; his wife in a mess with another man, ran up
big bills against him--he wanted to get away and never see the town
again.  So I bought the place and asked the agent to rent it for me,
for I was pretty busy just then.  A little later he told me he had seen
an especially good tenant--a well-to-do jeweller and his family, who
seemed disposed to take a long lease and improve the property.

"'You certainly have the luck, doctor!' he said.

"I remember I leaned out of my buggy and lectured him.

"'Luck!' says I.  'Nonsense, man!  I get good tenants because I keep
good repairs in good houses.  You put down two and two and you get back
four.  Mathematics is under this world!'

"Pompous, wasn't I?  But I was only forty.  Only forty..."

His eyes gleamed at them from under his shaggy, grey brows; he seemed
saturated with life, full of experiences.

"Well, I got my rent every month, and I gave 'em permission to put an
evergreen hedge around the place, and I paid half the costs of piping
water into the stable; the jeweller kept a horse and runabout for his
wife.  Then, just before the year was up, the agent called.

"'I'm afraid we won't get any renewal on this, doctor,' he said.

"'Why not?  Not good enough for him any longer?' said I.

"'I'm afraid it's too good,' says he.  'You'll see it in the papers
to-morrow, but I had it straight from him.  His wife has skipped with
his head clerk and they've taken most of the stock and all the money.
He's nearly crazy.'

"'For heaven's sake!' said I.  'I thought they were a decent lot
enough.'

"'So they were, I'll swear to it,' said he, 'but lately--I've seen her
off and on'--and he looked rather conscious, I thought--' she's struck
me differently.  She's a queer woman.'

"Well, the upshot of it was, I let him off as easily as I could--he had
three children on his hands and big debts to pay--and I bought a lot of
his stuff and paid for the evergreen hedge.  The woman never came back
and he moved East.  So much for them.

"I advertised the house, and that week the rectory of the principal
Episcopal Church burned to the ground, and while they were building it
again--in stone, of course--they decided to rent that house of mine,
and of course I was pleased, because a lot of good, solid people see
the property, in a case like that.  I've always thought I'd like to
develop a whole new section somewhere ... I had ideas ... but I never
got the time.  O Lord, the time!  Slipping, slipping, under your palms,
between your fingers, crumbling and running away!"

He shook himself like a big, loose-skinned bear, and long breaths were
drawn all around the table.

"One night my wife asked me if I thought the rector liked his new
rectory.

"'Why, I suppose so,' I said.  'I've had no complaints--why?'

"'He doesn't stay in it very much,' she said, rather slowly, for her,
and when a woman measures her words, I always listen very carefully.

"'What do you mean?' I asked.

"'He practically lives in the study at the church,' said she, 'working
there on parish business all day, and a good many evenings, too.  That
leaves her all alone, and that's not good for any woman.'

"' What on earth do you mean?' I said.  'Are those long-nosed old
tabbies gossiping already?  Shame on 'em!'

"'Oh, John,' she broke down and cried.  'They're talking horribly!  It
doesn't seem possible!  But why isn't she more careful?'

"Well, there's no good going into that much further.  It was a very
unpleasant business.  He was a pig-headed parson who wouldn't look
after his own, and she, I thought, till my wife finally persuaded her
to call me in, was simply one of those women who have mistaken their
natural vocation.  They hadn't been in the town long and they didn't
stay long, for as soon as I really understood her I put her into a
sanitarium--the sanitarium boom had just begun, then--and he went into
the Salvation Army.  He'd got his eyes opened, I fancy, and he made a
great success in Chicago; he told me he never wanted to see another
fashionable congregation in his life--said they were sinks of iniquity.
But I don't think there was ever anything actually iniquitous in that
business--it hadn't got that far.  Only for a clergyman's family, of
course ...

"You see, I got her out in time.  Ugh!  It makes me sick to think of
it!  She was a nervous wreck.

"That was the first time that Miss Jessop ever went back on me.  She
was a trained nurse not long out of the training school, and nurses
were scarcer, then.  A handsome, plucky creature--we worked together
for years, and I got to depend a good deal on her.  But after a week of
the parson's wife she flounced in on me with that regular bronze-mule
look of hers and informed me she was leaving the next day--she had to
go back East, home, she said.

"I reasoned a bit with her--she had a great influence on women, Jessop,
but it was no use.

"'There are two good nurses for to-morrow, doctor,' she said, 'I happen
to know.  I'd rather not argue about it.  I'm tired.  I need a change.
I've had no vacation this year.  And that woman would be better off in
a hospital, anyway.'

"I was cross, and I kept my patient in her own house.  I thought she
wasn't fit to move.

"'I believe I'm going mad!' she used to tell me, with that glitter in
the eye--gives the effect of a rearing horse--perfectly symptomatic.
'I tell you I'm not responsible, doctor, for what I do!  You must keep
me away from--people.  But don't leave me alone--oh, don't leave me
alone!  Why don't the women come to see me?  Oh, I can't stay alone!'

"And so on, and so on.  It poured out in the regular way--how the poor
things spend themselves!--and I listened to it all.  They're perfectly
typical under those circumstances, but one phrase struck me:

"'I have fought--  Oh, I _have_ fought!  It's killing me, but I have
fought!'

"She had, poor little woman.  But what was she?  When I realised ...
when I _knew_..."

They sat now in a circle of dark.  The room was nearly empty; the rain
had grown to a torrent and lashed the windows furiously.

"Well, I couldn't help taking stock of the thing, and it looked odd,
anyway you looked at it.  I remembered that the reason I got the house
in the first place was very much the same reason that had emptied it
twice.  Of course the agent remembered it, too.

"'Where's those mathematics of yours, doctor?' he asked me with a
good-natured grin.

"'Stuff and nonsense!' I said to him.  'I'll get a tenant for that
house, myself.'

"You see, whether or not there was any sense in it, I couldn't let that
house get a bad name.  There were neighbours and they will talk--they
don't always know so much about mathematics as scientific men, you know!

"What a great thing it is, if one could get hold of it and use it--the
collective spirit of a community!  It's utilizable--or ought to
be--like water power....

"There was a woman in town then, a 'mental healer,' she called herself.
I'd run across her more than once and she interested me very much.  She
was a clever woman--sensible, too, which doesn't always follow, you
know.  So far as I could tell, she never handled a case she wasn't able
to attend to, which may seem an odd thing for me to say, but happens to
be so.  I know of a dozen nervous, hysterical women--emotional
spend-thrifts--that she bullied into shape and got so they could stand
up without her behind them, too.  They were cured, and they stayed
cured.  More than that, I sent more than one to her, myself!

"'Mrs. Mears,' I said, 'there's nothing the matter with these women
that I can see but pure, piggish, bone-idle selfishness.  I haven't got
the courage to tell 'em so; if you have, and the long words you use
disguise the fact sufficiently, go ahead and cure 'em, and God bless
you!'

"'Thank you, doctor,' she said, and she cured 'em.  They had no use for
me after that.  No, indeed--they told my wife they'd found a higher law
and that calomel was sinful.  But the poor old calomel wasn't so bad
for 'em, after all, maybe.

"Well, I met her on my rounds one day and I stopped and asked her if
she was satisfied with her house--I knew the neighbourhood was rather
running down, there--the darkies were creeping up.  She admitted she
wasn't particularly, and, to make a long story short, I offered her
this house of mine for two-thirds the regular rental.

"'I want a good steady tenant, Mrs. Mears,' I said, 'and people may as
well get used to bringing their headaches over there--I may move out
there sometime.'

"So she moved in and I never gave the matter another thought--I knew
she wouldn't run off with anybody!  No, she'd had her lesson, I take
it.  No blue-eyed woman gets as sensible as that woman was without a
good, solid reason.  And the reason is pretty certain to wear trousers.

"Well, sir, in a month she came to see me.  I can see her now: a firm,
stocky woman, long body and short legs and big head--the efficient
type.  She had the smooth pink cheeks and smooth forehead and straight
eyes those healer-women have when they're first class of their
kind--oh, there's a lot in it--a lot!  We fight 'em and get the law on
'em and absorb 'em, finally, as we've fought every advance in medicine.
It seems to be the only way in this world...

"She always looked so clean and taut, that woman, never a loose end
anywhere.

"'Doctor,' says she, 'you must get a new tenant.  I'm leaving
to-morrow.  How much will it cost me, giving no notice?'

"'Why, what's the matter?' I began.  'Anything I can attend to?'

"'Not a thing,' she answered promptly, 'and we won't discuss it, if you
please.  The van is there, by this time.'

"'Why, see here, Mrs. Mears,' I said seriously.  'This--this is hardly
professional, it seems to me.  If there's anything wrong with my
property, I want to know it.  Of course I know your theories--God's in
his heaven and all's right with the world, and if you discuss it, the
devil may creep in--I've read Emerson's Essays, myself.  I know what
you think about medicine and surgery and hygiene--you think Emerson!
And that's all right, as far as it goes.  But just for ten minutes,
between you and me, what's the matter?  You can keep on being serene,
after that, all you want.  Come now--as man to man!'

"She flattened her lips a little and tried not to scowl.

"'Put it that I don't like old houses, doctor,' she said finally.

"'Ah!  House haunted?' I suggested, to tease her a little.

"She turned on me.

"'You said it, not I,' she answered, 'but it is true.  The house is
haunted, doctor, and if I lived there a day longer, I couldn't do my
work.  I didn't wish to discuss it--you know we don't believe in
that--but you meant to do me a service.  It's a crime to rent that
house.  It's slimy.  It crawls.'

"'Slimy!' I cried.  'Why the agent told me that the cellar was new
cemented, all whitewashed, every room new papered, fresh matting, hard
wood on the lower floor, and I attended to the plumbing myself!  It was
gone over thoroughly three years ago--there must have been a thousand
dollars put into it.  It hadn't been lived in for years before that.
Slimy!'

"'You don't understand me,' she said quietly.

"'For heaven's sake, what haunts it, then?  Who's the ghost?' I cried
testily.

"'Evil,' she said slowly, 'evil thought, evil lives ... you breathe it
in ... it tangles you ... another night there ... I should have no more
power, absolutely--I could help nobody.  I must ask you not to refer to
it again, please.  I should not have mentioned it.  How much do I owe
you?'

"'You owe me nothing, of course,' I said shortly.  'I'll return you the
amount of your cheque this afternoon.  I'll move into that house,
myself.'

"'You will be making a mistake,' she said very placidly, and left the
office.

"It took me about forty-eight hours to make my arrangements.  It was
hot summer weather, fortunately, and I sent my wife off to the
mountains, started in to have my own house renovated and decorated, as
an excuse, left the housekeeper in charge there and moved my office
paraphernalia into that old house with the evergreen hedge.  My wife
was a Southern woman and we always had darky servants.  I took the
waitress with me, a quiet little mulatto we'd had for more than a year,
and sent for her mother, a very capable woman that I'd often used as
nurse in cases where they couldn't pay a professional.  She could do
anything, the way those Southern darkies can, and she would cook and
look after things generally.

"Well, in three days it seemed as if I'd always been there.  You know
how quickly a man manages a change like that; it's hard to see where
the women generate all the friction they make out of a move of that
sort.  Althea was frying chicken contentedly and Mynie was sweeping and
dusting as quietly as she always did.

"She was a slender, oval-faced little yellow girl with almost straight
hair, parted and drawn down like a madonna's, very low voiced and
capable, with only one fault; she was almost too shy and always timid
that she'd make some blunder--which she seldom if ever did.  She was
devoted to her mother, who had brought her up particularly well, and
delighted to be living with her.  The patients all liked her and she
was especially tactful with children.

"One day, after I'd been there a week, I strolled out in the kitchen.

"'This strikes me as being a pretty good house, eh, Althea?'  I said.
'New and clean.  Everything all right?'

"'Yes, Dr. Stanchon, thank you, seh, it seems like a very good house,
seh,' she answered respectfully.

"'It's right surprisin' Mrs. Mears didn't like it!' says Mynie with a
little giggle.

"It struck me then that I had never known Mynie to speak, in her life,
without being spoken to, and even so, when I had occasion to speak to
her, she started and looked a little scared.  I supposed living with
her mother had given her more confidence and felt rather glad of it.

"It might have been a week later one morning, as I leaned out of one of
the office windows to knock my pipe clean, I heard a low laughing and
murmuring on the side porch, and glancing carelessly in that direction,
what should I see but Mynie twisting the lapel of a young man's coat;
his arm was around her waist.  It occurred to me that he was pretty
well dressed for any beau she'd be likely to have, and as he turned his
face partly, I realised with a disgusted surprise that it was George,
my colored office-man.  It would be hard to make you feel the way I did
then, and you'll probably smile when I tell you that I couldn't have
been more shocked and startled if it had been any one of you--but it's
the truth.

"You see, George was a most exceptional fellow.  Everybody in--in the
city I'm telling about--knew him and respected him.  Everybody among my
patients knew that except for his colour he'd have been my regular
office assistant long ago.  As it was, he knew more medicine than many
a lad with his gilt shingle up, and his English was perfect--he'd been
in school till he was eighteen and was a great reader.  He'd come to me
as a coachman, but I soon saw his value and promoted him to the office,
where he took all the telephoning, received the patients, got out the
bills and kept all my accounts, personal and professional.  He'd helped
me more than once in operations, and had a perfect genius for
administering anaesthetics.  Nobody but our two selves knew what his
salary was, but I never grudged a penny of it.  Why, the fellow read
French and German almost as well as I did, and tact--Lord, I wished
every day of my life I had George's tact and resource!  My wife was
tremendously fond of him, and lent him all her books, and they used to
have great discussions on political economy and theosophy and prison
reform--oh, everything!

"He had lots of white blood, of course, and his wife you'd never guess
to be anything but pure American, she was so white.  One of the
children, though, was black as my hat.  The other had almost golden
hair and deep blue eyes--a beautiful little girl, brought up like a
duchess, too.  They lived in a nice little house on the extreme edge of
the negro district, and we all understood that when the little girl was
fifteen or sixteen, she and her mother were going to move to Paris and
train her voice; then if everything went well, George and the boy would
join them and never come back--he was specialising in dentistry, mind
you, in his spare time.  It's different, of course, abroad.

"I'm telling you all this, so you can see how I felt; I'd had George
nine years, and we'd always had darky servants, and--oh, well, to find
him with that yellow streak in him after all, nearly floored me.  I
could have sworn he wasn't that sort of pup, and when he came in for
his orders I talked to him like a Dutch uncle.

"'You've got to stop this, George,' I said directly, 'I can't have any
such performances here.  To tell you the truth, I never thought it of
you!  The idea--a quiet little thing like Mynie!  She's as timid as a
kitten and as innocent.  Now I want your word of honour before you
leave this office and I want it quick!'

"He opened his mouth once or twice in a confused sort of way, looked at
me curiously, and then gave his word quietly.  So far as I knew, he had
never broken it.

"But I wasn't satisfied with that and I spoke to her mother.

"'You'd better keep an eye on Mynie, Althea,' I said carelessly.
'She's a pretty girl, you know, and men aren't always too careful what
they say to a girl as pretty as Mynie.'

"'Yes, seh, I'll look out,' she said, 'I'll look out, doctor--ef I kin.
Seems like I may have trouble, though.  Is Mis' Stanchon comin' back
soon, seh?'

"'Probably not,' I said.  'It's too hot for her here.  Why, what's the
matter?  Anything wrong?'

"'I guess not, seh,' she answered, hesitating.  'I try to do my best,
doctor.  But I will sholy be glad when she comes back.  And would you
mind to speak to Mynie yo'self, seh?' and she slipped away.

"Well, I did speak to her.  I spoke when I ran across her, strolling
with George in a deserted walk of an old park.  I called her right into
the office the next morning.

"'Mynie,' I said sharply, 'what were you doing yesterday afternoon?
Out with it!'

"She opened her eyes and looked full at me for a second--something she
had never done.

"'I reckon 'twas my afternoon out, doctor!' she said softly, and that
was all.  But it was enough.  It wouldn't have made any difference what
she said, anyhow--the look was enough.  It wasn't the look of our shy
little Mynie; her eyes had never gone any farther than my breakfast
table and the office door.  But these eyes were slanting, curious,
audacious--conscious.  That's what it was, they were conscious of
something--something I didn't know.  And for a quick moment I
remembered, with no connection, apparently, that queer look in the eyes
of the parson's wife--the one that had the house before.  I didn't know
why, and I dismissed it as irrelevant, for that poor creature had been
frightened to death, and Mynie was more self-confident than I had ever
seen her and not at all pleasant with it.  I've never been of a temper
to stand any nonsense from servants, and the class of Northern darky
that was growing up in that city wasn't always easy to deal with.  But
I remembered what a sterling creature the mother was, and I tried to be
gentle with the girl.

"'You understand, Mynie,' I said temperately, 'I only speak for your
good.  I know the world better than you can and I don't want to see you
get into bad ways.  Do you want to lose George his place?  You've got a
good home, and you're with your mother, and there's no excuse for you
if you slip up, you see.  Understand me?'

"'Yes, doctor, I understand you,' she said, and walked out of the room
with her head high and her hips swinging.  Something in her
carriage--so different from the way she used to slip in and out--struck
me all of a sudden, and there flashed into my mind an old story about
Althea's being the direct descendant of one of the oldest African kings
and a princess in her own right.  Absurd, of course, but it makes a lot
of difference whether you regard those people as creeping up to our
democracy or sliding down from their royalty, you see.  And with Mynie
the scale had shifted suddenly, and it was the last of an old line that
swung by me, not the first of a new one.  Straight across the
commonplace air of my office a wind out of the jungle had blown, a
whiff of something old and unmanageable, and beyond rules, or beneath
'em, perhaps; something there wasn't any prescription for; something
not to be weighed and measured by any of the new methods, because it
antedated method.

"Yes, it was all that.  I don't know if I make myself clear at all....
You may think I was working up a fanciful theory just because a pert
servant maid was getting a little wayward, but it wasn't only
that--Lord, no!  It was a great deal more than that, and it was just
beginning; just beginning."

There was no doubt that he had the strained attention of all of them:
their hands held the glasses, but they did not drink, looking mostly at
the wet rings on the polished table, or the little heaps of white
ashes.  A servant passing through scratched a match with a rasping
splutter, and they twitched angrily at the interruption, fearing it
would throw him off the track--he was so easily quieted, and when once
one of his great gulfs of silence received him, it was hopeless.

But this time he went on.

"After that the house got very still, by degrees.  Althea sang less and
less and by and by not at all.  There seemed to be no clatter, no
bustle, no homely, chattering machinery of life.  Sometimes I would
step out through the dining-room and listen, purposely, to see where
they were.  And it was always the same thing: Althea sitting in her
clean kitchen, by her clean table, with a bowl or a pan or what not in
her lap, her yellowish hands lax, her knees as still as marble, her
eyes set ahead of her, thinking, thinking, thinking.  Her brows would
be knit and her face all drawn.  She had the look of a fighter, a
struggler with something--but there was nothing there.  And out on the
side porch Mynie would be sitting, her head thrown back against the
wooden column of the porch, her hands clasped about her knees, smiling,
smiling, always smiling.  Sometimes she would hum a sort of low
tuneless chant--it sounded like a pagan ritual of some sort, all
repetitions, rising and falling in a monotonous, haunting drone.  And
once, as I stood watching her curiously, the word for that noise
flashed suddenly into my mind--incantation.  That was it, incantation.

"Well!  All this sounds very feeble, doesn't it?  The truth is, I
haven't got the right vocabulary--as a matter of fact, I don't think
anybody has.  When you can describe a thing, a sensation, perfectly, I
doubt if it's very important anyhow.  It's always so.  The big things
simply elude description.  And yet we all know them.  Falling in love,
for instance: God knows it's as definite as measles, but who ever
described it?  The most these writing fellows can manage is to tell you
what a lot of people did who happened to be in that way, and sometimes
they catch a lot of the tricks, but that's all.  Then there's dying.
There's a specific atmosphere about that--everybody knows it.  The
people know it mostly, themselves.  I mean, if any one ever had
occasion to die twice, he'd recognise the symptoms immediately.  But
nobody can describe it, though plenty of us know what it is.

"So with that house and the atmosphere in it.  Something was happening
there.  Something so strong and so actual that it defied all
appearances, all the ordinary influences that might be supposed to act
on the imagination of, say, a sensitive, hysterical, under-occupied
woman.  For as a matter of fact there was nothing morbid in the look of
the house--nothing at all.  It was sunny and fresh and painted.  It was
clean and dry.  But it ought not to have been.  No ... I've sat there,
late afternoons, when it seemed to me if I touched the walls they'd be
damp and the woodwork rotted and mouldy.  The boards should have
creaked there and the stair-rails ought to have given under the
hand--but they didn't.  I had them all repaired, you see!  But there
were a few things I hadn't had the chance to repair and they ... oh,
well, they were there, that was all.

"There?  You'd have said so, any of you, if you'd seen Althea as I saw
her one morning.  I stepped into the kitchen suddenly, to give an order
for some beef-tea I wanted to take away with me, and there she sat,
cross-legged on the clean floor, a red silk scarf twined around her
shoulders and--of all things--a red and blue kerchief twisted into a
turban on her head.  She was rocking back and forth and singing, and I
give you my word, I was as shocked as if I'd seen my own mother in that
rig, swaying there!

"She turned her head as I came in and I saw that she had big blue glass
earrings in her ears.

"And all of a sudden it came to me--what was happening there: I felt
very queer for a moment, I tell you!  Everything seemed to be rolling
backward, like one of those cinematograph things, reversed.  Not I--I
swear nothing touched me.  I was the same.  _So was the jeweller.  So
was the parson.  So was the man before that..._

"'Althea,' I said roughly, 'what are you doing there?  Take those rags
off you!  Get up immediately!  I am ashamed of you.'

"Her eyes met mine for a moment, glittering like a savage's--it was nip
and tuck between us there: she might have thrown a plate at me.  But
she didn't; I won.  You see, she was not a young woman, and unusually
controlled for one of her race, and she owed me a good deal, besides.

"'I'm thoroughly ashamed of you,' I repeated.

"She staggered up and burst into hoarse, frightened sobbing.

"''Fore God, I am, too, doctor!' she cried and stumbled into her
pantry, shaking and muttering.  I waited till she came back, and she
was quiet and trim again--herself.  She stuffed a bundle into the stove
before my eyes, and I don't think she ever met my look again.  She was
a good woman, Althea was.

"But the other--Mynie--well, the game was up with her.  Heavens, the
change in that girl's eyes!  It wasn't that they were bold, it wasn't
that they were beautiful, nor even that they were conscious of it.  No,
it was more than that--more and worse and deeper and older--  Oh, as
old as Hell!  That look unsettled ... disorganized ... how shall I put
it?  The flimsiness of civilisation, the essential bedrock of
animalism--the big, ceaseless undertow of things ... anyway, it was all
in that girl's eyes and it touched that spring in poor George that
Nature has coiled in every one of us.  The Old Lady wound us up with
that spring and she daren't let it run down, you see."

The room was absolutely empty but for the four of them; they stared at
him steadily, his rumbling, husky voice held them like a vise; they
could not miss a word.

"She got fat on it.  She bloomed in that infernal house like some
tropical bog-flower; she expanded, she shot up.

"Once, at twilight, I peeped out and saw her sitting on the side porch,
her chin in her hand, staring and staring, and laughing, now and then,
and shutting her eyes.  It made me shiver.

"That warm, damp dusk was like a Florida swamp; the air seemed to
thicken, thicken, as I looked.  A quick instinct warned me to look for
George in the shadow: it seemed to me that he stood there, in ... glue
... like a caught fly.  To let go--to drift in a warm, relaxing current
...  I had to shake my shoulders, actually, as if there had been a net
...  I felt for him so.

"I went to her mother.

"'Call that girl in!' I said roughly.  'What's the matter with her?'

"She wouldn't look at me.

"'Come, what's all this?  Out with it!' I said.  But she stood there,
obstinate as a mule, and perfectly silent.  You can't do anything with
them, then.

"Well, it was like fighting filthy cobwebs: walking through them,
breathing them, pulling them off from your mouth, your wrists, your
ankles!  Not that I felt anything directly, mind you--I could have
lived there for years--alone.  But it was all up with Mynie and George,
they were done for, like the others ... like the others.

"What worked there, rotting like some infernal yeast?  What terrible
energy, what malignant, vindictive lust infected that place?  What
distorted, unhappy soul first sickened there?  How long ago?  _How long
ago?_  Are there centres of negation?  Oh, I tell you, the
table-tippers are harmless beside the sickening truths, the simply
incredible possibilities of this little crevice we walk along!

"Was it like a grain of that nasty musk that gets into a woman's drawer
and taints endlessly?

"I tell you, I saw that girl disintegrate, decay, turn fungoid under my
eyes--ugh!

"There had to be an end, of course.  I asked where she was going one
afternoon, and then she smiled and looked up at me sidewise.

"'You needn't come back,' I said abruptly.  'I'll settle with your
mother.  Do you understand?'

"She arched her shoulder and flashed a glance straight above me, out of
the open window.

"'I'm sorry you don't want me, doctor,' she said softly.  I could see
poor George tremble--the porch vines shook.

"Then I took her by the shoulders and shook her.

"'Get out of my house, you black slut!' I said--but I didn't say
'slut.'  And she went.  It was the only time I was ever brutal to a
woman."

He gulped the rest of his tumbler.

"The next day I moved my office stuff back, and that damned house was
empty.

"'I'm sorry about Mynie, Althea,' I said to the mother, the day
afterward.  'If you ever need any money----'

"'Thank you, Dr. Stanchon, thank you, seh.  You couldn't help it.  But
I guess she'll never need money, seh,' she said quietly.  And she was
right enough, of course.

"She knew.  They're not far from the apes, and they know a lot we've
forgotten, I believe.  Perhaps forgetting it is what civilised us.

"I never saw Mynie again.  She went off East, and George with her.
They're both dead, now.  His wife stayed on in the cottage.

"I gave her all the help I could ... it was my fault, I suppose.  And
yet, God knows, I meant nothing.  I thought _I_ was undertaking that
damned house, you see--how could I tell how the thing worked?"

They watched him eagerly: his face showed that he had more to tell.
Not a man moved, unless it were to knock the ash from his cigar or to
light a fresh one.

"There was a Catholic priest there, then," he said slowly.  "He's been
moved higher up, since, and you'd all know his name, if I gave it.
We'll call him Father Kelly--though that wasn't it, of course.  He and
I were great friends--he was a little older than I was--and we used to
have many a good talk together, meeting on our rounds, you see.  Often
I'd take him miles on his way, and drop my driver out on the road, just
for the pleasure of his company.  Of course we disagreed entirely on
what he considered the most important points, but leaving them out, we
were thoroughly congenial, and we were often glad of each other's
opinion, I can tell you, for we often had the same patients.

"Well, a day or two after I'd moved my stuff out of that cursed house,
he came to the office with a drug case he was trying to reform: he'd
persuaded the fellow as far as the pledge went, and I was to talk to
him about diet and exercise and all the rest.  After the man left,
Father Kelly looked at me once or twice, talked a bit about the
weather, and finally pulled out his old blackened pipe and looked
around the office.

"'Have ye a bit of tobacco about ye, doctor?' says he.  'If so, and
you're not too busy, I could do with a little rest--I was up all night.'

"I was glad enough, for I felt blue and out of sorts, and we pulled our
chairs in front of the fireplace, from habit, and after a few minutes I
found myself telling him the whole business.

"'Now what do you make of it, Father?' I asked.

"'I make the devil out of it, doctor,' said he, very placidly.

"'Oh, well,' I began impatiently, 'of course I can't be expected----'

"'Now, wait a bit, doctor,' he put in.  'If you don't go with my
diagnosis, what's your own?  What do you make out of it?'

"Well, there he had me.

"'Of course,' I said, 'it's a mere coincidence.'

"'Ah,' says he, 'then would you be willing to go and live there with
your wife?'

"'Good God, no!' I burst out, before I thought.  And then I wouldn't
back out of it.  You see, there had been five women.  Five good,
ordinary, honest women--six, if you count Miss Jessop.

"'I thought not,' said he quietly.

"He sat and puffed awhile.

"Finally, 'I'll have to be taking a look at your house, doctor,' he
said.

"'All right,' said I.  'When?'

"'This evening,' he said, 'after my confessions.  Say about nine.  And
I'll go home and have a nap.  I'm thinking I'll need one.'

"And he knocked out his pipe and left.

"I was busy all the afternoon, so busy that I almost forgot the whole
thing, and as a matter of fact, I had had no time for dinner, when he
called for me.  He was so fresh and bright and jolly that you'd never
have suspected he'd just got a murderer to agree to give himself up,
gone with him to see him safely jailed, and sent his confession up to
the governor--oh, he was a remarkable man, that man!  And it's a
remarkable institution, the Confessional.  We're learning to do more
with it now than we did twenty years ago.  But they've always known ...
they've always known..."

He ruminated long, and crushed the ashes in the brass tray before him.
The men nodded, but kept silence, dreading lest he lose the thread.

"I had the horse ready and drove myself.  When I unlocked the door of
the house I lighted the lamp in the hall, and so on in every room we
went through, kitchen and all.  In every room there was a fresh shining
lamp, filled and ready, for Althea had left everything like a new pin,
and in every room that lamp was lighted, when we left it.  You know
what a nice, warm glow an old-fashioned kerosene lamp gives a
place--electricity's nothing to it, in my opinion.

"'This seems a good sort of house, doctor,' said Father Kelly to me, as
we came back and sat down in the pretty little sitting-room, with a
palm in it, and cushions my wife had made, and books on the table.  'I
can't see any harm here.'

"'All right,' said I, 'then let's go home.  I missed my dinner.  Since
you see there's no devil here----'

"'I don't see that,' said he, calmly, 'I only see that I haven't found
him yet.  If a woman has a cancer, doctor, you don't know it the moment
you shake hands with her, do ye?  So with me and my patients.  Now
let's think a bit, and if you don't object, I'll call a little
consultation.'

"So he takes a little black book out of his pocket, and actually sits
there reading!  I humoured him, and smoked.  After a while he looks up,
crosses himself, puts away the book and nods at me contentedly.

"'Now, which room would all of these women use the most, doctor?' says
he.

"'The kitchen,' I said directly, thinking of Mynie and Althea.  Then,
'No, no, for Mrs. Mears used this for her consulting-room.  But the
parson's wife spent most of her time in her bedroom.  Still, the
jeweller's wife didn't--they used the dining-room to sit in.  There's
no one room, you see.'

"'Unless they all had the same bedroom,' he suggested quietly.

"'By George, they did, then!' I cried, 'for I gave it to Mynie and
Althea because it was the coolest.  I always sleep on the ground floor.'

"'Then we'll try the bedroom, doctor,' says he, and we went up-stairs.
He was a stocky, short little fellow, strong as a bull, with iron-grey
hair, very solid on his feet, yet quick and active, like a thin man.
He sat down in the rocking-chair in the neat, empty bedroom and I
brought in another lamp from across the hall.

"'You don't think you'll need the dark for your materializations,
Father?' I said, half laughing, as I set my lamp on the bureau.

"'No, no, doctor,' he answered, smiling.  'The Church doesn't work in
the dark, you know.  We're all for candles, and plenty of 'em.'

"I had to grin at that.  He was as quick a man with his tongue as I
ever met.

"Well, we sat there, and sat there, and he shut his eyes and tipped
back and forth in that chair like a woman, and I might as well have not
been there.  I mean I was out of his consciousness entirely.  Finally I
got nervous and bored.

"'There's nothing here, Father,' I said, rather testily.  'Haven't I
been here hours on end with the parson's wife?  Wouldn't I have known
it?'

"He never opened his eyes.

"'Probably not, doctor,' he said pleasantly.  'It's not your job, you
see.  You were thinking about her liver.'

"'And you?' said I.

"'Her life everlasting,' said he.

"And his eyes shut, all the time!

"So I shut my mouth and watched him.  And suddenly his lips began to
work, and he was mumbling to himself, and I saw that his hands were
grasping the arms of the wooden chair tight, so tight that as he
prayed, he actually worked himself over the floor, as a child will, you
know.  After he'd moved several feet that way, between me and the
fireplace--I was counting the inches, to keep myself quiet--he stopped
suddenly, opened his eyes and loosened his hands.

"'I've got it now, thanks be!' he said, looking straight at me.  'It's
this room, sure enough, doctor!'

"'What do you mean, for heaven's sake?' I said, getting up and coming
to him, interested enough, now, you can believe.

"'_For hell's sake_, would be nearer the mark,' he answered me, gently
enough, but his jaw was set and there was a light in his eye I'd seen
there once or twice.  'This is a bad business.  This'll take more than
sitting down, this will.'

"And flat on his knees he plumped, ahead of his chair, and crossed
himself and started praying in Latin.  He made no special noise nor
movement, but after a while I saw the sweat stand out on his forehead
and his face was drawn and pale--and grew paler.  Every now and then
he'd give a sort of deep sigh and hitch along, almost imperceptibly, on
his knees, from fatigue and nervous tension, and after about ten
minutes he was almost in the fireplace.  With anybody else I could
never have stood it, but it was impossible not to respect Father Kelly,
and I can tell you that whatever prayers he prayed, they were no
perfunctory mumblings: they took it out of him!  He was like a man
fighting, blindfolded--he breathed like a prize fighter, I tell you!
And just at the edge of the hearth, when I thought I must stop him
(that sort of auto-hypnosis will take a person straight out of an open
six-story window, you know) he stopped himself, opened his eyes with a
jerk, and pointed ahead of him.

"'Mother of God,' he said in a husky whisper, 'but it's there!'

"'There!' said I.  'What's there, Father?  There can't be anything in
that fireplace--I've seen a dozen fires in it.'

"He got up from his knees as unconcerned as he'd gotten down on them
and cleared his throat.

"'Not in it, perhaps, doctor,' he said, 'but then, under it.  Or over
it, perhaps.  But there, somewhere, it is.'

"'You mean the bricks?' I cried, and he nodded his head like a man too
weak to talk.

"'Maybe,' he whispered.  'Look and see."

"There was a full set of fire-irons there, and I took the poker and
tapped all about the hearth, as excited as a boy on a treasure hunt,
though of course I didn't believe in it, any more than the boy does,
really.

"'No, Father,' I said, 'there's nothing to show--' and then, just
between the andirons, I hit a blow that rang as hollow as a drum!

"'But there's no brick loose!' I cried, and he whispered, 'Then break
it!'

"It took more than a few blows and I broke the poker, but finally I
loosened the mortar and there under the two centre bricks was an iron
box, about seven inches square, made like a little trunk.  I fished it
out and opened it--it opened from the side--and pulled out two thick
handfuls of yellow letters, without envelopes.  I opened the top one
eagerly, but it had no date nor address.  For signature there was only
the name 'Olive.'"

He stopped abruptly and stared at the thick-bellied decanter before
him.  His voice sank lower.

"I have never heard or read that name since," he said slowly, "without
a thrill at my nerves like a picked violin string.  They were the
wickedest letters ever written, I think.  Even for a woman, they were
incredible."

The men stared at him, mystified, confused, eager.

"One, the third, I think, said something like this: '_They may bury me,
now that you want me no longer.  They shall never bury these letters--I
swear it.  Here in the room where I wrote them, they shall live after I
am gone._'

"And they lived--God, they lived!  As I pored over them, cross-legged
by that little hearth, I believe that I was as lost to the world about
me as Father Kelly had been a few moments before.  They were not
written for me, they offered me nothing, the writer was beyond doubt
dead and gone; but for the moment those yellow papers held me, soul and
body, in such a grip as I have never known before or since.  I can't
tell you ... I didn't know such things could be written...."  He shook
his head slowly.

"I'd always been fairly decent, you see--there were circumstances ... I
couldn't take advantage...

"Did you ever turn over a good old sunny rock, flat, a little mossy,
but clean and wholesome?  And underneath it crawls--it crawls!  Black,
slimy slug things ... muck of the Pit!

"That was me.  And every time my eyes fell on one of those amazing
phrases on that yellow page, I had to hold the rock down!

"Suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder.  I jumped like a woman.  Father
Kelly stood over me, and he looked, from where I sat below him,
unhumanly tall.  He held out his hand.

"'Give them to me,' he said.

"'But, Father, you don't want to see them!' I burst out.  'I'm going to
destroy them.  You--you mustn't see them!  Let me burn them----'

"'Give them to me, my son," he repeated, and I gave them up like a
child.  It was remarkable.

"'At any rate, I warn you,' I began.  But he only smiled.

"'When you are warned of fever in a house, do you pass it by, my son?'
he asked me softly.  'But this is a different matter.'

"I admit that I couldn't meet his eyes.

"Well, he read them all through placidly, and then he sighed and shook
his head.

"'Poor things, poor things!' he said, 'and now we'll burn them.  There
is nothing I can do.'

"So we burned them there and put back the bricks and he muttered some
short prayer or other and made the sign of the cross over the fireplace
and then turned to me.

"'Didn't I see some bread and ham and a cheese in that wire safe in the
cellar, doctor?' says he.  'I had no supper to-night.'

"We went down and got them and a bottle of Scotch, too, and I remember
perfectly that we polished off half a small ham, a whole Edam cheese, a
loaf of bread and nearly a bottle of the Scotch--the bottle wasn't
quite full, to begin with, you see.

"After we'd finished we had a smoke, and then I stared at him straight.

"'What's the meaning of it all, Father?' I asked.

"'I can't tell you, my son,' said he (he never called me so before or
since that night) 'but you may be sure of one thing--God reigns.  And
now, what are you thinking to do?'

"'Burn down this house,' said I, 'and send for my wife to come back.'

"'By all means send for your wife,' says he quickly, 'but if you're
bound to destroy this house--which strikes me as a very good sort of
house--why not give it me?'

"'To you?' I cried.  'You don't mean that you'd use it?'

"'I could put a parochial school for girls there next week,' he said
cheerfully.  'We need one at this end badly, but I hadn't the money."

"'And you'd put innocent girls in this place?'

"'Give me a chance, and then come hear Sister Mary Eustacia sing with
'em, next Sunday,' he said.

"So I deeded it to him, land and all, and they had a great kick-up
there with little boys in lace night-gowns, and incense and what not.
And, by George, the girls did sing for me, too, with Sister
Somebody-or-other bowing and blushing behind 'em--all in white they
were, with blue sashes, and voices like larks ... I never had a
daughter...."

He half rose, heavily, leaning on his elbows.  "Mind you, there's
something there!" he said slowly.

"There's a Pit below--you have to count on it.  Perhaps we're
shovelling it in, all the time, shovelling it in...

"And the more you whistle, the better you'll work, of course.  Very
well, then, whistle!  But don't mistake--it's there ... it's there."

They drew long breaths and pushed away from the table; the rain had
stopped.

And still in silence they walked out together into the fresh, damp
evening.




THE ORACLES

You'll wonder, no doubt, at me having the daring to make what you might
call a sort of romance out of her life--now all's over.  And, of
course, it's not in my way at all.  Not but what I've read enough of
romance-books--many's the many!  My mother was always at me to lay them
by and take up some bit of work that 'ud bring me in more in the
end--and yet, there's no doubt it was my readings and dreamings and
such-like that brought me about Miss Lisbet's friendship, at the first,
and that friendship was the making of me, one way and another, as
mother never denied.

It was Dr. Stanchon that set me about it.  He came into my cottage, a
matter of a month or so back, looking fair grizzled and white--the
heat, he said.  And if I knew better, I never said so.  He never minded
the heat till this summer.  And on his vacation at home, too!  But he
showed his age, fair.

"You haven't some kind of drink for me, have you, Rhoda?" he says, sort
of faint-like.  "It's been a hard day at the hospital."

Now that might do for some, but not for me, that's known the doctor
fifty-four years come Easter.  I looked at the wheels of the gig, and
they were all clay, red clay from the one road hereabouts that's made
of it--the graveyard road.  And I knew where he'd been.  But of course
I says nothing, but brings him a palm-leaf fan, and seats him out of
the glare, in the entry that looks over the little garden, and I waters
the red bricks of the porch with a spray or two from the garden-pot
(nothing so cooling as watered brick, I say!) and hurries in to beat up
his drink.  He settled down in the old chair I always keep for him--a
Windsor, cushioned in some English chintz his wife brought me out from
home, twenty years ago--and I heard him sigh and stretch as I got the
lemons and the eggs.  I beat up the whites, stiff as silver, added the
lemon juice by littles, dusted a bit of castor sugar, and stuck in a
sprig of mint from my sunken half-barrel where the cress grows.

"Ah, that makes a man new!" says he, handing back the glass.  "It's a
pity you can't patent that, Rhoda!"

And then he pulled out his old pipe, and smoked for a quarter-hour,
without a word.  But he rested.

"And how's Miss Jessop, these days, doctor?" says I, when I saw he was
ready for talking.

"Finely, finely!" says he.  "Her little girl wrote me a letter
yesterday.  Ten years old!  Image of her father, that child.  You're as
bad as Lisbet, though, that never would learn to change."

"I'm sure I beg her pardon--Mrs. Weldon, of course, and her with a boy
fourteen, too!" says I.  "How Miss Lisbet did take to her, surely!  I
always thought having her to help with Master Louis's children when
they were so bad, just helped poor Miss Lisbet to bear with her sorrow
at not starting the hospital, and all that."

"Yes, yes," he said and nodded.

"She was a fine woman, Jessop was.  Best nurse I ever had.  Yes,
yes--Weldon's a lucky fellow."

The cress smelled strong in the heat, then, and I couldn't but say:

"Do you remember when Miss Lisbet and I started the cress-bed, doctor,
down in the Winthrop pond?"

At first he didn't answer, and I saw the old times in his face.

"How she did enjoy your cress-and-mustard salad!" he says, finally.
"Mrs. Stanchon spoke of it this morning--have you a little mess I could
take up to the house?"

And so we passed to talking about her, and it eased us both.

"It's like a sort of tale, sir, isn't it?" says I, thoughtful-like.
"Often and often when my niece has left everything tidy, and made my
tea and cakes, and put away the wash, and watered the brick, and gone
home, and I sit here while the pot draws and there's only the cat for
company (not that I complain!  I've my thoughts, and plenty of books,
and all the old days to live over!) often and often, as I say, it'll
come to me in a sort of tale, like, and I wish there was some one to
take it down; it would read off like a book!"

"And why not take it down yourself, Rhoda, my girl?" says he.  "There's
one, as I needn't tell you, would have no little pleasure reading it."

And so I began.  You'd be surprised at the many that's offered to help
me, and piece out bits of her life that maybe I wouldn't know.  But I
knew enough for what I had in mind to show, namely, what Miss Lisbet
was always planning to do--and what she really did do.

So now I'll begin at the beginning.

      *      *      *      *      *

It was the morning of the day I was ten years old that I first saw her.
A Saturday it was, and a holiday, and mother gave me a piece of currant
bread, buttered, for a treat, and the day free till sunset, after my
morning tasks were through.  I was all that was left her--five others
buried, in fifteen years--and she was very easy with me, for which you
could scarcely blame her, poor soul!  Three lost in England, of the
smallpox, and one that hardly opened his little eyes, and my sister of
something that they had no name for rightly in those days, doctor says,
but they call it appendicitis now.  I was born over here, and never saw
England, though I've always loved to read about it and always called it
"home," not thinking, as one often will.  Mother had black memories of
the old country and was anxious for us to grow up little Americans,
though I can see now that she went to work very wrong to bring that
about, for we always curtseyed to the rector and old Madam Winthrop
when she rode by in the coach, and never, in short, thought of looking
higher than we were born.

So when I saw a lovely young lady drive up in a pony cart, hand the
reins to the groom, get out, and walk through the gate toward me, I
held the currant bread behind me and dropped a little curtsey.

"Is this Mrs. Pennyfield's house?" she says, stopping and staring at me.

"Yes, miss, she's my mother," says I.

"What is your name?" says she.

"Rhoda Pennyfield, please, miss," says I, and then, the goodness knows
why, for I was a shy enough little thing commonly, "It's my birthday!"

"Why, how funny!" she says, smiling the loveliest smile in the world.
"It's mine, too!  How old are you, Rhoda Pennyfield?"

"Ten, miss."

"Isn't that wonderful!" she cries out, blushing like a rose peony.  "I
am ten to-day, too!  What were your presents?  Mine were the pony
phaeton and this gold watch (she held it out to me on a chain about her
neck) and a macaw from South America from my Uncle Mather, on an ebony
perch.  And a French doll from my aunty in New York, but I don't care
for dolls any more.  What had you?"

Now, as you can see, if I had really been a little American, I should
have been jealous and ashamed that things were so different between us,
but such a notion never entered my head.

"Mother baked currant bread, miss," I said, "and Madam Winthrop's
gardener gave me a spotted kitten, and I have a string of blue beads
and the day to myself.  I'm thinking I'll go up to The Cedars and Mrs.
Williams will let me read some of the books from the library for the
afternoon."

"Why, that's where I live--The Cedars!" she says, surprised.  "Madam
Winthrop is my aunt, and Mrs. Williams dresses me!  Come into the
phaeton and I'll drive you there!"

She had forgot the errand she came on, bless her, with the excitement,
and if mother hadn't come out to inquire, there'd have been a great
to-do.  There was a maid all over blotches at The Cedars, and a doctor
and nurse was wanted, and mother was ready very quick, as she always
was.  So I got into the phaeton and Miss Lisbet drove me to The Cedars,
and I had a birthday dinner with her: roast fowl and mashed potatoes
and new peas and a frozen pudding with figs and almonds in it.  I can
see her now, at the head of the table, with me and Mrs. Williams on
either side, and the macaw, all indigo and orange color and scarlet, on
his perch opposite!  She had on a worked muslin frock with lace-trimmed
pantalets, blue silk stockings, and black French kid ankle-ties.  Her
hair, a light golden brown, was all in curls, and a blue velvet snood
kept it back: the young girls today wear ribbons about their heads
something like it.  Her eyes were a dark, bright blue, and her cheeks,
like most American children's, a sort of clear pale, that flushed quick
with her feelings.  She was tall and slim and looked quite three years
older than me, that has always been stocky-like and apple-cheeked, even
at sixty-four!

She had been away at a school for two years, having lost her father and
mother, and old Madam Winthrop had adopted her, in a sort of way, being
her great-aunt, and was to leave her all her money.

While we were eating, old Dr. Stanchon pops in, leading a little
red-haired boy, very plain and clever-looking, by the hand.

"Can this youngster have a bite with you, Mrs. Williams?" says he,
looking worried like.  "That precious girl of yours has the fever, and
I'll be busy some time.  I promised him the fish pond for a treat, for
it's his birthday, to-day, and now perhaps Miss Elizabeth will take him
there--hello, little Rhoda!  How fine we are!"

The little lad pulls out a great pocket-knife and lays it on the table.

"I am Dick Stanchon, and I'm ten years old to-day!" says he very quick.
"I have this Barlow knife and the 'Arabian Nights,' and I'm to be a
doctor, like my father.  Do you have frozen pudding often, here?"

Well, you can see how startling it would be to three children to be at
the same birthday together!  We couldn't be tired talking of it.

"We will all be firm friends for the rest of our life," said Miss
Lisbet, very excited, "and never have secrets from each other.  And
when I get Aunt Winthrop's money, I will divide it into three parts,
one for each.  And we will do a great deal of good in the world."

"Come, come," says Mrs. Williams, sour-like, "not so fast, missy.
You've not the money yet, nor shouldn't speak of it, and as for being
friends, it's all right so far as Dick Stanchon is concerned, but I
doubt if Madam will feel the same as to Rhoda Pennyfield!  So make no
more plans till we know."

But of course we did make plans, for all her stiffness.  We sat in the
red cedar grove, playing at tea-parties with a beautiful china tea-set,
and Master Dick was to marry her, and I was to live with them and be
nurse to the children, with one named for me!

Dear, dear!  I've forgot much that's come in between and many that's
been kind to me (more shame to me!) but I can see the sun on her curls
now and him sharpening his new knife on the granite rocks that were so
thick in the grove.

"Rhoda and Dick," says she, very solemn, after a little, "I'm going to
tell you a great secret.  Come close to me."

You can believe we listened with all our ears; we worshipped the ground
she trod on, both of us, do you see, even then.

"I mean to do a great deal of good in the world before I die," says
she, "as I mentioned before, at dinner.  I don't mean just ordinary
_being_ good, you know, but _doing_ it.  At school I always meant to go
as a missionary, and I was saving all my money for a fund for it, but I
couldn't seem to keep it, somehow.  Two or three of the girls were poor
girls, and if they hadn't their birthdays remembered, it would have
been dreadful.  And the cook's little boy was lame in his spine and he
was so fond of flowers!  And I hadn't so much money, anyway.  Then, all
my time was full, because we had to do things every hour, just so.  But
now I'm to have a governess and I shall have a great deal of time, so I
can study hard for a missionary and perhaps go to South America--if
there are any heathens there, as I suppose there are."

"Yes, miss," says I.

"So now my new life is beginning," she says very low and solemn, "and I
feel that everything will be different.  I wish I could be _sure_,
though, that it would be!"

"Why don't you try the larkspurs, miss," says I.  "They'll tell you."

My mother, you must know, was a great believer in signs.  Not being
much educated, she went by them, I suppose, the way plain people will,
be it ever so.  There's no use saying it's against religion--mother was
as religious as any one, take who you will--they will do it.  If a bird
flew into the house, there was death for sure, and she never would let
three candles be lighted, no matter whose the house.  And so my sister
and I had many of these ways and signs, and always told how things
would be by larkspurs.  So I told Miss Lisbet how to strip them off for
"yes, no, yes, no," and she asked her question very solemn:

  "_Larkspur, larkspur, tell me true,_
  _Or never again I'll trust to you!_

Is there to be a great change in my life?"  And she stripped them off,
mumbling-like to herself, "Yes, no, yes, no"--and the last off was "no."

And then she cried, poor thing, and I with her, for we both believed in
'em, but Dick only laughed and said it was all foolishness.

"If you want to do different from what you have been, Lisbet, of course
you can," says he, and then the old doctor came and fetched us both
home.

"I'm going to begin my studying, just the same!" she calls after us,
and I watched the sun on her hair till the coachman's cottage cut us
off.

Well, the governess came and they'd lessons all morning long and music
practising afternoons, but there was no missionary study, because she
took it into her head that I must be educated and know all she knew--as
if that was likely!  Still, I picked up a good bit, here and there, and
the gardener's little boy, that was backward and dumb-like, isn't
forgetting to-day what he owes to Miss Lisbet, I'll warrant.  Three
days a week she'd read to him and spell the letters and sums plain--and
him that was the mock of the scholars, so that he'd never go near the
school, what is he now, I ask you?  Professor in Yale College, and
helped Dr. Stanchon in the planning of a big school for those children
that are backward-like, as he was, and many of them as bright as
bright, really.  They manage such as them better than they did in those
days, doctor says, and most of it owed to Henry Wilson's boy.

Often and often we'd walk up to her tea from the lodge, her setting her
little teeth to keep from crying at the time she was wasting, with all
her heathen waiting for her in South America!

"But I can't leave poor little Ezra Wilson, Rhoda, I just can't!" she'd
cry out.  "Wait till these old music-lessons are over and I haven't to
use those horrible dumb-bells every morning, and I'll do something for
the world, yet!"

"Surely, miss," I'd soothe her.

Well, the time went by like sands in a glass, and we were grown maids
before you'd think twice.  She looked full two years more than her
seventeen, and Master Dick was away at Harvard College two years
already, for he was wonderful forward and clever always, and first in
all his classes.  What time she'd had from her lessons and her
paintings and sketching (which she hated dreadfully, poor thing, though
seeming a master of it, to my eyes!) she was teaching him French and
German from her governess, for they didn't teach it in the village
school and his mother couldn't spare him away, and those languages
helped him a good bit in his studies at the college.  The old doctor
was terrible proud of him.

And then came the day that he came home so sudden.  It was a grand
April morning and Miss Lisbet and I were directing Henry Wilson about
changing the vines and laying them by for the house painting: Madam was
scolding and fussing about, annoying everybody with her sharp ways, and
I remember thinking that she was failing for sure.  I was sad, too, for
mother had decided to put me out to service, after all, and that meant
a parting for Miss Lisbet and me.  Mother felt that I was getting above
myself, like, and spoiled for anything that would happen me in the
usual course if Miss Lisbet ever changed, you see.  And who could deny
that?  But the dear thing knew nothing of it, yet--I hadn't the heart.

Well, Madam was scolding away famously.

"Mind that wistaria, Wilson!" says she.  "There's not its equal in
Westchester County!"

"Yes, yes, Madam," says he, crusty-like.  "Why good-morning, Master
Dick!"

And there he stood.  At the first glance, I saw he looked different.
Older and graver.

"What's this, what's this, Richard?" Madam cries.  "Neglecting your
studies?"

"Studies?  Studies?" says he, as quick and sharp as she.  "What, is the
matter with the people about here?  Are you dreaming?  Fort Sumter
down, the flag insulted, the President calling for seventy-five
thousand volunteers, and you talk of studies!  I'm going to try to get
into the Seventh, and I'm only here to see Elizabeth before I go."

"Nonsense, boy!" says Madam, trembling, though.  "We'll see what your
father has to say, first."

"My father only wishes he had a dozen sons, ma'am!" he told her, proud
as Lucifer.  "Lisbet, can I speak with you?"

She went directly to him, and they walked, holding hands, behind the
cedar grove.  She told me afterward that he just said:

"Will you wait till I come back, Lisbet?"

And she answered, "Why, of course, Dick!"  They parted a promised
couple.  Madam was all shaky, but she kissed him good-bye, and let him
put a little blue-stoned ring on Miss Lisbet's hand--there was a splash
of red paint on it from the house, and mother fair turned white when I
told her.  "They'll never wed," she said, "that's certain sure!  Poor
young people!"

But the paint wasn't for blood, after all, for he never got a scratch.
He was handsome enough in his new uniform, and more than one envied my
Miss Lisbet when she waved him good-bye on the train--they were off for
Baltimore.

"Rhoda," says she to me, after a few weeks of waiting, "I can't bear
this!  Us eating and drinking so easy, and those poor boys dying--it's
not right.  I must and shall go as nurse!"

And we could do nothing with her--she'd hardly sleep.  It was Dr.
Stanchon found the way to handle her.

"Dear child," he says at last, "why not do as I do--send a substitute?
I sent my boy, because I'm the only doctor left here, now, and people
must be born and die, you know, war or no war," says he.  "I'd far
rather have gone.  Now, it's out of the question for you, for many
reasons, but if your aunt would give you your dress-money and you gave
up a summer at the mountains, you could pay a good, settled woman, of
experience, and there's many would love to go."

Well, she seized on that, the generous creature, and got it out of
Madam, and we fitted out a respectable widow-woman mother often had to
help her, and sent her to one of those Southern cities--I forget now.
She wrote up only that there was mostly blacks for waiting on one, and
food poor and scarce.  But Master Dick sent word that she kept the
fever away for a mile around her, and the officers thereabouts gave her
a long piece of writing and a medal after all was over, and the Rebels
a silver cup--she cared for all alike, whatever the uniform.  The
little house she had was built up into a hospital, later, and she lived
and died there, and only came up to the north to beg money for it.  It
was the only one in thirty miles around.  Eighteen years she lived
there, and left the cup to Miss Lisbet; the medal to her daughter.

Well, I must hurry on.  I could talk about those days forever, but in
the books, I have taken notice often, they pick and choose.

So I will pass to when it came to her of a sudden how she could collect
clothes and food for the army, and keep one place open for the
lint-scraping and bandage-rolling, as all the ladies were doing in the
big cities.  She had a tongue of honey and every one knew about her
having hired Mrs. Jarvis to go nurse, so she was sure to get what she
begged for.  She took over a vacant office in the village, part of
Madam's property, and I never saw her happier than the day we were
fitting it up.  It was all cleaned and new furnished and there were
desks and tables and nursing-books and shelves for the jellies and
medicines, and everything to be sent orderly and where needed at the
time, not rushed forward all helter-skelter as so much is at such
times.  Dr. Stanchon saw all, and heard the plans, and patted her
shoulder.

"Well done, Blossom, well done!" says he.  "I might have let you go,
after all!"

And he offered to advise and find out the quickest and best trains and
such like.

It was July and a hot, clear day.  The notice was in the village paper
for all the women that could help, to come to a first meeting and take
hours for duty there, and routes to collect, and offer wagons if they
had them, and give fruit for jelly, and Miss Lisbet led off with the
old pony and cart for steady work.

We were resting in the garden and she had just told me that she meant
to give all her time to the "office," as we called it in a joking way
(for nice young ladies didn't go to offices then, I promise you!  Madam
thought little enough of it) and she put her hand on mine.

"Rhoda," says she, "my dream is coming true--do you see?  I'm to do
something for my country, after all!  Just as a man would--just as Dick
does, Rhoda!  Isn't it a grand thing?"

"Yes, miss," says I.

"The change is coming now, Rhoda," she says, and then, laughing at
herself, "I'm going to ask the larkspurs!"

And she pulled a great stalk and held it over her head, as I had taught
her seven years before.

  "_Larkspur, larkspur, tell me true,_
  _Or never again I'll trust to you!_

Is there to be a great change in my life?"

And she stripped them off, _yes, no, yes, no_--and they said _no_!  The
sweet face fell, and I hurried to comfort her.

"Maybe they always say no hereabouts," says I.  "Let me have a try!"
And I asked the same question, but it came _yes_, and that I knew must
be true, though she did not.

The next day, after she had made a speech like the Queen's (I thought)
and every one wondering, with her so young, and a hundred dollars
pledged, and all so eager to work under her--for she was one of them
that's born to lead--who should run in but Henry Wilson, all out of
breath, crying to her to hurry home, for Madam was down with a stroke,
and one side of her all powerless!

Well, to make a long story short, she never left her poor aunt for
above an hour at a time till the fighting was over!  Madam, who had
never seemed overfond before, was mad for her now, and she was pushing
her chair or reading to her or stroking her hand or playing old tunes
or sitting in sight, the livelong day.  They tried the sea and they
tried the mountains and there was a nurse and a maid, but it was always
Miss Lisbet behind it all.  She was rich, she had real French convent
lace on her body-linen, and asparagus and peaches in winter, and a
conservatory as big as a house, oh, yes.  But she was more tied down
than many a poor girl 'prenticed for her living, and I often wonder if
it's not that way with many of the rich ladies you see!  I know I was
working hard with a dressmaker the first year--before they kept me as
seamstress and mender at The Cedars--and _I_ wouldn't have changed with
her, except for love of her, poor dear!

I was back in The Cedars when Madam went off in her sleep one night as
easy as a baby.  There was no need for grieving--'twas a blessed
release, and just the soberness and the thoughts that must come to one
when even an old body of eighty-odd passes away.  Poor old Madam hadn't
many friends, for everybody was so afraid of her, and we all felt the
best that ever she'd done was to leave the lonely old place to Miss
Lisbet.  Master Dick was coming home, for the war was over, and the
black men freed at last, and he was full captain, and never a scratch
or a headache even, to show for the four years!

We were in the garden waiting for him, she as lovely as ever I'd seen
her in a white dress, all frilled from the waist down, with violet
ribbons (Madam made her vow never to wear black for her) and a violet
band in her hair.  She'd a great brooch of amethyst stones at her neck
and Master Dick's blue ring on her finger.

"Rhoda," says she, of a sudden, "what if we tried the larkspurs again?"
and she smiled at me, a mischievous little smile, like a child's.

"Nay, now, miss dear," says I, "what's the good of such games, and you
a grown woman?  No doubt now but your way is clear to do as you like--a
fine husband and plenty of money.  Let it be."

"But I will," she says, reaching for a spray of the blue stuff, "I
will, Rhoda, once more, for luck."

"Well, then, miss," says I, "put the question different like, why not?
Make it plainer--you're forever talking about 'a change in your life,'
and there's always changes, you know."

So she laughs and holds it up and sings:

  "_Larkspur, larkspur, tell me true,_
  _Or never again I'll trust to you!_

Am I going to be able now to use all this money to help some great
cause?"

And the flowers said, _no_!

Well, I couldn't say I was sorry for that, just because she was all for
schooling and helping the blacks, now they were thrown on themselves
like; for old Dr. Stanchon would have it that they were bound to make
more trouble now in the South than they had before, and that those who
had freed them owed them a living--or something like that.  Most hated
him for it around our parts, but doctor says the country has found his
father was right, to-day.  Nevertheless, there's other uses for good
family money than that, as we all know.

"You've bewitched the larkspurs, Miss Lisbet," I said, laughing.  "Why
not fool them a bit?  Pick a tiny short spray like this, and ask a
question you _know_ the answer to, and then you'll see how things are."

"Well," says she, "I'll ask 'If I'm to marry Dick'!"

I didn't half like that, but I happened to peep out of the tail of my
eye and who should I see but Master Dick himself, leaning over the low
cedar hedge, looking for us.  He was out of her sight, and so I made
haste and picked a tiny stalk with but three blossoms and handed it to
her.

"Quick, quick, Miss Lisbet, dear!" I said, knowing well what the answer
would be.  She asked quick enough, but when she stripped them, _yes,
no_--and stopped there, I saw that the third had somehow fallen off and
lay on her white lap.  It gave me a turn, but she only brushed it away
and laughed softly.

"It _is_ foolish," she said, "isn't it, Rhoda?  For there he is!  Here,
Dick, this way!"

I started to leave them, but she wouldn't have it, and gave him her
cheek to kiss as easy as a child--or started to, but there was a man in
uniform behind him, just rounding the turn, and she drew back.

"Major La Salle," says Master Dick, proud as Punch, you could see,
"Miss Elizabeth Winthrop."

She curtseyed and the Major bowed to the ground, and I couldn't but
notice a tiny bald spot amongst his curly dark hair.

"An old fellow for Master Dick's friend," thought I, and so he was,
being all of thirty-six, and more like Dr. Stanchon's crony than his
son's!  Thirty-six was something in those days, you see, and Master
Dick was all ready to settle when the young men of his age to-day are
playing their football games and heedless as school girls.

The Major had lines about his mouth and eyes, and had buried a wife, we
learned, three years before the war--a sad marriage, by Master Dick's
accounts, as she wasn't worthy of him and had made him grave before his
time.  Our young Captain couldn't talk enough of him and had written
many's the letters about him before ever we saw him.  But we were both
surprised to find him so much older than we had thought, and Miss
Lisbet was afraid to talk much before him at first, for fear he'd find
her missish and ignorant.  She didn't realize, the sweet thing, how any
one would think, to see her at the head of that great house, managing
all and doing so much good in the village, that she was the equal of
any woman.

They'd been but three days in the village, and all the time they had
from the doctor's wife's proud tea-drinkings, to show off her boy,
they'd spent with us.  She always had me by her, for Mrs. Williams was
getting on, and best off by herself, and Miss Lisbet didn't feel 'twas
quite as it should be for her to be off with them alone.  So when they
spoke of Madam's will, I was sewing near by.

Miss Lisbet was telling of her schemes for the poor blacks and the
Major was agreeing with her, and said that Master Dick's father had the
right of it.

"Now, for heaven's sake, Louis, don't encourage Miss Winthrop in any of
her plans for the human race," says Master Dick, laughing.  "It's bad
enough to have my father executor.  All that money depends on me, you
know, and I don't approve of women's rights as much as you do."

"Depends on you?  What do you mean?" says the Major.

"Why, unless she marries me she doesn't get Madam's money at all," says
Master Dick.  "The old lady was afraid of unprincipled fortune hunters,
and of me, at least, she knew the worst!"

"But the larkspurs said I wouldn't marry you, Captain Dick Stanchon!"
she cried, half laughing, half displeased, for she couldn't bear him to
question what she said.

The Major got up at that and walked away, and I left them, too, as was
quite correct for a promised pair.

It might have been an hour later that I walked to the cedar grove to
find my thimble and saw Miss Lisbet hurrying there ahead of me.  I
slackened a bit, and when I caught her up I saw she was talking with
the Major--he must have been waiting there for her.  I thought it odd,
but stooped over and looked through the grass, and all of a sudden they
were level with me, the other side the hedge.

"You sent for me?" said she, breathless like.

"Yes.  Can you guess why?" said he, and my knees began to shake.

"N-no, Major La Salle," said she, still breathing strangely.

"I sent for you to tell you that the larkspur told you true,
Elizabeth," he said, very deep.  "You will never marry Dick Stanchon,
you will marry me."

"Why--why..." she began, and I couldn't move then, try as I might.

"As sure as that little star belongs in the moon's arms, Elizabeth, you
belong in mine!" said he.  "Don't you know it?"

"But, Dick," she said, still breathing as I had never heard her.

"Dick is a boy," he said.  "You are fit for a man.  I loved you when I
first took off my cap before you.  But I would never court an heiress.
Could you come to a western army post and live on a Major's pay?"

"It's not me--I could live on nothing, almost--it's how to tell Dick!"
she began, crying and breathing that strange way, both together--and
then I knew it was all over, of course.

"My star!" I heard him say, and I crept away, somehow.

Well, that was all.  One week, she was a great heiress and engaged to a
bright young fellow with life opening out before him; the next she was
married to a poor widower, fifteen years her elder, and off to some
place in the western prairies, with only a chest of linen and silver
and some old mahogany and her clothes!  It was like a dream.  But only
to see her look at him, you'd know she'd met her master.  Before, she
hadn't sensed things rightly, she told me.

I was wild to go with her, but no such thing as a maid for his wife,
the Major said, and anyway, mother was near doubled with the rheumatism
and I couldn't be spared.  So I kissed her on the station platform and
cried myself blind that night.  And Master Dick went off to Germany, to
study, and never a word was mentioned: he held his head high, the
Captain did!

We got news regular from little Essie White, that Miss Lisbet's outworn
dresses used to go to.  She used to read an hour a day, did Miss
Lisbet, to Essie's mother, who went blind, and she stocked Essie with
flannels and such, as she grew.  I trained her in as kitchen maid when
I was at The Cedars, and when help turned out so poor and scarce in the
West--all ignorant Paddies, as we called them then--she sent to me and
I sped Essie out to her, and a good job, too, for she was in no state
to be worrying out her precious health over dust and dirt and victuals!

Essie wrote us long letters, how Miss Lisbet was the belle of the post
and had a night school for the private soldiers started, with officers'
ladies to teach, and took all the charge of the little hospital.  Mrs.
Jarvis sent her rules and saving ways and many clever contrivances from
all her experience in the South, and long after the La Salles left that
post the night school was kept up--and may be now, for aught I know,
for it seemed that all she planted, grew.  Balls they gave and private
theatricals and riding parties, and Essie said she was happy as the day
was long, but for that she felt she might have done so much for the
world with Madam's money.  She wanted schools in all the army posts and
the negroes taught farming and goodness knows what not, you see.

But when little Louis came there was no time for all that, I promise
you!  It broke my heart not to be with her, but mother was failing,
slow but sure, and 'twould have been sin to leave her.

But I heard all his sweet ways and when he was creeping, and how he
called my poor old picture "Dody" (bless him!) and hardly was he ready
for his kilts but his brother was stepping into his shoes!  Named for
her father he was, and the image of the first, that was the image of
the Major.  She took the care of them mostly, herself, for she didn't
like the rough girls out there, and had only Essie and a woman for
washing, and I didn't need Essie's letters to tell me she was tired and
worn-like.  It seemed a poor kind of life for one that had had a half
dozen of servants and gardens and grape houses and her
saddle-horse--but she wouldn't have changed for Windsor Castle, I well
knew.

And next I heard, they were to move, very sudden, and the garden just
planted and all, and worst of all, Essie had lost her heart to a
corporal and was to stay behind.  At the time I blamed her sorely and
wrote her a bitter letter, but, dearie me, life is life for all of us,
and Miss Lisbet wasn't her treasure as she was mine.  We made it up
later, Essie and me.

My dear wrote me herself, the saddest letter that ever I had from her,
I believe.  The old mahogany pieces had been stored, very careful, and
burned in the storage, and the linen was out and the china broken, and
the new baby would find but a poor house, she feared, when they should
be settled.  Could I find her one for Essie's place?  And oh, if only
she could see my face, for she dreaded her coming trial, with every one
strange!

I was sitting in my new black, when I read the letter, with poor mother
free of her rheumatics at last, and all soft as I was from it, I cried
and cried!

I wrote her that I'd find some one, and then I went to the old doctor
and we talked and twisted it this way and that, and he went up to The
Cedars and called on Madam's heir-at-law, a crabbed old cousin that
lived much to himself and saw only the doctor, and the end of it was
that I was to pick out what I thought Miss Lisbet would like in the
matter of furniture, for he used but a third of the rooms, and what
linen and stuff his housekeeper thought could be spared.

And wasn't I glad to hear that, for well I knew the housekeeper, a good
woman who'd nursed turn about with mother for years, and had seen my
young lady grow up!

Well, if I do say it of myself, I stripped The Cedars thorough!  And
yet a stranger would hardly know.  It was full, do you see, from many
generations, and overflowing, and I furnished three bedrooms, complete,
from the garrets!  Blankets I got, and a trunk of towels, and seven
woven bedspreads, and a dining-table that Miss Lisbet's mother's mother
had eaten a wedding dinner at, and the stuffed macaw on his ebony
perch!  Eight dozen dinner napkins that had never seen the laundry, and
carpets that the moths were sure to take if I didn't!  And brass
fire-irons and a great chest of books and some heads of statues she'd
always liked, and big engravings of foreign places, broken old ruins
and such.  And her nursery fittings, that had never been touched, I
took entire--fire guard and small chairs, Moses in the Bulrushes,
little kneeling Samuel and all!  And nearly everything from her lovely
bedroom--chintz valances, and the little South American
dressing-cabinet, and the china-set in a strawed barrel.  _I_ knew what
she loved--who better?  And the old doctor got the whole car-load
across the country free as air for me, through a gentleman that had
heard how much Miss Lisbet had done in the War, and that as good as
owned the railroad.  He had us met with mules, too, at the end of the
horrid, dusty trip; and when me and little Maria Riggs (niece of a tidy
widow-woman Miss Lisbet had had chair-caning taught to, so that she had
no need to come on the town) got to the new home, we found only a
neighbor to give us the keys.  The Major was off on army matters for a
week, and she had taken the two boys and gone on a visit to a new
friend she'd made, and left things all hugger-mugger, from despair and
tiredness, poor girl!

I was quite as well pleased, and Maria and I swept and cleaned and
nailed carpets and hung pictures and clear-starched muslin curtains and
filled shelves and drawers, as happy as queens.  And round the house I
planted out the five old vines I'd brought all moist and good in an
open basket, from The Cedars, and in the garden that a fine,
fresh-faced soldierman, English as could be, dug and spaded for me,
what did I put in but _larkspur seeds_, amongst the sweet williams and
pansies and mignonette!

Well, she came back, expecting nothing, do you see, and there at the
door was I, in black, with white cuffs and apron, and little Maria
curtseying behind me.  And the old claw-leg card-table in the hall and
the glass with the gilt eagle above it.

"Rhoda!  _Rhoda!_" she screams, and gives one look at the statues and
pictures and new carpet in the drawing-room and faints on the floor!
And I nearly crazy for being such a fool at such a time!

None the less, the third boy was born in his mother's old four-posted
bed, as beautiful as a king, and her living picture.  Stanchon La Salle
he was, for the old doctor, who never bore her a moment's grudge, mind
you, on Master Dick's account.

"He's a fine man, Rhoda, and I doubt if Dick could have managed her
right," was all he ever said to me.  "She has a great spirit."

And then the time went by like the water under a bridge.  She'd no more
worries about drudging, for Maria and I did all, with the English
soldierman for rough jobs; but she had her hands full with the boys,
for the Major didn't want them sent back to the East to school, and she
had all the teaching and training of them, to say nothing of the care
of them, growing.  Nine years we lived there, and then Master Louis was
off to West Point, and in two years more his brother, and one day--it
seemed the next day but two or three!--we were packing Master
Stanchon's trunk to go to Yale College, where his father went!  We
rubbed our eyes and sat alone, and there was the macaw she got for her
tenth birthday looking at us!  And I do assure you, I felt much the
same as ever.  Which I had heard people say, as a girl, and felt to be
unbecoming.

The Colonel was pretty nigh to white hair, but firm and strong, and she
was grey, but not a wrinkle, and very beautiful.  He was to leave the
service and had been offered a post in government, somehow, at
Washington, when just as we were beginning to worry if his eyes could
stand the book-work, the lawyer's letter came.

It seemed too good to be true.  Old, crabbed Mr. Hawkes was long ago
dead, and The Cedars closed, and his heir, a very curious woman, had
felt that Miss Lisbet was defrauded, and left everything to her in her
will!  So we were to go back, and it cleared so many worries that we
cried together.

"And now, Rhoda, now for a chance to do something!" she says, suddenly.

I only stared at her.

"Why, Miss Lisbet, you've been doing since you were born!" I cried.

"Oh, Rhoda, you know!" she says, coaxing, "only for those near me, and
in such a small way!  Now the boys are started, and no more worry for
the Colonel, and you and I can do something that will last!"

And laughing like a girl, if she didn't fly out to the garden and find
our frost-bitten, yellow larkspur, the last!

"See!" says she, and began to wave it.

"Oh, don't, don't!" says I, anxious-like, "and you to be a grandmother
next year, maybe!" (for Louis was to be married to a New York young
lady in the winter).

But she would, and when she asked, half laughing, half frightened:

"_Am I to do what I have longed for all my life, at last?_" and
stripped off the rotting blossoms, _yes, no, yes, no_--the last one
fell.

And before ever we reached The Cedars the Colonel had gone blind!

Well, for five years she was never from his side one half hour at a
time.  He said he blessed the blindness that gave him her hand at every
moment, and it was a beautiful sight to see them together.  Riches
makes such an affliction as light as it can ever be, that's certain,
and he lived in luxury.  He held Louis's twin daughters in his arms and
hoped to "see," as he called it, smiling, the next brother's, but it
was not to be.

Dr. Stanchon, as I learned at last to call Master Dick, said that he
couldn't have had a moment's pain, and his own boy, named for the
Colonel, carried him to the grave with our three.

Mrs. Stanchon was a sweet soul, tied to a wheel-chair for life after
five years married, and Miss Lisbet was forever doing things for her
entertainment and to make her forget, like.  She never did too much,
but just enough, and didn't stop with grapes and books, as many rich
folk will, you know, but sat with her every other day, at least, with
the Colonel by her side, listening to her bright talk.  I doubt the two
of them realized, at those times, how afflicted they were!

She never talked as if he was gone--always as if they'd only parted for
a little.  Her hair was soon whiter than his, and she walked and moved
very slow, for her, but the boys seemed to see no difference.

Louis's wife was delicate and came to us, finally, till he should have
an easier post, and the twins were not strong, like our babies.  Once
we nearly lost them, and after that Granny Lisbet (as they called her)
never took her eye off them, and pulled them through.  It seemed the
village was full of sick children that year, and the mothers were crazy
for her to look at every one.

She was anxious to set up a regular nurse for the district, and gave a
room for that purpose, with a lending closet, and arranged money for
the nurse to be paid for ten years.  (They are quite common, now, but
hers was the first in our parts.)

"She's working too hard, Rhoda, my girl," says Dr. Stanchon.  "Her
heart's not what she thinks.  Keep her quiet, can't you?"  But what
could I do?

I nearly cried, last June, when I'd got her out in the garden, that
day, for a bit of quiet, and she began on her plans for the villages to
be taxed for nurses and doctors, to keep off sickness!

"The babies are all well, now," says she, "and Louis comes for his
family to-morrow, and the twins are no trouble.  The nurse is all
started in the village and I am going to see the Governor at Albany
next week--I have an appointment.  Isn't it strange, Rhoda, that I am
all but fifty, and only ready now to do something with my
opportunities?  I've ten good years before me, and the Colonel shall be
proud of me yet!"

I felt so weak and sad all of a sudden--God knows why.  She rarely
spoke of him.  I held her hand.

"Why, look, Rhoda, there's a stalk of larkspur out!" she said.  "Go
pick it for me, will you?"

I started to say no, but then I saw but one bud on it and I thought to
myself, "I'll see her pleased for once, I will!" knowing she'd never
notice, and so brought it.  She waved it, blue above her white head
(and me only iron grey to-day!)

  "_Larkspur, larkspur, tell me true,_
  _Or never again I'll trust to you,_"

she mumbled like, and I thought her voice sounded strange and far away,
somehow.

"_Is a change coming at last in my narrow little life?_"

"Oh, hush, Miss Lisbet! you that have been so much to so many!" says I,
sobbing at her dear stupidness, and then she begins, yes--and that was
all.

"Why, Rhoda!" she cries, "at last, at last I've won!" and half rises in
the garden-chair.  Then suddenly her hands went to her heart.

"Why, Louis--Louis!  My dear!" she said, staring at the cedar hedge.
"_Can you see?_"  And fell back.

The change had come, indeed, and I and all that loved her hope that now
she knows what a life like hers meant to those she lived among and
blessed!




THE END












        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STRANGE CASES OF DR. STANCHON ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

