




  Transcriber's Note: Authorial idiosyncracies have been retained.


THE

SECRET OF THE

CREATION

_By_

DR. HOWARD D. POLLYEN

This book, the great wonder of the literary
age.

Contains the first and second chapters of the
secret of the creation.

The mightiest book ever written on earth
among men.

Price 25c


THE SECRET OF THE CREATION

_By_

DR. HOWARD D. POLLYEN

THIS BOOK

 The great wonder of the literary age.
Contains the first and second chapters
   of the Secret of the Creation.
  The most mighty book ever written
        on earth among men.

    Also contains songs and poems by Dr. Howard D. Pollyen,
    the world's greatest author and writer of all times.

    Author of the deepest and most mystifying
    songs--revealing the whole history of the human soul.

    The Secret of the Creation in full will follow this
    little book which is but a touch of heaven's torchlight
    to the human heart.


The Secret of the Creation

By Dr. Howard D. Pollyen

       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER I

The Creation of the Heavens


Jehovah has no beginning. He himself created time, and taught its
principles to the living things he also created, giving to them
comprehension, by which we ascribe, unto the infiniteness of Jehovah a
time and a beginning.

Before that there were not any man or angels or living creatures of any
form created. When there were no worlds yet formed, nature stood in
three kingdoms. They were Light, Water, and Darkness.

Then the kingdom of the light strove against the kingdom of darkness,
and the darkness contended with the light. The two elements came
together, each of them a separate unit, contending against the other.
And in their controversy the virtue of the power of each of them became
formed and concentrated into a living being. Their personalities are as
those of men, but their substance is power. The virtue--the
pre-motive--the ruling quorum--the master of all power: The being of
light was much greater than the being of darkness and ruled over him;
therefore was his name Jehovah. The being of darkness hated him with
great envy, thereby was his name Satan. But they were both lonesome;
being alone: Even as light and darkness is obstinate to each other.

Then Jehovah saw that he was the master of nature, all power being
controlled by his hands. He looked upon the kingdom of the Waters and
saw that their alluvian substance could be divided and congealed into
many kingdoms of minerals, and he decided to create a world. He sent a
current of electricity in its first nature through the face of the
waters and said, "let the minerals be gathered together, each one in its
place in perfect order for the earth; and let the dry land appear above
the face of the waters." And the natural electricity went forth and
returned to and fro, and it was done.

And Jehovah came and walked upon the world which he had created, and he
called it Heaven. For it was a place upon which he would cause to rest
the substance of life--out of which he had come. And he called to the
kingdom of light and saw that it was an immensity of life. Dividing it
he formed and created minor beings after his own image and in his own
form. And he called them souls. But they were naked, having no substance
for bodies like him. All the face of the heaven was filled with them as
they glittered before their creator in hosts. Some of them were great
and some of them were small; all being different, each one shining
according to the power of its own light.

Then Jehovah created souls for other living things of all manner of
shapes and forms, great and small--unto the infinite small things until
the substance of life was contained.

Jehovah set for his created things an order and a procession of life,
creating for them bodies. And they arose up and began to fill all the
face of heaven with songs and music. And thus the Heaven and the hosts
of it were finished.

And Satan enveighed Jehovah and the things which he had made, for he
knew that there was no power of creating forces in the virtue of
darkness, and that he himself could not create or make any living thing
to stand before him in life. Therefore he hated life and sought with all
his power to destroy the created things of Jehovah. Satan's power went
out as a shadower of darkness towards them. It was the virtue of his own
evil self--his spirit of darkness--which attempted to come upon the
people and the beasts which Jehovah had made, to destroy them.

But a light went forth from Jehovah as a refuge and a defense. It was
the virtue of his own righteous self--his spirit of perfection--the
embodiment of his almighty mind. The righteousness of his power went
forth and filled all his creation, and shielded and protected all the
living things which he had made from the darkness and evil of Satan.

The creation teemed with the glory of Jehovah, an unmentionable space,
for there was no time there. Neither were there the aged or dying, for
Satan had not as yet cursed any thing that Jehovah had made. But justice
being the authority of Jehovah, he must be just with Satan also. He
could not prevent Satan from coming upon the earth and walking to and
fro through his creation. Jehovah could be jealous, but not selfish and
unjust. If Satan could persuade any of his creatures to forsake him and
to receive within them the power of his own Satanic spirit, justice said
that they were his and Jehovah should bear the loss.

But Satan could not withstand the light and glory of Jehovah, for
Jehovah's brilliancy filled the heaven. He dwelt upon a throne in a
temple of power. The throne and temple were living power. Being gathered
together a natural substance which is power, and the pre-motive glory of
all beauty giving life to the living by its power of that which he
chose to array his dwelling place with. The virtue of the colors, the
red and green, azure, onyx, diamond, bedellium, saraf, amber, and all
manner of adornments of beauty, were faded of their virgin colors and
their sereness of glory, were brought forth in the construction of his
temple and throne. So that no being should be able to surpass Jehovah in
glory hence.

And the temple and the throne in the temple is one living thing of
eternal life, borne by other living things. Where Jehovah wills to go,
the temple also can go. Eternal substance of power like streams of fire,
but more white like the light of diamond issuing toward every point of
the creation as it goes forth in its glory; and there is nothing unseen
or hid from its light.

In the language and knowledge of man, infinite was the time that Satan
sought before he was able to defile any of the sons and daughters of
Jehovah. But out somewhere in the eternity sin began to steal into the
souls of the sons of the mighty. And they began to hate Jehovah and to
envy his glory in a great dispensation. Satan diminishing them after his
own power until one-third of all the hosts of heaven were defiled with
sin. And they had fallen from their power and from their former glory,
and had strayed away from their father's house; the brightness of their
souls glittering not. Satan had captivated them over into his great
night of despair--and they knew it not, for Satan had always appeared to
them arrayed in glory as if Jehovah, and they supposed that he was able
to continually give them light. But they were cast away from Jehovah,
and there was darkness and violence and despair, for the light of Satan
was as the shadows of a great night. There was no sun and moon and stars
to give them artificial light, for Jehovah is the only light of the
living soul, and his glory is the light of that world. The heaven was
filled with violence and his name was blasphemed with many inventions.
But they repented not from Satan unto Jehovah. Then there was war upon
the face of all the heaven: Michael and Mikrell and Gabriel, and the
millions of the mighty ones of the righteous came before Jehovah in a
council of war. And it was decreed that all the hosts of the wicked
should be slain and cast out of the heaven. And that the face of the
heaven should be cleansed.

Then one came and stood before Jehovah--one whom he loved greater than
the love which he had for many of his created beings. He being the
excellency of his beginning, his son by love. And he said "Father, if
all these be slain and cast down they remain dead forever. They are
Satan's and he rejoices against thee that he shall ever have them. I go
in their midst and redeem them from Satan that they shall live again. I
shall purchase them from Satan with my own life. I die that they might
live again. Father, make for them another world that they might live
again and have a chance to repent from Satan unto thee. That they in
their great hosts remain not dead--forever dead." And Jehovah said,
"Son, if we make man again in our own image after our glory; again will
man sin, and Satan will have the mastery over him, and there would be
none to inhabit the new world which I create." Then the son said,
"Father, it shall be righteous that you make man again, for I shall go
with him until a day in which I shall meet thee out upon that world and
there again I will pay the price of man's sins, and redeem him from the
power of Satan, that not all of those be lost--forever lost."

The decree of Jehovah was given that they should live again. Then
Michael, the captain of Jehovah's hosts, went forth and fought against
the Dragon; and the Dragon and his armies fought, but prevailed not;
neither was there any more room found in heaven for Satan and his host.
And the great Dragon--Satan--was cast out of heaven and all his angels
with him.

And his right to dwell upon the face of heaven was forfeited when his
servants had slain the son of Jehovah. Who also redeemed the souls of
the dead from Satan's power when they had shed the blood of the captain
of salvation. And the heaven was cleansed from sin. Neither could Satan
or any of his servants return. All those who had sinned were forever
cast down. And the decree was set that they should not ascend again into
heaven in the infinite eternity. But those of Jehovah's servants who
loved not their lives in the days of battle and were slain in the war,
if they chose to follow their lost brothers down into the new world,
they from there might ascend again unto their father's house.

And the waters stood beneath the heavens, and there was no form or void
in their substance. And the darkness prevailed unchanging. Then the
spirit of Jehovah moved upon the face of the waters beholding all
things. And Jehovah said let the light appear upon the face of the deep,
and let the darkness be gathered together in one place beneath the
heaven, and half of its place be given for the light, and it was so. And
Jehovah beheld the light that it was glorious. And he said let the
firmament of electricity divide the waters again beneath the heaven. And
let the substance of the upper part of the waters above the firmament be
gathered together and let the dry land appear.

And let the waters whose substance have formed the earth be gathered
together, and let the earth and the waters stand in perfectness in their
orders. And let the firmament beneath the heaven of electricity remain
unmovable, and let there be a door as a gateway from the heaven to the
earth remain through the firmament.

And thus on the first and second space of time which became days Jehovah
formed the earth and laid up veins of the minerals after their kinds in
their places, in perfect order. The mountains rising up high above the
seas, giving to the seas their places of permanency in the lower places
of the earth. In the third day Jehovah created the trees and
vegetation--all manner of trees to eradicate the face of the earth from
its nakedness. He created the seeds in the earth, each seed after its
kind, so it could not change forever from the laws of nature. The fourth
day he created great lights, the sun and moon and stars, and set them in
the firmament above the earth. In abodement of twelve houses. Made to
rule the darkness and to alternate nature, giving life to the things
which were to live in the parts of the earth where there was to be life.

He made three hundred and sixty-four roads in the firmament above the
earth, and placed the sun and the moon in them. The roads he made in an
oblong shape and joined them together at one place in the East and in
the West, that the sun should make his circuits over the earth and drive
the darkness before him. And that the moon should make her circuits over
the earth to alternate and rule the darkness. And for her aid he made
the stars and set them in their places in the firmament and in the cross
roads which run across the pathways of the sun and moon; setting them in
order in twelve groups. And Jehovah wrote the stars and their pathways
upon the face of the firmament. They tell the story of his creation and
his love for the things he has created. As they move in their concourses
they are constantly spelling out the things which have never been
changed, glittering above the mist of the earth in their work of
perfection.

And in the midst of the earth he set a magnet joining the heaven and the
earth together that the heaven and the earth should not move out of
their place forever. The magnet in its dimensions is perfectly round--a
tower of bluish mist shining bright like silver--where it stands in its
zone of perpetual darkness; where he made not a light to shine superior
to the darkness. And the magnet revolves around perpetually in its
protraction, carrying the sun and moon and stars in their circuits over
the face of the earth in their roads--in their courses according to
their metallic natures--around in a circuit over the parts of the earth,
where he designed for his things of life to live. Each monitor of the
firmament moving in its own place according to its power with the magnet
of its own nature to do the things it was created to do, until its work
should be finished; then it falls from its place when its course is run,
and is no more.

And the sun sped on his course driving the darkness before him as it
closed up again behind him. And the morning and the evening were the
fourth day in the beginning of time. And the moon and the stars in their
courses over the earth drew up the metallic substance of the earth and
distilled and gave it to the sun; and he in his great speed cast them
out upon the earth, again in minute atoms, and as they came in contact
with their own primordial atoms which lie upon the earth, and more
densely in the lower parts of the earth, they explode, causing
atmospherical heat; each atom giving forth a yellow flame of light as it
explodes, so minute that one light cannot be distinguished from another
by the sense of man.

Thus on the fourth day began heat to gender upon the face of the earth,
preventing the ice and snow from overcoming the life of vegetation in
the circuit of life which the creator had decreed upon the plains of
the world. And the sun went forth upon his circuit and came around again
to the place from where he had started, encircling the magnet in the
center of the earth, thus beginning an endless day and an endless night,
perpetually unchanging. His roads were decreed that from hence he should
run from the east to the west upon one line, then from the west to the
east around on another line each day, drawing closer to the magnet on
one side and falling farther away on the other side, creating an endless
summer and an endless winter, and a springtime and a fall perpetually.

The light of the sun as it came upon its nearest lines to the magnet
where it stood in the center and lowest part of the earth, far enough
distant that his rays could not penetrate into the region of the magnet
and disturb its silence as it stands in its sea of ice and darkness,
while the light of the sun from the outer roads from the magnet was
bounded about by darkness and unchanging ice. And towards the west
Jehovah had set up a great chain of mountains to hold back the light
while the sun was upon his outer roads, that half of the nights might be
long towards the region of the magnet. While to the east he had set up
no great mountains that the light of the sun on its outer roads from
thence might reach across the plains towards the region of the magnet,
that half of the nights might be light and giving glories of light for
half of the time of the years. While in the great white way of life the
continents and islands lay all teeming with glory.

The large continents having divides of high lands through them, from
which large rivers flow, some towards the outer seas and some of them
flow down towards the lower parts of the earth towards the magnet. Then
the sons of Jehovah and the morning stars sang together and shouted for
joy when they saw the glory of Jehovah's creation. And the morning of
the fifth day began.

And Jehovah said let the waters and the earth bring forth living
creatures. Things to be in the seas after their kinds, and living
creatures to be upon the earth and in the earth. Things that have life
to live in the dust of the world, and fowl that they may soar above the
earth. And Jehovah and his tribune formed the flesh and bones of fish to
live in the waters, his spirit being in the labor and toil of the day.
He formed great whales and fish of mighty propensities to consume the
substance of life in the waters. And for them he made Leviathan to be
their king and a god over them. And the creatures of the waters were in
the seas and in the rivers and in the earth, everywhere that there is
water, every one after its kind unchangeable. He also made the fowl upon
the earth out of the clay of the earth, every one after its kind, upon
the continents and islands where it should live; and gave to them an
order of life as the things of the waters, the female delivering the
substance of flesh in an egg; and by the process of heat the shell
becoming expanded and then the spirit of the fowl entering into the
substance through the expanded pores of the shell, forming flesh to
itself, while containing knowledge of the world. As soon as its flesh is
strong enough it mines a passage for itself through the shell and takes
its flesh into the world. And Jehovah made the beasts out of the earth
after their kinds, in their forms upon the islands and continents where
they should live. And the Tribune formed all manner of beasts, both
great and small, out of the earth. They formed their flesh and bones and
cast their souls in them. And they arose up in life a pair of them of
every kind, in every part of the earth where the decree had gone forth
that they should live. And they made beasts after the form of man, and
in his appearance of many sizes and shapes, walking upon their two feet
with two hands to handle things as a man. And they were of many colors,
some black and brown and yellow striped, white and spotted and striped
with all manner of colors. And they were upon the face of the earth and
in the waters.

And Jehovah and his Tribune made huge beasts great in power and form, to
dwell upon parts of the earth. The unicorn was larger than the elephant.
He had horns as the horns of a bull. He was mighty in strength and was a
ferocious beast. Mazaroth was much larger than the unicorn; he was a
beast of the rivers, of the swamps, and glades. Arcturus was a roving
beast of the plains; he went in droves in his day. His army stood on the
plains in the shade of the mountains as a cluster of little hills
crouched, beneath the trees. He heeded not the battle cry of man in his
ways. Magathuren was a roving beast of the smooth parts of the earth; he
could not pass up or down a steep incline or step over anything above
his knees. He had a straight horn with which he lifted the trunks of
fallen trees and things out of his way, as he passed to and fro over the
earth. Behemoth was also a beast of the plains; he was the largest beast
which Jehovah made to dwell upon the dry land of the earth. But he was
not like Leviathan, the king or the pride of the deep. And there were
also great beasts made to dwell in the seas as well as upon the earth;
until the substance, of life was contained. And there went up a mist
from the waters of the earth, and rain fell upon the dry land, bringing
forth food for the living things which were made. But as yet Jehovah had
not made man upon the earth.




CHAPTER II

The Race of Man


And Jehovah created a vineyard upon the high lands, from whose mountains
flowed away four rivers. Being parted in four ways from the vineyard.
The first and second are those which encompass the land of Havilah and
Ethiopia, and flow into the Caspian Sea. The third and fourth are the
Euphrates and Hiddekel which flow into the Persian gulf. And in the
sixth day Jehovah said let us make man in our own image after our
likeness in our similitude. And he formed the body of man out of the
clay of the earth, with his hands and with his spirit he made him after
his own form and likeness. Then he called one of the rebellious souls
which had been cast out of Heaven and he cast the soul into the body
which he had made, and the body arose up with the vigor of life, and
became an active soul before Jehovah, its creator. And he called his
name Adam, because he had made him out of the red clay of the heights,
and man was red after the appearance of Jehovah. And Jehovah caused all
of the beasts to pass before Adam. And Adam gave names to them after
their kinds. And he called the beast which had hands and feet and stood
upright as himself, Serpent. And Jehovah placed Adam in the vineyard to
live, and gave to him the serpent to be his servant, in the garden of
rest which he so named Eden. And Jehovah returned about and refrained
from his work on the seventh day, and sanctified it as a day of rest.
And Adam dwelt alone in Eden. And he was lonesome. But after a time
Jehovah returned with his hosts, and he said it is not good for Adam to
dwell thus alone. I will now make for man his mother. And she shall be
wiser and mightier than he in wisdom, and shall be his counselor, and a
light to rule over him that his days be many in the earth.

And Jehovah caused a sleep to come over Adam, and he took out one of his
ribs with the flesh of the bone, and closed up the flesh of Adam. And
out of it he made the body of a child,--leaving Adam twelve ribs on one
side and eleven on the other side. But the ribs of the child were even
twelve on both sides. And Jehovah placed within her a soul and gave her
to Adam, and he knew that she had been made of his flesh, and he called
her Woman. And also shall her name be Eve, because she is the beginning
of the mothers of man.

And there was a tree which Jehovah had planted in the garden of Eden. As
if a hundred feet to the first limb, and the leaves of the tree hung to
the ground--touching the ground on all sides, "Broad and strong like
rubber, yet with velvet softness. Beneath this tree was the home of Adam
and Eve." Beneath the downy fragrant leaves they were shielded from all
heat and cold. And the eagles and the fowl of the air run into the
branches of the tree in time of storm. Here in this sublimeness Eve grew
up with Adam, and the Serpent was their servant.

The Trees of the vineyard brought forth every thing which was good for
food. There were trees which bare fruits large and shining as gold,
fruits of all manner colors as a field of stars in glory. A river run
through the Garden. Crystal waters rifting over fields of beautiful
stones. The bedellium and onyx stones and much gold abounding in and
about the waters. And on one side of the river stood a tree which bare
fruit twelve times in the year, whose substance would cause one to live
forever. It was the tree of life. None that eat of its fruit should
ever die. From month to month and from year to year it had power to
renew life perpetually. And on the other side of the river stood a tree
which had power to make one wise. It was a tree of knowledge, one whose
fruit would intoxicate and revitalize,--speeding up the action of life,
causing one to think rapidly, and to see with a clearer vision. Setting
the vitalities in a key where they must wear out, bringing forth the
order of death. This tree was called the tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, because its power was the division between man and sin. He could
eat of the tree of life and realize the power and nature of life in all
its glory. But he could not realize the nature and effect of death and
sorrow until he should eat of the fruit of the tree of death, and become
intoxicated with the mania of its devastating forces. And for this cause
Jehovah commanded Adam that he should not eat of the fruit of the tree
of death or come near it.

But the command was not given to Eve, for she was but a child--left in
Adam's keeping. And they dwelt in glory in their home beneath the wings
of the tree in the vineyard. And they were naked 'But knew it not.'
Satan was upon earth, and envied them in their salvation, but he could
not come near the vineyard, neither could he tempt them to sin. For they
were redeemed, and Satan could not break the decree. But when Eve was
grown the servant walked to and fro beyond the templed paradise, and sat
with Satan by a pool. And Satan taught the servant how that it could
become free from its masters. Then she hastened back and came again into
the vineyard. And Eve stood by the tree of death admiring its beauty.
And the servant came and said to her, "has Jehovah said that you shall
not eat of every tree in this garden?" And Eve said, "we may eat of the
fruit of every tree but this tree, which stands in the midst of the
garden we shall not eat of it, neither shall we touch it lest we die."
And the servant said, "you shall not surely die,--For the Creator he
knows that in the day you eat of the fruit of this tree your eyes shall
be open and you shall become wise like before the fall--as gods knowing
the effect of good and evil."

And when she saw that the tree was good for food and excellent in
beauty, she commanded the servant and she brought to her the fruit and
she ate of it. Then she was enlightened and was as another woman. Then
she with her own hands brought of the fruit to Adam, and when he saw its
power upon her he also ate of the fruit, and the mind of them both were
enlightened, and the mist was removed from over their souls; and they
knew that they were not as the beast, but were naked. And they sewed
leaves together for clothes and dwelt in great fear.

And it was so that in the evening time of a day they heard the voice of
Jehovah as he walked through the garden. And they fled from their temple
and hid themselves from his presence among the trees, and were not where
they were wanted to be found. And Jehovah called unto Adam and said,
"where are you Adam?" And Adam said I heard you talking in the garden
and I was afraid, and I hid myself because I was naked.

And Jehovah said who told you that you was naked? Have you eaten of the
tree which I commanded thee not to eat? And he said the woman which you
gave me she gave me of the fruit of the tree and I did eat. And Jehovah
said unto Eve, what have you done. And she said the serpent bewitched me
and I did eat. And Jehovah said to the serpent, because you have done
this thing you are cursed beyond everything which I have created. Upon
your belly you shall travel, and you shall not henceforth eat. In this,
that you have caused my children to sin in the process of eating.

The dust shall be your food, and I shall put envy between your race and
the race of the woman. And she shall bruise your head, and you shall
bruise her heel. And the serpent fell upon the earth before Jehovah, and
her arms and legs became into one straight body. And he took her teeth
out of her mouth so that she should not masticate food. But he left in
her mouth the imprints of her teeth, which is yet to be seen in the
mouth of the serpent. And he placed great crooked fangs in her mouth and
filled them with poison. If she should masticate food her own poison
would destroy her life.

But she was given power to reach forth and to inject the poison of her
fangs into the flesh of man and other living things--to destroy their
lives. Then he parted her tongue in two parts, and upon the end of each
probescue he tied a small round knot, that is the knot which is yet to
be seen on the ends of the serpent's tongue unto this day.

And according to the decree were all the serpents changed, in the
process of nature. That they should not again speak with the voice of
man. But their knowledge was not veiled. And while they cannot speak to
man; yet while in contact they show their tongues and say with
unmistakable signs "by my speech I cause thee to fall." This is the life
of the serpent who through envy was finally bound in hell. And to Eve,
he said, "I will greatly multiply sorrow upon thee. With your children
you shall be distressed. And man shall set thee at naught, and curse his
days--defying and bearing rule over thee. And your desire shall be to
your man."

And unto Adam he said "because you have eaten of the tree which I
commanded thee not to eat, cursed is the fruit of the ground for your
sake. They shall come forth in thistles and thorns before thee. And you
shall turn unto the herbs of the field for food, and shall spend your
days in toil, eating of the vintage in sorrow, until you return unto the
ground from which you was taken. Dust you are and unto the dust you
shall return." And he drove Adam and Eve out of paradise, and left an
angel to keep the vineyard, from whose sword issued a stream of power
like fire as he turned about every way upon the plains.

And Adam and Eve went out a little ways from Edon northward towards the
Caspian Sea, and set up for themselves a place of abode, and soon began
to till the earth. And Eve became the mother of children. Her first born
son she called Node, and she bare him also a sister and called her name
Midre. And Node went forth with his sister to the Eastward of Edon. And
in time there built a city, which was called the City of Nod. But Node
was a man of sin.

And again Eve bare Havilah, and his sister Zillah. But he also was a man
of sin. And he dwelt to the west, and proclaimed a land which was called
the land of Havilah. And again Eve bare Cain, and she said he is a man
to serve Jehovah. And she bare also his brother Abul, one to seek the
will of Jehovah. And Adah and her brothers and sisters were also born
unto the house of Adam.

And Cain and Abul sought to worship Jehovah. And Abul offered of the
noblest of his sheep as a sacrifice to Jehovah, and Jehovah was well
pleased with his offering. And then Cain offered of the finest of his
fruit of his harvest. And Jehovah had no respect for his sacrifice,
saying, "why bring of the things before me which I have defamed.
Redemption shall be found alone in the blood of that which I have not
cursed." Then Cain was very wroth, and Jehovah said unto him repent;
but he would not.

And in process of time as he talked with Abul in a field he arose up
against him and slew him. And the soul of Abul cried unto Jehovah from
the earth. And he said to Cain the voice of your brother's soul cries
unto me from the ground. And now are you cursed in the blessings of the
earth which has received your brother's blood by your hand. When you
till the soil it shall not yield unto you her strength. A fugitive and a
vagabond shall you be in the earth. And Cain repented and said, "my
punishment is greater than I can bear; you have driven me out from among
the people, and from your face I shall be hid; and it shall come to pass
that if any one should find me that they shall slay me."

And Jehovah said to the people, whosoever slays Cain, "Vengeance shall
be taken upon him seven fold." And he set a mark upon Cain's forehead of
many colors. And Cain went from the presence of Jehovah and dwelt in the
land of Nod. And in time he became the father of a generation. But his
days were evil and sullen, and when he was aged a lad slew him with an
arrow.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise of Memory

    The north winds howled across the rockies, with a blasting chill.
    The people wandered through the snow drifts, while the stars shone
      cold and still.

    There was no place on earth to rest then; no place for the children
      to lie.
    But Mosier watched throughout the hosts, that none of them should die.

    Through the desert lone and dreary; through the cold, drifting sands,
    The people fled from the hosts of Satan, from the wrath of wicked man.

    The spirit of Jehovah gleams across the heaven, a light for every man;
    Showing white the road that leads to Zion, shining bright in every
      land.

    Watching in a city by the river, praising in music and in song,
    Waiting for the train of Zion, Mosier with his hosts of angels comes
      speeding on.

    Ring you bells, for the station of Zion; let the music sound out over
      the land.
    Mosier with his hosts of the angels comes to earth to reign with man.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

    The Lord of these hills is king of the plains, too, and he rules the
      starry blue.
    He is coming to earth with the children of men to reign the ages
      through.

    Over the hills of silvered blue, over the fields of gold and gray.
    The angels shall march in songs of high praise, through the great
      white way.

    When the forests and the orchards are all prepared, and the flowers
      are in full bloom
    There will be no time for the shadows of doubt, we praise in eternal
      noon.

    The children shall sing on the mountain high; the aged shall pray in
      the plains.
    While Jesus, with his high spirit of power, over the hosts shall
      reign.

    The thistle and the thorns and the weeds shall bear its foods of a
      valiant worth.
    There shall be no hunger or tears of the poor, for the Lord he feeds
      the whole earth.

    We will plant the rose on the mountain high, the lily in the plain,
    In songs with flowers we will greet our king, when he with the saints
      shall come to earth to reign.

    The oak and the chestnut and the pine shall bloom, filling the world
      with light.
    Mosier Alleuher's great son has banished sin's long dark night.

    Or if this mortal shall fade or the bones be laid in the clay,
    This spirit shall fly away on the wings of his power, to the realms of
      that blessed day.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Priest

O great Alleuher just for a while--only for a while it shall
    be, we will take our harps and fly away on the wings of
    your power, and soon return to thee. From out over the
    earth in tears tonight and from over the cloud-mist
    seas.

A soul has been born tonight in the hills of Bethany,
    shining in the light of thee, O Alleuher, glittering in
    the image of thee. We will take our harps and sing
    praise to thee, for the glorious gift of love to the
    world for your memory.

We see your glory asleep with the children down there; the
    lily of the valley, the rose of Sharon shall bare. Peace
    and good will in its season to the world of despair;
    while we watch and praise the Ancient of Days above the
    cloud-strewn air.

O great Alleuher, a new light has been made to shine for
    tonight, revealing his love in the deeds of his might.
    Answering to that light that shall arise from Calvary,
    shining to the world for ever shall be, out over the
    earth and the cloud-mist seas.

We will take our harps and sing praise to thee, for the
    children of the earth and the marines of the sea. For
    the shepherds of the hills dwelling in light descending
    from thee. In the songs that arise from the high hills,
    in the music of the valleys and the seas.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

Praise Him Ye Hosts

Mosier's spirit searches through the mist of the evening,
    through the night times of gloom; through the morning in
    its rising; through the brightness of noon. And I know
    wherever I be, as his spirit searches through the
    shadows, that he sees me.

Through the rivers and the oceans, through the starry plains
    of time; through the hosts of the living, Mosier
    searches men's minds. And I know that wherever I be, as
    his spirit searches through the shadows, that he sees
    me.

Through the heavens and its hosts, through the nations that
    war; blending the minds of the whole creation, he comes
    seeking on this living shore. And I know wherever I be,
    as his spirit searches through the shadows, that he sees
    me.


A High Praise--Victory

    One day a great train pulled out from mount Zion, for a destiny well
      known.
    Three passengers stepped on board, and the train moved onward for
      Jehovah's great throne.

    For ages and ages the saints have been waiting for the returning of
      that train.
    When Jehovah shall lift the curse of sin from the nations, in sending
      his son to reign.

    We will meet King Jesus out upon the great highway, in songs of high
      praise.
    In the light of his spirit, dwelling in rest forever, given by the
      Ancient of Days.

    They have been making up the great train of Zion, through the ages she
      stands by.
    Soon the hosts of our Father's glory shall come sweeping through the
      sky.

    The great conductor is standing in the depot, by the gates of praise
      he stands by.
    Waiting for the saints of the whole creation, to be ready to receive
      his train from the sky.

    The music sounds out over the nations, the bells are ringing on every
      sea.
    I am going to march with the saints to Zion, while the bells are
      tolling for me.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise--The Rivers

    I wrought not these miracles by any zest of mine.
    The angels keep watch over the rivers, that float down by the steeps
      of time.

    He wrote with his hand upon the marble, the songs of Zion's chimes.
    The angels watch through the stillness until the morning time.

    He said, "I will not forsake thee or leave thee in despair alone.
    The angels and my spirit shall guard upon the rivers, all those that
      are my own."

    We believed him when he descended, and the mountain smoked with his
      mighty power.
    The music rang out over the hosts, as sang heaven's mighty choir.

    We believe him now while ascending up the steeps of time.
    With the angels close by the rivers, that lead up to the heights of
      Zion.

    You cannot believe him except his spirit makes himself known unto thee.
    Or even in all your wisdom you will sail upon the unknown sea.

       *       *       *       *       *


Praise Alleuher Ye Saints

    We thank thee, O Great Alleuher, for a redeemer; one who taught us of
      your way.
    That we should walk in the light of Zion 'till we enter one eternal
      day.

    That we should know from the hills of Zion, Alleuher in beauty has
      shone forth.
    He made our low way in the sin's dark valley shine more brighter than
      any day.

    He came to the King of all the nations, King supreme, grand and true,
    He gave to the people the spirit of salvation to make the soul anew.

    This to us the spirit whispers, music more than we mortals sing.
    To our hearts ring the bells of heaven, we are the children of that
      great king.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

    We thank thee, O Great Alleuher, for a prophet, one to teach us in
      this day.
    All glitt'ring in thy truth of light, shining along our misty way.

    We whose minds are sealed over, and are driven far away,
    Come seeking unto Zion's light in the evening time of day.

    The Lord of hosts in these mountains, O his gracious power,
    Comes scatt'ring the aged long night, he is our refuge in every hour.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise--The Judgment

    Light, great light, Alleuher's high spirit, that shines above the day,
    Searching the souls of the living things, calling his children from
      sin away.
    I will not grow weary in the times, which others may fear.

    He shall return at the end of each year.
    I will wait for his glory shining through all creation unto my spirit
      to appear.

    My soul sings by the rivers millions of songs of thee.
    All through the ages thou hast truly been with me, guarding my spirit
      from sin's reveries.

           *       *       *       *       *

    I see out in the fields of memory, a light which gleams across the
      night of mist to me.
    By its rays I walk as in times of past along by the shores of the old,
      old sea.

    I have found no mystic treasure hidden in the mines of long ago.
    He has kept for me a light in heaven's window, burning bright in its
      intrinsic glow.

    I see by the gleam of the yesterdays, the things of today's revene.
    I see the lane that leads over the river of tomorrow's bridged stream.

    My treasure has never been hidden, or cast away by the hand of wroth.
    But kept a gift of mercy, burnished bright from the dust of moth.

    I walked for a day by Shilo's river, out in the land; I compassed the
      rays of Eden,
    And harked to listen at the call of Zion upon the golden strands.

    I pass from ages unto ages, I am a child of time.
    I cannot return or choose the wrath that I would gather, as I pass by
      the gates of my own mind.

    If I pass over the divide, the world shall see the things that Jehovah
      lent to me.
    That great light for which his son once died on Calvary.

    That I might sift the sheltered sands, and gather out the gold;
    Strewn by the mystic hand of him, back in the days of old.

    Through the hills and upon the desert, as a mighty obelisk stands,
    We gather out the wreaths of beauty, cast for the life of man.

    The hosts stand in the distance, to observe the things that we do.
    As our ridged furrows in the gray light come trailing through.

    As I wrought with my comrades, I saw some jewels glitter in the sands;
    Ling'ring in the dust of time, to be brought within demand.

    The soul is always waiting, and the heart is always true;
    Where the workmen seek to gather, from the dust beneath the azure
      lights of blue.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

We are marching toward that city, in the great trend of mind. We see our
friends gathering from over the ranges, stepping by the hours of time.
We are ascending the heights from the rivers, Lord plant our feet in thy
Zion.

In the spirit in which we are calling, so shall the answer be. Each
deed and day shall be answered, as our souls cry to thee. We are moving
in the light of your spirit; Lord, plant our feet in thy Zion.

Lord, let us pay for our ways, in the days of our time. For unto life we
shall gather from over the ranges, proven by the powers of mind. Let us
ascend the heights from the rivers; Lord, plant our feet in thy Zion.

Soon our sorrows are ended, soon our woes shall cease. Our days for us
shall be brighter on through the ages, ascending the hills of peace.
Lord, shall we arise beyond these sorrows? Lord, plant our feet in thy
Zion.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise--Speed

Some one is watching at the windows tonight, as onward through the
valleys and over the rocks of white, the gleaming wheels they speed with
might; calling the stars at the approach of night; concealing them away
with the speed of light.

I do not know what my title holds, because the way has been long;
through the orchards and by the waste lands swifter than the shadows of
the dawn. But the angel who watches through the train of time hurries
all on board along.

The shadows of the evening that enclose upon the fleeting sunlight are
swiftly turned away; as out of the night time the speeding wheels they
sway, before the gloom that's left approaching into the light of day.

Music rings above the hill tops, from the canyons that we passed by;
while sweeping beneath the light of heaven, that beckons from the
windows in the sky. Soon within the harbor the speeding monitor shall
lie; then shall be the answer to the soul which shall never die.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise--Reason

    Here lie the brave and valiant-hearted, strewn by the pathway of the
      noble race.
    These are our kindred whose souls linger near their dwelling place.

    Here lie the stars which have fallen, from the altar of the race.
    Their light still on our memories gleam, bright before our face.

    These are of our people, their souls are still upon the breeze.
    Death cannot them destroy, or blot out their secret memories.

    Some of them were old and faded, and others were of the age of the
      bloom,
    That grows upon the lilies, and fades before the rays of noon.

    But out in the mist they are waiting to greet us, and we shall
      welcome
      them once more.
    Beneath the sun that shines in stillness, upon this living shore.

    The battlements are faded, and the swords are laid aside,
    And he has come with his saints to reign through the ages, over the
      human tide.


A Meditation--Life

I see the people out on the plains--from the distance they call to me.
Come and march with us for a day, and be one of the people of the
plains. Floating along with the winds that blow--the great human sea.

I love the sage and the vintage that grow, and the oaks that stand in
chains. I love the music sung with the wings of the dust through the
fields of chaffing grains, shadowed beneath the azure light of the
hill's refrains.

Move, you angels of speed, across the white serenes. You rocks of earth
stand still. You seas that lash with a turbulent rage shall all obey my
will. I will watch by the things that strive and love, till all the
earth be filled.

You teeming hosts a' moving on--I love the things of life. You serene
glories of the sun's meridian gleam across the extending plains of
white; that love and live in the dust of the earth, beneath the sun's
great light.

Move you children with the speed of fire; I love those wings that sing
in their strength, and might. Haste the speed of the soul that the
living mind be right, you things that live in the light of the day--I
hate the things of night.

Gather on the plains like clouds all spectered with black and gray. The
things of speed shall dwell sublime, though the things that wait shall
pass away. I shall call to those of my own in the midst of the sea; I
shall wait for those that pray.

There is a light that shines with those that tell of the speed and
power. Of the soul that hastens to the things of right in the days of
their fleeting hours. Of the things that live in the love of light you
people that is of power.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Meditation--Our Praise

Mosier of the ages hear the children when they cry. Out on the plains
they pray. Hold aright the storms that sweep over, bear the tempest far
away. The chief of Jehovah's tribune--his hosts above the azure lights
of gray. His spirit searches over the plains through all the souls of
day.

We have a refuge in the light of the first morning, made brighter by the
noon. Unfolding from Zion's harbor unto all the saints upon the
spectered earth is strewn. Jehovah's gift descending through the gloom.
A great rock that was cut out above the earth, but not with hands was
hewn.

Then by the river of Zion all his saints shall meet once more. The
angels in their salvation shall set his children then before. When the
king descends to welcome his hosts upon that living shore, in one speech
all voices of earth his high praises shall sing while crossing over.

This is when the afterwhile has become the present, and the day to come
is just now. When those who hasten to be saved before his throne they
bow. The tears of grief shall be no more for ever. The call comes forth
to know just how. You saints shall answer with the light of life sealed
on every ransomed brow.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise--A Charge to The Spirits

Blow! O blow on the rocks of time you silent winds divine. Glitter on
the mountain heights you rifting specters bright. Marching on you hosts
of the senless quite. Out in that day of every soul that's neither dark
or light.

Know you your place and name and who it is you be. It is the hand of a
higher one leads thee through eternity. A price was paid, its value
true, back in the ages one day; as onward through the shadows gleam the
vampires wing their way.

The tiny feet disturb not the dewdrops, as on the rose of Sharrion's
breast they lie. You lights upon the stillness, you unseen passers by.
How old are you thou tiny might that never has been still? Before the
mountains were brought forth or the sands were in the hills.

With you let not sorrow, grief or pain, as in your house of clay which
you oft regain. It is not yours to demand to give forth or to say. But
it is of him who paid the price back in an ancient day. By him who
created us of nature, to walk in nature's way. Haste you spirits of
silence and tell me what you know; you lights against the walls like
shadows of the snow.

I am not with thee; you make me hate you in my dreams. Except thy feet
have been dipped beneath the fountain streams; or have fallen with
Lebannon's cedar from the heights of boze. And grown up again in the
springtime with the seed of Sharrion's rose. And been judged in the
dewdrops by the morning star. And been tested by Judah's lion with all
his might and power.

Come then, you messengers of love, and gladness, and speak when I am not
awar. In the silence of the night time when turmoils and strife are
o'er. Pass over the starry valleys where maidens slumber beneath the
shades of time. They shall be mothers without sin sublime. Forget not
the pine upon the mountain or the vine that droops from the wall. Tender
as the orchard bloom that lingers till the day of fall.

Why make you sin of the things that are sacred? Did Mosier tell you so?
To change the heart of nature for things that would not grow. It was
Satan who stood about the city with his host of fiends, and accused the
highest saints of Jehovah of the vilest sins. Cease not then in your
trend of events, you travellers weep no more. For the workman of
Nazareth he has bridged the river o'er.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise--Salvation

    The sorrows of the living in tears that are shed,
    Are oftimes calmed by the silent speech of those that are dead.

    Some of them have been gone for many years.
    Ministering souls of Mosier in the great vineyard of careers.

    Shadows of the soul's despair, are banished by the host of the saints
      of the air.
    Mosier's saints as they linger near.

    Mosier, with his saints, shall return to reign some day.
    By the spirit of his light over all his people of the great white way.


A High Praise

    King Simon he was a rich man, in land and silver and gold.
    In sheep and cattle and wealth untold.
    He also worshiped Jehovah; this was that king Simon in the days of old.

    Every year he came to Zion to sacrifice--his cattle all arrayed in the
      finest of gold.
    Great respect he had for Jehovah, moving on in the laws of light in
      the things he was told.

    He said to his bearers at dawn, "Let us arise and away.
    There is a sacrifice in Zion and I want to be there to pray."
    Perhaps he will respect these mites of ours before his altar we convey.

    There was sorrow in Zion, the heavens were all faded and gray.
    Jehovah had hid his face from the children of the world, and taken his
      spirit away.
    His son, assailed with their wrath, sang beneath the diheftie in the
      gates of the city that day.

    They cried, "yonder comes that Nigger in his silken chariot of gold.
    Come down you king, or we will crucify you and your fold."
    But tears of sorrow for one among man, only revealed the thoughts of
      his soul.

    He picked up the diheftie and away, and laid it down on Calvary,
    Then said to his bearers, "Send those sheep and cattle away--in the
      wilds let them go free.
    For Jehovah's own son in this city of tears has ended such things for
      me."


A High Praise

    Some one is watching over the earth that is still; some one rules over
      the fringed hills.
    O you wonders of life praise him who rules over our changing wills.

    I watched those stars in the distances; there are some that falter and
      fall.
    I see them glitter for an instant through the azure ways, and are not
      found at all.

    Does the soul have need of things? Come, then, and ask of me.
    I will tell you where the fallen stars are found--in the treasure of
      the prince of Galilee.

    The brilliant stars of a billion lights are seen to fade and pass away,
      as they wander through the haze of gray.
    Out of the darkness of the night into the light of day.

    Who is that glittering above Eden's light, with the prayers of the
      saints scattering the night?
    Changing the stars in their courses so bright; teaching the speeding
      sun to shed his light.

    Whatever the soul desires that shall it ask of me. I, who arose from
      the dead on Calvary.
    Holding the earth in its place aright; ruling the seas with his
      powerful might.

    O you transcities on the hills of white; for thee changing the time
      into days and nights.
    If the soul shall cry, the prince shall hear the Lord whose high
      spirit is always near.

    He cares for you as a father would; as a chickadee in the garden
      protects her brood.
    Who is he that holds creation in its perfect mood?
    He is almighty, yet you can help him; you can if you would.

    What does your work profit? Why labor as one great? Does the Lord
      have need of you?
    As the saints believe in his greatness, these are the things the Lord
      will do.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

Alleuher with sin I am done, I believe on your son, I am saved by the
love of the sanctified one.

What more can he say, than to me he has said? Showing mercy to the
sinner, and raising the dead.

If Jairus had not believed, surely he would not have seen the salvation
of Mosier, his power supreme.

The children came to seek him. O how they loved him then, O praise his
high spirit that is given to men.

Yonder comes then that woman, a sinner to her people to say, "Mosier
rests by our city, it is time that we pray."

O how the children love him, because that he is ever true. His kingdom
is with power, all the ages through.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

King Mosier traveled through the land. He healed the sick, both of the
rich and poor. He cast his spirit upon those in sorrow, and their
sorrows were no more.

King Mosier went down to the pool of Solomon, where the sick were lying
upon the shore. He bid them arise, be on the way, and their diseases
were no more.

King Mosier went down to Bethany, where the dead were waiting in the
tomb. O, death fell from its throne, and delivered up his own, to this
power of Mosier that's known.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise

    There is a beautiful sea called memory. Many ships come sailing to
      me through the whole day,
    From over the beautiful sea of memory.
    The deep wide sea, the great high sea,
    My beautiful sea of memory.

    My beautiful ships on the great high sea.
    Some are aged like, and hazed in the light of gray.
    Others are as the roses that bloom in May.
    Come sailing to me along by the shore through the whole day.

    Deeds of kindness that are written
    As the stars over the deep blue sea. Sailing along those that love me.
    My beautiful ships the light of the mind.
    Sailing out of the yesterdays to me.
    Over the deep wide sea, the great high sea,
    My beautiful sea of memory.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

I sing of the great king who reigns in a city far above the star strewn
blue. He is master and king over all creation, over the heaven and its
angels, and the earth with its people, too.

There is a story true as the ages are old, sung by all the children of
nature, calling the ancient times unto the present fold. Singing all the
children of the great king these anthems as the ages roll.

High as the heavens above the earth, so high are his ways. Just children
speaking of things in deeds and plays. Jehovah is higher, the great
creator, he who gave one for the salvation of our days.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

Over the rampage of the ages wild, came the voice of Mosier to me. As
the sighing winds blow over the mountains and orchard valleys, ye
stealthy lights that gleam upon the seas; most assuredly have you been
born again. Have your souls been reclaimed by my spirit--I who holds
that light of Calverie. Do you know me for yourself and not by another?
are the souls that are known of me.

From the surging streams of the northland sealed, of the blue that
shines across the earth revealed; unto all you souls that pray. Do you
hear my voice in harmonies as the vespers play? As the sighing winds
pass over the mountains most assuredly have you been, reclaimed by me. I
have a torchlight descending from my father's throne. I who bare the
sorrows of the world alone.

Is sorrow and pain turned to joy before thee; do you love death as the
others love life. Is there no secret sin with thee, as with them of
unjust strife? I am your strength in this way, I keep for you the
eternal treasure of love and life. My father and I have made ourselves
known unto thee, you saints of light; most assuredly as the sighing
winds pass over the mountains you rest beyond the night.


A Praise--The Answer

    Long ago we left the city of sorrow, for a city which is yet to come.
    We sought the way that leads to Zion, and Jerusalem our home.

    Mosier has gone from this world of sorrow, to prepare for us an eternal
      home.
    And in the highway he has walked before us, he will ever care for
      his own.

    With the new song we shall praise him ever, in that city he has gone
      to prepare.
    When we enter the hilleued hills of Zion, O why not come and go with
      us there?

    Some people wonder why we are sincere ever; some people wonder why we
      are true.
    But to us Mosier is a real friend ever, and he is our glorious king,
      too.


Memory

    As I wrought in the fields of time one day,
    I passed through the valley of beauty, of things that were hidden away.
    To the east and to the west and to all the horizon
    There were hills and mountains of blue, and gold, and gray.

    There were clear rivers glist'ning over rocks that were crystal white.
    There were flowers that bloomed in the shade of a thousand lights.
    There were stars that shone from the heaven, writing in the silent
      speech of the night.

    A people had lived there in that valley one day.
    They had sung and laughed and some times would cry or pray.
    As I or you live in the trend of this song that ends in the close of
      the day.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise--In Memory of Keturah

    She was once upon earth, but now she sings through the fields of the
      stars.
    She once knew distress, hunger and tears.
    But now they feed her at Alleuher's own table through the centuries
      and years.

    She is a servant of Mosier up there. With the host of the angels and
      the saints of the air.
    O Alleuher's great tribune watching over the earth and its hosts of
      tears.

    I heard her voice from the plains of the stars talking to the world
      with the fire of speed.
    O Alleuher, the angels unfolding the glories of heaven to me,
    And I rise with the hosts' glad refrain above the earth and the sea.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise--The Answer

    When through this orchard life we cease to wander; when comes the close
      of the years.
    Let us cross over the river and rest in the beautiful valley beyond
      the shadows of tears.

    Shall we gather by the river, just out yonder?
    Shall we meet somewhere after a while?
    As the evening draws nearer, upon the long road as we wander, greeted
      by our redeemer's smile.

    If I should see the glories of the saints up yonder, and should hear
      their glad refrain,
    All glittering over the world, His hosts upon higher plains, I shall
      know I am one of his train.

    We will watch their ways from the still mountains. The days of man
      on earth we know.
    Changing as the drifting snow, till the Redeemer calls together the
      souls from sorrow here below.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise

    From Samaria to Shilo Jesus walked along one day.
    A great host came praising him through the way.
    A blind man was Barnabas, who heard some one say,
    "It is Jesus the prophet of Galilee--unto whom the people praise and
      pray."
    This we say to you that you may be content, and in your place to stay.

    Then Barnabas said to his friend, a man who also could not see:
    "I'll tell you I think this prophet is nowise of Galilee.
    But Jehovah's own son, who has come to earth that such as we may see."
    The light shines from our father's throne to the living man, out over
      the earth and the seas.

    Then he cried, "O Mosier, you son in the house of David, show mercy
      unto such as we be."
    Then Mosier said, "you that callest unto me speak in truth clear and
      plain.
    For behold I go up to Judah and there for the world to be slain.
    That I should arise from the dead today, in my father's glory to
      reign."

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise

    Strive not to make lies your refuge, it is the fire of sorrow and woe.
    Let not satan deceive you as along the way you go.
    If you have not the truth of Mosier with you, life truly is in vain.
    It will turn to sorrow as in the revelrie you seek for honor and fame.

    You cannot hide behind falsehood, for investment behind the screen.
    It will turn to vexation, all your deeds are plainly seen.
    Your might soon fades in the swelling vortex as brown changes the
      green.
    And when you can strive no longer, Satan's falsehoods hover over the
      scene.

    But if you should have the spirit of Mosier with you and have him for
      your friend today,
    He will give you high life and glory, you will have a good time all
      the way.
    Then when the old house begins to shatter, brighter is life's star
      above the day.
    The angels linger near to bear the ransomed soul away.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Praise--The Kingdom

    Over the eastern star Shilo's light will shine.
    Through the many that is dimly burning ascends high the light of Zion.

    He to reign for a thousand years, the seas the rocks obey.
    Preparing the world for his father's throne, through all the souls to
      him that pray.

    The saints with him to reign for a thousand years, the rest of the
      dead is a long time gone.
    The angels with him shall reign, the great infinite throng.

    When the souls and the hills are all prepared; when the seas are
      overcome,
    The kingdom of all creation he delivers up as an obedient son.

       *       *       *       *       *


The Song of the Serpent

We went to Calvary and stood just away. The prince of glory
    was there, in the hands of the people, who crucified him
    that day: Out on Judah's green hills, arrayed in the
    light of white and gray.

We went to watch through the ages, the things that the
    wicked would do. The works of the evil all the way
    through. They have crucified his saints in all nations
    of the earth. All of his saints that were true.

From the gates above Zion the Lord shall descend. His fiery
    wheels flaming with power--scattering the wicked of men.
    Who have slaughtered his saints in prisons of horrid
    death; whosoever were known among them.

A billion angels at his right, intermingling with
    others--the saints of might. Who has ascended from
    death, enthroned with his light. Those that were burned
    in the fire by the wicked, to spite. Comes inclosing the
    evil in their eternal dark night.

The voice of the serpent,--that whispers from the mire of
    the sea. Or that sigh of the evil, from the dust
    ascending before thee. Each soul is still weeping--each
    heart in sorrow alone. Or that mind of the living that
    fell from his great throne.

What joy thought the evil, that wandered in sorrow's broad
    trend. My soul has heard a wailing, as the song of the
    serpent by men. O souls what ail thee, its envy's dark
    cloud broader than the earth, and deeper than the sea.
    Spread over the spirits--their wicked melee.

They were a war of those that danced, in the trend of
    sorrow's vulgar wail. As the serpent held them by the
    hand, they knew that they were inshrouded in the evil
    dark vale. But "lo, lo," cried the company, "you shall
    not from us depart, for even the soul that shall fail."

Your door that stands closed, as a storm that darkens the
    noon. O soul of envy atroped senility that bloom. O you
    mind of the wicked, the close of the day has arriven so
    soon. No deeds of mercy, no work was begun, for in the
    heart of the wicked, the race was never run.

You saints as the eagle from the heavens that cry. You
    mountains of love all glorious and white ascending so
    high. O beautiful souls, Mosier's hosts, in all creation
    stand by. Watching over the earth and its hosts, no mind
    of the living can die.

O beautiful songs from the great throne that be. To the mind
    of all living--yet heard only by thee. The hosts of the
    heaven as the winds or the waves of the sea. Giving to
    every soul who has understanding and a portion of light
    for me.

Alleuher is not mocked by the race, or the evil within. Not
    by those who have fallen and rage, you terrors of sin:
    He keeps his city and its hosts of the earth and the
    air. The hours of the evil shall approach, but none of
    them shall come there, to that beautiful Zion, that city
    so fair.

Alleuher holds the order of life. All things in their hosts
    and zones. A power is with them, for they are his own. A
    lion and an eagle and a bull and the image of a man
    living in his glory, and bearing to and fro his great
    throne. His spirit descending through the hosts, the
    souls of all men is known. His salvation for his saints,
    his glory in order is shown.

Through the gates above Zion the hosts pass by, ascending
    and descending by the silvering portals. Upon that
    beautiful road he has built through the sky. All the
    earth is full of his glory as the wind, his power is
    nigh. His saints walk in his strength. There is no
    death, there is none of his hosts that ever die.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Meditation--The Afterwhile

1. In the twilight I wandered by the old home place, and I saw it lie in
wreck; all was vanity and despair. I sought for the things that belonged
to my childhood days, but none of them were there.

2. The old apple tree which stood by the gate, had aged and fallen
almost away. Its branches were drooped and crisp with time, through
which I used to chase in games of play.

3. I looked away to the old house which stood midst the terrace blue. I
thought of the days of my childhood ways, but storm and drear had
changed things to an age of bronzed hue.

4. My old rose was gone which stood by the doorway, resting its hands
against the wall. And seemed to watch me as I would fleet across the
terrace, as if to guard against my fall.

5. I went to look through the garden of the days of long ago, and I saw
that my brook lay mired and neglected, which so proudly through its
vintage once did flow.

6. My old oak, too, had fallen which stood by the garden wall; crowned
with azure gray like the light of fall. Casting its shadows across our
brook, it was so strong, so mighty, and tall.

7. My cherry trees and the peaches, too, were gone, some hand had cast
them aside. And the lilies and the magnolias and all the orchard
beauties of my childhood pride.

8. There were only tiny fragments of our ships which in the rustic brook
still yet did lie. When since so short a time when our gay sails and
flags upon its waters did fly.

9. There had been a great rain out upon the hills, and our brook had
become a mighty sea. Then we went with our ships to explore unknown
lands, Julie, and Anna, and Me.

10. We set our ships in order and gave up our brave young lives to
fate. We proudly manned our sails from the old elm tree down to the
lower gate.

11. The tide rose high and turbulent and cast our ships upon a foreign
shore. And we took charge of that land in order as by our swords and
crowns we swore.

12. A bull screamed in the distance upon the bronzed hills. The cattle
were coming home across the fringed rills. As in haste our ships we
sought to fill, with trophies of that vintage land for our conquest to
tell.

13. When we heard the voice of our Mother calling from over the mighty
sea: "Come home, children, come home," she called across the river, "for
Julie, and Anna, and Me."

14. I stood in the evening shadows with my head bare and gray. And as I
looked through the evening twilight I saw my orchard beauties
transplanted upon a hill to the leeward just away.

15. My old Oak was there, and the apple trees, and the peaches and the
pretty things that bloom in red and rone. And I thought I heard the
voice of our old rose still calling my children, "Come home, come home."

       *       *       *       *       *


The Victory of Love

    Early in the morning--in the morning of life.
    Resting while the flowers unfolding to soothe the burning day of
      strife.
    Fleeting hands lingering nearer, pressing down the folds of my shade.
    A heart of gold ye diamond light transparent, to my soul such love
      is made.

    I must rise and be ascending, while the flowers are in full bloom.
    Through the fields be swiftly passing, the fleeting hours of noon.
    I shall gather while praising on the lyre, a few wreaths are strewn.
    That I shall rest through the evening, for the night shall triumph
      soon.

    I shall ascend beyond the evening, to a field of light that is shown.
    With hearts like gold ye love transparent, before a great white throne.
    There again it shall be morning, for he made that day of rest you see.
    Calling those fleeting hands come hither; those that love, are loved
      by me.

       *       *       *       *       *


A High Praise--by Thomas Alvin Edison, the Great Apostle

    I abjure thee by the living God that the truth be found in thee.
    For the soul of man also needs light, wandering through eternity.

    The living God he reigns in all the earth and watches on man's ways.
    He demands in him that we believe serving through our evil days.

    Mosier Alleuher's great son has shown the beautiful way
    With light for the living mind of man from the haze of these
      cloud-strewn days.

    We shall serve the living God, ministering saints of the air.
    Or be driven from his beautiful light to the dark'ning realms of
      despair.

    The living mind hastens to prepare desperately at the closing our here.
    Something with which to join the high hosts watching over the earth
      up there.

    Behold, I show the great mystery to thee, for the Lord shall make it
      fair.
    Ye minds shall soon depart from the earth, to join the Lord in the air.

    The soul's refuge is found in life that praises here.
    All glory to the Lord on high who brought great joy and salvation near.

    Ye thunders in darkness lash with rage, the Lord is not in them found.
    But in peace with his saints over the beautiful world his spirit is
      bound.

    O arise ye hosts of the earth, it's in high praises by thee.
    That the Lord shall banish the tears of grief from the great human sea.

    Music and great joy descending from his throne in praises with thee.
    It's not far from there by the saints of the air to all the souls
      that be.

    While the tempest rages wild or the seas roll back from the shore.
    He will lead his saints through sorrow 'till all their trials are o'er.

       *       *       *       *       *


A Meditation--The Shadows

    Darkness mingles midst the tall green pines that shadow the face of
      the whole brown earth.
    Doubt and despair is the fate that we share, all the days of life
      from the time of one's birth.

    O, see the pretty moths whose wings have been broken, and they cannot
      rise with the songs of the breeze.
    In silence they weep all alone, midst the shadows of the dense dark
      trees.

    O, see, the proud souls that weep alone, midst the shadows of the
      world's despair.
    Their wings all shrouded with that glory which were theirs, above in
      the light of the clear bright air.

    O, see the pretty things that have come from afar; all appareled in
      the raiments of the homeland gay.
    Marching in the path of the soul's refining, pretty things which tarry
      in passing through the shadowed ways.

    O, look away to the eagle's heights, see the ever green cedars how they
      cling in every towering ledge.
    From the tall rocks so white and serene, come stealthily down to the
      river's edge.

    O, see, there are enduring souls that never change; who rest secure on
      higher plains in every clime and age.
    Along by the rivers and above the shadows in every life that's made,
    From the tiny urchin to the mighty sage.

    O, see, there are violets which stand close by the rivers, chaft by
      the rain and dew.
    But others are strewn all along upon the mountain sides of blue.

    There is some one always waiting--some one with a soul that is always
      true,
    Down by the rivers or upon the mountain sides in the same state as I
      or you.

    O, see, there are souls that have no glory, weeping beneath the mist
      of gloom.
    Their power is faded, before the time of noon.
    It is the creator that exalts things which are his own,
    In temperaments and harmony within each of their own zone.
    No soul shall be reinstated by its power and might alone.


  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




