and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net










                           IN LUCK AT LAST.




                           BY WALTER BESANT.






                               NEW YORK:
                   GEORGE MUNRO'S SONS, PUBLISHERS,
                      17 TO 27 VANDEWATER STREET.






CHAPTER I.

WITHIN THREE WEEKS


If everyone were allowed beforehand to choose and select for himself
the most pleasant method of performing this earthly pilgrimage, there
would be, I have always thought, an immediate run upon that way of
getting to the Delectable Mountains which is known as the Craft and
Mystery of Second-hand Bookselling. If, further, one were allowed to
select and arrange the minor details--such, for instance, as the
"pitch" and the character of the shop, it would seem desirable that,
as regards the latter, the kind of bookselling should be neither too
lofty nor too mean--that is to say, that one's ambition would not
aspire to a great collector's establishment, such as one or two we
might name in Piccadilly, the Haymarket, or New Bond Street; these
should be left to those who greatly dare and are prepared to play the
games of Speculation and of Patience; nor, on the other hand, would
one choose an open cart at the beginning of the Whitechapel Road, or
one of the shops in Seven Dials, whose stock-in-trade consists wholly
of three or four boxes outside the door filled with odd volumes at
twopence apiece. As for "pitch" or situation, one would wish it to be
somewhat retired, but not too much; one would not, for instance,
willingly be thrown away in Hoxton, nor would one languish in the
obscurity of Kentish Town; a second-hand bookseller must not be so far
removed from the haunts of men as to place him practically beyond the
reach of the collector; nor, on the other hand, should he be planted
in a busy thoroughfare--the noise of many vehicles, the hurry of quick
footsteps, the swift current of anxious humanity are out of harmony
with the atmosphere of a second-hand bookshop. Some suggestion of
external repose is absolutely necessary; there must be some stillness
in the air; yet the thing itself belongs essentially to the city--no
one can imagine a second-hand bookshop beside green fields--so that
there should be some murmur and perceptible hum of mankind always
present in the ear. Thus there are half-a-dozen bookshops in King
William Street, Strand, which seem to enjoy every possible advantage
of position, for they are in the very heart of London, but yet are not
exposed to the full noise and tumult of that overflowing tide which
surges round Charing Cross. Again, there are streets north of Holborn
and Oxford Street most pleasantly situated for the second-hand
bookseller, and there are streets where he ought not to be, where he
has no business, and where his presence jars. Could we, for instance,
endure to see the shop of a second-hand bookseller established in
Cheapside?

Perhaps, however, the most delightful spot in all London for a
second-hand bookshop is that occupied by Emblem's in the King's Road,
Chelsea.

It stands at the lower end of the road, where one begins to realize
and thoroughly feel the influences of that ancient and lordly suburb.
At this end of the road there are rows of houses with old-fashioned
balconies; right and left of it there are streets which in the summer
and early autumn are green, yellow, red, and golden with their masses
of creepers; squares which look as if, with the people living in them,
they must belong to the year eighteen hundred; neither a day before
nor a day after; they lie open to the road, with their gardens full of
trees. Cheyne Walk and the old church, with its red-brick tower, and
the new Embankment, are all so close that they seem part and parcel of
the King's Road. The great Hospital is within five minutes' walk, and
sometimes the honest veterans themselves may be seen wandering in the
road. The air is heavy with associations and memories. You can
actually smell the fragrance of the new-made Chelsea buns, fresh from
the oven, just as you would a hundred years ago. You may sit with
dainty damsels, all hoops and furbelows, eating custards at the
Bun-house; you may wander among the rare plants of the Botanic
Gardens. The old great houses rise, shadowy and magnificent, above the
modern terraces; Don Saltero's Coffee-House yet opens its hospitable
doors; Sir Thomas More meditates again on Cheyne Walk; at dead of
night the ghosts of ancient minuet tunes may be heard from the Rotunda
of Ranelagh Gardens, though the new barracks stand upon its site; and
along the modern streets you may fancy that if you saw the ladies with
their hoop petticoats, and the gentlemen with their wigs and their
three-cornered hats and swords, you would not be in the least
astonished.

Emblem's is one of two or three shops which stand together, but it
differs from its neighbors in many important particulars. For it has
no plate-glass, as the others have; nor does it stand like them with
open doors; nor does it flare away gas at night; nor is it bright with
gilding and fresh paint; nor does it seek to attract notice by posters
and bills. On the contrary, it retains the old, small, and
unpretending panes of glass which it has always had; in the evening it
is dimly lighted, and it closes early; its door is always shut, and
although the name over the shop is dingy, one feels that a coat of
paint, while it would certainly freshen up the place, would take
something from its character. For a second-hand bookseller who
respects himself must present an exterior which has something of faded
splendor, of worn paint and shabbiness. Within the shop, books line
the walls and cumber the floor. There are an outer and an inner shop;
in the former a small table stands among the books, at which Mr.
James, the assistant, is always at work cataloguing, when he is not
tying up parcels; sometimes even with gum and paste repairing the
slighter ravages of time--foxed bindings and close-cut margins no man
can repair. In the latter, which is Mr. Emblem's sanctum, there are
chairs and a table, also covered with books, a writing-desk, a small
safe, and a glass case, wherein are secured the more costly books in
stock. Emblem's, as must be confessed, is no longer quite what it was
in former days; twenty, thirty, or forty years ago that glass case was
filled with precious treasures. In those days, if a man wanted a book
of county history, or of genealogy, or of heraldry, he knew where was
his best chance of finding it, for Emblem's, in its prime and heyday,
had its specialty. Other books treating on more frivolous subjects,
such as science, belles lettres, art, or politics, he would consider,
buy, and sell again; but he took little pride in them. Collectors of
county histories, however, and genealogy-hunters and their kind, knew
that at Emblem's, where they would be most likely to get what they
wanted, they would have to pay the market price for it.

There is no patience like the patience of a book-collector; there is
no such industry given to any work comparable with the thoughtful and
anxious industry with which he peruses the latest catalogues; there is
no care like unto that which rends his mind before the day of auction
or while he is still trying to pick up a bargain; there are no eyes so
sharp as those which pry into the contents of a box full of old books,
tumbled together, at sixpence apiece. The bookseller himself partakes
of the noble enthusiasm of the collector, though he sells his
collection; like the amateur, the professional moves heaven and earth
to get a bargain: like him, he rejoices as much over a book which has
been picked up below its price, as over a lost sheep which has
returned into the fold. But Emblem is now old, and Emblem's shop is no
longer what it was to the collector of the last generation.

It was an afternoon in late September, and in this very year of grace,
eighteen hundred and eighty-four. The day was as sunny and warm as any
of the days of its predecessor Augustus the Gorgeous, but yet there
was an autumnal feeling in the air which made itself felt even in
streets where there were no red and yellow Virginia creepers, no
square gardens with long trails of mignonette and banks of flowering
nasturtiums. In fact, you cannot anywhere escape the autumnal feeling,
which begins about the middle of September. It makes old people think
with sadness that the grasshopper is a burden in the land, and that
the almond-tree is about to flourish; but the young it fills with a
vinous and intoxicated rejoicing, as if the time of feasting, fruits,
harvests, and young wine, strong and fruity, was upon the world. It
made Mr. James--his surname has never been ascertained, but man and
boy, Mr. James has been at Emblem's for twenty-five years and
more--leave his table where he was preparing the forthcoming
catalogue, and go to the open door, where he wasted a good minute and
a half in gazing up at the clear sky and down the sunny street. Then
he stretched his arms and returned to his work, impelled by the sense
of duty rather than by the scourge of necessity, because there was no
hurry about the catalogue and most of the books in it were rubbish,
and at that season of the year few customers could be expected, and
there were no parcels to tie up and send out. He went back to his
work, therefore, but he left the door partly open in order to enjoy
the sight of the warm sunshine. Now for Emblem's to have its door
open, was much as if Mr. Emblem himself should so far forget his
self-respect as to sit in his shirt-sleeves. The shop had been rather
dark, the window being full of books, but now through the open door
there poured a little stream of sunshine, reflected from some far off
window. It fell upon a row of old eighteenth century volumes, bound in
dark and rusty leather, and did so light up and glorify the dingy
bindings and faded gold, that they seemed fresh from the binder's
hands, and just ready for the noble purchaser, long since dead and
gone, whose book plate they bore. Some of this golden stream fell also
upon the head of the assistant--it was a red head, with fiery red
eyes, red eyebrows, bristly and thick, and sharp thin features to
match--and it gave him the look of one who is dragged unwillingly into
the sunlight. However, Mr. James took no notice of the sunshine, and
went on with his cataloguing almost as if he liked that kind of work.
There are many people who seem to like dull work, and they would not
be a bit more unhappy if they were made to take the place of Sisyphus,
or transformed into the damsels who are condemned to toil continually
at the weary work of pouring water into a sieve. Perhaps Sisyphus does
not so much mind the continual going up and down hill. "After all," he
might say, "this is better than the lot of poor Ixion. At all events,
I have got my limbs free." Ixion, on the other hand, no doubt, is full
of pity for his poor friend Sisyphus. "I, at least," he says, "have no
work to do. And the rapid motion of the wheel is in sultry weather
sometimes pleasant."

Behind the shop, where had been originally the "back parlor," in the
days when every genteel house in Chelsea had both its front and back
parlor--the latter for sitting and living in, the former for the
reception of company--sat this afternoon the proprietor, the man whose
name had stood above the shop for fifty years, the original and only
Emblem. He was--nay, he is--for you may still find him in his place,
and may make his acquaintance over a county history any day in the
King's Road--he is an old man now, advanced in the seventies, who was
born before the battle of Waterloo was fought, and can remember
Chelsea when it was full of veterans wounded in battles fought long
before the Corsican Attila was let loose upon the world. His face
wears the peaceful and wise expression which belongs peculiarly to his
profession. Other callings make a man look peaceful, but not all other
callings make him look wise. Mr. Emblem was born by nature of a calm
temperament,--otherwise he would not have been happy in his business;
a smile lies generally upon his lips, and his eyes are soft and
benign; his hair is white, and his face, once ruddy, is pale, yet not
shrunk and seamed with furrows as happens to so many old men, but
round and firm; like his chin and lips it is clean shaven; he wears a
black coat extraordinarily shiny in the sleeve, and a black silk stock
just as he used to wear in the thirties when he was young, and
something of a dandy, and would show himself on a Saturday evening in
the pit of Drury Lane; and the stock is fastened behind with a silver
buckle. He is, in fact, a delightful old gentleman to look at and
pleasant to converse with, and on his brow every one who can read may
see, visibly stamped, the seal of a harmless and honest life. At the
contemplation of such a man, one's opinion of humanity is sensibly
raised, and even house-agents, plumbers, and suburban builders, feel
that, after all, virtue may bring with, it some reward.

The quiet and warmth of the afternoon, unbroken to his accustomed ear,
as it would be to a stranger, by the murmurous roll of London, made
him sleepy. In his hand he held a letter which he had been reading for
the hundredth time, and of which he knew by heart every word; and as
his eyes closed he went back in imagination to a passage in the past
which it recalled.

He stood, in imagination, upon the deck of a sailing-ship--an emigrant
ship. The year was eighteen hundred and sixty-four, a year when very
few were tempted to try their fortunes in a country torn by civil war.
With him were his daughter and his son-in-law, and they were come to
bid the latter farewell.

"My dear--my dear," cried the wife, in her husband's arms, "come what
may, I will join you in a year."

Her husband shook his head sadly.

"They do not want me here," he said; "the work goes into stronger and
rougher hands. Perhaps over there we may get on better, and besides,
it seems an opening."

If the kind of work which he wanted was given to stronger and rougher
hands than his in England, far more would it be the case in young and
rough America. It was journalistic work--writing work--that he wanted;
and he was a gentleman, a scholar, and a creature of retired and
refined tastes and manners. There are, perhaps, some still living who
have survived the tempestuous life of the ordinary Fleet Street
"newspaper man" of twenty or thirty years ago; perhaps one or two
among these remember Claude Aglen--but he was so short a time with
them that it is not likely; those who do remember him will understand
that the way to success, rough and thorny for all, for such as Aglen
was impossible.

"But you will think every day of little Iris?" said his wife. "Oh, my
dear, if I were only going with you! And but for me you would be at
home with your father, well and happy."

Then in his dream, which was also a memory, the old man saw how the
young husband kissed and comforted his wife.

"My dear," said Claude, "if it were not for you, what happiness could
I have in the world? Courage, my wife, courage and hope. I shall think
of you and Iris all day and all night until we meet again."

And so they parted and the ship sailed away.

The old man opened his eyes and looked about him. It was a dream.

"It was twenty years ago," he said, "and Iris was a baby in arms.
Twenty years ago, and he never saw his wife again. Never again!
Because she died," he added after a pause; "my Alice died."

He shed no tears, being so old that the time of tears was well-nigh
past--at seventy-five the eyes are drier than at forty, and one is no
longer surprised or disappointed, and seldom even angry, whatever
happens.

But he opened the letter in his hand and read it again mechanically.
It was written on thin foreign paper, and the creases of the folds had
become gaping rents. It was dated September, 1866, just eighteen years
back.

"When you read these lines," the letter said, "I shall be in the
silent land, whither Alice, my wife, has gone before me. It would be a
strange thing only to think upon this journey which lies before me,
and which I must take alone, had I time left for thinking. But I have
not. I may last a week, or I may die in a few hours. Therefore, to the
point.

"In one small thing we deceived you, Alice and I--my name is not Aglen
at all; we took that name for certain reasons. Perhaps we were wrong,
but we thought that as we were quite poor, and likely to remain poor,
it would be well to keep our secret to ourselves. Forgive us both this
suppression of the truth. We were made poor by our own voluntary act
and deed, and because I married the only woman I loved.

"I was engaged to a girl whom I did not love. We had been brought up
like brother and sister together, but I did not love her, though I was
engaged to her. In breaking this engagement I angered my father. In
marrying Alice I angered him still more.

"I now know that he has forgiven me; he forgave me on his death-bed;
he revoked his former will and made me his sole heir--just as if
nothing had happened to destroy his old affection--subject to one
condition--viz., that the girl to whom I was first engaged should
receive the whole income until I, or my heirs, should return to
England in order to claim the inheritance.

"It is strange. I die in a wooden shanty, in a little Western town,
the editor of a miserable little country paper. I have not money
enough even to bury me, and yet, if I were at home, I might be called
a rich man, as men go. My little Iris will be an heiress. At the very
moment when I learn that I am my father's heir, I am struck down by
fever; and now I know that I shall never get up again.

"It is strange. Yet my father sent me his forgiveness, and my wife is
dead, and the wealth that has come is useless to me. Wherefore,
nothing now matters much to me, and I know that you will hold my last
wishes sacred.

"I desire that Iris shall be educated as well and thoroughly as you
can afford; keep her free from rough and rude companions; make her
understand that her father was a gentleman of ancient family; this
knowledge will, perhaps, help to give her self-respect. If any
misfortune should fall upon you, such as the loss of health or wealth,
give the papers inclosed to a trustworthy solicitor, and bid him act
as is best in the interests of Iris. If, as I hope, all will go well
with you, do not open the papers until my child's twenty-first
birthday; do not let her know until then that she is going to be rich;
on her twenty-first birthday, open the papers and bid her claim her
own.

"To the woman I wronged--I know not whether she has married or
not--bid Iris carry my last message of sorrow at what has happened. I
do not regret, and I have never regretted, that I married Alice. But,
I gave her pain, for which I have never ceased to grieve. I have been
punished for this breach of faith. You will find among the papers an
account of all the circumstances connected with this engagement. There
is also in the packet my portrait, taken when I was a lad of sixteen;
give her that as well; there is the certificate of my marriage, my
register of baptism, that of Iris's baptism, my signet ring--" "His
arms"--the old man interrupted his reading--"his arms were: quarterly:
first and fourth, two roses and a boar's head, erect; second and
third, gules and fesse between--between--but I cannot remember what it
was between--" He went on reading: "My father's last letter to me;
Alice's letters, and one or two from yourself. If Iris should
unhappily die before her twenty-first birthday, open these papers,
find out from them the owner's name and address, seek her out, and
tell her that she will never now be disturbed by any claimants to the
estate."

The letter ended here abruptly, as if the writer had designed to add
more, but was prevented by death.

For there was a postscript, in another hand, which stated: "Mr. Aglen
died November 25th, 1866, and is buried in the cemetery of Johnson
City, Ill."

The old man folded the letter carefully, and laid it on the table.
Then he rose and walked across the room to the safe, which stood with
open door in the corner furthest from the fireplace. Among its
contents was a packet sealed and tied up in red tape, endorsed: "For
Iris. To be given to her on her twenty-first birthday. From her
father."

"It will be her twenty-first birthday," he said, "in three weeks. Then
I must give her the packet. So--so--with the portrait of her father,
and his marriage-certificate." He fell into a fit of musing, with the
papers in his hand. "She will be safe, whatever happens to me; and as
for me, if I lose her--of course I shall lose her. Why, what will it
matter? Have I not lost all, except Iris? One must not be selfish. Oh,
Iris, what a surprise--what a surprise I have in store for you!"

He placed the letter he had been reading within the tape which
fastened the bundle, so that it should form a part of the
communication to be made on Iris's birthday.

"There," he said, "now I shall read this letter no more. I wonder how
many times I have read it in the last eighteen years, and how often I
have wondered what the child's fortune would be? In three weeks--in
three short weeks. Oh, Iris, if you only knew!"

He put back the letters and the packet, locked the safe, and resumed
his seat.

The red-eyed assistant, still gumming and pasting his slips with
punctilious regard to duty, had been following his master's movements
with curiosity.

"Counting his investments again as usual," Mr. James murmured. "Ah!
and adding 'em up! Always at it. Oh, what a trade it must have been
once!"

Just then there appeared in the door a gentleman. He was quite shabby,
and even ragged in his dress, but he was clearly a gentleman. He was
no longer young; his shoulders were bent, and he had the unmistakable
stamp and carriage of a student.

"Guv'nor's at home," said the assistant briefly.

The visitor walked into the sanctum. He had under his arm half-a-dozen
volumes, which, without a word, he laid before Mr. Emblem, and untied
the string.

"You ought to know this book," he said without further introduction.

Mr. Emblem looked doubtfully at the visitor.

"You sold it to me twenty-five years ago," he went on, "for five
pounds."

"I did. And I remember now. You are Mr. Frank Farrar. Why, it is
twenty-five years ago!"

"I have bought no more books for twenty years and more," he replied.

"Sad--sad! Dear me--tut, tut!--bought no books? And you, Mr. Farrar,
once my best customer. And now--you do not mean to say that you are
going to sell--that you actually want to sell--this precious book?"

"I am selling, one by one, all my books," replied the other with a
sigh. "I am going down hill, Emblem, fast."

"Oh, dear, dear!" replied the bookseller. "This is very sad. One
cannot bear to think of the libraries being dispersed and sold off.
And now yours, Mr. Farrar? Really, yours? Must it be?"

"'Needs must,'" Mr. Farrar said with a sickly smile, "needs must when
the devil drives. I have parted with half my books already. But I
thought you might like to have this set, because they were once your
own."

"So I should"--Mr. Emblem laid a loving hand upon the volumes--"so I
should, Mr. Farrar, but not from you; not from you, sir. Why, you were
almost my best customer--I think almost my very best--thirty years
ago, when my trade was better than it is now. Yes, you gave me five
pounds--or was it five pounds ten?--for this very work. And it is
worth twelve pounds now--I assure you it is worth twelve pounds, if it
is worth a penny."

"Will you give me ten pounds for it, then?" cried the other eagerly;
"I want the money badly."

"No, I can't; but I will send you to a man who can and will. I do not
speculate now; I never go to auctions. I am old, you see. Besides, I
am poor. I will not buy your book, but I will send you to a man who
will give you ten pounds for it, I am sure, and then he will sell it
for fifteen." He wrote the address on a slip of paper. "Why, Mr.
Farrar, if an old friend, so to speak, can put the question, why in
the world--"

"The most natural thing," replied Mr. Farrar with a cold laugh; "I am
old, as I told you, and the younger men get all the work. That is all.
Nobody wants a genealogist and antiquary."

"Dear me, dear me! Why, Mr. Farrar, I remember now; you used to know
my poor son-in-law, who is dead eighteen years since. I was just
reading the last letter he ever wrote to me, just before he died. You
used to come here and sit with him in the evening. I remember now. So
you did."

"Thank you for your good will," said Mr. Farrar. "Yes, I remember your
son-in-law. I knew him before his marriage."

"Did you? Before his marriage? Then--" He was going to add, "Then you
can tell me his real name," but he paused, because it is a pity ever
to acknowledge ignorance, and especially ignorance in such elementary
matters as your son-in-law's name.

So Mr. Emblem checked himself.

"He ought to have been a rich man," Mr. Farrar continued; "but he
quarreled with his father, who cut him off with a shilling, I
suppose."

Then the poor scholar, who could find no market for his learned
papers, tied up his books again and went away with hanging head.

"Ugh!" Mr. James, who had been listening, groaned as Mr. Farrar passed
through the door. "Ugh! Call that a way of doing business? Why, if it
had been me, I'd have bought the book off of that old chap for a
couple o' pounds, I would. Ay, or a sov, so seedy he is, and wants
money so bad. And I know who'd have given twelve pound for it, in the
trade too. Call that carrying on business? He may well add up his
investments every day, it he can afford to chuck such chances. Ah, but
he'll retire soon." His fiery eyes brightened, and his face glowed
with the joy of anticipation. "He must retire before long."

There came another visitor. This time it was a lanky boy, with, a blue
bag over his shoulder and a notebook and pencil-stump in his hand. He
nodded to the assistant as to an old friend with whom one may be at
ease, set down his bag, opened his notebook, and nibbled his stump.
Then he read aloud, with a comma or semicolon between each, a dozen or
twenty titles. They were the names of the books which his employer
wished to pick up. The red-eyed assistant listened, and shook his
head. Then the boy, without another word, shouldered his bag and
departed, on his way to the next second-hand book-shop.

He was followed, at a decent interval, by another caller. This time it
was an old gentleman who opened the door, put in his head, and looked
about him with a quick and suspicious glance. At sight of the
assistant he nodded and smiled in the most friendly way possible, and
came in.

"Good-morning, Mr. James; good-morning, my friend. Splendid weather.
Pray don't disturb yourself. I am just having a look round--only a
look round, you know. Don't move, Mr. James."

He addressed Mr. James, but he was looking at the shelves as he spoke,
and, with the habit of a book-hunter, taking down the volumes, looking
at the title-pages and replacing them; under his arm he carried a
single volume in old leather binding.

Mr. James nodded his head, but did disturb himself; in fact, he rose
with a scowl upon his face, and followed this polite old gentlemen all
round the shop, placing himself close to his elbow. One might almost
suppose that he suspected him, so close and assiduous was his
assistance. But the visitor, accepting these attentions as if they
were customary, and the result of high breeding, went slowly round the
shelves, taking down book after book, but buying none. Presently he
smiled again, and said that he must be moving on, and very politely
thanked Mr. James for his kindness.

"Nowhere," he was so good as to say, "does one get so much personal
kindness and attention as at Emblem's. Good-morning, Mr. James;
good-morning, my friend."

Mr. James grunted; and closed the door after him.

"Ugh!" he said with disgust, "I know you; I know your likes. Want to
make your set complete--eh? Want to sneak one of our books to do it
with, don't you? Ah!" He looked into the back shop before he returned
to his paste and his slips. "That was Mr. Potts, the great Queen Anne
collector, sir. Most notorious book-snatcher in all London, and the
most barefaced. Wanted our fourth volume of the 'Athenian Oracle.' I
saw his eyes reached out this way, and that way, and always resting on
that volume. I saw him edging along to the shelf. Got another odd
volume just like it in his wicked old hand, ready to change it when I
wasn't looking."

"Ah," said Mr. Emblem, waking up from his dream of Iris and her
father's letter; "ah, they will try it on. Keep your eyes open,
James."

"No thanks, as usual," grumbled Mr. James as he returned to his gum
and his scissors. "Might as well have left him to snatch the book."

Here, however, James was wrong, because it is the first duty of an
assistant to hinder and obstruct the book-snatcher, who carries on his
work by methods of crafty and fraudulent exchange rather than by plain
theft, which is a mere brutal way. For, first, the book-snatcher marks
his prey; he finds the shop which has a set containing the volume
which is missing in his own set; next, he arms himself with a volume
which closely resembles the one he covets, and then, on pretense of
turning over the leaves, he watches his opportunity to effect an
exchange, and goes away rejoicing, his set complete. No collector, as
is very well known, whether of books, coins, pictures, medals, fans,
scarabs, book-plates, autographs, stamps, or anything else, has any
conscience at all. Anybody can cut out slips and make a catalogue, but
it requires a sharp assistant, with eyes all over his head like a
spider, to be always on guard against this felonious and unscrupulous
collector.

Next, there came two schoolboys together, who asked for and bought a
crib to "Virgil;" and then a girl who wanted some cheap French
reading-book. Just as the clock began to strike five, Mr. Emblem
lifted his head and looked up. The shop-door opened, and there stepped
in, rubbing his shoes on the mat as if he belonged to the house, an
elderly gentleman of somewhat singular appearance. He wore a fez cap,
but was otherwise dressed as an Englishman--in black frock coat, that
is, buttoned up--except that his feet were incased in black cloth
shoes, so that he went noiselessly. His hair was short and white, and
he wore a small white beard; his skin was a rather dark brown; he was,
in fact, a Hindoo, and his name was Lala Roy.

He nodded gravely to Mr. James and walked into the back shop.

"It goes well," he asked, "with the buying and the selling?"

"Surely, Lala, surely."

"A quiet way of buying and selling; a way fit for one who meditates,"
said the Hindoo, looking round. "Tell me, my friend, what ails the
child? Is she sick?"

"The child is well, Lala."

"Her mind wandered this morning. She failed to perceive a simple
method which I tried to teach her. I feared she might be ill."

"She is not ill, my friend, but I think her mind is troubled."

"She is a woman. We are men. There is nothing in the world that is
able to trouble the mind of the philosopher."

"Nothing," said Mr. Emblem manfully, as if he, too, was a disciple.
"Nothing; is there now?"

The stoutness of the assertion was sensibly impaired by the question.

"Not poverty, which is a shadow; nor pain, which passes; nor the loss
of woman's love, which is a gain; nor fall from greatness--nothing.
Nevertheless," his eyes did look anxious in spite of his philosophy,
"this trouble of the child--will it soon be over?"

"I hope this evening," said Mr. Emblem. "Indeed I am sure that it will
be finished this evening."

"If the child had a mother, or a brother, or any protectors but
ourselves, my friend, we might leave her to them. But she has nobody
except you and me. I am glad that she is not ill."

He left Mr. Emblem, and passing through the door of communication
between house and shop, went noiselessly up the stairs.

One more visitor--unusual for so many to call on a September
afternoon. This time it was a youngish man of thirty or so, who
stepped into the shop with an air of business, and, taking no notice
at all of the assistant, walked swiftly into the back shop and shut
the door behind him.

"I thought so," murmured Mr. James. "After he's been counting up his
investments, his lawyer calls. More investments."

Mr. David Chalker was a solicitor and, according to his friends, who
were proud of him, a sharp practitioner. He was, in fact, one of those
members of the profession who, starting with no connection, have to
make business for themselves. This, in London, they do by encouraging
the county court, setting neighbors by the ears, lending money in
small sums, fomenting quarrels, charging commissions, and generally
making themselves a blessing and a boon to the district where they
reside. But chiefly Mr. Chalker occupied himself with lending money.

"Now, Mr. Emblem," he said, not in a menacing tone, but as one who
warns; "now, Mr. Emblem."

"Now, Mr. Chalker," the bookseller repeated mildly.

"What are you going to do for me?"

"I got your usual notice," the old bookseller began, hesitating, "six
months ago."

"Of course you did. Three fifty is the amount. Three fifty, exactly."

"Just so. But I am afraid I am not prepared to pay off the bill of
sale. The interest, as usual, will be ready."

"Of course it will. But this time the principal must be ready too."

"Can't you get another client to find the money?"

"No, I can't. Money is tight, and your security, Mr. Emblem, isn't so
good as it was."

"The furniture is there, and so is the stock."

"Furniture wears out; as for the stock--who knows what that is worth?
All your books together may not be worth fifty pounds, for what I
know."

"Then what am I to do?"

"Find the money yourself. Come, Mr. Emblem, everybody knows--your
grandson himself told me--all the world knows--you've been for years
saving up for your granddaughter. You told Joe only six months
ago--you can't deny it--that whatever happened to you she would be
well off."

Mr. Emblem did not deny the charge. But he ought not to have told this
to his grandson, of all people in the world.

"As for Joe," Mr. Chalker went on, "you are going to do nothing for
him. I know that. But is it business like, Mr. Emblem, to waste good
money which you might have invested for your granddaughter?"

"You do not understand. Mr. Chalker. You really do not, and I cannot
explain. But about this bill of sale--never mind my granddaughter."

"You the aforesaid Richard Emblem"--Mr. Chalker began to recite,
without commas--"have assigned to me David Chalker aforesaid his
executors administrators and assigns all and singular the several
chattels and things specifically described in the schedule hereto
annexed by way of security for the payment of the sum of three hundred
and fifty pounds and interest thereon at the rate of eight per cent.
per annum."

"Thank you, Mr. Chalker. I know all that."

"You can't complain, I'm sure. It is five years since you borrowed the
money."

"It was fifty pounds and a box of old law books out of your office,
and I signed a bill for a hundred."

"You forget the circumstances."

"No, I do not. My grandson was a rogue. One does not readily forget
that circumstance. He was also your friend, I remember."

"And I held my tongue."

"I have had no more money from you, and the sum has become three
hundred and fifty."

"Of course you don't understand law, Mr. Emblem. How should you! But
we lawyers don't work for nothing. However it isn't what you got, but
what I am to get. Come, my good sir, it's cutting off your nose to
spite your face. Settle and have done with it, even if it does take a
little slice off your granddaughter's fortune? Now look here"--his
voice became persuasive--"why not take me into your confidence? Make a
friend of me. You want advice; let me advise you. I can get you good
investments--far better than you know anything of--good and safe
investments--at six certain, and sometimes seven and even eight per
cent. Make me your man of business--come now. As for this trumpery
bill of sale--this trifle of three fifty, what is it to you?
Nothing--nothing. And as for your intention to enrich your
granddaughter, and cut off your grandson with a shilling, why I honor
you for it--there, though he was my friend. For Joe deserves it
thoroughly. I've told him so, mind. You ask him. I've told him so a
dozen times. I've said: 'The old man's right, Joe.' Ask him if I
haven't."

This was very expansive, but somehow Mr. Emblem did not respond.

Presently, however, he lifted his head.

"I have three weeks still."

"Three weeks still."

"And if I do not find the money within three weeks?"

"Why--but of course you will--but if you do not--I suppose there will
be only one thing left to do--realize the security, sell up--sticks
and books and all."

"Thank you, Mr. Chalker. I will look round me, and--and--do my best.
Good day, Mr. Chalker."

"The best you can do, Mr. Emblem," returned the solicitor, "is to take
me as your adviser. You trust David Chalker."

"Thank you. Good-day, Mr. Chalker."

On his way out, Mr. Chalker stopped for a moment and looked round the
shop.

"How's business?" he asked the assistant.

"Dull, sir," replied Mr. James. "He throws it all away, and neglects
his chances. Naturally, being so rich--"

"So rich, indeed," the solicitor echoed.

"It will be bad for his successor," Mr. James went on, thinking how
much he should himself like to be that successor. "The goodwill won't
be worth half what it ought to be, and the stock is just falling to
pieces."

Mr. Chalker looked about him again thoughtfully, and opened his mouth
as if about to ask a question, but said nothing. He remembered, in
time, that the shopman was not likely to know the amount of his
master's capital or investments.

"There isn't a book even in the glass-case that's worth a five-pound
note," continued Mr. James, whispering, "and he don't look about for
purchases any more. Seems to have lost his pluck."

Mr. Chalker returned to the back-shop.

"Within three weeks, Mr. Emblem," he repeated, and then departed.

Mr. Emblem sat in his chair. He had to find three hundred and fifty
pounds in three weeks. No one knew better than himself that this was
impossible. Within three weeks! But, in three weeks, he would open the
packet of letters, and give Iris her inheritance. At least, she would
not suffer. As for himself--He looked round the little back shop, and
tried to recall the fifty years he had spent there, the books he had
bought and sold, the money which had slipped through his fingers, the
friends who had come and gone. Why, as for the books, he seemed to
remember them every one--his joy in the purchase, his pride in
possession, and his grief at letting them go. All the friends gone
before him, his trade sunk to nothing.

"Yet," he murmured, "I thought it would last my time."

But the clock struck six. It was his tea-time. He rose mechanically,
and went upstairs to Iris.




CHAPTER II.

FOX AND WOLF.


Mr. James, left to himself, attempted, in accordance with his daily
custom, to commit a dishonorable action.

That is to say, he first listened carefully to the retreating
footsteps of his master, as he went up the stairs; then he left his
table, crept stealthily into the back shop, and began to pull the
drawers, turn the handle of the safe, and try the desk. Everything was
carefully locked. Then he turned over all the papers on the table, but
found nothing that contained the information he looked for. It was his
daily practice thus to try the locks, in hope that some day the safe,
or the drawers, or the desk would be left open by accident, when he
might be able to solve a certain problem, the doubt and difficulty of
which sore let and hindered him--namely, of what extent, and where
placed, were those great treasures, savings, and investments which
enabled his master to be careless over his business. It was, further,
customary with him to be thus frustrated and disappointed. Having
briefly, therefore, also in accordance with his usual custom,
expressed his disgust at this want of confidence between master and
man, Mr. James returned to his paste and scissors.

About a quarter past six the shop door was cautiously opened, and a
head appeared, which looked round stealthily. Seeing nobody about
except Mr. James, the head nodded, and presently followed by its body,
stepped into the shop.

"Where's the admiral, Foxy?" asked the caller.

"Guv'nor's upstairs, Mr. Joseph, taking of his tea with Miss Iris,"
replied Mr. James, not at all offended by the allusion to his
craftiness. Who should resemble the fox if not the second-hand
bookseller? In no trade, perhaps, can the truly admirable qualities of
that animal--his patience, his subtlety and craft, his pertinacity,
his sagacity--be illustrated more to advantage. Mr. James felt a glow
of virtue--would that he could grow daily and hourly, and more and
more toward the perfect fox. Then, indeed, and not till then would he
be able to live truly up to his second-hand books.

"Having tea with Iris; well--"

The speaker looked as if it required some effort to receive this
statement with resignation.

"He always does at six o'clock. Why shouldn't he?" asked Mr. James.

"Because, James, he spends the time in cockering up that gal whom he's
ruined and spoiled--him and the old nigger between them--so that her
mind is poisoned against her lawful relations, and nothing will
content her but coming into all the old man's money, instead of going
share and share alike, as a cousin should, and especially a
she-cousin, while there's a biscuit left in the locker and a drop of
rum in the cask."

"Ah!" said Mr. James with a touch of sympathy, called forth, perhaps,
by mention of the rum, which is a favorite drink with second-hand
booksellers' assistants.

"Nothing too good for her," the other went on; "the best of education,
pianos to play upon, and nobody good enough for her to know. Not on
visiting terms, if you please, with her neighbors; waiting for
duchesses to call upon her. And what is she, after all? A miserable
teacher!"

Mr. Joseph Gallop was a young man somewhere between twenty and thirty,
tall, large-limbed, well set-up, and broad-shouldered. A young man
who, at first sight, would seem eminently fitted to push his own
fortunes. Also, at first sight, a remarkably handsome fellow, with
straight, clear-cut features and light, curly hair. When he swung
along the street, his round hat carelessly thrown back, and his
handsome face lit up by the sun, the old women murmured a blessing
upon his comely head--as they used to do, a long time ago, upon the
comely and curly head of Absalom--and the young women looked meaningly
at one another--as was also done in the case of Absalom--and the
object of their admiration knew that they were saying to each other,
in the feminine way, where a look is as good as a whisper, "There goes
a handsome fellow." Those who knew him better, and had looked more
closely into his face, said that his mouth was bad and his eyes
shifty. The same opinion was held by the wiser sort as regards his
character. For, on the one hand, some averred that to their certain
knowledge Joe Gallop had shown himself a monster of ingratitude toward
his grandfather, who had paid his debts and done all kinds of things
for him; on the other hand there were some who thought he had been
badly treated; and some said that no good would ever come of a young
fellow who was never able to remain in the same situation more than a
month or so; and others said that he had certainly been unfortunate,
but that he was a quick and clever young man, who would some day find
the kind of work that suited him, and then he would show everybody of
what stuff he was composed. As for us, we have only to judge of him by
his actions.

"Perhaps, Mr. Joseph," said Mr. James, "perhaps Miss Iris won't have
all bequeathed to her?"

"Do you know anything?" Joe asked quickly. "Has he made a new will
lately?"

"Not that I know of. But Mr. Chalker has been here off and on a good
bit now."

"Ah! Chalker's a close one, too. Else he'd tell me, his old friend.
Look here, Foxy," he turned a beaming and smiling face upon the
assistant. "If you should see anything or find anything out, tell me,
mind. And, remember, I'll make it worth your while."

Mr. James looked as it he was asking himself how Joseph could make it
worth his while, seeing that he got nothing more from his grandfather,
and by his own showing never would have anything more.

"It's only his will I'm anxious to know about; that, and where he's
put away all his money. Think what a dreadful thing it would be for
his heirs if he were to go and die suddenly, and none of us to know
where his investments are. As for the shop, that is already disposed
of, as I dare say you know."

"Disposed of? The shop disposed of! Oh, Lord!" The assistant turned
pale. "Oh, Mr. Joseph," he asked earnestly, "what will become of the
shop? And who is to have it?"

"I am to have it," Mr. Joseph replied calmly. This was the lie
absolute, and he invented it very cleverly and at the right moment--a
thing which gives strength and life to a lie, because he already
suspected the truth and guessed the secret hope and ambition which
possesses every ambitious assistant in this trade--namely, to get the
succession. Mr. James looked upon himself as the lawful and rightful
heir to the business. But sometimes he entertained grievous doubts,
and now indeed his heart sunk into his boots. "I am to have it," Joe
repeated.

"Oh, I didn't know. You are to have it, then? Oh!"

If Mr. James had been ten years younger, I think he would have burst
into tears. But at the age of forty weeping no longer presents itself
as a form of relief. It is more usual to seek consolation in a swear.
He stammered, however, while he turned pale, and then red, and then
pale again.

"Yes, quite proper, Mr. Joseph, I'm sure, and a most beautiful
business may be made again here by one who understands the way. Oh,
you are a lucky man, Mr. Joseph. You are indeed, sir, to get such a
noble chance."

"The shop," Joe went on, "was settled--settled upon me, long ago." The
verb "to settle" is capable of conveying large and vague impressions.
"But after all, what's the good of this place to a sailor?"

"The good--the good of this place?" Mr. James's cheek flushed. "Why, to
make money, to be sure--to coin money in. If I had this place to
myself--why--why, in two years I would be making as much as two
hundred a year. I would indeed."

"You want to make money. Bah! That's all you fellows think of. To sit
in the back shop all day long and to sell moldy books! We jolly sailor
boys know better than that, my lad."

There really was something nautical about the look of the man. He wore
a black-silk tie, in a sailor's running-knot, the ends loose; his
waistcoat was unbuttoned, and his coat was a kind of jacket; not to
speak of his swinging walk and careless pose. In fact, he had been a
sailor; he had made two voyages to India and back as assistant-purser,
or purser's clerk, on board a P. and O. boat, but some disagreement
with his commanding officer concerning negligence, or impudence, or
drink, or laziness--he had been charged in different situations and at
different times with all these vices, either together or
separately--caused him to lose his rating on the ship's books.
However, he brought away from his short nautical experience, and
preserved, a certain nautical swagger, which accorded well with his
appearance, and gave him a swashbuckler air, which made those who knew
him well lament that he had not graced the Elizabethan era, when he
might have become a gallant buccaneer, and so got himself shot through
the head; or that he had not flourished under the reign of good Queen
Anne, when he would probably have turned pirate and been hanged; or
that, being born in the Victorian age, he had not gone to the Far
West, where he would, at least, have had the chance of getting shot in
a gambling-saloon.

"As for me, when I get the business," he continued, "I shall look
about for some one to carry it on until I am able to sell it for what
it will fetch. Books at a penny apiece all round, I suppose"--James
gasped--"shop furniture thrown in"--James panted--"and the goodwill
for a small lump sum." James wondered how far his own savings, and
what he could borrow, might go toward that lump sum, and how much
might "remain." "My grandfather, as you know, of course, is soon going
to retire from business altogether." This was another lie absolute, as
Mr. Emblem had no intention whatever of retiring.

"Soon, Mr. Joseph? He has never said a word to me about it."

"Very soon, now--sooner than you expect. At seventy-five, and with
all his money, why should he go on slaving any longer? Very soon,
indeed. Any day."

"Mr. Joseph," the assistant positively trembled with eagerness and
apprehension.

"What is it, James? Did you really think that a man like me was going
to sit in a back shop among these moldy volumes all day? Come, that's
too good. You might have given me credit for being one cut above a
counter, too. I am a gentleman, James, if you please; I am an officer
and a gentleman."

He then proceeded to explain, in language that smacked something of
the sea, that his ideas soared far above trade, which was, at best, a
contemptible occupation, and quite unworthy of a gentleman,
particularly an officer and a gentleman; and that his personal friends
would never condescend even to formal acquaintance, not to speak of
friendship, with trade. This discourse may be omitted. When one reads
about such a man as Joe Gallop, when we are told how he looked and
what he said and how he said it, with what gestures and in what tone,
we feel as if it would be impossible for the simplest person in the
world to be mistaken as to his real character. My friends, especially
my young friends, so far from the discernment of character being easy,
it is, on the contrary, an art most difficult, and very rarely
attained. Nature's indications are a kind of handwriting the
characters in which are known to few, so that, for instance, the
quick, enquiring glance of an eye, in which one may easily read--who
knows the character--treachery, lying, and deception, just as in the
letter Beth was originally easily discerned the effigies of a house,
may very easily pass unread by the multitude. The language, or rather
the alphabet, is much less complicated than the cuneiform of the Medes
and Persians, yet no one studies it, except women, most of whom are
profoundly skilled in this lore, which makes them so fearfully and
wonderfully wise. Thus it is easy for man to deceive his brother man,
but not his sister woman. Again, most of us are glad to take everybody
on his own statements; there are, or may be, we are all ready to
acknowledge, with sorrow for erring humanity, somewhere else in the
world, such things as pretending, swindling, acting a part, and
cheating, but they do not and cannot belong to our own world. Mr.
James, the assistant, very well knew that Mr. Emblem's grandson had
already, though still young, as bad a record as could be desired by
any; that he had been turned out of one situation after another; that
his grandfather had long since refused to help him any more; that he
was always to be found in the Broad Path which leadeth to destruction.
When he had money he ran down that path as fast as his legs could
carry him; when he had none, he only walked and wished he could run.
But he never left it, and never wished to leave it. Knowing all this,
the man accepted and believed every word of Joe's story. James
believed it, because he hoped it. He listened respectfully to Joe's
declamation on the meanness of trade, and then he rubbed his hands,
and said humbly that he ventured to hope, when the sale of the
business came on, Mr. Joseph would let him have a chance.

"You?" asked Joe. "I never thought of you. But why not? Why not, I
say? Why not you as well as anybody else?"

"Nobody but me, Mr. Joseph, knows what the business is, and how it
might be improved; and I could make arrangements for paying by regular
instalments."

"Well, we'll talk about it when the time comes. I won't forget.
Sailors, you know, can't be expected to understand the value of shops.
Say, James, what does the commodore do all day?"

"Sits in there and adds up his investments."

"Always doing that--eh? Always adding 'em up? Ah, and you've never got
a chance of looking over his shoulder, I suppose?"

"Never."

"You may find that chance, one of these days. I should like to know,
if only for curiosity, what they are and where they are. He sits in
there and adds 'em up. Yes--I've seen him at it. There must be
thousands by this time."

"Thousands," said the assistant, in the belief that the more you add
up a sum the larger it grows.

Joe walked into the back shop and tried the safe.

"Where are the keys?" he asked.

"Always in his pocket or on the table before him. He don't leave them
about."

"Or you'd ha' known pretty sharp all there is to know--eh, my lad?
Well, you're a foxy one, you are, if ever there was one. Let's be
pals, you and me. When the old man goes, you want the shop--well, I
don't see why you shouldn't have the shop. Somebody must have the
shop; and it will be mine to do what I please with. As for his
savings, he says they are all for Iris--well, wills have been set
aside before this. Do you think now, seriously, do you think, James
that the old man is quite right--eh? Don't answer in a hurry. Do you
think, now, that he is quite right in his chump?"

James laughed.

"He's right enough, though he throws away his chances."

"Throws away his chances. How the deuce can he be all right then? Did
you ever hear of a bookseller in his right mind throwing away his
chances?"

"Why--no--for that matter--"

"Very well, then; for that matter, don't forget that you've seen him
throw away all his chances--all his chances, you said. You are ready
to swear to that. Most important evidence, that, James." James had not
said "all," but he grunted, and the other man went on: "It may come in
useful, this recollection. Keep your eyes wide-open, my red haired
pirate. As for the moldy old shop, you may consider it as good as your
own. Why, I suppose you'll get somebody else to handle the paste-brush
and the scissors, and tie up the parcels, and water the shop--eh?
You'll be too proud to do that for yourself, you will."

Mr. James grinned and rubbed his hands.

"All your own--eh? Well, you'll wake 'em up a bit, won't you?"

Mr. James grinned again--he continued grinning.

"Go on, Mr. Joseph," he said; "go on--I like it."

"Consider the job as settled, then. As for terms they shall be easy;
I'm not a hard man. And--I say, Foxy, about that safe?"

Mr. James suddenly ceased grinning, because he observed a look in his
patron's eyes which alarmed him.

"About that safe. You must find out for me where the old man has put
his money, and what it is worth. Do you hear? Or else--"

"How can I find out? He won't tell me any more than you."

"Or else you must put me in the way of finding out." Mr. Joseph
lowered his voice to a whisper. "He keeps the keys on the table before
him. When a customer takes him out here, he leaves the keys behind
him. Do you know the key of the safe?"

"Yes, I know it."

"What is to prevent a clever, quick-eyed fellow like you, mate,
stepping in with a bit of wax--eh? While he is talking, you know. You
could rush it in a moment."

"It's--it's dangerous, Mr. Joseph."

"So it is--rather dangerous--not much. What of that?"

"I would do anything I could to be of service to you, Mr. Joseph; but
that's not honest, and it's dangerous."

"Dangerous! There's danger in the briny deep and shipwreck on the
blast, if you come to danger. Do we, therefore, jolly mariners afloat
ever think of that? Never. As to honesty, don't make a man sick."

"Look here, Mr. Joseph. If you'll give me a promise in writing, that
I'm to have the shop, as soon as you get it, at a fair valuation and
easy terms--say ten per cent down, and--"

"Stow it, mate; write what you like, and I'll sign it. Now about that
key?"

"Supposing you was to get a duplicate key, and supposing you was to
get into trouble about it, Mr. Joseph, should you--should you--I only
put it to you--should you up and round upon the man as got you that
key?"

"Foxy, you are as suspicious as a Chinaman. Well, then, do it this
way. Send it me in a letter, and then who is to know where the letter
came from?"

The assistant nodded.

"Then I think I can do the job, though not, perhaps, your way. But I
think I can do it. I won't promise for a day or two."

"There you spoke like an honest pal and a friendly shipmate.
Dangerous! Of course it is. When the roaring winds do blow--Hands upon
it, brother. Foxy, you've never done a better day's work. You are too
crafty for any sailor--you are, indeed. Here, just for a little key--"

"Hush, Mr. Joseph! Oh, pray--pray don't talk so loud! You don't know
who may be listening. There's Mr. Lala Roy. You never hear him
coming."

"Just for a trifle of a key, you are going to get possession of the
best book-shop in all Chelsea. Well, keep your eyes skinned and the
wax ready, will you? And now, James, I'll be off."

"Oh, I say, Mr. Joseph, wait a moment!" James was beginning to realize
what he had promised. "If anything dreadful should come of this? I
don't know what is in the safe. There may be money as well as papers."

"James, do you think I would steal? Do you mean to insinuate that I am
a thief, sir? Do you dare to suspect that I would take money?"

James certainly looked as if he had thought even that possible.

"I shall open the safe, take out the papers, read them, and put them
back just as I found them. Will that do for you?"

He shook hands again, and took himself off.

At seven o'clock Mr. Emblem came down-stairs again.

"Has any one been?" he asked as usual.

"Only Mr. Joseph."

"What might Mr. Joseph want?"

"Nothing at all."

"Then," said his grandfather, "Mr. Joseph might just as well have kept
away."

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us anticipate a little. James spent the next day hovering about in
the hope that an opportunity would offer of getting the key in his
possession for a few moments. There was no opportunity. The bunch of
keys lay on the table under the old man's eyes all day, and when he
left the table he carried them with him. But the day afterward he got
his chance. One of the old customers called to talk over past bargains
and former prizes. Mr. Emblem came out of the back shop with his
visitor, and continued talking with him as far as the door. As he
passed the table--James's table--he rested the hand which carried the
keys on it, and left them there. James pounced upon them and slipped
them into his pocket noiselessly. Mr. Emblem returned to his own chair
and thought nothing of the keys for an hour and a half by the clock,
and during this period James was out on business. When Mr. Emblem
remembered his keys, he felt for them in their usual place and missed
them, and then began searching about and cried out to James that he
had lost his bunch of keys.

"Why, sir," said James, bringing them to him, after a little search,
and with a very red face, "here they are; you must have left them on
my table."

And in this way the job was done.




CHAPTER III.

IRIS THE HERALD.


By a somewhat remarkable coincidence it was on this very evening that
Iris first made the acquaintance of her pupil, Mr. Arnold Arbuthnot.
These coincidences, I believe, happen oftener in real life than they
do even on the stage, where people are always turning up at the very
nick of time and the critical moment.

I need little persuasion to make me believe that the first meeting of
Arnold Arbuthnot and Iris, on the very evening when her cousin was
opening matters with the Foxy one, was nothing short of Providential.
You shall see, presently, what things might have happened if they had
not met. The meeting was, in fact, the second of the three really
important events in the life of a girl. The first, which is seldom
remembered with the gratitude which it deserves, is her birth; the
second, the first meeting with her future lover; the third, her
wedding-day; the other events of a woman's life are interesting,
perhaps, but not important.

Certain circumstances, which will be immediately explained, connected
with this meeting, made it an event of very considerable interest to
Iris, even though she did not suspect its immense importance. So much
interest that she thought of nothing else for a week beforehand; that
as the appointed hour drew near she trembled and grew pale; that when
her grandfather came up for his tea, she, who was usually so quick to
discern the least sign of care or anxiety in his face, actually did
not observe the trouble, plainly written in his drooping head and
anxious eyes, which was due to his interview with Mr. David Chalker.

She poured out the tea, therefore, without one word of sympathy. This
would have seemed hard if her grandfather had expected any. He did
not, however, because he did not know that the trouble showed in his
face, and was trying to look as if nothing had happened. Yet in his
brain were ringing and resounding the words, "Within three
weeks--within three weeks," with the regularity of a horrid clock at
midnight, when one wants to go to sleep.

"Oh," cried Iris, forced, as young people always are, to speak of her
own trouble, "oh, grandfather, he is coming to-night."

"Who is coming to-night, my dear?" and then he listened again for the
ticking of the clock: "Within three weeks--within three weeks." "Who
is coming to-night, my dear?"

He took the cup of tea from her, and sat down with an old man's
deliberation, which springs less from wisdom and the fullness of
thought that from respect to rheumatism.

The iteration of that refrain, "Within three weeks," made him forget
everything, even the trouble of his granddaughter's mind.

"Oh, grandfather, you cannot have forgotten!"

She spoke with the least possible touch of irritation, because she had
been thinking of this thing for a week past, day and night, and it was
a thing of such stupendous interest to her, that it seemed impossible
that anyone who knew of it could forget what was coming.

"No, no." The old man was stimulated into immediate recollection by
the disappointment in her eyes. "No, no, my dear, I have not
forgotten. Your pupil is coming. Mr. Arbuthnot is coming. But, Iris,
child, don't let that worry you. I will see him for you, if you like."

"No; I must see him myself. You see, dear, there is the awful
deception. Oh, how shall I tell him?"

"No deception at all," he said stoutly. "You advertised in your own
initials. He never asked if the initials belonged to a man or to a
woman. The other pupils do not know. Why should this one? What does it
matter to him if you have done the work for which he engaged your
services?"

"But, oh, he is so different! And the others, you know, keep to the
subject."

"So should he, then. Why didn't he?"

"But he hasn't. And I have been answering him, and he must think that
I was drawing him on to tell me more about himself; and now--oh, what
will he think? I drew him on and on--yet I didn't mean to--till at
last he writes to say that he regards me as the best friend and the
wisest adviser he has ever had. What will he think and say?
Grandfather, it is dreadful!"

"What did you tell him for, Iris, my dear? Why couldn't you let things
go on? And by telling him you will lose your pupil."

"Yes, of course; and, worse still, I shall lose his letters. We live
so quietly here that his letters have come to me like news of another
world. How many different worlds are there all round one in London? It
has been pleasant to read of that one in which ladies go about
beautifully dressed always, and where the people have nothing to do
but to amuse themselves. He has told me about this world in which he
lives, and about his own life, so that I know everything he does, and
where he goes; and"--here she sighed heavily--"of course it could not
go on forever; and I should not mind so much if it had not been
carried on under false pretenses."

"No false pretenses at all, my dear. Don't think it."

"I sent back his last check," she said, trying to find a little
consolation for herself. "But yet--"

"Well, Iris," said her grandfather, "he wanted to learn heraldry, and
you have taught him."

"For the last three months"--the girl blushed as if she was confessing
her sins--"for the last three months there has not been a single word
in his letters about heraldry. He tells me that he writes because he
is idle, or because he wants to talk, or because he is alone in his
studio, or because he wants his unknown friend's advice. I am his
unknown friend, and I have been giving him advice."

"And very good advice, too," said her grandfather benevolently. "Who
is so wise as my Iris?"

"I have answered all his letters, and never once told him that I am
only a girl."

"I am glad you did not tell him, Iris," said her grandfather; but he
did not say why he was glad. "And why can't he go on writing his
letters without making any fuss?"

"Because he says he must make the acquaintance of the man--the man, he
says--with whom he has been in correspondence so long. This is what he
says."

She opened a letter which lay upon a table covered with papers, but
her grandfather stopped her.

"Well, my dear, I do not want to know what he says. He wishes to make
your acquaintance. Very good, then. You are going to see him, and to
tell him who you are. That is enough. But as for deceiving"--he
paused, trying to understand this extreme scrupulosity of
conscience--"if you come to deceiving--well, in a kind sort of a way
you did allow him to think his correspondent a man. I admit that. What
harm is done to him? None. He won't be so mean, I suppose, as to ask
for his money back again."

"I think he ought to have it all back," said Iris; "yes, all from the
very beginning. I am ashamed that I ever took any money from him. My
face burns when I think of it."

To this her grandfather made no reply. The returning of money paid for
services rendered was, to his commercial mind, too foolish a thing to
be even talked about. At the same time, Iris was quite free to manage
her own affairs. And then there was that roll of papers in the safe.
Why, what matter if she sent away all her pupils? He changed the
subject.

"Iris, my dear," he said, "about this other world, where the people
amuse themselves; the world which lives in the squares and in the big
houses on the Chelsea Embankment here, you know--how should you like,
just for a change, to belong to that world and have no work to do?"

"I don't know," she replied carelessly, because the question did not
interest her.

"You would have to leave me, of course. You would sever your
connection, as they say, with the shop."

"Please, don't let us talk nonsense, grandfather."

"You would have to be ashamed, perhaps, of ever having taught for your
living."

"Now that I never should be--never, not if they made me a duchess."

"You would go dressed in silk and velvet. My dear, I should like to
see you dressed up just for once, as we have seen them at the
theater."

"Well, I should like one velvet dress in my life. Only one. And it
should be crimson--a beautiful, deep, dark crimson."

"Very good. And you would drive in a carriage instead of an omnibus;
you would sit in the stalls instead of the upper circle; you would
give quantities of money to poor people; and you would buy as many
second hand books as you pleased. There are rich people, I believe,
ostentatious people, who buy new books. But you, my dear, have been
better brought up. No books are worth buying till they have stood the
criticism of a whole generation at least. Never buy new books, my
dear."

"I won't," said Iris. "But, you dear old man, what have you got in
your head to-night? Why in the world should we talk about getting
rich?"

"I was only thinking," he said, "that perhaps, you might be so much
happier--"

"Happier? Nonsense! I am as happy as I can be. Six pupils already. To
be sure I have lost one," she sighed; "and the best among them all."

When her grandfather left her, Iris placed candles on the
writing-table, but did not light them, though it was already pretty
dark. She had half an hour to wait; and she wanted to think, and
candles are not necessary for meditation. She sat at the open window
and suffered her thoughts to ramble where they pleased. This is a
restful thing to do, especially if your windows look upon a tolerably
busy but not noisy London road. For then, it is almost as good as
sitting beside a swiftly-running stream; the movement of the people
below is like the unceasing flow of the current; the sound of the
footsteps is like the whisper of the water along the bank; the echo of
the half heard talk strikes your ear like the mysterious voices wafted
to the banks from the boats as they go by; and the lights of the shops
and the street presently become spectral and unreal like lights seen
upon the river in the evening.

Iris had a good many pupils--six, in fact, as she had boasted; why,
then, was she so strangely disturbed on account of one?

An old tutor by correspondence may be, and very likely is, indifferent
about his pupils, because he has had so many; but Iris was a young
tutor, and had as yet known few. One of her pupils, for instance, was
a gentleman in the fruit and potato line, in the Borough. By reason of
his early education, which had not been neglected so much as entirely
omitted, he was unable to personally conduct his accounts. Now a
merchant without his accounts is as helpless as a tourist without his
Cook. So that he desired, in his mature age, to learn book keeping,
compound addition, subtraction, and multiplication. He had no
partners, so that he did not want division. But it is difficult--say,
well-nigh impossible--for a middle-aged merchant, not trained in the
graces of letter-writing, to inspire a young lady with personal
regard, even though she is privileged to follow the current of his
thoughts day by day, and to set him his sums.

Next there was a young fellow of nineteen or twenty, who was beginning
life as an assistant-teacher in a commercial school at Lower Clapton.
This way is a stony and a thorny path to tread; no one walks upon it
willingly; those who are compelled to enter upon it speedily either
run away and enlist, or they go and find a secluded spot in which to
hang themselves. The smoother ways of the profession are only to be
entered by one who is the possessor of a degree, and it was the
determination of this young man to pass the London University
Examinations, and to obtain the degree of Bachelor. In this way his
value in the educational market would be at once doubled, and he could
command a better place and lighter work. He showed himself, in his
letters, to be an eminently practical, shrewd, selfish, and
thick-skinned young man, who would quite certainly get on in the
world, and was resolved to lose no opportunities, and, with that view,
he took as much work out of his tutor as he could get for the money.
Had he known that the "I.A." who took such a wonderful amount of
trouble with his papers was only a woman, he would certainly have
extorted a great deal more work for his money. All this Iris read in
his letters and understood. There is no way in which a man more surely
and more naturally reveals his true character than in his
correspondence, so that after awhile, even though the subject of the
letters be nothing more interesting than the studies in hand, those
who write the letters may learn to know each other if they have but
the mother wit to read between the lines. Certainly this young
schoolmaster did not know Iris, nor did he desire to discover what she
was like, being wholly occupied with the study of himself. Strange and
kindly provision of Nature. The less desirable a man actually appears
to others, the more fondly he loves and believes in himself. I have
heard it whispered that Narcissus was a hunchback.

Then there was another pupil, a girl who was working her very hardest
in order to become, as she hoped, a first-class governess, and who,
poor thing! by reason of her natural thickness would never reach even
the third rank. Iris would have been sorry for her, because she worked
so fiercely, and was so stupid, but there was something hard and
unsympathetic in her nature which forbade pity. She was miserably
poor, too, and had an unsuccessful father, no doubt as stupid as
herself, and made pitiful excuses for not forwarding the slender fees
with regularity.

Everybody who is poor should be, on that ground alone, worthy of pity
and sympathy. But the hardness and stupidity, and the ill-temper, all
combined and clearly shown in her letters, repelled her tutor. Iris,
who drew imaginary portraits of her pupils, pictured the girl as plain
to look upon, with a dull eye, a leathery, pallid cheek, a forehead
without sunshine upon it, and lips which seldom parted with a smile.

Then there was, besides, a Cambridge undergraduate. He was neither
clever, nor industrious, nor very ambitious; he thought that a
moderate place was quite good enough for him to aim at, and he found
that his unknown and obscure tutor by correspondence was cheap and
obliging, and willing to take trouble, and quite as efficacious for
his purposes as the most expensive Cambridge coach. Iris presently
discovered that he was lazy and luxurious, a deceiver of himself, a
dweller in Fool's Paradise and a constant shirker of work. Therefore,
she disliked him. Had she actually known him and talked with him, she
might have liked him better in spite of these faults and shortcomings,
for he was really a pleasant, easygoing youth, who wallowed in
intellectual sloth, but loved physical activity; who will presently
drop easily, and comfortably, and without an effort or a doubt, into
the bosom of the Church, and will develop later on into an admirable
country parson, unless they disestablish the Establishment: in which
case, I do not know what he will do.

But this other man, this man who was coming for an explanation, this
Mr. Arnold Arbuthnot, was, if you please, a very different kind of
pupil. In the first place he was a gentleman, a fact which he
displayed, not ostentatiously, in every line of his letters; next, he
had come to her for instruction--the only pupil she had in that
science, in heraldry, which she loved. It is far more pleasant to be
describing a shield and settling questions in the queer old language
of this queer old science, than in solving and propounding problems in
trigonometry and conic sections. And then--how if your pupil begins to
talk round the subject and to wander into other things? You cannot
very well talk round a branch of mathematics, but heraldry is a
subject surrounded by fields, meadows, and lawns, so to speak, all
covered with beautiful flowers. Into these the pupil wandered, and
Iris not unwillingly followed. Thus the teaching of heraldry by
correspondence became the most delightful interchange of letters
imaginable, set off and enriched with a curious and strange piquancy,
derived from the fact that one of them, supposed to be an elderly man,
was a young girl, ignorant of the world except from books, and the
advice given her by two old men, who formed all her society. Then, as
was natural, what was at first a kind of play, became before long a
serious and earnest confidence on the one side, and a hesitating
reception on the other.

Latterly he more than once amused himself by drawing an imaginary
portrait of her; it was a pleasing portrait, but it made her feel
uneasy.

"I know you," he said, "from your letters, but yet I want to know you
in person. I think you are a man advanced in years." Poor Iris! and
she not yet twenty-one. "You sit in your study and read; you wear
glasses, and your hair is gray; you have a kind heart and a cheerful
voice; you are not rich--you have never tried to make yourself rich;
you are therefore little versed in the ways of mankind; you take your
ideas chiefly from books; the few friends you have chosen are true and
loyal; you are full of sympathy, and quick to read the thoughts of
those in whom you take an interest." A very fine character, but it
made Iris's cheek to burn and her eyes to drop. To be sure she was not
rich, nor did she know the world; so far her pupil was right, but yet
she was not gray nor old. And, again, she was not, as he thought, a
man.

Letter-writing is not extinct, as it is a commonplace to affirm, and
as people would have us believe. Letters are written still--the most
delightful letters--letters as copious, as charming, as any of the
last century; but men and women no longer write their letters as
carefully as they used to do in the old days, because they were then
shown about, and very likely read aloud. Our letters, therefore,
though their sentences are not so balanced nor their periods so
rounded, are more real, more truthful, more spontaneous, and more
delightful than the laborious productions of our ancestors, who had to
weigh every phrase, and to think out their bon mots, epigrams, and
smart things for weeks beforehand, so that the letter might appear
full of impromptu wit. I should like, for instance, just for once, to
rob the outward or the homeward mail, in order to read all the
delightful letters which go every week backward and forward between
the folk in India and the folk at home.

"I shall lose my letters," Iris recollected, and her heart sunk. Not
only did her correspondent begin to draw these imaginary portraits of
her, but he proceeded to urge upon her to come out of her concealment,
and to grant him an interview. This she might have refused, in her
desire to continue a correspondence which brightened her monotonous
life. But there came another thing, and this decided her. He began to
give, and to ask, opinions concerning love, marriage, and such
topics--and then she perceived it could not possibly be discussed with
him, even in domino and male disguise. "As for love," her pupil wrote,
"I suppose it is a real and not a fancied necessity of life. A man, I
mean, may go on a long time without it, but there will come a time--do
not you think so?--when he is bound to feel the incompleteness of life
without a woman to love. We ought to train our boys and girls from the
very beginning to regard love and marriage as the only things really
worth having, because without them there is no happiness. Give me your
own experience. I am sure you must have been in love at some time or
other in your life."

Anybody will understand that Iris could not possibly give her own
experience in love-matters, nor could she plunge into speculative
philosophy of this kind with her pupil. Obviously the thing must come
to an end. Therefore she wrote a letter to him, telling him that
"I.A." would meet him, if he pleased, that very evening at the hour of
eight.

It is by this time sufficiently understood that Iris Aglen professed
to teach--it is an unusual combination--mathematics and heraldry; she
might also have taught equally well, had she chosen, sweetness of
disposition, goodness of heart, the benefits conferred by pure and
lofty thoughts on the expression of a girl's face, and the way to
acquire all the other gracious, maidenly virtues; but either there is
too limited a market for these branches of culture, or--which is
perhaps the truer reason--there are so many English girls, not to
speak of Americans, who are ready and competent to teach them, and do
teach them to their brothers, and their lovers, and to each other, and
to their younger sisters all day long.

As for her heraldry, it was natural that she should acquire that
science, because her grandfather knew as much as any Pursuivant or
King-at-Arms, and thought that by teaching the child a science which
is nowadays cultivated by so few, he was going to make her fortune.
Besides, ever mindful of the secret packet, he thought that an heiress
ought to understand heraldry. It was, indeed, as you shall see, in
this way that her fortune was made; but yet not quite in the way he
proposed to make it. Nobody ever makes a fortune quite in the way at
first intended for him.

As for her mathematics, it is no wonder that she was good in this
science, because she was a pupil of Lala Roy.

This learned Bengalee condescended to acknowledge the study of
mathematics as worthy even of the Indian intellect, and amused himself
with them when he was not more usefully engaged in chess. He it was
who, being a lodger in the house, taught Iris almost as soon as she
could read how letters placed side by side may be made to signify and
accomplish stupendous things, and how they may disguise the most
graceful and beautiful curves, and how they may even open a way into
boundless space, and there disclose marvels. This wondrous world did
the philosopher open to the ready and quick-witted girl; nor did he
ever lead her to believe that it was at all an unusual or an
extraordinary thing for a girl to be so quick and apt for science as
herself, nor did he tell her that if she went to Newnham or to Girton,
extraordinary glories would await her, with the acclamations of the
multitude in the Senate House and the praise of the Moderators. Iris,
therefore, was not proud of her mathematics, which seemed part of her
very nature. But of her heraldry she was, I fear, extremely
proud--proud even to sinfulness. No doubt this was the reason why,
through her heraldry, the humiliation of this evening fell upon her.

"If he is young," she thought, "if he is young--and he is sure to be
young--he will be very angry at having opened his mind to a girl"--it
will be perceived that, although she knew so much mathematics, she was
really very ignorant of the opposite sex, not to know that a young man
likes nothing so much as the opening of his mind to a young lady. "If
he is old, he will be more humiliated still"--as if any man at any age
was ever humiliated by confessing himself to a woman. "If he is a
proud man, he will never forgive me. Indeed, I am sure that he can
never forgive me, whatever kind of man he is. But I can do no more
than tell him I am sorry. If he will not forgive me then, what more
can I say? Oh, if he should be vindictive!"

When the clock began to strike the hour of eight, Iris lighted her
candles, and before the pulsation of the last stroke had died away,
she heard the ringing of the house-bell.

The door was opened by her grandfather himself, and she heard his
voice.

"Yes," he said, "you will find your tutor, in the first floor front,
alone. If you are inclined to be vindictive, when you hear all,
please ring the bell for me."

The visitor mounted the stairs, and Iris, hearing his step, began to
tremble and to shake for fear.

When the door opened she did not at first look up. But she knew that
her pupil was there, and that he was looking for his tutor.

"Pardon me"--the voice was not unpleasant--"pardon me. I was directed
to this room. I have an appointment with my tutor."

"If," said Iris, rising, for the time for confession had at length
arrived, "if you are Mr. Arnold Arbuthnot, your appointment is, I
believe, with me."

"It is with my tutor," he said.

"I am your tutor. My initials are I.A."

The room was only lighted by two candles, but they showed him the
hanging head and the form of a woman, and he thought she looked young,
judging by the outline. Her voice was sweet and clear.

"My tutor? You?"

"If you really are Mr. Arnold Arbuthnot, the gentleman who has
corresponded with I.A. for the last two years on heraldry, and--and
other things, I am your tutor."

She had made the dreaded confession. The rest would be easy. She even
ventured to raise her eyes, and she perceived, with a sinking of the
heart, that her estimate of her pupil's age was tolerably correct. He
was a young man, apparently not more than five or six and twenty.

It now remained to be seen if he was vindictive.

As for the pupil, when he recovered a little from the blow of this
announcement, he saw before him a girl, quite young, dressed in a
simple gray or drab colored stuff, which I have reason to believe is
called Carmelite. The dress had a crimson kerchief arranged in folds
over the front, and a lace collar, and at first sight it made the
beholder feel that, considered merely as a setting of face and figure,
it was remarkably effective. Surely this is the true end and aim of
all feminine adornment, apart from the elementary object of keeping
one warm.

"I--I did not know," the young man said, after a pause, "I did not
know at all that I was corresponding with a lady."

Here she raised her eyes again, and he observed that the eyes were
very large and full of light--"eyes like the fishpools of
Heshbon"--dove's eyes.

"I am very sorry," she said meekly. "It was my fault."

He observed other things now, having regained the use of his senses.
Thus he saw that she wore her hair, which was of a wonderful chestnut
brown color, parted at the side like a boy's, and that she had not
committed the horrible enormity of cutting it short. He observed, too,
that while her lips were quivering and her cheek was blushing, her
look was steadfast. Are dove's eyes, he asked himself, always
steadfast?

"I ought to have told you long ago, when you began to write
about--about yourself and other things, when I understood that you
thought I was a man--oh, long ago I ought to have told you the truth!"

"It is wonderful!" said the young man, "it is truly wonderful!" He
was thinking of the letters--long letters, full of sympathy, and a
curious unworldly wisdom, which she had sent him in reply to his own,
and he was comparing them with her youthful face, as one involuntarily
compares a poet's appearance with his poetry--generally a
disappointing thing to do, and always a foolish thing.

"I am very sorry," she repeated.

"Have you many pupils, like myself?"

"I have several pupils in mathematics. It does not matter to them
whether they are taught by a man or a woman. In heraldry I had only
one--you."

He looked round the room. One end was occupied by shelves, filled with
books; in one of the windows was a table, covered with papers and
adorned with a type-writer, by means of which Iris carried on her
correspondence. For a moment the unworthy thought crossed his mind
that he had been, perhaps, artfully lured on by a siren for his
destruction. Only for a moment, however, because she raised her face
and met his gaze again, with eyes so frank and innocent, that he could
not doubt them. Besides, there was the clear outline of her face, so
truthful and so honest. The young man was an artist, and therefore
believed in outline. Could any sane and intelligent creature doubt
those curves of cheek and chin?

"I have put together," she said, "all your letters for you. Here they
are. Will you, please, take them back? I must not keep them any
longer." He took them, and bowed. "I made this appointment, as you
desired, to tell you the truth, because I have deceived you too long:
and to beg you to forgive me; and to say that, of course, there is an
end to our correspondence."

"Thank you. It shall be as you desire. Exactly," he repeated, "as you
desire."

He ought to have gone at once. There was nothing more to say. Yet he
lingered, holding the letters in his hand.

"To write these letters," he said, "has been for a long time one of
my greatest pleasures, partly because I felt that I was writing to a
friend, and so wrote in full trust and confidence; partly because they
procured me a reply--in the shape of your letters. Must I take back
these letters of mine?"

She made no answer.

"It is hard, is it not, to lose a friend so slowly acquired, thus
suddenly and unexpectedly?"

"Yes," she said, "it is hard. I am very sorry. It was my fault."

"Perhaps I have said something, in my ignorance--something which ought
not to have been said or written--something careless--something which
has lowered me in your esteem--"

"Oh, no--no!" said Iris quickly. "You have never said anything that a
gentleman should not have said."

"And if you yourself found any pleasure in answering my letters--"

"Yes," said Iris with frankness, "it gave me great pleasure to read
and to answer your letters, as well as I could."

"I have not brought back your letters. I hope you will allow me to
keep them. And, if you will, why should we not continue our
correspondence as before?" But he did not ask the question
confidently.

"No," said Iris decidedly "it can never be continued as before. How
could it, when once we have met, and you have learned the truth?"

"Then," he continued, "if we cannot write to each other any more, can
we not talk?"

She ought to have informed him on the spot that the thing was quite
impossible, and not to be thought of for one moment. She should have
said, coldly, but firmly--every right-minded and well-behaved girl
would have said--"Sir, it is not right that you should come alone to a
young lady's study. Such things are not to be permitted. It we meet in
society, we may, perhaps, renew our acquaintance."

But girls do go on sometimes as if there was no such thing as
propriety at all, and such cases are said to be growing more frequent.
Besides, Iris was not a girl who was conversant with social
convenances. She looked at her pupil thoughtfully and frankly.

"Can we?" she asked. She who hesitates is lost, a maxim which cannot
be too often read, said, and studied. It is one of the very few golden
rules omitted from Solomon's Proverbs. "Can we? It would be pleasant."

"It you will permit me," he blushed and stammered, wondering at her
ready acquiescence, "if you will permit me to call upon you
sometimes--here, if you will allow me, or anywhere else. You know my
name. I am by profession an artist, and I have a studio close at hand
in Tite Street."

"To call upon me here?" she repeated.

Now, when one is a tutor, and has been reading with a pupil for two
years, one regards that pupil with a feeling which may not be exactly
parental, but which is unconventional. If Arnold had said, "Behold me!
May I, being a young man, call upon you, a young woman?" she would
have replied: "No, young man, that can never be." But when he said,
"May I, your pupil, call sometimes upon you, my tutor?" a distinction
was at once established by which the impossible became possible.

"Yes," she said, "I think you may call. My grandfather has his tea
with me every evening at six. You may call then if it will give you
any pleasure."

"You really will let me come here?"

The young man looked as if the permission was likely to give him the
greatest pleasure.

"Yes; if you wish it."

She spoke just exactly like an Oxford Don giving an undergraduate
permission to take an occasional walk with him, or to call for
conversation and advice at certain times in his rooms. Arnold noticed
the manner, and smiled.

"Still," he said, "as your pupil."

He meant to set her at her ease concerning the propriety of these
visits. She thought he meant a continuation of a certain little
arrangement as to fees, and blushed.

"No," she said; "I must not consider you as a pupil any longer. You
have put an end to that yourself."

"I do not mind, if only I continue your friend."

"Oh," she said, "but we must not pledge ourselves rashly to
friendship. Perhaps you will not like me when you once come to know
me."

"Then I remain your disciple."

"Oh no," she flushed again, "you must already think me presumptuous
enough in venturing to give you advice. I have written so many foolish
things--"

"Indeed, no," he interrupted, "a thousand times no. Let me tell you
once for all, if I may, that you have taught me a great deal--far more
than you can ever understand, or than I can explain. Where did you get
your wisdom? Not from the Book of Human Life. Of that you cannot know
much as yet."

"The wisdom is in your imagination, I think. You shall not be my pupil
nor my disciple, but--well--because you have told me so much, and I
seem to have known you so long, and, besides, because you must never
feel ashamed of having told me so much, you shall come, if you please,
as my brother."

It was not till afterward that she reflected on the vast
responsibilities she incurred in making this proposal, and on the
eagerness with which her pupil accepted it.

"As your brother!" he cried, offering her his hand. "Why, it is
far--far more than I could have ventured to hope. Yes, I will come as
your brother. And now, although you know so much about me, you have
told me nothing about yourself--not even your name."

"My name is Iris Aglen."

"Iris! It is a pretty name!"

"It was, I believe, my grandmother's. But I never saw her, and I do
not know who or what my father's relations are."

"Iris Aglen!" he repeated. "Iris was the Herald of the Gods, and the
rainbow was constructed on purpose to serve her for a way from Heaven
to the Earth."

"Mathematicians do not allow that," said the girl, smiling.

"I don't know any mathematics. But now I understand in what school you
learned your heraldry. You are Queen-at-Arms at least, and Herald to
the Gods of Olympus."

He wished to add something about the loveliness of Aphrodite, and the
wisdom of Athene, but he refrained, which was in good taste.

"Thank you, Mr. Arbuthnot," Iris replied. "I learned my heraldry of my
grandfather, who taught himself from the books he sells. And my
mathematics I learned of Lala Roy, who is our lodger, and a learned
Hindoo gentleman. My father is dead--and my mother as well--and I have
no friends in the world except these two old men, who love me, and
have done their best to spoil me."

Her eyes grew humid and her voice trembled.

No other friends in the world! Strange to say, this young man felt a
little sense of relief. No other friends. He ought to have sympathized
with the girl's loneliness; he might have asked her how she could
possibly endure life without companionship, but he did not; he only
felt that other friends might have been rough and ill-bred; this girl
derived her refinement, not only from nature, but also from separation
from the other girls who might in the ordinary course have been her
friends and associates. And if no other friends, then no lover.
Arnold was only going to visit the young lady as her brother; but
lovers do not generally approve the introduction of such novel effects
as that caused by the appearance of a brand-new and previously
unsuspected brother. He was glad, on the whole, that there was no
lover.

Then he left her, and went home to his studio, where he sat till
midnight, sketching a thousand heads one after the other with rapid
pencil. They were all girls' heads, and they all had hair parted on
the left side, with a broad, square forehead, full eyes, and straight,
clear-cut features.

"No," he said, "it is no good. I cannot catch the curve of her
mouth--nobody could. What a pretty girl! And I am to be her brother!
What will Clara say? And how--oh, how in the world can she be, all at
the same time, so young, so pretty, so learned, so quick, so
sympathetic, and so wise?"




CHAPTER IV.

THE WOLF AT HOME.


There is a certain music-hall, in a certain street, leading out of a
certain road, and this is quite clear and definite enough. Its
distinctive characteristics, above any of its fellows, is a vulgarity
so profound, that the connoisseur or student in that branch of mental
culture thinks that here at last he has reached the lowest depths. For
this reason one shrinks from actually naming it, because it might
become fashionable, and then, if it fondly tried to change its
character to suit its changed audience, it might entirely lose its
present charm, and become simply commonplace.

Joe Gallop stood in the doorway of this hall, a few days after the
Tempting of Mr. James. It was about ten o'clock, when the
entertainments were in full blast. He had a cigarette between his
lips, as becomes a young man of fashion, but it had gone out, and he
was thinking of something. To judge from the cunning look in his eyes,
it was something not immediately connected with the good of his
fellow-creatures. Presently the music of the orchestra ceased, and
certain female acrobats, who had been "contorting" themselves
fearfully and horribly for a quarter of an hour upon the stage, kissed
their hands, which were as hard as ropes, from the nature of their
profession, and smiled a fond farewell. There was some applause, but
not much, because neither man nor woman cares greatly for female
acrobats, and the performers themselves are with difficulty persuaded
to learn their art, and generally make haste to "go in" again as soon
as they can, and try henceforward to forget that they have ever done
things with ropes and bars.

Joe, when they left the stage, ceased his meditations, whatever may
have been their subject, lit a fresh cigarette, and assumed an air of
great expectation, as if something really worth seeing and hearing
were now about to appear. And when the chairman brought down the
hammer with the announcement that Miss Carlotta Claradine, the
People's Favorite, would now oblige, it was Joe who loudly led the way
for a tumultuous burst of applause. Then the band, which at this
establishment, and others like unto it, only plays two tunes, one for
acrobats, and one for singers, struck up the second air, and the
People's Favorite appeared. She may have had by nature a sweet and
tuneful voice; perhaps it was in order to please her friends, the
people, that, she converted it into a harsh and rasping voice, that
she delivered her words with even too much gesture, and that she
uttered a kind of shriek at the beginning of every verse, which was
not in the composer's original music, but was thrown in to compel
attention. She was dressed with great simplicity, in plain frock,
apron, and white cap, to represent a fair young Quakeress, and she
sung a song about her lover with much "archness"--a delightful quality
in woman.

"Splendid, splendid! Bravo!" shouted Joseph at the end of the first
verse. "That fetches 'em, don't it, sir? Positively drags 'em, in,
sir."

He addressed his words, without turning his head, to a man who had
just come in, and was gazing at him with unbounded astonishment.

"You here, Joe??" he said.

Joe started.

"Why, Chalker, who'd have thought to meet you in this music-hall?"

"It's a good step, isn't it? And what are you doing, Joe? I heard
you'd left the P. and O. Company."

"Had to," said Joe. "A gentleman has no choice but to resign. Ought
never to have gone there. There's no position, Chalker--no position at
all in the service. That is what I felt. Besides, the uniform, for a
man of my style, is unbecoming. And the captain was a cad."

"Humph! and what are you doing then? Living on the old man again?"

"Never you mind, David Chalker," replied Joe with dignity; "I am not
likely to trouble you any more after the last time I called upon you."

"Well, Joe," said the other, without taking offense, "it is not my
business to lend money without a security, and all you had to offer
was your chance of what your grandfather might leave you--or might
not."

"And a very good security too, if he does justice to his relations."

"Yes; but how did I know whether he was going to do justice? Come,
Joe, don't be shirty with an old friend."

There was a cordiality in the solicitor's manner which boded well. Joe
was pretty certain that Mr. Chalker was not a man to cultivate
friendship unless something was to be got out of it. It is only the
idle and careless who can waste time over unprofitable friendships.
With most men friendship means assisting in each other's little games,
so that every man must become, on occasion, bonnet, confederate, and
pal, for his friend, and may expect the same kindly office for
himself.

If Chalker wished to keep up his old acquaintance with Joe Gallop,
there must be some good reason. Now the only reason which suggested
itself to Joe at that moment was that Chalker had lately drawn a new
will for the old man, and that he himself might be in it. Here he was
wrong. The only reason of Mr. Chalker's friendly attitude was
curiosity to know what Joe was doing, and how he was living.

"Look here, Chalker," Joe whispered, "you used to pretend to be a pal.
What's the good of being a pal if you won't help a fellow? You see my
grandfather once a week or so; you shut the door and have long talks
with him. If you know what he's going to do with his money, why not
tell a fellow? Let's make a business matter of it."

"How much do you know, Joe, and what is your business proposal worth?"

"Nothing at all; that's the honest truth--I know nothing. The old
man's as tight as wax. But there's other business in the world besides
his. Suppose I know of something a precious sight better than his
investments, and suppose--just suppose--that I wanted a lawyer to
manage it for me?"

"Well, Joe?"

"Encore! Bravo! Encore! Bravo!" Joe banged his stick on the floor and
shouted because the singer ended her first song. He looked so fierce
and big, that all the bystanders made haste to follow his example.

"Splendid, isn't she?" he said.

"Hang the singer! What do you mean by other business?"

"Perhaps it's nothing. Perhaps there will be thousands in it. And
perhaps I can get on without you, after all."

"Very well, Joe. Get on without me if you like."

"Look here, Chalker," Joe laid a persuasive hand on the other's arm,
"can't we two be friendly? Why don't you give a fellow a lift? All I
want to know is where the old man's put his money, and how he's left
it."

"Suppose I do know," Mr. Chalker replied, wishing ardently that he
did, "do you think I am going to betray trust--a solicitor betray
trust--and for nothing? But if you want to talk real business, Joe,
come to my office. You know where that is."

Joe knew very well; in fact, there had been more than one difficulty
which had been adjusted through Mr. Chalker's not wholly disinterested
aid.

Then the singer appeared again attired in a new and startling dress,
and Joe began once more to applaud again with voice and stick. Mr.
Chalker, surprised at this newly-developed enthusiasm for art, left
him and walked up the hall, and sat down beside the chairman, whom he
seemed to know. In fact, the chairman was also the proprietor of the
show, and Mr. Chalker was acting for him in his professional capacity,
much as he had acted for Mr. Emblem.

"Who is your new singer?" he asked.

"She calls herself Miss Carlotta Claradine. She's a woman, let me tell
you, Mr. Chalker, who will get along. Fine figure, plenty of cheek,
loud voice, flings herself about, and don't mind a bit when the words
are a leetle strong. That's the kind of singer the people like. That's
her husband, at the far end of the room--the big, good-looking chap
with the light mustache and the cigarette in his mouth."

"Whew!" Mr. Chalker whistled the low note which indicates Surprise.
"That's her husband, is it? The husband of Miss Carlotta Claradine, is
it? Oho! oho! Her husband! Are you sure he is her husband?"

"Do you know him, then?"

"Yes, I know him. What was the real name of the girl?"

"Charlotte Smithers. This is her first appearance on any stage--and we
made up the name for her when we first put her on the posters. I made
it myself--out of Chlorodyne, you know, which is in the
advertisements. Sounds well, don't it? Carlotta Claradine."

"Very well, indeed. By Jove! Her husband, is he?"

"And, I suppose," said the chairman, "lives on his wife's salary.
Bless you, Mr. Chalker, there's a whole gang about every theater and
music hall trying to get hold of the promising girls. It's a regular
profession. Them as have nothing but their good looks may do for the
mashers, but these chaps look out for the girls who'll bring in the
money. What's a pretty face to them compared with the handling of a
big salary every week? That's the sort Carlotta's husband belongs to."

"Well, the life will suit him down to the ground."

"And jealous with it, if you please. He comes here every night to
applaud and takes her home himself. Keeps himself sober on purpose."

And then the lady appeared again in a wonderful costume of blue silk
and tights, personating the Lion Masher. It was her third and last
song.

In the applause which followed, Mr. Chalker could discern plainly the
stick as well as the voice of his old friend. And he thought how
beautiful is the love of husband unto wife, and he smiled, thinking
that when Joe came next to see him, he might, perhaps, hear truths
which he had thought unknown, and, for certain reasons, wished to
remain unknown.

Presently he saw the singer pass down the hall, and join her husband,
who now, his labors ended, was seeking refreshment at the bar. She was
a good-looking girl--still only a girl, and apparently under
twenty--quietly dressed, yet looking anything but quiet. But that
might have been due to her fringe, which was, so to speak, a
prominent-feature in her face. She was tall and well-made, with large
features, an ample cheek, a full eye, and a wide mouth. A
good-natured-looking girl, and though her mouth was wide, it suggested
smiles. The husband was exchanging a little graceful badinage with the
barmaid when she joined him, and perhaps this made her look a little
cross. "She's jealous, too," said Mr. Chalker, observant; "all the
better." Yet a face which, on the whole, was prepossessing and good
natured, and betokened a disposition to make the best of the world.

"How long has she been married?" Mr. Chalker asked the proprietor.

"Only about a month or so."

"Ah!"

Mr. Chalker proceeded to talk business, and gave no further hint of
any interest in the newly-married pair.

"Now, Joe," said the singer, with a freezing glance at the barmaid,
"are you going to stand here all night?"

Joe drank off his glass and followed his wife into the street. They
walked side by side in silence, until they reached their lodgings.
Then she threw off her hat and jacket, and sat down on the horsehair
sofa and said abruptly:

"I can't do it, Joe; and I won't. So don't ask me."

"Wait a bit--wait a bit, Lotty, my love. Don't be in a hurry, now.
Don't say rash things, there's a good girl." Joe spoke quite softly,
as if he were not the least angry, but, perhaps, a little hurt.
"There's not a bit of a hurry. You needn't decide to-day, nor yet
to-morrow."

"I couldn't do it," she said. "Oh, it's a dreadful, wicked thing even
to ask me. And only five weeks to-morrow since we married!"

"Lotty, my dear, let us be reasonable." He still spoke quite softly.
"If we are not to go on like other people; if we are to be continually
bothering our heads about honesty, and that rubbish, we shall be
always down in the world. How do other people make money and get on?
By humbug, my dear. By humbug. As for you, a little play-acting is
nothing."

"But I am not the man's daughter, and my own father's alive and well."

"Look here, Lotty. You are always grumbling about the music-halls."

"Well, and good reason to grumble. If you heard those ballet girls
talk, and see how they go on at the back, you'd grumble. As for the
music--" She laughed, as if against her will. "If anybody had told me
six months ago--me, that used to go to the Cathedral Service every
afternoon--that I should be a Lion Masher at a music-hall and go on
dressed in tights, I should have boxed his ears for impudence."

"Why, you don't mean to tell me, Lotty, that you wish you had stuck to
the moldy old place, and gone on selling music over the counter?"

"Well, then, perhaps I do."

"No, no, Lotty; your husband cannot let you say that."

"My husband can laugh and talk with barmaids. That makes him happy."

"Lotty," he said, "you are a little fool. And think of the glory.
Posters with your name in letters a foot and a half long--'The
People's Favorite.' Why, don't they applaud you till their hands drop
off?"

She melted a little.

"Applaud! As if that did any good! And me in tights!"

"As for the tights," Joe replied with dignity, "the only person whom
you need consult on that subject is your husband; and since I do not
object, I should like to see the man who does. Show me that man,
Lotty, and I'll straighten him out for you. You have my perfect
approval, my dear. I honor you for the tights."

"My husband's approval!"

She repeated his words again in a manner which had been on other
occasions most irritating to him. But to-night he refused to be
offended.

"Of course," he went on, "as soon as I get a berth on another ship I
shall take you off the boards. It is the husband's greatest delight,
especially if he is a jolly sailor, to brave all dangers for his wife.
Think, Lotty, how pleasant it would be not to do any more work."

"I should like to sing sometimes, to sing good music, at the great
concerts. That's what I thought I was going to do."

"You shall; you shall sing as little or as often as you like. 'A
sailor's wife a sailor's star should be.' You shall be a great lady,
Lotty, and you shall just command your own line. Wait a bit, and you
shall have your own carriage, and your own beautiful house, and go to
as many balls as you like among the countesses and the swells."

"Oh, Joe!" she laughed. "Why, if we were as rich as anything, I should
never get ladies to call upon me. And as for you, no one would ever
take you to be a gentleman, you know."

"Why, what do you call me, now?"

He laughed, but without much enjoyment. No one likes to be told that
he is not a gentleman, whatever his own suspicions on the subject may
be.

"Never mind. I know a gentleman when I see one. Go on with your
nonsense about being rich."

"I shall make you rich, Lotty, whether you like it or not," he said,
still with unwonted sweetness.

She shook her head.

"Not by wickedness," she said stoutly.

"I've got there," he pulled a bundle of papers out of his pockets,
"all the documents wanted to complete the case. All I want now is for
the rightful heiress to step forward."

"I'm not the rightful heiress, and I'm not the woman to step forward,
Joe; so don't you think it."

"I've been to-day," Joe continued, "to Doctors' Commons, and I've seen
the will. There's no manner of doubt about it; and the money--oh,
Lord, Lotty, if you only knew how much it is!"

"What does it matter, Joe, how much it is, if it is neither yours nor
mine?"

"It matters this: that it ought all to be mine."

"How can that be, if it was not left to you?"

Joe was nothing if not a man of resource. He therefore replied without
hesitation or confusion:

"The money was left to a certain man and to his heirs. That man is
dead. His heiress should have succeeded, but she was kept out of her
rights. She is dead, and I am her cousin, and entitled to all her
property, because she made no will."

"Is that gospel truth, Joe? Is she dead? Are you sure?"

"Quite sure," he replied. "Dead as a door-nail."

"Is that the way you got the papers?"

"That's the way, Lotty."

"Then why not go to a lawyer and make him take up the case for you,
and honestly get your own?"

"You don't know law, my dear, or you wouldn't talk nonsense about
lawyers. There are two ways. One is to go myself to the present
unlawful possessor and claim the whole. It's a woman; she would be
certain to refuse, and then we should go to law, and very likely lose
it all, although the right is on our side. The other way is for some
one--say you--to go to her and say: 'I am that man's daughter. Here
are my proofs. Here are all his papers. Give me back my own.' That you
could do in the interests of justice, though I own it is not the exact
truth."

"And if she refuses then?"

"She can't refuse, with the man's daughter actually standing before
her. She might make a fuss for a bit. But she would have to give in at
last."

"Joe, consider. You have got some papers, whatever they may contain.
Suppose that it is all true that you have told me--"

"Lotty, my dear, when did I ever tell you an untruth?"

"When did you ever tell me the truth, my dear? Don't talk wild.
Suppose it is all true, how are you going to make out where your
heiress has been all this time, and what she has been doing?"

"Trust me for that."

"I trust you for making up something or other, but--oh, Joe, you
little think, you clever people, how seldom you succeed in deceiving
any one."

"I've got such a story for you, Lotty, as would deceive anybody.
Listen now. It's part truth, and part--the other thing. Your father--"

"My father, poor dear man," Lotty interrupted, "is minding his
music-shop in Gloucester, and little thinking what wickedness his
daughter is being asked to do."

"Hang it! the girl's father, then. He died in America, where he went
under another name, and you were picked up by strangers and reared
under that name, in complete ignorance of your own family. All which
is true and can be proved."

"Who brought her up?"

"People in America. I'm one of 'em."

"Who is to prove that?"

"I am. I am come to England on purpose. I am her guardian."

"Who is to prove that you are the girl's guardian?"

"I shall find somebody to prove that."

His thoughts turned to Mr. Chalker, a gentleman whom he judged capable
of proving anything he was paid for.

"And suppose they ask me questions?"

"Don't answer 'em. You know very little. The papers were only found
the other day. You are not expected to know anything."

"Where was the real girl?"

"With her grandfather."

"Where was the grandfather?"

"What does that matter?" he replied; "I will tell you afterward."

"When did the real girl die?"

"That, too, I will tell you afterward."

Lotty leaned her cheek upon her hand, and looked at her husband
thoughtfully.

"Let us be plain, Joe."

"You can never be plain, my dear," he replied with the smile of a
lover, not a husband; "never in your husband's eyes; not even in
tights."

But she was not to be won by flattery.

"Fine words," she said, "fine words. What do they amount to? Oh, Joe,
little I thought when you came along with your beautiful promises,
what sort of a man I was going to marry."

"A very good sort of a man," he said. "You've got a jolly sailor--an
officer and a gentleman. Come now, what have you got to say to this?
Can't you be satisfied with an officer and a gentleman?"

He drew himself up to his full height. Well, he was a handsome fellow:
there was no denying it.

"Good looks and fine words," his wife went on. "Well, and now I've got
to keep you, and if you could make me sing in a dozen halls every
night, you would, and spend the money on yourself--joyfully you
would."

"We would spend it together, my dear. Don't turn rusty, Lotty."

He was not a bad-tempered man, and this kind of talk did not anger him
at all. So long as his wife worked hard and brought in the coin for
him to spend, what mattered for a few words now and then? Besides, he
wanted her assistance.

"What are you driving at?" he went on. "I show you a bit of my hand,
and you begin talking round and round. Look here, Lotty. Here's a
splendid chance for us. I must have a woman's help. I would rather
have your help than any other woman's--yes, than any other woman's in
the world. I would indeed. If you won't help me, why, then, of course,
I must go to some other woman."

His wife gasped and choked. She knew already, after only five weeks'
experience, how bad a man he was--how unscrupulous, false, and
treacherous, how lazy and selfish. But, after a fashion, she loved
him; after a woman's fashion, she was madly jealous of him. Another
woman! And only the other night she had seen him giving
brandy-and-soda to one of the music-hall ballet-girls. Another woman!

"If you do, Joe," she said; "oh, if you do--I will kill her and you
too!"

He laughed.

"If I do, my dear, you don't think I shall be such a fool as to tell
you who she is. Do you suppose that no woman has ever fallen in love
with me before you? But then, my pretty, you see I don't talk about
them; and do you suppose--oh, Lotty, are you such a fool as to suppose
that you are the first girl I ever fell in love with?"

"What do you want me to do? Tell me again."

"I have told you already. I want you to become, for the time, the
daughter of the man who died in America; you will claim your
inheritance; I will provide you with all the papers; I will stand by
you; I will back you up with such a story as will disarm all
suspicion. That is all."

"Yes. I understand. Haven't people been sent to prison for less, Joe?"

"Foolish people have. Not people who are well advised and under good
management. Mind you, this business is under my direction. I am boss."

She made no reply, but took her candle and went off to bed.

In the dead of night she awakened her husband.

"Joe," she said, "is it true that you know another girl who would do
this for you?"

"More than one, Lotty," he replied, this man of resource, although he
was only half awake. "More than one. A great many more. Half-a-dozen,
I know, at least."

She was silent. Half an hour afterward she woke him up again.

"Joe," she said, "I've made up my mind. You sha'n't say that I refused
to do for you what any other girl in the world would have done."

As a tempter it will be seen that Joe was unsurpassed.

It was now a week since he had received, carefully wrapped in wool,
and deposited in a wooden box dispatched by post, a key, newly made.
It was, also, very nearly a week since he had used that key. It was
used during Mr. Emblem's hour for tea, while James waited and watched
outside in an agony of terror. But Joe did not find what he wanted.
There were in the safe one or two ledgers, a banker's book, a
check-book, and a small quantity of money. But there were not any
records at all of monies invested. There were no railway certificates,
waterwork shares, transfers, or notes of stock, mortgages, loans, or
anything at all. The only thing that he saw was a roll of papers tied
up with red tape. On the roll was written: "For Iris. To be given to
her on her twenty-first birthday."

"What the deuce is this, I wonder?" Joe took this out and looked at it
suspiciously. "Can he be going to give her all his money before he
dies? Is he going to make her inherit it at once?" The thought was so
exasperating that he slipped the roll into his pocket. "At all
events," he said, "she sha'n't have them until I have read them first.
I dare say they won't be missed for a day or two."

He calculated that he could read and master the contents that night,
and put back the papers in the safe in the morning while James was
opening the shop.

"There's nothing, James," he whispered as he went out, the safe being
locked again. "There is nothing at all. Look here, my lad, you must
try another way of finding out where the money is."

"I wish I was sure that he hasn't carried off something in his
pocket," James murmured.

Joe spent the whole evening alone, contrary to his usual practice,
which was, as we have seen, to spend it at a certain music-hall. He
read the papers over and over again.

"I wish," he said at length, "I wish I had known this only two months
ago. I wish I had paid more attention to Iris. What a dreadful thing
it is to have a grandfather who keeps secrets from his grandson. What
a game we might have had over this job! What a game we might have
still if--"

And here he stopped, for the first germ or conception of a magnificent
coup dawned upon him, and fairly dazzled him so that his eyes saw a
bright light and nothing else.

"If Lotty would," he said. "But I am afraid she won't hear of it." He
sprung to his feet and caught sight of his own face in the looking
glass over the fireplace. He smiled. "I will try," he said, "I think
I know by this time, how to get round most of 'em. Once they get to
feel there are other women in the world besides themselves, they're
pretty easy worked. I will try."

One has only to add to the revelations already made that Joe paid a
second visit to the shop, this time early in the morning. The shutters
were only just taken down. James was going about with that remarkable
watering-pot only used in shops, which has a little stream running out
of it, and Mr. Emblem was upstairs slowly shaving and dressing in his
bedroom. He walked in, nodded to his friend the assistant, opened the
safe, and put back the roll.

"Now," he murmured, "if the old man has really been such a
dunder-headed pump as not to open the packet all these years, what the
devil can he know? The name is different; he hasn't got any clew to
the will; he hasn't got the certificate of his daughter's marriage, or
of the child's baptism--both in the real name. He hasn't got anything.
As for the girl here, Iris, having the same christian-name, that's
nothing. I suppose there is more than one woman with such a fool of a
name as that about in the world.

"Foxy," he said cheerfully, "have you found anything yet about the
investments? Odd, isn't it? Nothing in the safe at all. You can have
your key back."

He tossed him the key carelessly and went away.

The question of his grandfather's savings was grown insignificant
beside this great and splendid prize which lay waiting for him. What
could the savings be? At best a few thousands; the slowly saved thrift
of fifty years; nobody knew better than Joe himself how much his own
profligacies had cost his grandfather; a few thousands, and those
settled on his Cousin Iris, so that, to get his share, he would have
to try every kind of persuasion unless he could get up a case for law.
But the other thing--why, it was nearly all personal estate, so far as
he could learn by the will, and he had read it over and over again in
the room at Somerset House, with the long table in it, and the
watchful man who won't let anybody copy anything. What a shame, he
thought, not to let wills be copied! Personalty sworn under a hundred
and twenty thousand, all in three per cents, and devised to a certain
young lady, the testator's ward, in trust, for the testator's son, or
his heirs, when he or they should present themselves. Meantime, the
ward was to receive for her own use and benefit, year by year, the
whole income.

"It is unfortunate," said Joe, "that we can't come down upon her for
arrears. Still, there's an income, a steady income, of three thousand
six hundred a year when the son's heirs present themselves. I should
like to call myself a solicitor, but that kite won't fly, I'm afraid.
Lotty must be the sole heiress. Dressed quiet, without any powder, and
her fringe brushed flat, she'd pass for a lady anywhere. Perhaps it's
lucky, after all, that I married her, though if I had had the good
sense to make up to Iris, who's a deuced sight prettier, she'd have
kept me going almost as well with her pupils, and set me right with
the old man and handed me over this magnificent haul for a finish. If
only the old man hasn't broken the seals and read the papers!"

The old man had not, and Joe's fears were, therefore, groundless.




CHAPTER V.

AS A BROTHER.


Arnold immediately began to use the privilege accorded to him with a
large and liberal interpretation. If, he argued, a man is to be
treated as a brother, there should be the immediate concession of the
exchange of christian-names, and he should be allowed to call as often
as he pleases. Naturally he began by trying to read the secret of a
life self-contained, so dull, and yet so happy, so strange to his
experience.

"Is this, Iris?" he asked, "all your life? Is there nothing more?"

"No," she said; "I think you have seen all. In the morning I have my
correspondence; in the afternoon I do my sewing, I play a little, I
read, or I walk, sometimes by myself, and sometimes with Lala Roy; in
the evening I play again, or I read again, or I work at the
mathematics, while my grandfather and Lala Roy have their chess. We
used to go to the theater sometimes, but of late my grandfather has
not gone. At ten we go to bed. That is all my life."

"But, Iris, have you no friends at all, and no relations? Are there no
girls of your own age who come to see you?"

"No, not one; I have a cousin, but he is not a good man at all. His
father and mother are in Australia. When he comes here, which is very
seldom, my grandfather falls ill only with thinking about him and
looking at him. But I have no other relations, because, you see, I do
not know who my father's people were."

"Then," said Arnold, "you may be countess in your own right; you may
have any number of rich people and nice people for your cousins. Do
you not sometimes think of that?"

"No" said Iris; "I never think about things impossible."

"If I were you, I should go about the streets, and walk round the
picture-galleries looking for a face like your own. There cannot be
many. Let me draw your face, Iris, and then we will send it to the
Grosvenor, and label it, 'Wanted, this young lady's cousins.' You must
have cousins, if you could only find them out."

"I suppose I must. But what if they should turn out to be rough and
disagreeable people?"

"Your cousins could not be disagreeable, Iris," said Arnold.

She shook her head.

"One thing I should like," she replied. "It would be to find that my
cousins, if I have any, are clever people--astronomers,
mathematicians, great philosophers, and writers. But what nonsense it
is even to talk of such things; I am quite alone, except for my
grandfather and Lala Roy."

"And they are old," murmured Arnold.

"Do not look at me with such pity," said the girl. "I am very happy. I
have my own occupation; I am independent; I have my work to fill my
mind; and I have these two old gentlemen to care for and think
of. They have taken so much care of me that I ought to think of
nothing else but their comfort; and then there are the books
down-stairs--thousands of beautiful old books always within my reach."

"But you must have some companions, if only to talk and walk with."

"Why, the books are my companions; and then Lala Roy goes for walks
with me; and as for talking, I think it is much more pleasant to
think."

"Where do you walk?"

"There is Battersea Park; there are the squares; and if you take an
omnibus, there are the Gardens and Hyde Park."

"But never alone, Iris?"

"Oh, yes, I am often alone. Why not?"

"I suppose," said Arnold, shirking the question, because this is a
civilized country, and in fact, why not? "I suppose that it is your
work which keeps you from feeling life dull and monotonous."

"No life," she said, looking as wise as Newton, if Newton was ever
young and handsome--"no life can be dull when one is thinking about
mathematics all day. Do you study mathematics?"

"No; I was at Oxford, you know."

"Then perhaps you prefer metaphysics? Though Lala Roy says that the
true metaphysics, which he has tried to teach me, can only be reached
by the Hindoo intellect."

"No, indeed; I have never read any metaphysics whatever. I have only
got the English intellect." This he said with intent satirical, but
Iris failed to understand it so, and thought it was meant for a
commendable humility.

"Physical science, perhaps?"

"No, Iris. Philosophy, mathematics, physics, metaphysics, or science
of any kind have I never learned, except only the science of Heraldry,
which you have taught me, with a few other things."

"Oh!" She wondered how a man could exist at all without learning these
things. "Not any science at all? How can any one live without some
science?"

"I knew very well," he said, "that as soon as I was found out I should
be despised."

"Oh, no, not despised. But it seems such a pity--"

"There is another kind of life, Iris, which you do not know. You must
let me teach you. It is the life of Art. If you would only condescend
to show the least curiosity about me, Iris, I would try to show you
something of the Art life."

"How can I show curiosity about you, Arnold? I feel none."

"No; that is just the thing which shames me. I have felt the most
lively curiosity about you, and I have asked you thousands of
impertinent questions."

"Not impertinent, Arnold. If you want to ask any more, pray do. I dare
say you cannot understand my simple life."

"And you ask me nothing at all about myself. It isn't fair, Iris."

"Why should I? I know you already."

"You know nothing at all about me."

"Oh, yes, I know you very well indeed. I knew you before you came
here. You showed me yourself in your letters. You are exactly like the
portrait I drew of you. I never thought, for instance, that you were
an old gentleman, as you thought me." He laughed. It was a new thing
to see Iris using, even gently, the dainty weapons of satire.

"But you do not know what I am, or what is my profession, or anything
at all about me."

"No; I do not care to know. All that is not part of yourself. It is
outside you."

"And because you thought you knew me from those letters, you suffer me
to come here and be your disciple still? Yet you gave me back my
letters?"

"That was because they were written to me under a wrong impression."

"Will you have them back again?"

She shook her head.

"I know them all by heart," she said simply.

There was not the slightest sign of coquetry or flattery in her voice,
or in her eyes, which met his look with clear and steady gaze.

"I cannot ask you to read my portrait to me as you drew it from those
pictures."

"Why not?" She began to read him his portrait as readily as if she
were stating the conclusion of a problem. "I saw that you were young
and full of generous thoughts; sometimes you were indignant with
things as they are, but generally you laughed at them and accepted
them. It is, it seems, the nature of your friends to laugh a great
deal at things which they ought to remedy if they could; not laugh at
them. I thought that you wanted some strong stimulus to work; anybody
could see that you were a man of kindly nature and good-breeding. You
were careful not to offend by anything that you wrote, and I was
certain that you were a man of honor. I trusted you, Arnold, before I
saw your face, because I knew your soul."

"Trust me still, Iris," he said in rather a husky voice.

"Of course I did not know, and never thought, what sort of a man you
were to look at. Yet I ought to have known that you were handsome. I
should have guessed that from the very tone of your letters. A
hunchback or a cripple could not have written in so light-hearted a
strain, and I should have discovered, if I had thought of such a
thing, that you were very well satisfied with your personal
appearance. Young men should always be that, at least, if only to give
them confidence."

"Oh, Iris--oh! Do you really think me conceited?"

"I did not say that. I only said that you were satisfied with
yourself. That, I understand now, was clear, from many little natural
touches in your letters."

"What else did you learn?"

"Oh, a great deal--much more than I can tell you. I knew that you go
into society, and I learned from you what society means; and though
you tried to be sarcastic, I understood easily that you liked social
pleasure."

"Was I sarcastic?"

"Was it not sarcastic to tell me how the fine ladies, who affect so
much enthusiasm for art, go to see the galleries on the private-view
day, and are never seen in them again? Was it not sarcastic--"

"Spare me, Iris. I will never do it again. And knowing so much, do you
not desire to know more?"

"No, Arnold. I am not interested in anything else."

"But my position, my profession, my people--are you not curious to
know them?"

"No. They are not you. They are accidents of yourself."

"Philosopher! But you must know more about me. I told you I was an
artist. But you have never inquired whether I was a great artist or a
little one."

"You are still a little artist," she said. "I know that, without being
told. But perhaps you may become great when you learn to work
seriously."

"I have been lazy," he replied with something like a blush, "but that
is all over now. I am going to work. I will give up society. I will
take my profession seriously, if only you will encourage me."

Did he mean what he said? When he came away he used at this period to
ask himself that question, and was astonished at the length he had
gone. With any other girl in the world, he would have been taken at
his word, and either encouraged to go on, or snubbed on the spot. But
Iris received these advances as if they were a confession of weakness.

"Why do you want me to encourage you?" she asked. "I know nothing
about Art. Can't you encourage yourself, Arnold?"

"Iris, I must tell you something more about myself. Will you listen
for a moment? Well, I am the son of a clergyman who now holds a
colonial appointment. I have got the usual number of brothers and
sisters, who are doing the usual things. I will not bore you with
details about them."

"No," said Iris, "please do not."

"I am the adopted son, or ward, or whatever you please, of a certain
cousin. She is a single lady with a great income, which she promises
to bequeath to me in the future. In the meantime, I am to have
whatever I want. Do you understand the position, Iris?"

"Yes, I think so. It is interesting, because it shows why you will
never be a great artist. But it is very sad."

"A man may rise above his conditions, Iris," said Arnold meekly.

"No," she went on; "it is only the poor men who do anything good. Lala
Roy says so."

"I will pretend to be poor--indeed, I am poor. I have nothing. If it
were not for my cousin, I could not even profess to follow Art."

"What a pity," she said, "that you are rich! Lala Roy was rich once."

Arnold repressed an inclination to desire that Lala Roy might be kept
out of the conversation.

"But he gave up all his wealth and has been happy, and a philosopher,
ever since."

"I can't give up my wealth, Iris, because I haven't got any--I owe my
cousin everything. But for her, I should never even have known you."

He watched her at her work in the morning when she sat patiently
answering questions, working out problems, and making papers. She
showed him the letters of her pupils, exacting, excusing,
petulant--sometimes dissatisfied and even ill-tempered, he watched her
in the afternoon while she sewed or read. In the evening he sat with
her while the two old men played their game of chess. Regularly every
evening at half-past nine the Bengalee checkmated Mr. Emblem. Up to
that hour he amused himself with his opponent, formed ingenious
combinations, watched openings, and gradually cleared the board until
he found himself as the hour of half-past nine drew near, able to
propose a simple problem to his own mind, such as, "White moves first,
to mate in three, four, or five moves," and then he proceeded to solve
that problem, and checkmated his adversary.

No one, not even Iris, knew how Lala Roy lived, or what he did in the
daytime. It was rumored that he had been seen at Simpson's in the
Strand, but this report wanted confirmation. He had lived in Mr.
Emblem's second floor for twenty years; he always paid his bills with
regularity, and his long spare figure and white mustache and fez were
as well known in Chelsea as any red-coated lounger among the old
veterans of the Hospital.

"It is quiet for you in the evenings," said Arnold.

"I play to them sometimes. They like to hear me play during the game.
Look at them."

She sat down and played. She had a delicate touch, and played soft
music, such as soothes, not excites the soul. Arnold watched her, not
the old men. How was it that refinement, grave, self-possession,
manners, and the culture of a lady, could be found in one who knew no
ladies? But then Arnold did not know Lala Roy, nor did he understand
the old bookseller.

"You are always wondering about me," she said, talking while she
played; "I see it in your eyes. Can you not take me as I am, without
thinking why I am different from other girls? Of course I am
different, because I know none of them."

"I wish they were all like you," he said.

"No; that would be a great pity. You want girls who understand your
own life, and can enter into your pursuits--you want companions who
can talk to you; go back to them, Arnold, as soon as you are tired of
coming here."

And yet his instinct was right which told him that the girl was not a
coquette. She had no thought--not the least thought--as yet that
anything was possible beyond the existing friendship. It was pleasant,
but Arnold would get tired of her, and go back to his own people. Then
he would remain in her memory as a study of character. This she did
not exactly formulate, but she had that feeling. Every woman makes a
study of character about every man in whom she becomes ever so little
interested. But we must not get conceited, my brothers, over this
fact. The converse, unhappily, does not hold true. Very few men ever
study the character of a woman at all. Either they fall in love with
her before they have had time to make more than a sketch, and do not
afterward pursue the subject, or they do not fall in love with her at
all; and in the latter case it hardly seems worth while to follow up a
first rough draft.

"Checkmate," said Lala Roy.

The game was finished and the evening over. "Would you like," he
said, another evening, "to see my studio, or do you consider my studio
outside myself?"

"I should very much like to see an artist's studio," she replied with
her usual frankness, leaving it an open question whether she would not
be equally pleased to see any other studio.

She came, however, accompanied by Lala Roy, who had never been in a
studio before, and indeed had never looked at a picture, except with
the contemptuous glance which the philosopher bestows upon the follies
of mankind. Yet he came, because Iris asked him. Arnold's studio is
one of the smallest of those in Tite Street. Of course it is built of
red brick, and of course it has a noble staircase and a beautiful
painting-room or studio proper all set about with bits of tapestry,
armor, pictures, and china, besides the tools and properties of the
craft. He had portfolios full of sketches; against the wall stood
pictures, finished and unfinished; on an easel was a half-painted
picture representing a group taken from a modern novel. Most painters
only draw scenes from two novels--the "Vicar of Wakefield" and "Don
Quixote;" but Arnold knew more. The central figure was a girl, quite
unfinished--in fact, barely sketched in.

Iris looked at everything with the interest which belongs to the new
and unexpected.

Arnold began to show the pictures in the portfolios. There were
sketches of peasant life in Norway and on the Continent; there were
landscapes, quaint old houses, and castles; there were ships and
ports; and there were heads--hundreds of heads.

"I said you might be a great artist," said Iris. "I am sure now that
you will be if you choose."

"Thank you, Iris. It is the greatest compliment you could pay me."

"And what is this?" she was before the easel on which stood the
unfinished picture.

"It is a scene from a novel. But I cannot get the principal face. None
of the models are half good enough. I want a sweet face, a serious
face, a face with deep, beautiful eyes. Iris"--it was a sudden
impulse, an inspiration--"let me put your face there. Give me my first
commission."

She blushed deeply. All these drawings, the multitudinous faces and
heads and figures in the portfolio were a revelation to her. And just
at the very moment when she discovered that Arnold was one of those
who worship beauty--a thing she had never before understood--he told
her that her face was so beautiful that he must put in his picture.

"Oh, Arnold," she said, "my face would be out of place in that
picture."

"Would it? Please sit down, and let me make a sketch."

He seized his crayons and began rapidly.

"What do you say, Lala Roy?" he asked by way of diversion.

"The gifts of the understanding," said the Sage, "are the treasures of
the Lord; and He appointeth to every one his portion."

"Thank you," replied Arnold. "Very true and very apt, I'm sure. Iris,
please, your face turned just a little. So. Ah, if I can but do some
measure of justice to your eyes!"

When Iris went away, there was for the first time the least touch of
restraint or self-consciousness in her. Arnold felt it. She showed it
in her eyes and in the touch of her fingers when he took her hand at
parting. It was then for the first time also that Arnold discovered a
truth of overwhelming importance. Every new fact--everything which
cannot be disputed or denied, is, we all know, of the most enormous
importance. He discovered no less a truth than that he was in love
with Iris. So important is this truth to a young man that it reduces
the countless myriads of the world to a single pair--himself and
another; it converts the most arid waste of streets into an Eden; and
it blinds the eyes to ambition, riches, and success. Arnold sat down
and reasoned out this truth. He said coldly and "squarely:"

"This is a girl whom I have known only a fortnight or so; she lives
over a second-hand bookshop; she is a teacher by profession; she knows
none of the ways of society; she would doubtless be guilty of all
kinds of queer things, if she were suddenly introduced to good people;
probably, she would never learn our manners," with more to the same
effect, which may be reasonably omitted. Then his Conscience woke up,
and said quite simply: "Arnold, you are a liar." Conscience does
sometimes call hard names. She is feminine, and therefore privileged
to call hard names. Else we would sometimes kick and belabor
Conscience. "Arnold, don't tell more lies. You have been gradually
learning to know Iris, through the wisest and sweetest letters that
were ever written, for a whole year. You gradually began to know her,
in fact, when you first began to interlard your letters with conceited
revelations about yourself. You knew her to be sympathetic, quick, and
of a most kind and tender heart. You are quite sure, though you try to
disguise the fact, that she is as honest as the day, and as true as
steel. As for her not being a lady, you ought to be ashamed of
yourself for even thinking such a thing. Has she not been tenderly
brought up by two old men who are full of honor, and truth, and all
the simple virtues? Does she not look, move, and speak like the most
gracious lady in the land?" "Like a goddess," Arnold confessed. "As
for the ways and talk of society, what are these worth? and cannot
they be acquired? And what are her manners save those of the most
perfect refinement and purity?" Thus far Conscience. Then Arnold, or
Arnold's secret _advocatus diaboli_, began upon another and quite
different line. "She must have schemed at the outset to get me into
her net; she is a siren; she assumes the disguise of innocence and
ignorance the better to beguile and to deceive. She has gone home
to-day elated because she thinks she has landed a gentleman."

Conscience said nothing; there are some things to which Conscience has
no reply in words to offer; yet Conscience pointed to the portrait of
the girl, and bade the most unworthy of all lovers look upon even his
own poor and meager representation of her eyes and face, and ask
whether such blasphemies could ever be forgiven.

After a self abasement, which for shame's sake we must pass over, the
young man felt happier.

Henry the Second felt much the same satisfaction the morning after
his scourging at the hands of the monks, who were as muscular as they
were vindictive.




CHAPTER VI.

COUSIN CLARA.


That man who spends his days in painting a girl's portrait, in talking
to her, and in gazing upon the unfinished portrait when she is not
with him, and occupies his thoughts during the watches of the night in
thinking about her, is perilously near to taking the last and fatal
step. Flight for such a man is the only thing left, and he so seldom
thinks of flight until it is too late.

Arnold was at this point.

"I am possessed by this girl," he might have said had he put his
thoughts into words. "I am haunted by her eyes; her voice lingers on
my ears; I dream of her face, the touch of her fingers is like the
touch of an electric battery." What symptoms are these, so common that
one is almost ashamed to write them down, but the infallible symptoms
of love? And yet he hesitated, not because he doubted himself any
longer, but because he was not independent, and such an engagement
might deprive him at one stroke of all that he possessed. Might? It
certainly would. Yes, the new and beautiful studio, all the things in
it, all his prospects for the future, would have to be given up. "She
is worth more than that," said Arnold, "and I should find work
somehow. But yet, to plunge her into poverty--and to make Clara the
most unhappy of women!"

The reason why Clara would be made the most unhappy of women, was that
Clara was his cousin and his benefactor, to whom he owed everything.
She was the kindest of patrons, and she liked nothing so much as the
lavishing upon her ward everything that he could desire. But she also,
unfortunately, illustrated the truth of Chaucer's teaching, in that
she loved power more than anything else, and had already mapped out
Arnold's life for him.

It was his custom to call upon her daily, to use her house as his own.
When they were separated, they wrote to each other every day; the
relations between them were of the most intimate and affectionate
kind. He advised in all her affairs, while she directed his; it was
understood that he was her heir, and though she was not more than five
and forty or so, and had, apparently, a long life still before her, so
that the succession was distant, the prospect gave him importance. She
had been out of town, and perhaps the fact of a new acquaintance with
so obscure a person as a simple tutor by correspondence, seemed to
Arnold not worth mentioning. At all events, he had not mentioned it in
his daily letters.

And now she was coming home; she was actually arrived; he would see
her that evening. Her last letter was lying before him.

     "I parted from dear Stella yesterday. She goes to stay with
     the Essex Mainwarings for a month; after that, I hope that
     she will give me a long visit. I do not know where one could
     find a sweeter girl, or one more eminently calculated to
     make a man happy. Beautiful, strictly speaking, she is not,
     perhaps, but of excellent connections, not without a
     portion, young, clever, and ambitious. With such a wife, my
     dear Arnold, a man may aspire to anything."

"To anything!" repeated Arnold; "what is her notion of anything? She
has arrived by this time." He looked at his watch and found it was
past five. "I ought to have been at the station to meet her. I must go
round and see her, and I must dine with her to-night." He sighed
heavily. "It would be much pleasanter to spend the evening with Iris."

Then a carriage stopped at his door. It was his cousin, and the next
minute he was receiving and giving the kiss of welcome. For his own
part, he felt guilty, because he could put so little heart into that
kiss, compared with all previous embraces. She was a stout, hearty
little woman, who could never have been in the least beautiful, even
when she was young. Now on the middle line, between forty and fifty,
she looked as if her face had been chopped out of the marble by a rude
but determined artist, one who knew what he wanted and would tolerate
no conventional work. So that her face, at all events, was, if not
unique, at least unlike any other face one had ever seen. Most faces,
we know, can be reduced to certain general types--even Iris's face
might be classified--while of yours, my brother, there are, no doubt,
multitudes. Miss Holland, however, had good eyes--bright, clear
gray--the eyes of a woman who knows what she wants and means to get it
if she can.

"Well, my dear," she said, taking the one comfortable chair in the
studio, "I am back again, and I have enjoyed my journey very much; we
will have all the travels this evening. You are looking splendid,
Arnold!"

"I am very well indeed. And you, Clara? But I need not ask."

"No, I am always well. I told you about dear Stella, did I not? I
never had a more delightful companion."

"So glad you liked her."

"If only, Arnold, you would like her too. But I know"--for Arnold
changed color--"I know one must not interfere in these matters. But
surely one may go so far with a young man one loves as to say, 'Here
is a girl of a million.' There is not, Arnold, I declare, her equal
anywhere; a clearer head I never met, or a better educated girl, or
one who knows what a man can do, and how he can be helped to do it."

"Thank you, Clara," Arnold said coldly; "I dare say I shall discover
the young lady's perfections in time."

"Not, I think, without some help. She is not an ordinary girl. You
must draw her out, my dear boy."

"I will," he said listlessly. "I will try to draw her out, if you
like."

"We talked a great deal of you, Arnold," Clara went on. "I confided to
her some of my hopes and ambitions for you; and I am free to confess
to you that she has greatly modified all my plans and calculations."

"Oh!" Arnold was interested in this "But, my dear Clara, I have my
profession. I must follow my profession."

"Surely--surely! Listen, Arnold, patiently. Anybody can become an
artist--anybody, of course, who has the genius. And all kinds of
people, gutter people, have the genius."

"The sun," said Arnold, just as if he had been Lala Roy, "shines on
all alike."

"Quite so; and there is an immense enthusiasm for art everywhere; but
there is no art leader. There is no one man recognized as the man most
competent to speak on art of every kind. Think of that. It is Stella's
idea entirely. This man, when he is found, will sway enormous
authority; he will become, if he has a wife able to assist him, an
immense social power."

"And you want me to become that man?"

"Yes, Arnold. I do not see why you should not become that man. Cease
to think of becoming President of the Royal Academy, yet go on
painting; prove your genius, so as to command respect; cultivate the
art of public speaking; and look about for a wife who will be your
right hand. Think of this seriously. This is only a rough sketch, we
can fill in the details afterward. But think of it. Oh, my dear boy!
if I were only a man, and five-and-twenty, with such a chance before
me! What a glorious career is yours, if you choose! But of course you
will choose. Good gracious, Arnold! who is that?"

She pointed to the canvas on the easel, where Iris's face was like the
tale of Cambuscan, half told.

"It is no one you know, Clara."

"One of your models?" She rose and examined it more closely through
her glasses. "The eyes are wonderful, Arnold. They are eyes I know. As
if I could ever forget them! They are the same eyes, exactly the same
eyes. I have never met with any like them before. They are the eyes of
my poor, lost, betrayed Claude Deseret. Where did you pick up this
girl, Arnold? Is she a common model?"

"Not at all. She is not a model. She is a young lady who teaches by
correspondence. She is my tutor--of course I have so often talked to
you about her--who taught me the science of Heraldry, and wrote me
such charming letters."

"Your tutor! You said your tutor was an old gentleman."

"So I thought, Clara. But I was wrong. My tutor is a young lady, and
this is her portrait, half-finished. It does not do her any kind of
justice."

"A young lady!" She looked suspiciously at Arnold, whose telltale
cheek flushed. "A young lady! Indeed! And you have made her
acquaintance."

"As you see, Clara; and she does me the honor to let me paint her
portrait."

"What is her name, Arnold?"

"She is a Miss Aglen."

"Strange. The Deserets once intermarried with the Aglens. I wonder if
she is any connection. They were Warwickshire Aglens. But it is
impossible--a teacher by correspondence, a mere private governess! Who
are her people?"

"She lives with her grandfather. I think her father was a tutor or
journalist of some kind, but he is dead; and her grandfather keeps a
second-hand bookshop in the King's Road close by."

"A bookshop! But you said, Arnold, that she was a young lady."

"So she is, Clara," he replied simply.

"Arnold!" for the first time in his life Arnold saw his cousin angry
with him. She was constantly being angry with other people, but never
before had she been angry with him. "Arnold, spare me this nonsense.
If you have been playing with this shop-girl I cannot help it, and I
beg that you will tell me no more about it, and do not, to my face,
speak of her as a lady."

"I have not been playing with her, I think," said Arnold gravely; "I
have been very serious with her."

"Everybody nowadays is a young lady. The girl who gives you a cup of
tea in a shop; the girl who dances in the ballet; the girl who makes
your dresses."

"In that case, Clara, you need not mind my calling Miss Aglen a young
lady."

"There is one word left, at least: women of my class are gentlewomen."

"Miss Aglen is a gentlewoman."

"Arnold, look me in the face. My dear boy, tell me, are you mad? Oh,
think of my poor unhappy Claude, what he did, and what he must have
suffered!"

"I know what he did. I do not know what he suffered. My case, however,
is different from his. I am not engaged to any one."

"Arnold, think of the great scheme of life I have drawn out for you.
My dear boy, would you throw that all away?"

She laid her hands upon his arm and looked in his eyes with a pitiful
gaze. He took her hands in his.

"My dear, every man must shape his life for himself, or must live out
the life shaped for him by his fate, not by his friends. What if I see
a life more delightful to me than that of which you dream?"

"You talk of a delightful life, Arnold; I spoke of an honorable
career."

"Mine will be a life of quiet work and love. Yours, Clara, would be of
noisy and troublesome work without love."

"Without love, Arnold? You are infatuated."

She sunk into the chair and buried her face in her hands. First, it
was her lover who had deserted her for the sake of a governess, the
daughter of some London tradesman; and now her adopted son, almost the
only creature she loved, for whom she had schemed and thought for
nearly twenty years, was ready to give up everything for the sake of
another governess, also connected with the lower forms of commercial
interests.

"It is very hard, Arnold," she said. "No, don't try to persuade me. I
am getting an old woman, and it is too late for me to learn that a
gentleman can be happy unless he marries a lady. You might as well ask
me to look for happiness with a grocer."

"Not quite," said Arnold.

"It is exactly the same thing. Pray, have you proposed to this--this
young lady of the second-hand bookshop?"

"No, I have not."

"You are in love with her, however?"

"I am, Clara."

"And you intend to ask her--in the shop, I dare say, among the
second-hand books--to become your wife?"

"That is my serious intention, Clara."

"Claude did the same thing. His father remonstrated with him in vain,
he took his wife to London, where, for a time, he lived in misery and
self-reproach."

"Do you know that he reproached himself?"

"I know what must have happened when he found out his mistake. Then he
went to America, where he died, no doubt in despair, although his
father had forgiven him."

"The cases are hardly parallel," said Arnold. "Still, will you permit
me to introduce Miss Aglen to you, if she should do me the honor of
accepting me? Be generous, Clara. Do not condemn the poor girl without
seeing her."

"I condemn no one--I judge no one, not even you, Arnold. But I will
not receive that young woman."

"Very well, Clara."

"How shall you live, Arnold?" she asked coldly.

It was the finishing stroke--the dismissal.

"I suppose we shall not marry; but, of course, I am talking as if--"

"As if she was ready to jump into your arms. Go on."

"We shall not marry until I have made some kind of a beginning in my
work. Clara, let us have no further explanation. I understand
perfectly well. But, my dear Clara," he laid his arm upon her neck and
kissed her, "I shall not let you quarrel with me. I owe you too much,
and I love you too well. I am always your most faithful of servants."

"No; till you are married--then--Oh, Arnold! Arnold!"

A less strong-minded woman would have burst into tears. Clara did not.
She got into her carriage and drove home. She spent a miserable
evening and a sleepless night. But she did not cry.




CHAPTER VII.

ON BATTERSEA TERRACE.


If a woman were to choose any period of her life which she pleased,
for indefinite prolongation, she would certainly select that period
which lies between the first perception of the first symptoms--when
she begins to understand that a man has begun to love her--and the day
when he tells her so.

Yet women who look back to this period with so much fondness and
regret forget their little tremors and misgivings--the self-distrust,
the hopes and fears, the doubts and perplexities, which troubled this
time. For although it is acknowledged, and has been taught by all
philosophers from King Lemuel and Lao-Kiun downward, that no greater
prize can be gained by any man than the love of a good woman, which is
better than a Peerage--better than a Bonanza mine--better than Name
and Fame, Kudos and the newspaper paragraph, and is arrived at by much
less exertion, being indeed the special gift of the gods to those
they love; yet all women perfectly understand the other side to this
great truth--namely, that no greater happiness can fall to any woman
than the love of a good man. So that, in all the multitudinous and
delightful courtships which go on around us, and in our midst, there
is, on both sides, both with man and with maid, among those who truly
reach to the right understanding of what this great thing may mean, a
continual distrust of self, with humility and anxiety. And when, as
sometimes happens, a girl has been brought up in entire ignorance of
love, so that the thought of it has never entered her head, the thing
itself, when it falls upon her, is overwhelming, and infolds her as
with a garment from head to foot, and, except to her lover, she
becomes as a sealed fountain. I know not how long this season of
expectation would have lasted for Iris, but for Arnold's conversation
with his cousin, which persuaded him to speak and bring matters to a
final issue. To this girl, living as secluded as if she was in an
Oriental harem, who had never thought of love as a thing possible for
herself, the consciousness that Arnold loved her was bewildering and
astonishing, and she waited, knowing that sooner or later something
would be said, but trembling for fear that it should be said.

After all, it was Lala Roy, and not Clara, who finally determined
Arnold to wait no longer.

He came every day to the studio with Iris when she sat for her
portrait. This was in the afternoon. But he now got into the habit of
coming in the morning, and would sit in silence looking on. He came
partly because he liked the young man, and partly because the
painter's art was new to him, and it amused him to watch a man giving
his whole time and intellect to the copying or faces and things on
canvas. Also, he was well aware by this time that it was not to see
Mr. Emblem or himself that Arnold spent every evening at the house,
and he was amused to watch the progress of an English courtship. In
India, we know, they manage matters differently, and so as to give the
bridegroom no more trouble than is necessary. This young man, however,
took, he observed, the most wonderful pains and the most extraordinary
trouble to please.

"Do you know, Lala Roy," Arnold said one morning after a silence of
three hours or so, "do you know that this is going to be the portrait
of the most beautiful woman in the world, and the best?"

"It is well," said the Philosopher, "when a young man desires virtue
as well as beauty."

"You have known her all her life. Don't trouble yourself to speak,
Lala. You can nod your head if there isn't a maxim ready. You began to
lodge in the house twenty years ago, and you have seen her every day
since. If she is not the best, as well as the most beautiful girl in
the world, you ought to know and can contradict me. But you do know
it."

"Happy is the man," said the Sage, "who shall call her wife; happy the
children who shall call her mother."

"I suppose, Lala," Arnold went on with an ingenuous blush, "I suppose
that you have perceived that--that--in fact--I love her."

The Philosopher inclined his head.

"Do you think--you who know her so well--that she suspects or knows
it?"

"The thoughts of a maiden are secret thoughts. As well may one search
for the beginnings of a river as inquire into the mind of a woman.
Their ways are not our ways, nor are their thoughts ours, nor have we
wit to understand, nor have they tongue to utter the things they
think. I know not whether she suspects."

"Yet you have had experience, Lala Roy?"

A smile stole over the Sage's features.

"In the old days when I was young, I had experience, as all men have.
I have had many wives. Yet to me, as to all others, the thoughts of
the harem are unknown."

"Yet, Iris--surely you know the thoughts of Iris, your pupil."

"I know only that her heart is the abode of goodness, and that she
knows not any evil thought. Young man, beware. Trouble not the clear
fountain."

"Heaven knows," said Arnold, "I would not--" And here he stopped.

"Youth," said the Sage presently, "is the season for love. Enjoy the
present happiness. Woman is made to be loved. Receive with gratitude
what Heaven gives. The present moment is your own. Defer not until the
evening what you may accomplish at noon."

With these words the oracle became silent, and Arnold sat down and
began to think it all over again.

An hour later he presented himself at the house in the King's Road.
Iris was alone, and she was playing.

"You, Arnold? It is early for you."

"Forgive me, Iris, for breaking in on your afternoon; but I
thought--it is a fine afternoon--I thought that, perhaps--You have
never taken a walk with me."

She blushed, I think in sympathy with Arnold, who looked confused and
stammered, and then she said she would go with him.

They left the King's Road by the Royal Avenue, where the leaves were
already thin and yellow, and passed through the Hospital and its broad
grounds down to the river-side; then they turned to the right, and
walked along the embankment, where are the great new red houses, to
Cheyne Walk, and so across the Suspension Bridge. Arnold did not speak
one word the whole way. His heart was so full that he could not trust
himself to speak. Who would not be four-and-twenty again, even with
all the risks and dangers of life before one, the set traps, the
gaping holes, and the treacherous quicksands, if it were only to feel
once more the overwhelming spirit of the mysterious goddess of the
golden cestus? In silence they walked side by side over the bridge.
Half-way across, they stopped and looked up the river. The tide was
running in with a swift current, and the broad river was nearly at the
full; the strong September sun fell upon the water, which was broken
into little waves under a fresh breeze meeting the current from the
north-west. There were lighters and barges majestically creeping up
stream, some with brown three-cornered sails set in the bows and
stern, some slowly moving with the tide, their bows kept steady by
long oars, and some, lashed one to the other, forming a long train,
and pulled along by a noisy little tug, all paddle wheel and engine.
There was a sculler vigorously practicing for his next race, and
dreaming, perhaps, of sending a challenge to Hanlan; there were some
boys in a rowing-boat, laughing and splashing each other; on the north
bank there was the garden of the Embankment, with its young trees
still green, for the summer lasted into late September this year, and,
beyond, the red brick tower of the old church, with its flag post on
the top. These details are never so carefully marked as when one is
anxious, and fully absorbed in things of great importance. Perhaps
Arnold had crossed the bridge a hundred times before, but to day, for
the first time, he noticed the common things of the river. One may be
an artist, and yet may miss the treasures that lie at the very feet.
This is a remark which occurs to one with each new Academy Show. With
every tide the boats go up and down with their brown sails, and always
the tower of Chelsea Church rises above the trees, and the broad river
never forgets to sparkle and to glow in the sunshine when it gets the
chance. Such common things are for the most part unheeded, but, when
the mind is anxious and full, they force themselves upon one. Arnold
watched boats, and river, and sunshine on the sails, with a strange
interest and wonder, as one sees visions in a dream. He had seen all
these things before, yet now he noticed them for the first time, and
all the while he was thinking what he should say to Iris, and how he
should approach the subject. I know not whether Iris, like him, saw
one thing and noticed another. The thoughts of a maiden, as Lala Roy
said, are secret thoughts. She looked upon the river from the bridge
with Arnold. When he turned, she turned with him, and neither spoke.

They left the bridge, and passed through the wooden gate at the
Battersea end of it, and across the corner where the stone columns
lie, like an imitation of Tadmor in the Desert, and so to the broad
terrace overlooking the river.

There is not, anywhere, a more beautiful terrace than this of
Battersea Park, especially when the tide is high. Before it lies the
splendid river, with the barges which Arnold had seen from the bridge.
They are broad, and flat, and sometimes squat, and sometimes black
with coal, and sometimes they go up and down sideways, in lubberly
Dutch fashion, but they are always picturesque; and beyond the river
is the Embankment, with its young trees, which will before many years
be tall and stately trees; and behind the trees are the new red
palaces; and above the houses, at this time of the year and day, are
the flying clouds, already colored with the light of the sinking sun.
Behind the terrace are the trees, and lawns of the best-kept park in
London.

In the afternoon of a late September day, there are not many who walk
in these gardens. Arnold and Iris had the terrace almost to
themselves, save for half-a-dozen girls with children, and two or
three old men making the most of the last summer they were ever likely
to see, though it would have been cruel to tell them so.

"This is your favorite walk, Iris," said Arnold at last, breaking the
silence.

"Yes; I come here very often. It is my garden. Sometimes in the
winter, and when the east wind blows up the river, I have it all to
myself."

"A quiet life, Iris," he said, "and a happy life."

"Yes; a happy life."

"Iris, will you change it for a life which will not be so quiet?" He
took her hand, but she made no reply. "I must tell you, Iris, because
I cannot keep it from you any longer. I love you--oh, my dear, I
cannot tell you how I love you."

"Oh, Arnold!" she whispered. It had come, the thing she feared to
hear!

"May I go on? I have told you now the most important thing, and the
rest matters little. Oh, Iris, may I go on and tell you all?"

"Go on," she said; "tell me all."

"As for telling you everything," He said with a little laugh, "that is
no new thing. I have told you all that is in my mind for a year and
more. It seems natural that I should tell you this too, even if it did
not concern you at all, but some other girl; though that would be
impossible. I love you, Iris; I love you--I should like to say nothing
more. But I must tell you as well that I am quite a poor man; I am an
absolute pauper; I have nothing at all--no money, no work, nothing. My
studio and all must go back to her; and yet, Iris, in spite of this, I
am so selfish as to tell you that I love you. I would give you, if I
could, the most delightful palace in the world, and I offer you a
share in the uncertain life of an artist, who does not know whether he
has any genius, or whether he is fit even to be called an artist."

She gave him her hand with the frankness which was her chief charm,
and with a look in her eyes so full of trust and truth that his heart
sunk within him for very fear lest he should prove unworthy of so much
confidence.

"Oh, Arnold," she said, "I think that I have loved you all along, ever
since you began to write to me. And yet I never thought that love
would come to me."

He led her into that bosky grove set with seats convenient for lovers,
which lies romantically close to the Italian Restaurant, where they
sell the cocoa and the ginger beer. There was no one in the place
besides themselves, and here, among the falling leaves, and in a
solitude as profound as on the top of a Dartmoor tor, Arnold told the
story of his love again, and with greater coherence, though even more
passion.

"Oh," said Iris again, "how could you love me, Arnold--how could you
love any girl so? It is a shame, Arnold; we are not worth so much.
Could any woman," she thought, "be worth the wealth of passion and
devotion which her lover poured out for her?"

"My tutor," he went on, "if you only knew what things you have taught
me, a man of experience! If I admired you when I thought you must be a
man, and pictured an old scholar full of books and wisdom, what could
I do when I found that a young girl had written those letters? You
gave mine back to me; did you think that I would ever part with yours?
And you owned--oh, Iris, what would not the finished woman of the
world give to have the secret of your power?--you owned that you knew
all my letters, every one, by heart. And after all, you will love me,
your disciple and pupil, and a man who has his way to make from the
very beginning and first round of the ladder. Think, Iris, first. Is
it right to throw away so much upon a man who is worth so little?"

"But I am glad that you are poor. If you were rich I should have been
afraid--oh, not of you, Arnold--never of you, but of your people. And,
besides it is so good--oh, so very good for a young man--a young man
of the best kind, not my cousin's kind--to be poor. Nobody ought ever
to be allowed to become rich before he is fifty years of age at the
very least. Because now you will have to work in earnest, and you will
become a great artist--yes, a truly great artist, and we shall be
proud of you."

"You shall make of me what you please, and what you can. For your
sake, Iris, I wish I were another Raphael. You are my mistress and my
queen. Bid me to die, and I will dare--Iris, I swear that the words of
the extravagant old song are real to me."

"Nay," she said, "not your queen, but your servant always. Surely love
cannot command. But, I think," she added softly, with a tender blush;
"I think--nay, I am sure and certain that it can obey."

He stooped and kissed her fingers.

"My love," he murmured; "my love--my love!"

The shadows lengthened and the evening fell; but those two foolish
people sat side by side, and hand in hand, and what they said further
we need not write down, because to tell too much of what young lovers
whisper to each other is a kind of sacrilege.

At last Arnold became aware that the sun was actually set, and he
sprung to his feet.

They walked home again across the Suspension Bridge. In the western
sky was hanging a huge bank of cloud all bathed in purple, red and
gold; the river was ablaze; the barges floated in a golden haze; the
light shone on their faces, and made them all glorious, like the face
of Moses, for they, too, had stood--nay, they were still standing--at
the very gates of Heaven.

"See, Iris," said the happy lover, "the day is done; your old life is
finished; it has been a happy time, and it sets in glory and splendor.
The red light in the west is a happy omen of the day to come."

So he took her hand, and led her over the river, and then to his own
studio in Tite Street. There, in the solemn twilight, he held her in
his arms, and renewed the vows of love with kisses and fond caresses.

"Iris, my dear--my dear--you are mine and I am yours. What have I done
to deserve this happy fate?"




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DISCOVERY.


At nine o'clock that evening, Mr. Emblem looked up from the chess
board.

"Where is Mr. Arbuthnot this evening, my dear?" he asked.

It would be significant in some houses when a young man is expected
every evening. Iris blushed, and said that perhaps he was not coming.
But he was, and his step was on the stair as she spoke.

"You are late, Mr. Arbuthnot," said Mr. Emblem, reproachfully, "you
are late, sir, and somehow we get no music now until you come. Play us
something, Iris. It is my move, Lala--"

Iris opened the piano and Arnold sat down beside her, and their eyes
met. There was in each the consciousness of what had passed.

"I shall speak to him to-night, Iris," Arnold whispered. "I have
already written to my cousin. Do not be hurt if she does not call upon
you."

"Nothing of that sort will hurt me," Iris said, being ignorant of
social ways, and without the least ambition to rise in the world. "If
your cousin does not call upon me I shall not be disappointed. Why
should she want to know me? But I am sorry, Arnold, that she is angry
with you."

Lala Roy just then found himself in presence of a most beautiful
problem--white to move and checkmate in three moves. Mr. Emblem found
the meshes of fate closing round him earlier than usual, and both bent
their heads closely over the table.

"Checkmate!" said Lala Roy. "My friend, you have played badly this
evening."

"I have played badly," Mr. Emblem replied, "because to-morrow will be
an important day for Iris, and for myself. A day, Iris, that I have
been looking forward to for eighteen years, ever since I got your
father's last letter, written upon his death-bed. It seems a long
time, but like a lifetime," said the old man of seventy-five, "it is
as nothing when it is gone. Eighteen years, and you were a little
thing of three, child!"

"What is going to happen to me, grandfather, except that I shall be
twenty-one?"

"We shall see to-morrow. Patience, my dear--patience."

He spread out his hands and laughed. What was going to happen to
himself was a small thing compared with the restoration of Iris to her
own.

"Mr. Emblem," said Arnold, "I also have something of importance to
say."

"You, too, Mr. Arbuthnot? Cannot yours wait also until to-morrow?"

"No; it is too important. It cannot wait an hour."

"Well, sir"--Mr. Emblem pushed up his spectacles and leaned back in
his chair--"well, Mr. Arbuthnot, let us have it."

"I think you may guess what I have to say, Mr. Emblem. I am sure that
Lala Roy has already guessed it."

The philosopher inclined his head in assent.

"It is that I have this afternoon asked Iris to marry me, Mr. Emblem.
And she has consented."

"Have you consented, Iris, my dear?" said her grandfather.

She placed her hand in Arnold's for reply.

"Do you think you know him well enough, my dear?" Mr. Emblem asked
gravely, looking at her lover. "Marriage is a serious thing: it is a
partnership for life. Children, think well before you venture on the
happiness or ruin of your whole lives. And you are so young. What a
pity--what a thousand pities that people were not ordained to marry at
seventy or so!"

"We have thought well," said Arnold. "Iris has faith in me."

"Then, young man, I have nothing to say. Iris will marry to please
herself, and I pray that she may be happy. As for you, I like your
face and manners, but I do not know who you are, nor what your means
may be. Remember that I am poor--I am so poor--I can tell you all now,
that to-morrow we shall--well, patience--to-morrow I shall most likely
have my very stock seized and sold."

"Your stock sold? Oh, grandfather!" cried Iris; "and you did not tell
me! And I have been so happy."

"Friend," said Lala, "was it well to hide this from me?"

"Foolish people," Mr. Emblem went on, "have spread reports that I am
rich, and have saved money for Iris. It is not true, Mr. Arbuthnot. I
am not rich. Iris will come to you empty-handed."

"And as for me, I have nothing," said Arnold, "except a pair of hands
and all the time there is. So we have all to gain and nothing to
lose."

"You have your profession," said Iris, "and I have mine. Grandfather,
do not fear, even though we shall all four become poor together."

It seemed natural to include Lala Roy, who had been included with them
for twenty years.

"As for Iris being empty-handed," said Arnold, "how can that ever be?
Why, she carries in her hands an inexhaustible cornucopia, full of
precious things."

"My dear," said the old man, holding out his arms to her, "I could not
keep you always. Some day I knew you would leave me; it is well that
you should leave me when I am no longer able to keep a roof over your
head."

"But we shall find a roof for you, grandfather, somewhere. We shall
never part."

"The best of girls always," said Mr. Emblem; "the best of girls! Mr.
Arbuthnot, you are a happy man."

Then the Sage lifted up his voice and said solemnly:

"On her tongue dwelleth music; the sweetness of honey floweth from her
lips; humility is like a crown of glory about her head; her eye
speaketh softness and love; her husband putteth his heart in her bosom
and findeth joy."

"Oh, you are all too good to me," murmured Iris.

"A friend of mine," said Mr. Emblem, "now, like nearly all my friends,
beneath the sod, used to say that a good marriage was a happy blending
of the finest Wallsend with the most delicate Silkstone. But he was in
the coal trade. For my own part I have always thought that it is like
the binding of two scarce volumes into one."

"Oh, not second-hand volumes, grandfather," said Iris.

"I don't know. Certainly not new ones. Not volumes under
one-and-twenty, if you please. Mr. Arbuthnot, I am glad; you will know
why very soon. I am very glad that Iris made her choice before her
twenty-first birthday. Whatever may happen now, no one can say that
either of you was influenced by any expectations. You both think
yourself paupers; well, I say nothing, because I know nothing. But,
children, if a great thing happen to you, and that before
four-and-twenty hours have passed, be prepared--be prepared, I say--to
receive it with moderate rejoicing."

"To-morrow?" Iris asked. "Why to-morrow? Why not to-night, if you have
a secret to tell us?"

"Your father enjoined in his last letter to wait till you were
twenty-one. The eve of your birthday, however, is the same thing as
your birthday. We will open the papers to-night. What I have to tell
you, Iris, shall be told in the presence of your lover, whatever it
is--good or bad."

He led the way down-stairs into the back shop. Here he lit the gas,
and began to open his case, slowly and cautiously.

"Eighteen years ago, Iris, my child, I received your father's last
letter, written on his death bed. This I have already told you. He set
down, in that letter, several things which surprised me very much. We
shall come to these things presently. He also laid down certain
instructions for your bringing up, my dear. I was, first of all, to
give you as good an education as I could afford; I was to keep you as
much as possible separated from companions who might not be thought
afterward fit to be the friends of a young lady. You have as good an
education as Lala Roy and I could devise between us. From him you have
learned mathematics, so as to steady your mind and make you exact; and
you have learned the science of heraldry from me, so that you may at
once step into your own place in the polite world, where, no doubt, it
is a familiar and a necessary study. You have also learned music,
because that is an accomplishment which every one should possess. What
more can any girl want for any station? My dear, I am happy to think
that a gentleman is your lover. Let him tell us, now--Lala Roy and
me--to our very faces, if he thinks we have, between us, made you a
lady."

Arnold stooped and kissed her hand.

"There is no more perfect lady," he said, "in all the land."

"Iris's father, Mr. Arbuthnot, was a gentleman of honorable and
ancient family, and I will tell you, presently, as soon as I find it
out myself, his real name. As for his coat-of-arms, he bore Quarterly,
first and fourth, two roses and a boar's head erect; second and third,
gules and fesse between--strange, now that I have forgotten what it
was between. Everybody calls himself a gentleman nowadays; even Mr.
Chalker, who is going to sell me up, I suppose; but everybody, if you
please, is not armiger. Iris, your father was armiger. I suppose I am
a gentleman on Sundays, when I go to church with Iris, and wear a
black coat. But your father, my dear, though he married my daughter,
was a gentleman by birth. And one who knows heraldry respects a
gentleman by birth." He laid his hand now on the handle of the safe,
as if the time were nearly come for opening it, but not quite. "He
sent me, with this last letter, a small parcel for you, my dear, not
to be opened until you reached the age of twenty-one. As for the
person who had succeeded to his inheritance, she was to be left in
peaceable possession for a reason which he gave--quite a romantic
story, which I will tell you presently--until you came of age. He was
very urgent on this point. If, however, any disaster of sickness or
misfortune fell upon me, I was to act in your interests at once,
without waiting for time. Children," the old man added solemnly, "by
the blessing of Heaven--I cannot take it as anything less--I have been
spared in health and fortune until this day. Now let me depart in
peace, for my trust is expired, and my child is safe, her inheritance
secured, with a younger and better protector." He placed the key in
the door of the safe. "I do not know, mind," he said, still hesitating
to take the final step; "I do not know the nature of the inheritance;
it may be little or maybe great. The letter does not inform me on this
point. I do not even know the name of the testator, my son-in-law's
father. Nor do I know the name of my daughter's husband. I do not even
know your true name, Iris, my child. But it is not Aglen."

"Then, have I been going under a false name all my life?"

"It was the name your father chose to bear for reasons which seemed
good and sufficient to him, and these are part of the story which I
shall have to tell you. Will you have this story first, or shall we
first open the safe and read the contents of the parcel?"

"First," said Arnold, "let us sit down and look in each other's
faces."

It was a practical suggestion. But, as it proved, it was an unlucky
one, because it deprived them of the story.

"Iris," he said, while they waited, "this is truly wonderful!"

"Oh, Arnold! What am I to do with an inheritance?"

"That depends on what it is. Perhaps it is a landed estate; in which
case we shall not be much better off, and can go on with our work;
perhaps there will be houses; perhaps it will be thousands of pounds,
and perhaps hundreds. Shall we build a castle in the air to suit our
inheritance?"

"Yes; let us pretend. Oh, grandfather, stop one moment! Our castle,
Arnold, shall be, first of all, the most beautiful studio in the world
for you. You shall have tapestry, blue china, armor, lovely glass,
soft carpets, carved doors and painted panels, a tall mantelshelf,
old wooden cabinets, silver cups, and everything else what one ought
to like, and you shall choose everything for yourself, and never get
tired of it. But you must go on painting; you must never stop working,
because we must be proud of you as well that you like. Oh, but I have
not done yet. My grandfather is to have two rooms for himself, which
he can fill with the books he will spend his time in collecting; Lala
Roy will have two more rooms, quite separate, where he can sit by
himself whenever he does not choose to sit with me; I shall have my
own study to myself, where I shall go on reading mathematics; and we
shall all have, between us, the most beautiful dining-room and
drawing-room that you ever saw; and a garden and a fountain,
and--yes--money to give to people who are not so fortunate as
ourselves. Will that do, Arnold?"

"Yes, but you have almost forgotten yourself, dear. There must be
carriages for you, and jewels, and dainty things all your own, and a
boudoir, and nobody shall think of doing or saying anything in the
house at all, except for your pleasure; will that do, Iris?"

"I suppose we shall have to give parties of some kind, and to go to
them. Perhaps one may get to like society. You will teach me
lawn-tennis, Arnold; and I should like, I think, to learn dancing. I
suppose I must leave off making my own dresses, though I know that I
shall never be so well dressed if I do. And about the cakes and
puddings--but, oh, there is enough pretending."

"It is difficult," said Lala Roy, "to bear adversity. But to be
temperate in prosperity is the height of wisdom."

"And now suppose, Iris," said Arnold "that the inheritance, instead
of being thousands a year, is only a few hundreds."

"Ah, then, Arnold, it will be ever so much simpler. We shall have
something to live upon until you begin to make money for us all."

"Yes; that is very simple. But suppose, again, that the inheritance is
nothing but a small sum of money."

"Why, then," said Iris, "we will give it all to grandfather, who will
pay off his creditor, and we will go on as if nothing had happened."

"Child!" said Mr. Emblem, "do you think that I would take your little
all?"

"And suppose, again," Arnold went on, "that the inheritance turns out
a delusion, and that there is nothing at all?"

"That cannot be supposed," said Mr. Emblem quickly; "that is absurd!"

"If it were," said Iris, "we shall only be, to-morrow, just exactly
what we are to-day. I am a teacher by correspondence, with five
pupils. Arnold is looking for art-work, which will pay; and between
us, my dear grandfather and Lala Roy, we are going to see that you
want nothing."

Always Lala Roy with her grandfather, as if their interests were
identical, and, indeed, he had lived so long with them that Iris could
not separate the two old men.

"We will all live together," Iris continued, "and when our fortune is
made we will all live in a palace. And now, grandfather, that we have
relieved our feelings, shall we have the story and the opening of the
papers in the safe?"

"Which will you have first?" Mr. Emblem asked again.

"Oh, the safe," said Arnold. "The story can wait. Let us examine the
contents of the safe."

"The story," said Mr. Emblem, "is nearly all told in your father's
letter, my dear. But there is a little that I would tell you first,
before I read that letter. You know, Iris, that I have never been
rich; my shop has kept me up till now, but I have never been able to
put by money. Well--my daughter Alice, your poor mother, my dear, who
was as good and clever as you are, was determined to earn her own
living, and so she went out as a governess. And one day she came home
with her husband; she had been married the day before, and she told me
they had very little money, and her husband was a scholar and a
gentleman, and wanted to get work by writing. He got some, but not
enough, and they were always in a poor way, until one day he got a
letter from America--it was while the Civil War was raging--from an
old Oxford friend, inviting him to emigrate and try fortune as a
journalist out there. He went, and his wife was to join him. But she
died, my dear; your mother died, and a year later I had your father's
last letter, which I am now going to read to you."

"One moment, sir," said Arnold. "Before you open the safe and take out
the papers, remember that Iris and I can take nothing--nothing at all
for ourselves until all your troubles are tided over."

"Children--children," cried Mr. Emblem.

"Go, my son, to the Desert," observed the Sage, standing solemnly
upright like a Prophet of Israel. "Observe the young stork of the
wilderness, how he beareth on his wings his aged sire and supplieth
him with food. The piety of a child is sweeter than the incense of
Persia offered to the sun; yea, more delicious is it than the odors
from a field of Arabian spice."

"Thank you, Lala," said Mr. Emblem. "And now, children, we will
discover the mystery."

He unlocked the safe and threw it open with somewhat of a theatrical
air. "The roll of papers." He took it out. "'For Iris to be opened on
her twenty-first birthday.' And this is the eve of it. But where is
the letter? I tied the letter round it, with a piece of tape. Very
strange. I am sure I tied the letter with a piece of tape. Perhaps it
was--Where is the letter?"

He peered about in the safe; there was nothing else in it except a few
old account books; but he could not find the letter! Where could it
be?

"I remember," he said--"most distinctly I remember tying up the
letter with the parcel. Where can it be gone to?"

A feeling of trouble to come seized him. He was perfectly sure he had
tied up the letter with the parcel, and here was the parcel without
the letter, and no one had opened the safe except himself.

"Never mind about the letter, grandfather," said Iris; "we shall find
that afterward."

"Well, then, let us open the parcel."

It was a packet about the size of a crown-octavo volume, in brown
paper, carefully fastened up with gum, and on the face of it was a
white label inscribed: "For Iris, to be opened on her twenty-first
birthday." Everybody in turn took it, weighed it, so to speak, looked
at it curiously, and read the legend. Then they returned it to Mr.
Emblem, who laid it before him and produced a penknife. With this, as
carefully and solemnly as if he were offering up a sacrifice or
performing a religious function, he cut the parcel straight through.

"After eighteen years," he said; "after eighteen years. The ink will
be faded and the papers yellow. But we shall see the certificates of
the marriage and of your baptism, Iris; there will also be letters to
different people, and a true account of the rupture with his father,
and the cause, of which his letter spoke. And of course we shall find
out what was his real name and what is the kind of inheritance which
has been waiting for you so long, my dear. Now then."

The covering incase of the packet was a kind of stiff cardboard or
millboard, within brown paper. Mr. Emblem laid it open. It was full of
folded papers. He took up the first and opened it. The paper was
blank. The next, it was blank; the third, it was blank; the fourth,
and fifth, and sixth, and so on throughout. The case, which had been
waiting so long, waiting for eighteen years, to be opened on Iris's
twenty-first birthday, was full of blank papers. They were all half
sheets of note-paper.

Mr. Emblem looked surprised at the first two or three papers; then he
turned pale; then he rushed at the rest. When he had opened all, he
stared about him with bewilderment.

"Where is the letter?" he asked again. Then he began with trembling
hands to tear out the contents of the safe and spread them upon the
table. The letter was nowhere.

"I am certain," he said, for the tenth time, "I am quite certain that
I tied up the letter with red tape, outside the packet. And no one has
been at the safe except me."

"Tell us," said Arnold, "the contents of the letter as well as you
remember them. Your son-in-law was known to you under the name of
Aglen, which was not his real name. Did he tell you his real name?"

"No."

"What did he tell you? Do you remember the letter?"

"I remember every word of the letter."

"If you dictate it, I will write it down. That may be a help."

Mr. Emblem began quickly, and as if he was afraid of forgetting:

"'When you read these lines, I shall be in the Silent Land, whither
Alice, my wife, has gone before me.'"

Then Mr. Emblem began to stammer.

"'In one small thing we deceived you, Alice and I. My name is not
Aglen'--is not Aglen--"

And here a strange thing happened. His memory failed him at this
point.

"Take time," said Arnold; "there is no hurry."

Mr. Emblem shook his head.

"I shall remember the rest to-morrow, perhaps," he said.

"Is there anything else you have to help us?" asked Arnold: "never
mind the letter, Mr. Emblem. No doubt that will come back presently.
You see we want to find out, first, who Iris's father really was, and
what is her real name. There was his coat-of-arms. That will connect
her with some family, though it may be a family with many branches."

"Yes--oh yes! his coat-of-arms. I have seen his signet-ring a dozen
times. Yes, his coat; yes, first and fourth, two roses and a boar's
head erect; second and third--I forget."

"Humph! Was there any one who knew him before he was married?"

"Yes, yes," Mr. Emblem sat up eagerly. "Yes, there is--there is; he is
my oldest customer. But I forget his name, I have forgotten
everything. Perhaps I shall get back my memory to-morrow. But I am
old. Perhaps it will never get back."

He leaned his head upon his hands, and stared about him with
bewildered eyes.

"I do not know, young man," he said presently, addressing Arnold, "who
you are. If you come from Mr. Chalker, let me tell you it is a day too
soon. To-morrow we will speak of business." Then he sprung to his feet
suddenly, struck with a thought which pierced him like a dagger.
"To-morrow! It is the day when they will come to sell me up. Oh, Iris!
what did that matter when you were safe? Now we are all paupers
together--all paupers."

He fell back in his chair white and trembling. Iris soothed him;
kissed his cheek and pressed his hand; but the terror and despair of
bankruptcy were upon him. This is an awful specter, which is ever
ready to appear before the man who has embarked his all in one
venture. A disastrous season, two or three unlucky ventures, a
succession of bad debts, and the grisly specter stands before them.
He had no terror for the old man so long as he thought that Iris was
safe. But now--

"Idle talk, Iris--idle talk, child," he said, when they tried to
comfort him. "How can a girl make money by teaching? Idle talk, young
man. How can money be made by painting? It's as bad a trade as
writing. How can money be made anyhow but in an honest shop? And
to-morrow I shall have no shop, and we shall all go into the street
together!"

Presently, when lamentations had yielded to despair, they persuaded
him to go to bed. It was past midnight. Iris went upstairs with him,
while Lala Roy and Arnold waited down below. And then Arnold made a
great discovery. He began to examine the folded papers which were in
the packet. I think he had some kind of vague idea that they might
contain secret and invisible writing. They were all sheets of
note-paper, of the same size, folded in the same way--namely, doubled
as if for a square envelope. On holding one to the light, he read the
water-mark:

     HIEROGLYPHICA
     A Vegetable Vellum.
     M.S. & Co.

They all had the same water-mark. He showed the thing to the Hindoo,
who did not understand what it meant.

Then Iris came down again. Her grandfather was sleeping. Like a child,
he fell asleep the moment his head fell upon the pillow.

"Iris," he said, "this is no delusion of your grandfather's. The
parcel has been robbed."

"How do you know, Arnold?"

"The stupid fellow who stole and opened the packet no doubt thought he
was wonderfully clever to fill it up again with paper. But he forgot
that the packet has been lying for eighteen years in the safe, and
that this note-paper was made the day before yesterday."

"How do you know that?"

"You can tell by the look and feel of the paper; they did not make
paper like this twenty years ago; besides, look at the water-mark;" he
held it to the light, and Iris read the mystic words. "That is the
fashion of to-day. One house issues a new kind of paper, with a fancy
name, and another imitates them. To-morrow, I will ascertain exactly
when this paper was made."

"But who would steal it, Arnold? Who could steal it?"

"It would not probably be of the least use to any one. But it might be
stolen in order to sell it back. We may see an advertisement carefully
worded, guarded, or perhaps--Iris, who had access to the place, when
your grandfather was out?"

"No one but James, the shopman. He has been here five-and-twenty
years. He would not, surely, rob his old master. No one else comes
here except the customers and Cousin Joe."

"Joe is not, I believe, quite--"

"Joe is a very bad man. He has done dreadful things. But then, even if
Joe were bad enough to rob the safe, how could he get at it? My
grandfather never leaves it unlocked. Oh, Arnold, Arnold, that all
this trouble should fall upon us on the very day--"

"My dear, is it not better that it should fall upon you when I am
here, one more added to your advisers? If you have lost a fortune, I
have found one. Think that you have given it to me."

"Oh, the fortune may go," she said. "The future is ours, and we are
young. But who shall console my grandfather in his old age for his
bankruptcy?"

"As the stream," said Lala Roy, "which passeth from the mountains to
the ocean, kisseth every meadow on its way, yet tarries not in any
place, so Fortune visits the sons of men; she is unstable as the wind;
who shall hold her? Let not adversity tear off the wings of hope."

They could do nothing more. Arnold replaced the paper in the packet,
and gave it to Iris; they put back the ledgers and account-books in
the safe, and locked it up, and then they went upstairs.

"You shall go to bed, Iris," said Arnold, "and you, too, Lala Roy. I
shall stay here, in case Mr. Emblem should--should want anything."

He was, in reality, afraid that "something would happen" to the old
man. His sudden loss of memory, his loss of self-control when he spoke
of his bankruptcy, the confusion of his words, told clearly of a mind
unhinged. He could not go away and leave Iris with no better
protection than one other weak old man.

He remained, but Iris sat with him, and in the silent watches of the
night they talked about the future.

Under every roof are those who talk about the future, and those who
think about the past; so the shadow of death is always with us and the
sunshine of life. Not without reason is the Roman Catholic altar
incomplete without a bone of some dead man. As for the thing which had
been stolen, that affected them but little. What does it matter--the
loss of what was promised but five minutes since?

It was one o'clock in the morning when Lala Roy left them. They sat at
the window, hand-in-hand, and talked. The street below them was very
quiet; now and then a late cab broke the silence, or the tramp of a
policeman; but there were no other sounds. They sat in darkness
because they wanted no light. The hours sped too swiftly for them. At
five the day began to dawn.

"Iris," said Arnold, "leave me now, and try to sleep a little. Shall
we ever forget this night of sweet and tender talk?"

When she was gone, he began to be aware of footsteps overhead in the
old man's room. What was he going to do? Arnold waited at the door.
Presently the door opened, and he heard careful steps upon the stairs.
They were the steps of Mr. Emblem himself. He was fully dressed, with
his usual care and neatness, his black silk stock buckled behind, and
his white hair brushed.

"Ah, Mr. Arbuthnot," he said cheerfully, "you are early this morning!"
as if it was quite a usual thing for his friends to look in at six in
the morning.

"You are going down to the shop, Mr. Emblem?"

"Yes, certainly--to the shop. Pray come with me."

Arnold followed him.

"I have just remembered," said the old man, "that last night we did
not look on the floor. I will have one more search for the letter, and
then, if I cannot find it, I will write it all out--every word. There
is not much, to be sure, but the story is told without the names."

"Tell me the story, Mr. Emblem, while you remember it."

"All in good time, young man. Youth is impatient."

He drew up the blind and let in the morning light; then he began his
search for the letter on the floor, going on his hands and knees, and
peering under the table and chairs with a candle. At length he
desisted.

"I tied it up," he said, "with the parcel, with red tape. Very
well--we must do without it. Now, Mr. Arbuthnot, my plan is this.
First, I will dictate the letter. This will give you the outlines of
the story. Next, I will send you to--to my old customer, who can tell
you my son-in-law's real name. And then I will describe his
coat-of-arms. My memory was never so clear and good as I feel it
to-day. Strange that last night I seemed, for the moment, to forget
everything! Ha, ha! Ridiculous, wasn't it? I suppose--But there is no
accounting for these queer things. Perhaps I was disappointed to find
nothing in the packet. Do you think, Mr. Arbuthnot, that I--" Here he
began to tremble. "Do you think that I dreamed it all? Old men think
strange things. Perhaps--"

"Let us try to remember the letter, Mr. Emblem."

"Yes, yes--certainly--the letter. Why it went--ahem!--as follows--"

       *       *       *       *       *

Arnold laid down the pen in despair. The poor old man was mad. He had
poured out the wildest farrago without sense, coherence, or story.

"So much for the letter, Mr. Arbuthnot." He was mad without doubt, yet
he knew Arnold, and knew, too, why he was in the house. "Ah, I knew it
would come back to me. Strange if it did not. Why I read that letter
once every quarter or so for eighteen years. It is a part of myself. I
could not forget it."

"And the name of your son-in-law's old friend?"

"Oh, yes, the name!"

He gave some name, which might have been the lost name, but as Mr.
Emblem changed it the next moment, and forgot it again the moment
after, it was doubtful; certainly not much to build upon.

"And the coat-of-arms?"

"We are getting on famously, are we not? The coat, sir, was as
follows."

He proceeded to describe an impossible coat--a coat which might have
been drawn by a man absolutely ignorant of science.

All this took a couple of hours. It was now eight o'clock.

"Thank you, Mr. Emblem," said Arnold. "I have no doubt now that we
shall somehow bring Iris to her own again, in spite of your loss.
Shall we go upstairs and have some breakfast?"

"It is all right, Iris," cried the old man gleefully. "It is all
right. I have remembered everything, and Mr. Arbuthnot will go out
presently and secure your inheritance."

Iris looked at Arnold.

"Yes, dear," she said. "You shall have your breakfast. And then you
shall tell me all about it when Arnold goes; and you will take a
holiday, won't you--because I am twenty-one to-day?"

"Aha!" He was quite cheerful and mirthful, because he had recovered
his memory. "Aha, my dear, all is well! You are twenty-one, and I am
seventy-five; and Mr. Arbuthnot will go and bring home the--the
inheritance. And I shall sit here all day long. It was a good dream
that came to me this morning, was it not? Quite a voice from Heaven,
which said: 'Get up and write down the letter while you remember it.'
I got up; I found by the--by the merest accident, Mr. Arbuthnot on the
stairs, and we have arranged everything for you--everything."




CHAPTER IX.

DR. WASHINGTON.


Arnold returned to his studio, sat down and fell fast asleep.

He was awakened about noon by his Cousin Clara.

"Oh, Arnold," she cried, shaking him wrathfully by the arm, "this is a
moment of the greatest excitement and importance to me, and you are my
only adviser, and you are asleep!"

He sprung to his feet.

"I am awake now, Clara. Anxiety and trouble? On account of our talk
yesterday?"

He saw that she had been crying. In her hands she had a packet of
letters.

"Oh, no, no; it is far more important than that. As for our talk--"

"I am engaged to her, Clara."

"So I expected," she replied coldly. "But I am not come here about
your engagement. And you do not want my congratulations, I suppose?"

"I should like to have your good wishes, Clara."

"Oh, Arnold, that is what my poor Claude said when he deserted me and
married the governess. You men want to have your own way, and then
expect us to be delighted with it."

"I expect nothing, Clara. Pray understand that."

"I told Claude, when he wrote asking forgiveness, that he had my good
wishes, whatever he chose to do, but that I would not on any account
receive his wife. Very well, Arnold; that is exactly what I say to
you."

"Very well, Clara. I quite understand. As for the studio, and all the
things that you have given me, they are, of course, yours again. Let
me restore what I can to you."

"No, Arnold, they are yours. Let me hear no more about things that are
your own. Of course, your business, as you call it, is exciting. But
as for this other thing, it is far more important. Something has
happened; something I always expected; something that I looked
forward to for years; although it has waited on the way so long, it
has actually come at last, when I had almost forgotten to look for it.
So true it is, Arnold, that good fortune and misfortune alike come
when we least expect them."

Arnold sat down. He knew his cousin too well to interrupt her. She had
her own way of telling a story, and it was a roundabout way.

"I cannot complain, after twenty years, can I? I have had plenty of
rope, as you would say. But still it has come at last. And naturally,
when it does come, it is a shock."

"Is it hereditary gout, Clara?"

"Gout! Nonsense, Arnold! When the will was read, I said to myself,
'Claude is certain to come back and claim his own. It is his right,
and I hope he will come. But for my own part, I have not the least
intention of calling upon the governess.' Then three or four years
passed away, and I heard--I do not remember how--that he was dead. And
then I waited for his heirs, his children, or their guardians. But
they did not come."

"And now they have really come? Oh, Clara, this is indeed a
misfortune."

"No, Arnold; call it a restitution, not a misfortune. I have been
living all these years on the money which belongs to Claude's heirs."

"There was a son, then. And now he has dropped upon us from the
clouds?"

"It is a daughter, not a son. But you shall hear. I received a letter
this morning from a person called Dr. Joseph Washington, stating that
he wrote to me on account of the only child and heiress of the late
Claude Deseret."

"Who is Dr. Joseph Washington?"

"He is a physician, he says, and an American."

"Yes; will you go on?"

"I do not mind it, Arnold; I really do not. I must give up my house
and put down my carriage, but it is for Claude's daughter. I rejoice
to think that he has left some one behind him. Arnold, that face upon
your canvas really has got eyes wonderfully like his, if it was not a
mere fancy, when I saw it yesterday. I am glad, I say, to give up
everything to the child of Claude."

"You think so kindly of him, Clara, who inflicted so much pain on
you."

"I can never think bitterly of Claude. We were brought up together; we
were like brother and sister; he never loved me in any other way. Oh,
I understood it all years ago. To begin with, I was never beautiful;
and it was his father's mistake. Well: this American followed up his
letter by a visit. In the letter he merely said he had come to London
with the heiress. But he called an hour ago, and brought me--oh,
Arnold, he brought me one more letter from Claude. It has been waiting
for me for eighteen years. After all that time, after eighteen years,
my poor dead Claude speaks to me again. My dear, when I thought he was
miserable on account of his marriage, I was wrong. His wife made him
happy, and he died because she died." The tears came into her eyes
again. "Poor boy! Poor Claude! The letter speaks of his child. It
says--" She opened and read the letter. "He says: 'Some day my child
will, I hope, come to you, and say: Cousin Clara, I am Iris
Deseret.'"

"Iris?" said Arnold.

"It is her name, Arnold. It was the child's grandmother's name."

"A strange coincidence," he said. "Pray go on."

"'She will say: Cousin Clara, I am Iris Deseret. Then you will be
kind to her, as you would to me, if I were to come home again.' I
cannot read any more, my dear, even to you."

"Did this American give you any other proof of what he asserts?"

"He gave me a portrait of Claude, taken years ago, when he was a boy
of sixteen, and showed me the certificate of marriage, and the child's
certificate of baptism, and letters from his wife. I suppose nothing
more can be wanted."

"I dare say it is all right, Clara. But why was not the child brought
over before?"

"Because--this is the really romantic part of the story--when her
father died, leaving the child, she was adopted by these charitable
Americans, and no one ever thought of examining the papers, which were
lying in a desk, until the other day."

"You have not seen the young lady."

"No; he is to bring her to-morrow."

"And what sort of a man is this American? Is he a gentleman?"

"Well, I do not quite know. Perhaps Americans are different from
Englishmen. If he was an Englishman, I should say without any
hesitation that he is not a gentleman, as we count good breeding and
good manners. He is a big man, handsome and burly, and he seems
good-tempered. When I told him what was the full amount of Iris's
inheritance--"

"Iris's inheritance!" Arnold repeated. "I beg your pardon, Clara; pray
go on; but it seems like a dream."

"He only laughed, and said he was glad she would have so much. The
utmost they hoped, he said, was that it might be a farm, or a house or
two, or a few hundreds in the stocks. He is to bring her to-morrow,
and of course I shall make her stay with me. As for himself, he says
that he is only anxious to get back home to his wife and his
practice."

"He wants nothing for himself, then? That seems a good sign."

"I asked him that question, and he said that he could not possibly
take money for what he and his family had done for Iris; that is to
say, her education and maintenance. This was very generous of him.
Perhaps he is really a gentleman by birth, but has provincial manners.
He said, however, that he had no objection to receiving the small
amount of money spent on the voyage and on Iris's outfit, because they
were not rich people, and it was a serious thing to fit out a young
lady suitably. So of course I gave him what he suggested, a check for
two hundred pounds. No one, he added with true feeling, would grudge a
single dollar that had been spent upon the education of the dear girl;
and this went to my heart."

"She is well educated, then?"

"She sings well," he says, "and has had a good plain education. He
said I might rest assured that she was ladylike, because she had been
brought up among his own friends."

"That is a very safe guarantee," said Arnold, laughing. "I wonder if
she is pretty?"

"I asked him that question too, and he replied very oddly that she had
a most splendid figure, which fetched everybody. Is not that rather a
vulgar expression?"

"It is, in England. Perhaps in America it belongs to the first
circles, and is a survival of the Pilgrim Fathers. So you gave him a
check for two hundred pounds?"

"Yes; surely I was not wrong, Arnold. Consider the circumstances, the
outfit and the voyage, and the man's reluctance and delicacy of
feeling."

"I dare say you were quite right, but--well, I think I should have
seen the young lady first. Remember, you have given the money to a
stranger, on his bare word."

"Oh, Arnold, this man is perfectly honest. I would answer for his
truth and honesty. He has frank, honest eyes. Besides, he brought me
all those letters. Well, dear, you are not going to desert me because
you are engaged, are you, Arnold? I want you to be present when she
comes to-morrow morning."

"Certainly I will be present, with the greatest--no, not the greatest
pleasure. But I will be present--I will come to luncheon, Clara."

When she was gone he thought again of the strange coincidence, both of
the man and of the inheritance. Yet what had his Iris in common with a
girl who had been brought up in America? Besides, she had lost her
inheritance, and this other Iris had crossed the ocean to receive
hers. Yet a very strange coincidence. It was so strange that he told
it to Iris and to Lala Roy. Iris laughed, and said she did not know
she had a single namesake. Lala did not laugh; but he sat thinking in
silence. There was no chess for him that night; instead of playing his
usual game, Mr. Emblem, in his chair, laughed and chuckled in rather a
ghastly way.




CHAPTER X.

"IT IS MY COUSIN."


"Well, Joe," said his wife, "and how is it going to finish? It looks
to me as if there was a prison-van and a police-court at the end.
Don't you think we had better back out of it while there is time?"

"You're a fool!" her husband replied--it was the morning after his
visit to Clara; "you know nothing about it. Now listen."

"I do nothing but listen; you've told me the story till I know it by
heart. Do you think anybody in the world will be so green as to
believe such a clumsy plan as that?"

"Now look here, Lotty; if there's another word said--mind, now--you
shall have nothing more to do with the business at all. I'll give it
to a girl I know--a clever girl, who will carry it through with flying
colors."

She set her lips hard, and drummed her fingers on the table. He knew
how to rule his wife.

"Go on," she said, "since we can't be honest."

"Be reasonable, then; that's all I ask you. Honest! who is honest?
Ain't we every one engaged in getting round our neighbors? Isn't the
whole game, all the world over, lying and deceit? Honest! you might as
well go on the boards without faking up your face, as try to live
honest. Hold your tongue, then." He growled and swore, and after his
fashion called on the Heavens to witness and express their
astonishment.

The girl bent her head, and made no reply for a space. She was cowed
and afraid. Presently she looked up and laughed, but with a forced
laugh.

"Don't be cross, Joe; I'll do whatever you want me to do, and
cheerfully, too, if it will do you any good. What is a woman good for
but to help her husband? Only don't be cross, Joe."

She knew what her husband was by this time--a false and unscrupulous
man. Yet she loved him. The case is not rare by any means, so that
there is hope for all of us, from the meanest and most wriggling worm
among us to the most hectoring ruffian.

"Why there, Lotty," he said, "that is what I like. Now listen. The old
lady is a cake--do you understand? She is a sponge, she swallows
everything, and is ready to fall on your neck and cry over you for
joy. As for doubt or suspicion, not a word. I don't think there will
be a single question asked. No, it's all 'My poor dear Claude'--that's
your father, Lotty--and 'My poor dear Iris'--that's you, Lotty."

"All right, Joe, go on. I am Iris--I am anybody you like. Go on."

"The more I think about it, the more I'm certain we shall do the
trick. Only keep cool over the job and forget the music-hall. You are
Iris Deseret, and you are the daughter of Claude Deseret, deceased. I
am Dr. Washington, one of the American family who brought you up.
You're grateful, mind. Nothing can be more lively than your gratitude.
We've been brother and sister, you and me, and I've got a wife and
young family and a rising practice at home in the State of Maine, and
I am only come over here to see you into your rights at great personal
expense. Paid a substitute. Yes, actually paid a substitute. We only
found the papers the other day, which is the reason why we did not
come over before, and I am going home again directly."

"You are not really going away, Joe, are you?"

"No, I am going to stay here; but I shall pretend to go away. Now
remember, we've got no suspicion ourselves, and we don't expect to
meet any. If there is any, we are surprised and sorry. We don't come
to the lady with a lawyer or a blunderbuss; we come as friends, and we
shall arrange this little business between ourselves. Oh, never you
fear, we shall arrange it quite comfortably, without lawyers."

"How much do you think we shall get out of it, Joe?"

"Listen, and open your eyes. There's nearly a hundred and twenty
thousand pounds and a small estate in the country. Don't let us
trouble about the estate more than we can help. Estates mean lawyers.
Money doesn't."

He spoke as if small sums like a hundred thousand pounds are carried
about in the pocket.

"Good gracious! And you've got two hundred of it already, haven't
you?"

"Yes, but what is two hundred out of a hundred and twenty thousand? A
hundred and twenty thousand! There's spending in it, isn't there,
Lotty? Gad, we'll make the money spin, I calculate! It may be a few
weeks before the old lady transfers the money--I don't quite know
where it is, but in stocks or something--to your name. As soon as it
is in your name I've got a plan. We'll remember that you've got a
sweetheart or something in America, and you'll break your heart for
wanting to see him. And then nothing will do but you must run across
for a trip. Oh, I'll manage, and we'll make the money fly."

He was always adding new details to his story, finding something to
embellish it and heighten the effect, and now having succeeded in
getting the false Iris into the house, he began already to devise
schemes to get her out again.

"A hundred thousand pounds? Why, Joe, it is a terrible great sum of
money. Good gracious! What shall we do with it, when we get it?"

"I'll show you what to do with it, my girl."

"And you said, Joe--you declared that it is your own by rights."

"Certainly it is my own. It would have been bequeathed to me by my own
cousin. But she didn't know it. And she died without knowing it, and I
am her heir."

Lotty wondered vaguely and rather sadly how much of this statement was
true. But she did not dare to ask. She had promised her assistance.
Every night she woke with a dreadful dream of a policeman knocking at
the door; whenever she saw a man in blue she trembled; and she knew
perfectly well that, if the plot failed, it was she herself, in all
probability, and not her husband at all, who would be put in the dock.
She did not believe a word about the cousin; she knew she was going to
do a vile and dreadful wickedness, but she was ready to go through
with it, or with anything else, to pleasure a husband who already, the
honeymoon hardly finished, showed the propensities of a rover.

"Very well, Lotty; we are going there at once. You need take nothing
with you, but you won't come back here for a good spell. In fact, I
think I shall have to give up these lodgings, for fear of accidents. I
shall leave you with your cousin."

"Yes; and I'm to be quiet, and behave pretty, I suppose?"

"You'll be just as quiet and demure as you used to be when you were
serving in the music shop. No loud laughing, no capers, no comic
songs, and no dancing."

"And am I to begin at once by asking for the money to be--what do you
call it, transferred?"

"No; you are not on any account to say a word about the money; you are
to go on living there without hinting at the money--without showing
any desire to discuss the subject--perhaps for months, until there
can't be the shadow of a doubt that you are the old woman's cousin.
You are to make much of her, flatter her, cocker her up, find out all
the family secrets, and get the length of her foot; but you are not
to say one single word about the money. As for your manners, I'm not
afraid of them, because when you like, you can look and talk like a
countess."

"I know now." She got up and changed her face so that it became at
once subdued and quiet, like a quiet serving-girl behind a counter.
"So, is that modest enough, Joe? And as for singing, I shall sing for
her, but not music-hall trash. This kind of thing. Listen."

There was a piano in the room, and she sat down and sang to her own
accompaniment, with a sweet, low voice, one of the soft, sad German
songs.

"That'll do," cried Joe. "Hang me! what a clever girl you are, Lotty!
That's the kind of thing the swells like. As for me, give me ten
minutes of Jolly Nash. But you know how to pull 'em in, Lotty."

It was approaching twelve, the hour when they were due. Lotty retired
and arrayed herself in her quietest and most sober dress, a costume in
some brown stuff, with a bonnet to match. She put on her best gloves
and boots, having herself felt the inferiority of the shop-girl to the
lady in those minor points, and she modified and mitigated her fringe,
which, she knew, was rather more exaggerated than young ladies in
society generally wear.

"You're not afraid, Lotty?" said Joe, when at last she was ready to
start.

"Afraid? Not I, Joe. Come along. I couldn't look quieter, not if I was
to make up as I do in the evening as a Quakeress. Come along. Oh, Joe,
it will be awful dull! Don't forget to send word to the hall that I am
ill. Afraid? Not I!" She laughed, but rather hysterically.

There would be, however, she secretly considered, some excitement when
it came to the finding out, which would happen, she was convinced, in
a very few hours. In fact, she had no faith at all in the story being
accepted and believed by anybody; to be sure, she herself had been
trained, as ladies in shops generally are, to mistrust all mankind,
and she could not understand at all the kind of confidence which comes
of having the very thing presented to you which you ardently desire.
When they arrived in Chester Square, she found waiting for her a lady,
who was certainly not beautiful, but she had kind eyes, which looked
eagerly at the strange face, and with an expression of disappointment.

"It can't be the fringe," thought Lotty.

"Cousin Clara," she said softly and sweetly, as her husband had taught
her, "I am Iris Deseret, the daughter of your old playfellow, Claude."

"Oh, my dear, my dear," cried Clara with enthusiasm, "come to my arms!
Welcome home again!"

She kissed and embraced her. Then she held her by both hands, and
looked at her face again.

"My dear," she said, "you have been a long time coming. I had almost
given up hoping that Claude had any children. But you are welcome,
after all--very welcome. You are in your own house, remember, my dear.
This house is yours, and the plate, and furniture, and everything, and
I am only your tenant."

"Oh!" said Lotty, overwhelmed. Why, she had actually been taken on her
word, or rather the word of Joe.

"Let me kiss you again. Your face does not remind me as yet, in any
single feature, of your father's. But I dare say I shall find
resemblance presently. And indeed, your voice does remind me of him
already. He had a singularly sweet and delicate voice."

"Iris has a remarkably sweet and delicate voice," said Joe, softly.
"No doubt she got it from her father. You will hear her sing
presently."

Lotty hardly knew her husband. His face was preternaturally solemn,
and he looked as if he was engaged in the most serious business of his
life.

"All her father's ways were gentle and delicate," said Clara.

"Just like hers," said Joe. "When all of us--American boys and girls,
pretty rough at times--were playing and larking about, Iris would be
just sittin' out like a cat on a carpet, quiet and demure. I suppose
she got that way, too, from her father."

"No doubt; and as for your face, my dear, I dare say I shall find a
likeness presently. But just now I see none. Will you take off your
bonnet?"

When the girl's bonnet was off, Clara looked at her again, curiously,
but kindly.

"I suppose I can't help looking for a likeness, my dear. But you must
take after your mother, whom I never saw. Your father's eyes were full
and limpid; yours are large, and clear, and bright; very good eyes, my
dear, but they are not limpid. His mouth was flexible and mobile, but
yours is firm. Your hair, however, reminds me somewhat of his, which
was much your light shade of brown when he was young. And now,
sir"--she addressed Joe--"now that you have brought this dear girl all
the way across the Atlantic, what are you going to do?"

"Well, I don't exactly know that there's anything to keep me," said
Joe. "You see, I've got my practice to look after at home--I am a
physician, as I told you--and my wife and children; and the sooner I
get back the better, now that I can leave Iris with her friends, safe
and comfortable. Stay," he added, "there are all those papers which I
promised you--the certificates, and the rest of them. You had better
take them all, miss, and keep them for Iris."

"Thank you," said Clara, touched by this confidence; "Iris will be
safe with me. It is very natural that you should want to go home
again. And you will be content to stay with me, my dear, won't you?
You need not be afraid, sir; I assure you that her interests will not
in any way suffer. Tell her to write and let you know exactly what is
done. Let her, however, since she is an English girl, remain with
English friends, and get to know her cousins and relations. You can
safely trust her with me, Dr. Washington."

"Thank you," said Joe. "You know that when one has known a girl all
her life, one is naturally anxious about her happiness. We are almost
brother and sister."

"I know; and I am sure, Mr. Washington, we ought to be most grateful
to you. As for the money you have expended upon her, let me once more
beg of you--"

Joe waved his hand majestically.

"As for that," he said, "the money is spent. Iris is welcome to it, if
it were ten times as much. Now, madam, you trusted me, the very first
day that you saw me, with two hundred pounds sterling. Only an English
lady would have done that. You trusted me without asking me who or
what I was, or doubting my word. I assure you, madam, I felt that
kindness, and that trust, very much indeed, and in return, I have
brought you Iris herself. After all expenses paid of coming over and
getting back, buying a few things for Iris, if I find that there's
anything over, I shall ask you to take back the balance. Madam, I
thank you for the money, but I am sure I have repaid you--with Iris."

This was a very clever speech. If there had been a shadow of doubt
before it in Clara's heart (which there was not), it would vanish now.
She cordially and joyfully accepted her newly-found cousin.

"And now, Iris," he said with a manly tremor in his voice, "I do not
know if I shall see you again before I go away. If not, I shall take
your fond love to all of them at home--Tom, and Dick, and Harry, and
Harriet, and Prissy, and all of them"--Joe really was carrying the
thing through splendidly--"and perhaps, my dear, when you are a grand
lady in England, you will give a thought--a thought now and again--to
your old friends across the water."

"Oh, Joe!" cried Lotty, really carried away with admiration, and
ashamed of her skeptical spirit. "Oh," she whispered, "ain't you
splendid!"

"But you must not go, Dr. Washington," said Clara, "without coming
again to say farewell. Will you not dine with us to-night? Will you
stay and have lunch?"

"No, madam, I thank you. It will be best for me to leave Iris alone
with you. The sooner she learns your English ways and forgets American
ways, the better."

"But you are not going to start away for Liverpool at once? You will
stay a day or two in London--"

The American physician said that perhaps he might stay a week longer
for scientific purposes.

"Have you got enough money, Joe?" asked the new Iris thoughtfully.

Joe gave her a glance of infinite admiration.

"Well," he said, "the fact is that I should like to buy a few books
and things. Perhaps--"

"Cousin," said Lotty eagerly, "please give him a check for a hundred
pounds. Make it a hundred. You said everything was mine. No, Joe, I
won't hear a word about repayment, as if a little thing like fifty
pounds, or a hundred pounds, should want to be repaid! As if you and I
could ever talk about repayment!"

Clara did as she was asked readily and eagerly. Then Joe departed,
promising to call and say farewell before he left England, and
resolving that in his next visit--his last visit--there should be
another check. But he had made one mistake; he had parted with the
papers. No one in any situation of life should ever give up the power,
until he has secured the substance. But it is human to err.

"And now, my dear," said Clara warmly, "sit down and let us talk.
Arnold is coming to lunch with us, and to make your acquaintance."

When Arnold came a few minutes later, he was astonished to find his
cousin already on the most affectionate terms with the newly-arrived
Iris Deseret. She was walking about the room showing her the pictures
of her grandfather and other ancestors, and they were hand-in-hand.

"Arnold," said Clara, "this is Iris, and I hope you will both be great
friends; Iris, this is my cousin, but he is not yours."

"I don't pretend to know how that may be," said the young lady. "But
then I am glad to know all your cousins, whether they are mine or not;
only don't bother me with questions, because I don't remember
anything, and I don't know anything. Why, until the other day I did
not even know that I was an English lady, not until they found those
papers."

A strange accent for an American! and she certainly said "laidy" for
"lady," and "paipper" for "paper," like a cockney. Alas! This comes of
London Music Halls even to country-bred damsels!

Arnold made a mental observation that the new-comer might be called
anything in the world, but could not be called a lady. She was
handsome, certainly, but how could Claude Deseret's daughter have
grown into so common a type of beauty? Where was the delicacy of
feature and manner which Clara had never ceased to commend in speaking
of her lost cousin?

"Iris," said Clara, "is our little savage from the American Forest.
She is Queen Pocahontas, who has come over to conquer England and to
win all our hearts. My dear, my Cousin Arnold will help me to make you
an English girl."

She spoke as in the State of Maine was still the hunting-ground of
Sioux and Iroquois.

Arnold thought that a less American-looking girl he had never seen;
that she did not speak or look like a lady was to be expected,
perhaps, if she had, as was probable, been brought up by rough and
unpolished people. But he had no doubt, any more than Clara herself,
as to the identity of the girl. Nobody ever doubts a claimant. Every
impostor, from Demetrius downward, has gained his supporters and
partisans by simply living among them and keeping up the imposition.
It is so easy, in fact, to be a claimant, that it is wonderful there
are not more of them.

Then luncheon was served, and the young lady not only showed a noble
appetite, but to Arnold's astonishment, confessed to an ardent love
for bottled stout.

"Most American ladies," he said impertinently, "only drink water, do
they not?"

Lotty perceived that she had made a mistake.

"I only drink stout," she said, "when the doctor tells me. But I like
it all the same."

She certainly had no American accent. But she would not talk much; she
was, perhaps, shy. After luncheon, however, Clara asked her if she
would sing, and she complied, showing considerable skill with her
accompaniment, and singing a simple song in good taste and with a
sweet voice. Arnold observed, however, that there was some weakness
about the letter "h," less common among Americans than among the
English. Presently he went away, and the girl, who had been aware that
he was watching her, breathed more easily.

"Who is your Cousin Arnold?" she asked.

"My dear, he is my cousin but not yours. You will not see him often,
because he is going to be married, I am sorry to say, and to be
married beneath him--oh, it is dreadful! to some tradesman's girl, my
dear."

"Dreadful!" said Iris with a queer look in her eyes. "Well, cousin, I
don't want to see much of him. He's a good-looking chap, too, though
rather too finicking for my taste. I like a man who looks as if he
could knock another man down. Besides, he looks at me as if I was a
riddle, and he wanted to find out the answer."

In the evening Arnold found that no change had come over the old man.
He was, however, perfectly happy, so that, considering the ruin of his
worldly prospects, it was, perhaps, as well that he had parted, for a
time, at least, with his wits. Some worldly misfortunes there are
which should always produce this effect.

"You told me," said Lala Roy, "that another Iris had just come from
America to claim an inheritance of your cousin."

"Yes; it is a very strange coincidence."

"Very strange. Two Englishmen die in America at the same time, each
having a daughter named Iris, and each daughter entitled to some kind
of inheritance."

Lala Roy spoke slowly, and with meaning.

"Oh!" cried Arnold. "It is more than strange. Do you think--is it
possible--"

He could not for the moment clothe his thoughts in words.

"Do you know if any one has brought this girl to England?"

"Yes; she was brought over by a young American physician, one of the
family who adopted and brought her up."

"What is he like--the young American physician?"

"I have not seen him."

"Go, my young friend, to-morrow morning, and ask your cousin if this
photograph resembles the American physician."

It was the photograph of a handsome young fellow, with strongly marked
features, apparently tall and well-set-up.

"Lala, you don't really suspect anything--you don't think--"

"Hush! I know who has stolen the papers. Perhaps the same man has
produced the heiress."

"And you think--you suspect that the man who stole the papers is
connected with--But then those papers must be--oh, it cannot be! For
then Iris would be Clara's cousin--Clara's cousin--and the other an
impostor."

"Even so; everything is possible. But silence. Do not speak a word,
even to Iris. If the papers are lost, they are lost. Say nothing to
her yet; but go--go, and find out if that photograph resembles the
American physician. The river wanders here and there, but the sea
swallows it at last."




CHAPTER XI.

MR. JAMES MAKES ATONEMENT.


James arrived as usual in the morning at nine o'clock, in order to
take down the shutters. To his astonishment, he found Lala Roy and
Iris waiting for him in the back shop. And they had grave faces.

"James," said Iris, "your master has suffered a great shock, and is
not himself this morning. His safe has been broken open by some one,
and most important papers have been taken out."

"Papers, miss--papers? Out of the safe?"

"Yes. They are papers of no value whatever to the thief, whoever he
may be. But they are of the very greatest importance to us. Your
master seems to have lost his memory for a while, and cannot help us
in finding out who has done this wicked thing. You have been a
faithful servant for so long that I am sure you will do what you can
for us. Think for us. Try to remember if anybody besides yourself has
had access to this room when your master was out of it."

James sat down. He felt that he must sit down, though Lala Roy was
looking at him with eyes full of doubt and suspicion. The whole
enormity of his own guilt, though he had not stolen anything, fell
upon him. He had got the key; he had given it to Mr. Joseph; and he
had received it back again. In fact, at that very moment, it was lying
in his pocket. The worst that he had feared had happened. The safe was
robbed.

He was struck with so horrible a dread, and so fearful a looking
forward to judgment and condemnation, that his teeth chattered and his
eye gave way.

"You will think it over, James," said Iris; "think it over, and tell
us presently if you can remember anything."

"Think it over, Mr. James," Lala Roy repeated in his deepest tone, and
with an emphatic gesture of his right forefinger. "Think it over
carefully. Like a lamp that is never extinguished are the eyes of the
faithful servant."

They left him, and James fell back into his chair with hollow cheek
and beating heart.

"He told me," he murmured--"oh, the villain!--he swore to me that he
had taken nothing from the safe. He said he only looked in it, and
read the contents. The scoundrel! He has stolen the papers! He must
have known they were there. And then, to save himself, he put me on to
the job. For who would be suspected if not--oh, Lord!--if not me?"

He grasped his paste brush, and attacked his work with a feverish
anxiety to find relief in exertion; but his heart was not in it, and
presently a thought pierced his brain, as an arrow pierceth the heart,
and under the pang and agony of it, his face turned ashy-pale, and the
big drops stood upon his brow.

"For," he thought, "suppose that the thing gets abroad; suppose they
were to advertise a reward; suppose the man who made the key were to
see the advertisement or to hear about it! And he knows my name, too,
and my business; and he'll let out for a reward--I know he will--who
it was ordered that key of him."

Already he saw himself examined before a magistrate; already he saw in
imagination that locksmith's man who made the key kissing the
Testament, and giving his testimony in clear and distinct words, which
could not be shaken.

"Oh, Lord! oh, Lord!" he groaned. "No one will believe me, even if I
do confess the truth: and as for him, I know him well; if I go to him,
he'll only laugh at me. But I must go to him--I must!"

He was so goaded by his terror that he left the shop unprotected--a
thing he had never thought to do--and ran as fast as he could to Joe's
lodgings. But he had left them; he was no longer there; he had not
been there for six weeks; the landlady did not know his address, or
would not give it. Then James felt sick and dizzy, and would have sat
down on the doorstep and cried but for the look of the thing. Besides,
he remembered the unprotected shop. So he turned away sadly and walked
back, well understanding now that he had fallen like a tool into a
trap, artfully set to fasten suspicion and guilt upon himself.

When he returned he found the place full of people. Mr. Emblem was
sitting in his customary place, and he was smiling. He did not look in
the least like a man who had been robbed. He was smiling pleasantly
and cheerfully. Mr. Chalker was also present, a man with whom no one
ever smiled, and Lala Roy, solemn and dignified, and a man--an unknown
man--who sat in the outer shop, and seemed to take no interest at all
in the proceedings. Were they come, he asked himself, to arrest him on
the spot?

Apparently they were not, for no one took the least notice of him, and
they were occupied with something else. How could they think of
anything else? Yet Mr. Chalker, standing at the table, was making a
speech, which had nothing to do with the robbery.

"Here I am, you see, Mr. Emblem," he said; "I have told you already
that I don't want to do anything to worry you. Let us be friends all
round. This gentleman, your friend from India, will advise you, I am
sure, for your own good, not to be obstinate. Lord! what is the
amount, after all, to a substantial man like yourself? A substantial
man, I say." He spoke confidently, but he glanced about the shop with
doubtful eyes. "Granted that it was borrowed to get your grandson out
of a scrape--supposing he promised to pay it back and hasn't done so;
putting the case that it has grown and developed itself as bills will
do, and can't help doing, and can't be stopped; it isn't the fault of
the lawyers, but the very nature of a hill to go on growing--it's like
a baby for growing. Why, after all, you were your grandson's
security--you can't escape that. And when I would no longer renew, you
gave of your own accord--come now, you can't deny that--a Bill of Sale
on goods and furniture. Now, Mr. Emblem, didn't, you? Don't let us
have any bitterness or quarreling. Let's be friends, and tell me I may
send away the man."

Mr. Emblem smiled pleasantly, but did not reply.

"A Bill of Sale it was, dated January the 25th, 1883, just before that
cursed Act of Parliament granted the five days' notice. Here is the
bailiff's man in possession. You can pay the amount, which is, with
costs and Sheriff's Poundage, three hundred and fifty-one pounds
thirteen shillings and fourpence, at once, or you may pay it five days
hence. Otherwise the shop, and furniture, and all, will be sold off in
seven days."

"Oh," James gasped, listening with bewilderment, "we can't be going to
be sold up! Emblem's to be sold up!"

"Three hundred and fifty pounds!" said Mr. Emblem. "My friend, let us
rather speak of thousands. This is a truly happy day for all of us.
Sit down, Mr. Chalker--my dear friend, sit down. Rejoice with us. A
happy morning."

"What the devil is the matter with him?" asked the money-lender.

"There was something, Mr. Chalker," Mr. Emblem went on cheerfully,
"something said about my grandson. Joe was always a bad lot; lucky his
father and mother are out of the way in Australia. You came to me
about that business, perhaps? Oh, on such a joyful day as this I
forgive everybody. Tell Joe I do not want to see him, but I have
forgiven him."

"Oh, he's mad!" growled James; "he's gone stark staring mad!"

"You don't seem quite yourself this morning, Mr. Emblem," said Mr.
Chalker. "Perhaps this gentleman, your friend from India, will advise
you when I am gone. You don't understand, Mister," he addressed Lala
Roy, "the nature of a bill. Once you start a bill, and begin to renew
it, it's like planting a tree, for it grows and grows of its own
accord, and by Act of Parliament, too, though they do try to hack and
cut it down in the most cruel way. You see Mr. Emblem is obstinate.
He's got to pay off that bill, which is a Bill of Sale, and he won't
do it. Make him write the check and have done with it."

"This is the best day's work I ever did," Mr. Emblem went on.
"To remember the letter, word for word, and everything!
Mr. Arbuthnot has, very likely, finished the whole business
by now. Thousands--thousands--and all for Iris!"

"Look here, Mr. Emblem," said the lawyer angrily. "You'll not only be
a bankrupt if you go on like this, but you'll be a fraudulent bankrupt
as well. Is it honest, I want to know, to refuse to pay your just
debts when you've put by thousands, as you boast--you actually
boast--for your granddaughter?"

"Yes," said the old man, "Iris will have thousands."

"I think, sir," said Lala Roy, "that you are under an illusion. Mr.
Emblem does not possess any such savings or investments as you
imagine."

"Then why does he go on talking about thousands?"

"He has had a shock; he cannot quite understand what has happened. You
had better leave him for the present."

"Leave him! And nothing but these moldy old books! Here, you sir--you
James--you shopman--come here! What is the stock worth?"

"It depends upon whether you are buying or selling," said James. "If
you were to sell it under the hammer, in lots, it wouldn't fetch a
hundred pounds."

"There, you hear--you hear, all of you! Not a hundred pounds, and my
Bill of Sale is three-fifty."

"Pray, sir," said Lala Roy, "who told you that Mr. Emblem was so
wealthy?"

"His grandson."

"Then, sir perhaps it would be well to question the grandson further,
he may know things of which we have heard nothing."

The Act of 1882, which came into operation in the following January,
is cruel indeed, I am told, to those who advanced money on Bills of
Sale before that date, for it allows--it actually allows the debtor
five clear days during which he may, if he can, without being caught,
make away with portions of his furniture and belongings--the smaller
and the more precious portion; or he may find some one else to lend
him the money, and so get off clear and save his sticks. It is, as the
modern Shylock declares, a most wicked and iniquitous Act, by which
the shark may be balked, and many an honest tradesman, who would
otherwise have been most justly ruined, is enabled to save his stock,
and left to worry along until the times become more prosperous. To a
man like Mr. David Chalker, such an Act of Parliament is most
revolting.

He went away at length, leaving the man--the professional
person--behind. Then Lala Roy persuaded Mr. Emblem to go upstairs
again. He did so without any apparent consciousness that there was a
Man in Possession.

"James," said Lala Roy, "you have heard that your master has been
robbed. You are reflecting and meditating on this circumstance.
Another thing is that a creditor has threatened to sell off everything
for a debt. Most likely, everything will be sold, and the shop closed.
You will, therefore, lose the place you have had for five-and-twenty
years. That is a very bad business for you. You are unfortunate this
morning. To lose your place--and then this robbery. That seems also a
bad business."

"It is," said James with a hollow groan. "It is, Mr. Lala Roy. It is a
dreadful bad business."

"Pray, Mr. James," continued this man with grave, searching eyes which
made sinners shake in their shoes, "pray, why did you run away, and
where did you go after you opened the shop this morning? You went to
see Mr. Emblem's grandson, did you not?"

"Yes, I did," said James.

"Why did you go to see him?"

"I w--w--went--oh, Lord!--I went to tell him what had happened,
because he is master's grandson, and I thought he ought to know," said
James.

"Did you tell him?"

"No; he has left his lodgings. I don't know where he is--oh, and he
always told me the shop was his--settled on him," he said.

"He is the Father of Lies; his end will be confusion. Shame and
confusion shall wait upon all who have hearkened unto him or worked
with him, until they repent and make atonement."

"Don't, Mister Lala Roy--don't; you frighten me," said James. "Oh,
what a dreadful liar he is!"

All the morning the philosopher sat in the bookseller's chair, and
James, in the outer shop, felt that those deep eyes were resting
continually upon him, and knew that bit by bit his secret would be
dragged from him. If he could get up and run away--if a customer
would come--if the dark gentleman would go upstairs--if he could
think of something else! But none of these things happened, and James,
at his table with the paste before him, passed a morning compared with
which any seat anywhere in Purgatory would have been comfortable.
Presently a strange feeling came over him, as if some invisible force
was pushing and dragging him and forcing him to leave his chair, and
throw himself at the Philosopher's feet and confess everything. This
was the mesmeric effect of those reproachful eyes fixed steadily upon
him. And in the doorway, like some figure in a nightmare--a figure
incongruous and out of place--the Man in Possession sitting, passive
and unconcerned, with one eye on the street and the other on the shop.
Upstairs Mr. Emblem was sitting fast asleep; joy had made him sleepy;
and Iris was at work among her pupils' letters, compiling sums for the
Fruiterer, making a paper on Conic Sections for the Cambridge man, and
working out Trigonometrical Equations for the young schoolmaster, and
her mind full of a solemn exultation and glory, for she was a woman
who was loved. The other things troubled her but little. Her
grandfather would get back his equilibrium of mind; the shop might be
shut up, but that mattered little. Arnold, and Lala Roy, and her
grandfather, and herself, would all live together, and she and Arnold
would work. The selfishness of youth is really astonishing.
Nothing--except perhaps toothache--can make a girl unhappy who is
loved and newly betrothed. She may say what she pleases, and her face
may be a yard long when she speaks of the misfortunes of others, but
all the time her heart is dancing.

To Lala Roy, the situation presented a problem with insufficient data,
some of which would have to be guessed. A letter, now lost, said that
a certain case contained papers necessary to obtain an unknown
inheritance for Iris. How then to ascertain whether anybody was
expecting or looking for a girl to claim an inheritance? Then there
was half a coat-of-arms, and lastly there was a certain customer of
unknown name, who had been acquainted with Iris's father before his
marriage. So far for Iris. As for the thief, Lala Roy had no doubt at
all. It was, he was quite certain, the grandson, whose career he had
watched for some years with interest and curiosity. Who else was there
who would steal the papers? And who would help him, and give him
access to the safe? He did not only suspect, he was certain that James
was in some way cognizant of the deed. Why else did he turn so pale?
Why did he rush off to Joe's lodgings? Why did he sit trembling?

At half-past twelve Lala Roy rose.

"It is your dinner-hour," he said to James, and it seemed to the
unhappy man as it he was saying, "I know all." "It is your dinner
hour; go, eat, refresh the body. Whom should suspicion affright except
the guilty?"

James put on his hat and sneaked--he felt that he was sneaking--out of
the shop.

During his dinner-hour, Joseph himself called. It was an unusual thing
to see him at any time; in fact, as he was never wont to call upon his
grandfather, unless he was in a scrape and wanted money, no one ever
made the poor young man welcome, or begged him to come more often.

But this morning, he walked upstairs and appeared so cheerful, so
entirely free from any self-reproach for past sins, and so easy in his
mind, without the least touch of the old hang-dog look, that Iris
began to reproach herself for thinking badly of her cousin.

When he was told about the robbery, he expressed the greatest surprise
that any one in the world could be so wicked as to rob an old man like
his grandfather. Besides his abhorrence of crime in the abstract, he
affirmed that the robbery of a safe was a species of villainy for
which hanging was too mild--much too mild a punishment. He then asked
his grandfather what were the contents of the packet stolen, and when
he received no answer except a pleasant and a cheery laugh, he asked
Iris, and learned to his sorrow that the contents were unknown, and
could not, therefore, be identified even if they were found. This, he
said, was a thousand pities, because, if they had been known, a reward
might have been offered. For his own part he would advise the greatest
caution. Nothing at all should be done at first; no step should be
taken which might awaken suspicion; they should go on as if the papers
were without value. As for that, they had no real proof that there was
any robbery. Iris thought of telling him about the water-mark of the
blank pages, but refrained. Perhaps there was no robbery after
all--who was to prove what had been inside the packet? But if there
had been papers, and it they were valueless except to the rightful
owners, they would, perhaps, be sent back voluntarily; or after a
time, say a year or two, they might be advertised for; not as if the
owners were very anxious to get them, and not revealing the nature of
the papers, but cautiously; and presently, if they had not been
destroyed, the holders of the papers would answer the advertisement,
and then a moderate reward might, after a while, be offered; and so
on, giving excellent advice. While he was speaking, Lala Roy entered
the room in his noiseless manner, and took his accustomed chair.

"And what do you think, sir?" said Joseph, when he had finished. "You
have heard my advice. You are not an Englishman, but I suppose you've
got some intelligence."

Lala bowed and spread his hands, but replied not.

"Your opinion should be asked," Joseph went on, "because you see, as
the only other person, besides my grandfather and my cousin, in the
house, you might yourself be suspected. Indeed," he added, "I have no
doubt you will be suspected. When I talk over the conduct of the case,
which will be my task, I suppose, it will, perhaps, be my duty to
suspect you."

Lala bowed again and again, spread his hands, but did not speak.

In fact, Joseph now perceived that he was having the conversation
wholly to himself. His grandfather sat passive, listening as one who,
in a dream, hears voices but does not heed what they are saying, yet
smiling politely. Iris listened, but paid no heed. She thought that a
great deal of fuss was being made about papers, which, perhaps, were
worth nothing. And as for her inheritance, why, as she never expected
to get any, she was not going to mourn the loss of what, perhaps, was
worth nothing.

"Very well, then," said Joseph, "that's all I've got to say. I've
given you the best advice I can, and I suppose I may go. Have you
lost your voice, Iris?"

"No; but I think you had better go, Joseph. My grandfather is not able
to talk this morning, and I dare say your advice is very good, but we
have other advisers."

"As for you, Mr. Lala Roy, or whatever you call yourself," said Joe
roughly, "I've warned you. Suspicion certainly will fall upon you, and
what I say is--take care. For my own part I never did believe in
niggers, and I wouldn't have one in my house."

Lala Roy bowed again and spread his fingers.

Then Joseph went away. The door between the shop and the hall was half
open, and he looked in. A strange man was sitting in the outer shop, a
pipe in his mouth, and James was leaning his head upon his hands, with
wild and haggard eyes gazing straight before him.

"Poor devil," murmured Joseph. "I feel for him, I do indeed. He had
the key made--for himself; he certainly let me use it once, but only
once, and who's to prove it? And he's had the opportunity every day of
using it himself. That's very awkward, Foxy, my boy. If I were Foxy, I
should be in a funk, myself."

He strolled away, thinking that all promised well. Lotty most
favorably and unsuspiciously received in her new character; no one
knowing the contents of the packet; his grandfather gone silly; and
for himself, he had had the opportunity of advising exactly what he
wished to be done--namely, that silence and inaction should be
observed for a space, in order to give the holders of the property a
chance of offering terms. What better advice could he give? And what
line of action would be better or safer for himself?

If James had known who was in the house-passage, the other side of the
door, there would, I think, have been a collision of two solid bodies.
But he did not know, and presently Lala Roy came back, and the torture
began again. James took down books and put them up again; he moved
about feverishly, doing nothing, with a duster in his hand; but all
the time he felt those deep accusing eyes upon him with a silence
worse than a thousand questions. He knew--he was perfectly
certain--that he should be found out. And all the trouble for nothing!
and the Bailiff's man in possession, and the safe robbed, and those
eyes upon him, saying, as plain as eyes could speak, "Thou art the
Man!"

"And Joe is the man," said James; "not me at all. What I did was
wrong, but I was tempted. Oh, what a precious liar and villain he is!
And what a fool I've been!"

The day passed more slowly than it seemed possible for any day to
pass; always the man in the shop; always the deep eyes of the silent
Hindoo upon him. It was a relief when, once, Mr. Chalker looked in and
surveyed the shelves with a suspicious air, and asked if the old man
had by this time listened to reason.

It is the business of him who makes plunder out of other men's
distresses--as the jackal feeds upon the offal and the putrid
carcass--to know as exactly as he can how his fellow-creatures are
situated. For this reason such a one doth diligently inquire, listen,
pick up secrets, put two and two together, and pry curiously into
everybody's affairs, being never so happy as when he gets an
opportunity of going to the rescue of a sinking man. Thus among those
who lived in good repute about the lower end of the King's Road, none
had a better name than Mr. Emblem, and no one was considered to have
made more of his chances. And it was with joy that Mr. Chalker
received Joe one evening and heard from him the dismal story, that if
he could not find fifty pounds within a few hours, he was ruined. The
fifty pounds was raised on a bill bearing Mr. Emblem's name. When it
was presented, however, and the circumstances explained, the old
gentleman, who had at first refused to own the signature, accepted it
meekly, and told no one that his grandson had written it himself,
without the polite formality of asking permission to sign for him. In
other words Joseph was a forger, and Mr. Chalker knew it, and this
made him the more astonished when Mr. Emblem did not take up the bill,
but got it renewed quarter after quarter, substituting at length a
bill of sale, as if he was determined to pay as much as possible for
his grandson's sins.

"Where is he?" asked the money-lender angrily. "Why doesn't he come
down and face his creditors?"

"Master's upstairs," said James, "and you've seen yourself, Mr.
Chalker, that he is off his chump. And oh, sir, who would have thought
that Emblem's would have come to ruin?"

"But there's something, James--Come, think--there must be something."

"Mr. Joseph said there were thousands. But he's a terrible liar--oh,
Mr. Chalker, he's a terrible liar and villain! Why, he's even deceived
me!"

"What? Has he borrowed your money?"

"Worse--worse. Do you know where I could find him, sir?"

"Well, I don't know--" Mr. Chalker was not in the habit of giving
addresses, but in this case, perhaps Joe might be squeezed as well as
his grandfather. Unfortunately that bill with the signature had been
destroyed. "I don't know. Perhaps if I find out I may tell you. And,
James, if you can learn anything--this rubbish won't fetch half the
money--I'll make it worth your while, James, I will indeed."

"I'll make him take his share," said James to himself. "If I have to
go to prison, he shall go too. They sha'n't send me without sending
him."

He looked round. The watchful eyes were gone. The Hindoo had gone away
noiselessly. James breathed again.

"After all," he said, "how are they to find out? How are they to prove
anything? Mr. Joseph took the things, and I helped him to a key; and
he isn't likely to split, and--oh, Lord, if they were to find it!" For
at that moment he felt the duplicate key in his waistcoat-pocket. "If
they were to find it!"

He took the key out, and looked at the bright and innocent-looking
thing, as a murderer might look at his blood stained dagger.

Just then, as he gazed upon it, holding it just twelve inches in front
of his nose, one hand was laid upon his shoulder, and another took the
key from between his fingers.

He turned quickly, and his knees gave way, and he sunk upon the floor,
crying:

"Oh, Mr. Lala Roy, sir, Mr. Lala Roy, I am not the thief! I am
innocent! I will tell you all about it! I will confess all to you! I
will indeed! I will make atonement! Oh, what a miserable fool I've
been!"

"Upon the heels of Folly," said the Sage, "treadeth Shame. You will
now be able to understand the words of wisdom, which say of the wicked
man, 'The curse of iniquity pursueth him; he liveth in continual fear;
the anxiety of his mind taketh vengeance upon him.' Stand up and
speak."

The Man in Possession looked on as if an incident of this kind was too
common in families for him to take any notice of it. Nothing, in fact,
is able to awaken astonishment in the heart of the Man in Possession,
because nothing is sacred to him except the "sticks" he has to guard.
To Iris, the event was, however, of importance, because it afforded
Lala Roy a chance of giving Arnold that photograph, no other than an
early portrait of Mr. Emblem's grandson.




CHAPTER XII.

IS THIS HIS PHOTOGRAPH?


The best way to get a talk with his cousin was to dine with her.
Arnold therefore went to Chester Square next day with the photograph
in his pocket. It was half an hour before dinner when he arrived, and
Clara was alone.

"My dear," she cried with enthusiasm, "I am charmed--I am
delighted--with Iris."

"I am glad," said Arnold mendaciously.

"I am delighted with her--in every way. She is more and better than I
could have expected--far more. A few Americanisms, of course--"

"No doubt," said Arnold. "When I saw her I thought they rather
resembled Anglicisms. But you have had opportunities of judging. You
have in your own possession," he continued, "have you not, all the
papers which establish her identity?"

"Oh, yes; they are all locked up in my strong-box. I shall be very
careful of them. Though, of course, there is no one who has to be
satisfied except myself. And I am perfectly satisfied. But then I
never had any doubt from the beginning. How could there be any doubt?"

"How, indeed?"

"Truth, honor, loyalty, and candor, as well as gentle descent, are
written on that girl's noble brow, Arnold, plain, so that all may
read. It is truly wonderful," she went on, "how the old gentle blood
shows itself, and will break out under the most unexpected conditions.
In her face she is not much like her father; that is true; though
sometimes I catch a momentary resemblance, which instantly disappears
again. Her eyes are not in the least like his, nor has she his manner,
or carriage, or any of his little tricks and peculiarities--though,
perhaps, I shall observe traces of some of them in time. But
especially she resembles him in her voice. The tone--the
timbre--reminds me every moment of my poor Claude."

"I suppose," said Arnold, "that one must inherit something, if it is
only a voice, from one's father. Have you said anything to her yet
about money matters, and a settlement of her claims?"

"No, not yet. I did venture, last night, to approach the subject, but
she would not hear of it. So I dropped it. I call that true delicacy,
Arnold--native, instinctive, hereditary delicacy."

"Have you given any more money to the American gentleman who brought
her home?"

"Iris made him take a hundred pounds, against his will, to buy books
with, for he is not rich. Poor fellow! It went much against the grain
with him to take the money. But she made him take it. She said he
wanted books and instruments, and insisted on his having at least a
hundred pounds. It was generous of her. Yes; she is--I am convinced--a
truly generous girl, and as open-handed as the day. Now, would a
common girl, a girl of no descent, have shown so much delicacy and
generosity?"

"By the way, Clara, here is a photograph. Does it belong to you? I--I
picked it up."

He showed the photograph which Lala Roy had given him.

"Oh, yes; it is a likeness of Dr. Washington, Iris's adopted brother
and guardian. She must have dropped it. I should think it was taken a
few years back, but it is still a very good likeness. A handsome man,
is he not? He grows upon one rather. His parting words with Iris
yesterday were very dignified and touching."

"I will give it to her presently," he replied, without further
comment.

There was, then, no doubt. The woman was an impostor, and the man was
the thief, and the papers were the papers which had been stolen from
the safe, and Iris Deseret was no other than his own Iris. But he must
not show the least sign of suspicion.

"What are you thinking about, Arnold?" asked Clara. "Your face is as
black as thunder. You are not sorry that Iris has returned, are you?"

"I was thinking of my engagement, Clara."

"Why, you are not tired of it already? An engaged man, Arnold, ought
not to look so gloomy as that."

"I am not tired of it yet. But I am unhappy as regards some
circumstances connected with it. Your disapproval, Clara, for one. My
dear cousin, I owe so much to you, that I want to owe you more. Now, I
have a proposition--a promise--to make to you. I am now so sure, so
very sure and certain, that you will want me to marry Miss Aglen--and
no one else--when you once know her, that I will engage solemnly not
to marry her unless you entirely approve. Let me owe my wife to you,
as well as everything else."

"Arnold, you are not in earnest."

"Quite in earnest."

"But I shall never approve. Never--never--never! I could not bring
myself, under any circumstances that I can conceive, to approve of
such a connection."

"My dear cousin, I am, on the other hand, perfectly certain that you
will approve. Why, if I were not quite certain, do you think I should
have made this promise? But to return to your newly-found cousin. Tell
me more about her."

"Well, I have discovered that she is a really very clever and gifted
girl. She can imitate people in the most wonderful way, especially
actresses, though she has only been to a theater once or twice in her
life. At Liverpool she heard some one sing what she calls a Tropical
Song, and this she actually remembers--she carried it away in her
head, every word--and she can sing it just as they sing it on the
stage, with all the vulgarity and gestures imitated to the very life.
Of course I should not like her to do this before anybody else, but it
is really wonderful."

"Indeed!" said Arnold. "It must be very clever and amusing."

"Of course," said Clara, with colossal ignorance, "an American lady
can hardly be expected to understand English vulgarities. No doubt
there is an American variety."

Arnold thought that a vulgar song could be judged at its true value by
any lady, either American or English, but he said nothing.

And then the young lady herself appeared. She had been driving about
with Clara among various shops, and now bore upon her person the
charming result of these journeys, in the shape of a garment, which
was rich in texture, and splendid in the making. And she really was a
handsome girl, only with a certain air of being dressed for the stage.
But Arnold, now more than suspicious, was not dazzled by the gorgeous
raiment, and only considered how his cousin could for a moment imagine
this person to be a lady, and how it would be best to break the news.

"Clara's cousin," she said, "I have forgotten your name; but how do
you do, again?"

And then they went in to dinner.

"You have learned, I suppose," said Arnold, "something about the
Deseret family by this time?"

"Oh, yes, I have heard all about the family-tree. I dare say I shall
get to know it by heart in time. But you don't expect me all at once,
to care much for it."

"Little Republican!" said Clara. "She actually does not feel a pride
in belonging to a good old family."

The girl made a little gesture.

"Your family can't do much for you, that I can see, except to make you
proud, and pretend not to see other women in the shop. That is what
the county ladies do."

"Why, my dear, what on earth do you know of the county ladies?"

Lotty blushed a little. She had made a mistake. But she quickly
recovered.

"I only know what I've read, cousin, about any kind of English ladies.
But that's enough, I'm sure. Stuck-up things!"

And again she observed, from Clara's pained expression, that she had
made another mistake.

If she showed a liking for stout at lunch, she manifested a positive
passion for champagne at dinner.

"I do like the English custom," she said, "of having two dinners in
the day."

"Ladies in America, I suppose," said Clara, "dine in the middle of the
day?"

"Always."

"But I have visited many families in New York and Boston who dined
late," said Arnold.

"Dare say," she replied carelessly. "I'm going to have some more of
that curry stuff, please. And don't ask any more questions, anybody,
till I've worried through with it. I'm a wolf at curry."

"She likes England, Arnold," said Clara, covering up this remark, so
to speak. "She likes the country, she says, very much."

"At all events," said the girl, "I like this house, which is
first-class--fine--proper. And the furniture, and pictures, and
all--tiptop. But I'm afraid it is going to be awful dull, except at
meals, and when the Boy is going." Her own head was just touched by
the "Boy," and she was a little off her guard.

"My dear child," said Clara, "you have only just come, and you have
not yet learned to know and love your own home and your father's
friends. You must take a little time."

"Oh, I'll take time. As long as you like. But I shall soon be tired of
sitting at home. I want to go about and see things--theaters and
music-halls, and all kinds of places."

"Ladies, in England, do not go to music-halls," said Arnold.

"Gentlemen do. Why not ladies, then? Answer me that. Why can't ladies
go, when gentlemen go? What is proper for gentlemen is proper for
ladies. Very well, then, I want to go somewhere every night. I want to
see everything there is to see, and to hear all that there is to
hear."

"We shall go, presently, a good deal into society," said Clara
timidly. "Society will come back to town very soon now--at least, some
of it."

"Oh, yes, I dare say. Society! No, thank you, with company manners. I
want to laugh, and talk, and enjoy myself."

The champagne, in fact, had made her forget the instructions of her
tutor. At all events, she looked anything but "quiet," with her face
flushed and her eyes bright. Suddenly she caught Arnold's expression
of suspicion and watchfulness, and resolutely subdued a rising
inclination to get up from the table and have a walk round with a
snatch of a Topical Song.

"Forgive me, Clara," she murmured in her sweetest tone, "forgive me,
cousin. I feel as if I must break out a bit, now and then. Yankee
manners, you know. Let me stay quiet with you for a while. You know
the thought of starched and stiff London society quite frightens me. I
am not used to anything stiff. Let me stay at home quiet, with you."

"Dear girl!" cried Clara, her eyes filling with tears; "she has all
Claude's affectionate softness of heart."

"I believe," said Arnold, later on in the evening, "that she must have
been a circus rider, or something of that sort. What on earth does
Clara mean by the gentle blood breaking out? We nearly had a breaking
out at dinner, but it certainly was not due to the gentle blood."

After dinner, Arnold found her sitting on a sofa with Clara, who was
telling her something about the glories of the Deseret family. He was
half inclined to pity the girl, or to laugh--he was not certain
which--for the patience with which she listened, in order to make
amends for any bad impression she might have produced at dinner. He
asked her, presently, if she would play. She might be, and certainly
was, vulgar; but she could play well and she knew good music. People
generally think that good music softens manners, and does not permit
those who play and practice it to be vulgar. But, concerning this
young person, so much could not be said with any truth.

"You play very well. Where did you learn? Who was your master?" Arnold
asked.

She began to reply, but stopped short. He had very nearly caught her.

"Don't ask questions," she said. "I told you not to ask questions
before. Where should I learn, but in America? Do you suppose no one
can play the piano, except in England? Look here," she glanced at her
cousin. "Do you, Mr. Arbuthnot, always spend your evenings like this?"

"How like this?"

"Why, going around in a swallow tail to drawing-rooms with the women,
like a tame tom-cat. If you do, you must be a truly good young man. If
you don't, what do you do?"

"Very often I spend my evenings in a drawing-room."

"Oh, Lord! Do most young Englishmen carry on in the same proper way?"

"Why not?"

"Don't they go to music-halls, please, and dancing cribs, and such?"

"Perhaps. But what does it concern us to know what some men do?"

"Oh, not much. Only if I were a man like you, I wouldn't consent to be
a tame tom-cat--that is all; but perhaps you like it."

She meant to insult and offend him so that he should not come any
more.

But she did not succeed. He only laughed, feeling that he was getting
below the surface, and sat down beside the piano.

"You amuse me," he said, "and you astonish me. You are, in fact, the
most astonishing person I ever met. For instance, you come from
America, and you talk pure London slang with a cockney twang. How did
it get there?"

In fact, it was not exactly London slang, but a patois or dialect,
learned partly from her husband, partly from her companions, and
partly brought from Gloucester.

"I don't know--I never asked. It came wrapped up in brown paper,
perhaps, with a string round it."

"You have lived in America all your life, and you look more like an
Englishwoman than any other girl I have ever seen."

"Do I? So much the better for the English girls; they can't do better
than take after me. But perhaps--most likely, in fact--you think that
American girls all squint, perhaps, or have got humpbacks? Anything
else?"

"You were brought up in a little American village, and yet you play in
the style of a girl who has had the best masters."

She did not explain--it was not necessary to explain--that her master
had been her father who was a teacher of music.

"I can't help it, can I?" she asked; "I can't help it if I turned out
different to what you expected. People sometimes do, you know. And
when you don't approve of a girl, it's English manners, I suppose, to
tell her so--kind of encourages her to persevere, and pray for better
luck next time, doesn't it? It's simple too, and prevents any foolish
errors--no mistake afterward, you see. I say, are you going to come
here often; because, if you are, I shall go away back to the States or
somewhere, or stay upstairs in my own room. You and me won't get on
very well together, I am afraid."

"I don't think you will see me very often," he replied. "That is
improbable; yet I dare say I shall come here as often as I usually
do."

"What do you mean by that?" She looked sharply and suspiciously at
him. He repeated his words, and she perceived that there was meaning
in them, and she felt uneasy.

"I don't understand at all," she said; "Clara tells me that this house
is mine. Now--don't you know--I don't intend to invite any but my own
friends to visit me in my own house?"

"That seems reasonable. No one can expect you to invite people who are
not your friends."

"Well, then, I ain't likely to call you my friend"--Arnold inclined
his head--"and I am not going to talk riddles any more. Is there
anything else you want to say?"

"Nothing more, I think, at present, thank you."

"If there is, you know, don't mind me--have it out--I'm nobody, of
course. I'm not expected to have any manners--I'm only a girl. You can
say what you please to me, and be as rude as you please; Englishmen
always are as rude as they can be to American girls--I've always heard
that."

Arnold laughed.

"At all events," he said, "you have charmed Clara, which is the only
really important thing. Good-night, Miss--Miss Deseret."

"Good-night, old man," she said, laughing, because she bore no malice,
and had given him a candid opinion; "I dare say when you get rid of
your fine company manners, and put off your swallow tail, you're not a
bad sort, after all. Perhaps, if you would confess, you are as fond of
a kick-up on your way home as anybody. Trust you quiet chaps!"

Clara had not fortunately heard much of this conversation, which,
indeed, was not meant for her, because the girl was playing all the
time some waltz music, which enabled her to talk and play without
being heard at the other end of the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, there was now no doubt. The American physician and the subject
of the photograph were certainly the same man. And this man was also
the thief of the safe, and Iris Aglen was Iris Deseret. Of that,
Arnold had no longer any reasonable doubt. There was, however, one
thing more. Before leaving Clara's house, he refreshed his memory as
to the Deseret arms. The quarterings of the shield were, so far,
exactly what Mr. Emblem recollected.

"It is," said Lala Roy, "what I thought. But, as yet, not a word to
Iris."

He then proceeded to relate the repentance, the confession, and the
atonement proposed by the remorseful James. But he did not tell quite
all. For the wise man never tells all. What really happened was this.
When James had made a clean breast and confessed his enormous share
in the villainy, Lala Roy bound him over to secrecy under pain of Law,
Law the Rigorous, pointing out that although they do not, in England,
exhibit the Kourbash, or bastinado the soles of the feet, they make
the prisoner sleep on a hard board, starve him on skilly, set him to
work which tears his nails from his fingers, keep him from
conversation, tobacco, and drink, and when he comes out, so hedge him
around with prejudice and so clothe him with a robe of shame, that no
one will ever employ him again, and he is therefore doomed to go back
again to the English Hell. Lala Roy, though a man of few words, drew
so vivid a description of the punishment which awaited his penitent
that James, foxy as he was by nature, felt constrained to resolve that
henceforth, happen what might, then and for all future, he would range
himself on the side of virtue, and as a beginning he promised to do
everything that he could for the confounding of Joseph and the
bringing of the guilty to justice.




CHAPTER XIII.

HIS LAST CHANCE.


Three days elapsed, during which nothing was done. That cause is
strongest which can afford to wait. But in those three days several
things happened.

First of all, Mr. David Chalker, seeing that the old man was obdurate,
made up his mind to lose most of his money, and cursed Joe continually
for having led him to build upon his grandfather's supposed wealth.
Yet he ought to have known. Tradesmen do not lock up their savings in
investments for their grandchildren, nor do they borrow small sums at
ruinous interest of money-lending solicitors; nor do they give Bills
of Sale. These general rules were probably known to Mr. Chalker. Yet
he did not apply them to this particular case. The neglect of the
General Rule, in fact, may lead the most astute of mankind into ways
of foolishness.

James, for his part, stimulated perpetually by fear of prison and loss
of character and of situation--for who would employ an assistant who
got keys made to open the safe?--showed himself the most repentant of
mortals. Dr. Joseph Washington, lulled into the most perfect security,
enjoyed all those pleasures which the sum of three hundred pounds
could purchase. Nobody knew where he was, or what he was doing. As for
Lotty, she had established herself firmly in Chester Square, and
Cousin Clara daily found out new and additional proofs of the gentle
blood breaking out!

On the fourth morning Lala Roy sallied forth. He was about to make a
great Moral Experiment, the nature of which you will immediately
understand. None but a philosopher who had studied Confucius and Lao
Kiun, would have conceived so fine a scheme.

First he paid a visit to Mr. Chalker.

The office was the ground-floor front room, in one of the small
streets north of the King's Road. It was not an imposing office, nor
did it seem as if much business was done there; and one clerk of
tender years sufficed for Mr. Chalker's wants.

"Oh!" he said, "it's our friend from India. You're a lodger of old
Emblem's, ain't you?"

"I have lived with him for twenty years. I am his friend."

"Very well. I dare say we shall come to terms, if he's come to his
senses. Just take a chair and sit down. How is the old man?"

"He has not yet recovered the use of his intellect."

"Oh! Then how can you act for him if he's off his head?"

"I came to ask an English creditor to show mercy."

"Mercy? What is the man talking about? Mercy! I want my money. What
has that got to do with mercy?"

"Nothing, truly; but I will give you your money. I will give you
justice, and you shall give me mercy. You lent Mr. Emblem fifty
pounds. Will you take your fifty pounds, and leave us in peace?"

He drew a bag out of his pocket--a brown banker's bag--and Mr. Chalker
distinctly heard the rustling of notes.

This is a sound which to some ears is more delightful than the finest
music in the world. It awakens all the most pleasurable emotions; it
provokes desire and hankering after possession; and it fills the soul
with the imaginary enjoyment of wealth.

"Certainly not," said Mr. Chalker, confident that better terms than
those would be offered. "If that is all you have to say, you may go
away again."

"But the rest is usury. Think! To give fifty, and ask three hundred
and fifty, is the part of an usurer."

"Call it what you please. The bill of sale is for three hundred and
fifty pounds. Pay that three hundred and fifty, with costs and
sheriff's poundage, and I take away my man. If you don't pay it, then
the books on the shelves and the furniture of the house go to the
hammer."

"The books, I am informed," said Lala Roy, "will not bring as much as
a hundred pounds if they are sold at auction. As for the furniture,
some of it is mine, and some belongs to Mr. Emblem's granddaughter."

"His granddaughter! Oh, it's a swindle," said Mr. Chalker angrily. "It
is nothing more or less than a rank swindle. The old man ought to be
prosecuted, and, mind you, I'll prosecute him, and you too, for
conspiring with him."

"A prosecution," said the Hindoo, "will not hurt him, but it might
hurt you. For it would show how you lent him fifty pounds five years
ago; how you made him give you a bill for a hundred; how you did not
press him to pay that bill, but you continually offered to renew it
for him, increasing the amount on each time of renewal; and at last
you made him give you a bill of sale for three hundred and fifty. This
is, I suppose, one of the many ways in which Englishmen grow rich.
There are also usurers in India, but they do not, in my country, call
themselves lawyers. A prosecution. My friend, it is for us to
prosecute. Shall we show that you have done the same thing with many
others? You are, by this time, well known in the neighborhood, Mr.
Chalker, and you are so much beloved that there are many who would be
delighted to relate their experiences and dealings with so clever a
man. Have you ever studied, one asks with wonder, the Precepts of the
great Sage who founded your religion?"

"Oh, come, don't let us have any religious nonsense!"

"I assure you they are worth studying. I am, myself, an humble
follower of Gautama, but I have read those precepts with profit. In
the kingdom imagined by that preacher, there is no room for usurers,
Mr. Chalker. Where, then, will be your kingdom? Every man must be
somewhere. You must have a kingdom and a king."

"This is tomfoolery!" Mr. Chalker turned red, and looked very
uncomfortable. "Stick to business. Payment in full. Those are my
terms."

"You think, then, that the Precepts of your Sage are only intended for
men while they sit in the church? Many Englishmen think so, I have
observed."

"Payment in full, mister. That's what I want."

He banged his fist on the table.

"No abatement? No mercy shown to an old man on the edge of the grave?
Think, Mr. Chalker. You will soon be as old as Mr. Emblem, your hair
as white, your reason as unsteady--"

"Payment in full, and no more words."

"It is well. Then, Mr. Chalker, I have another proposal to make to
you."

"I thought we should come to something more. Out with it!"

"I believe you are a friend of Mr. Emblem's grandson?"

"Joe? Oh yes, I know Joe."

"You know him intimately?"

"Yes, I may say so."

"You know that he forged his grandfather's name; that he is a
profligate and a spendthrift, and that he has taken or borrowed from
his grandfather whatever money he could get, and that--in short, he is
a friend of your own?"

It was not until after his visitor had gone that Mr. Chalker
understood, and began to resent this last observation.

"Go on," he said. "I know all about Joe."

"Good. Then, if you can tell me anything about him which may be of use
to me I will do this. I will pay you double the valuation of Mr.
Emblem's shop, in return, for a receipt in full. If you can not, you
may proceed to sell everything by auction."

Mr. Chalker hesitated. A valuation would certainly give a higher
figure than a forced sale, and then that valuation doubled!

"Well," he said, "I don't know. It's a cruel hard case to be done out
of my money. How am I to find out whether anything I tell you would be
of use to you or not? What kind of thing do you want? How do I know
that if you get what you want, you won't swear it is of no use to
you?"

"You have the word of one who never broke his word."

Mr. Chalker laughed derisively.

"Why," he said, "I wouldn't take the word of an English bishop--no,
nor of an archbishop--where money is concerned. What is it--what is
the kind of thing you want to know?"

"It is concerned with a certain woman."

"Oh, well, if it is only a woman! I thought it might be something
about money. Joe, you see, like a good many other people, has got his
own ideas about money, and perhaps he isn't so strict in his dealings
as he might be--few men are--and I should not like to let out one or
two things that only him and me know." In fact, Mr. Chalker saw, in
imagination, the burly form of Joe in his office, brandishing a stick,
and accusing him of friendship's trust betrayed.

"But as it is only a woman--which of 'em is it?"

"This is a young woman, said to be handsome, tall, and finely-made;
she has, I am told, light brown hair and large eyes. That is the
description of her given to me."

"I know the girl you mean. Splendid figure, and goes well in tights?"

"I have not been informed on that subject. Can you tell me any more
about her?"

"I suspect, mister," said Joe's friend, with cunning eyes, "that
you've made the acquaintance of a certain widow that was--married
woman that is. I remember now, I've seen Hindoos about her lodgings,
down Shadwell way."

"Perhaps," said Lala, "and perhaps not." His face showed not the least
sign which could be read. "You can tell me afterward what you know of
the woman at Shadwell."

"Well, then, Joe thinks I know nothing about it. Else I wouldn't tell
you. Because I don't want a fight with Joe. Is this any use to you? He
is married to the girl as well as to the widow."

"He is married to the girl as well as to the widow. He has, then, two
wives. It is against the English custom, and breaks the English law.
The young wife who is beautiful, and the old wife who has the
lodging-house. Very good. What is the address of this woman?"

Mr. Chalker looked puzzled.

"Don't you know it, then? What are you driving at?"

"What is the name and address of this Shadwell woman?"

"Well, then"--he wrote an address and handed it over--"you may be as
close as you like. I don't care. It isn't my business. But you won't
make me believe you don't know all about her. Look here, whatever
happens, don't say I told you."

"It shall be a secret," said Lala, taking out the bag of notes. "Let
us complete the business at once, Mr. Chalker. Here is another offer.
I will give you two hundred pounds in discharge of your whole claim,
or you shall have a valuation made, if you prefer it, and I will
double the amount."

Mr. Chalker chose the former promptly, and in a few moments handed
over the necessary receipts, and sent his clerk to recall the Man in
Possession.

"What are you going to do with Joe?" he asked. "No good turn, I'll
swear. And a more unforgiving face than yours I never set eyes on. It
isn't my business, but I'll give you one warning. If you make Joe
desperate, he'll turn on you; and Lord help your slender ribs if Joe
once begins. Don't make him desperate. And now I'll tell you another
thing. First, the woman at Shadwell is horribly jealous. She'll make a
row. Next, the young one, who sings at a music-hall, she's desperately
in love with her husband--more than he is with her--and if a woman's
in love with a man, there's one thing she never forgives. You
understand what that is. Between the pair, Joe's likely to have a
rough time."

"I do. I have had many wives myself."

"Oh, Lord, he says he's had many wives! How many?"

Lala Roy read the receipt, and put it in his pocket. Then he rose and
remarked, with a smile of supreme superiority:

"It is a pleasure to give money to you, and to such as you, Mr.
Chalker."

"Is it?" he replied with a grin. "Give me some more, then."

"You are one of those who, the richer they become, the less harm they
do. Many Englishmen are of this disposition. When they are poor they
are jackals, hyenas, wolves, and man-eating tigers; when they are rich
they are benevolent and charitable, and show mercy unto the wretched
and the poor. So that, in their case, the words of the Wise Man are
naught, when he says that the earth is barren of good things where she
hoardeth treasure; and that where gold is in her bowels no herb
groweth. Pray, Mr. Chalker, pray earnestly for gold in order that you
may become virtuous."

Mr. Chalker grinned, but looked uncomfortable.

"I will, mister," he said, "I will pray with all my might."

Nevertheless, he remained for the space of the whole morning in
uneasiness. The words of the Philosopher troubled him. I do not go so
far as to say that his mind went back to the days when he was young
and innocent, because he was still young, and he never had been
innocent; nor do I say that a tear rose to his eyes and trickled down
his cheek, because nothing brought tears into his eyes except a speck
of dust; or that he resolved to confine himself for the future to
legitimate lawyer's work, because he would then have starved. I only
say that he felt uncomfortable and humiliated, and chiefly so because
an old man with white hair and a brown skin--hang it! a common
nigger--had been able to bring discord into the sweet harmony of his
thoughts.

Lala Roy then betook himself to Joe's former lodgings, and asked for
that gentleman's present address.

The landlady professed to know nothing.

"You do know, however," he persisted, reading knowledge in her eyes.

"Is it trouble you mean for him?" asked the woman, "and him such a
fine, well-set-up young man, too! Is it trouble? Oh, dear, I always
thought he got his money on the cross. Look here. I ain't going to
round on him, though he has gone away and left a comfortable room. So
there! And you may go."

Lala Roy opened his hand. There were at least five golden sovereigns
glorifying his dingy palm.

"Can gold," the moralist asked, "ever increase the virtue of man?
Woman, how much?"

"Is it trouble?" she repeated, looking greedily at the money. "Will
the young man get copped?"

Lala understood no London slang. But he showed his hand again.

"How much? Who so is covetous let him know that his heart is poor. How
much?"

"Poor young man! I'll take them all, please, sir. What's he done?"

"Where does he live?"

"I know where he lives," she said, "because our Bill rode away with
him at the back of his cab, and saw where he got out. He's married
now, and his wife sings at the music-hall, and he lives on her
earnings. Quite the gentleman he is now, and smokes cigars all day
long. There's his address, and thank you for the money. Oh," she said
with a gasp. "To think that people can earn five pounds so easy."

"May the gold procure you happiness--such happiness as you desire!"
said Lala Roy.

"It will nearly pay the quarter's rent. And that's about happiness
enough for one morning."

Joe was sitting in his room alone, half asleep. In fact, he had a head
upon him. He sprung to his feet, however, when he saw Lala Roy.

"Hallo!" he cried. "You here, Nig? How the devil did you find out my
address?"

There was not only astonishment, but some alarm upon his countenance.

"Never mind. I want a little conversation with you, Mr. Joseph."

"Well, sit down and let us have it out. I say, have you come to tell
me that you did sneak those papers, after all? What did you get for
them?"

"I have not come to tell you that. I dare say, however, we shall be
able, some day, to tell you who did steal the papers--if any were
stolen, that is."

"Quite so, my jolly mariner. If any were stolen. Ho, ho! you've got to
prove that first, haven't you? How's the old man?"

"He is ill; he is feeble with age; he is weighed down with misfortune.
I am come, Mr. Joseph, to ask your help for him."

"My help for him? Why, can't he help himself?"

"Four or five years ago he incurred a debt for one who forged his
name. He needed not to have paid that money, but he saved a man from
prison."

"Who was that? Who forged his name?"

"I do not name that man, whose end will be confusion, unless he repent
and make amends. This debt has grown until it is too large for him to
pay it. Unless it is paid, his whole property, his very means of
living, will be sold by the creditor."

"How can I pay him back? It is three hundred and fifty pounds now,"
said Joseph.

"Man, thou hast named thyself."

Joseph stammered but blustered still.

"Well--then--what the devil do you mean--you and your forgery?"

"Forgery is one crime: you have since committed, perhaps, others.
Think. You have been saved once from prison. Will any one save you a
second time? How have you shown your gratitude? Will you now do
something for your benefactor?"

"What do you mean, I say? What do you mean by your forgery and prison?
Hang me, if I oughtn't to kick you out of the room. I would, too, if
you were ten years younger. Do you know, sir, that you are addressing
an officer and a gentleman?"

"There is sometimes, even at the very end, a door opened for
repentance. The door is open now. Young man, once more, consider. Your
grandfather is old and destitute. Will you help him?"

Joseph hesitated.

"I don't believe he is poor. He has saved up all his money for the
girl; let her help him."

"You are wrong. He has saved nothing. His granddaughter maintains
herself by teaching. He has not a penny. You have got from him, and
you have spent all the money he had."

"He ought to have saved."

"He could, at least, have lived by his calling but for you and for
this debt which was incurred by you. He is ruined by it. What will you
do for him?"

"I am not going to do anything for him," said Joseph. "Is it likely?
Did he ever have anything but a scowl for me?"

"He who injures another is always in the wrong. You will, then, do
nothing? Think. It is the open door. He is your grandfather; he has
kept you from starvation when you were turned out of office for drink
and dishonesty. I heard that you now have money. I have been told that
you have been seen to show a large sum of money. Will you give him
some?"

As a matter of fact, Joe had been, the night before, having a festive
evening at the music-hall, from which his wife was absent, owing to
temporary indisposition. While there, he took so much Scotch whisky
and water that his tongue was loosened and he became boastful; and
that to so foolish an extent that he actually brandished in the eyes
of the multitude a whole handful of banknotes. He now remembered this,
and was greatly struck by the curious fact that Lala Roy should seem
to know it.

"I haven't got any money. It was all brag last night. I couldn't help
my grandfather if I wanted to."

"You have what is left of three hundred pounds," said Lala Roy.

"If I said that last night," replied Joe, "I must have been drunker
than I thought. You old fool! the flimsies were duffers. Where do you
think I could raise three hundred pounds? No, no--I'm sorry for the
old man, but I can't help him. I'm going to see him again in a day or
two. We jolly sailors don't make much money, but if a pound or two,
when I come home, will be of any use to him, he's only got to say the
word. After all, I believe it's a kid, got up between you. The old man
must have saved something."

"You will suffer him, then, even to be taken to the workhouse?"

"Why, I can't help it, and I suppose you'll have to go there too. Ho,
ho! I say, Nig!" He began to laugh. "Ho, ho! They won't let you wear
that old fez of yours at the workhouse. How beautiful you'll look in
the workhouse uniform, won't you? I'll come home, and bring you some
'baccy. Now you can cheese it, old 'un."

"I will go, if that is what you mean. It is the last time that you
will be asked to help your grandfather. The door is closed. You have
had one more chance, and you have thrown it away."

So he departed, and Joe, who was of a self-reliant and sanguine
disposition, thought nothing of the warning, which was therefore
thrown away and wasted.

As for Lala, he called a cab, and drove to Shadwell. And if any man
ever felt that he was an instrument set apart to carry out a scheme of
vengeance, that Hindoo philosopher felt like one. The Count of Monte
Cristo himself was not more filled with the faith and conviction of
his divine obligation.

In the afternoon he returned to Chelsea, and perhaps one who knew him
might have remarked upon his face something like a gleam of
satisfaction. He had done his duty.

It was now five days since the fatal discovery. Mr. Emblem still
remained upstairs in his chair; but he was slowly recovering. He
clearly remembered that he had been robbed, and the principal sign of
the shock was his firm conviction that by his own exercise of memory
Iris had been enabled to enter into possession of her own.

As regards the Bill of Sale, he had clean forgotten it. Now, in the
morning, there happened a thing which surprised James very much. The
Man in Possession was recalled. He went away. So that the money must
have been paid. James was so astonished that he ran upstairs to tell
Iris.

"Then," said the girl, "we shall not be turned out after all. But who
has paid the money?"

It could have been no other than Arnold. Yet when, later in the day,
he was taxed with having committed the good action, Arnold stoutly
denied it. He had not so much money in the world, he said; in fact, he
had no money at all.

"The good man," said the Philosopher, "has friends of whom he knoweth
not. As the river returns its waters to the sea, so the heart
rejoiceth in returning benefits received."

"Oh, Lala," said Iris. "But on whom have we conferred any benefits?"

"The moon shines upon all alike," said Lala, "and knows not what she
illumines."

"Lala Roy," said Arnold, suddenly getting a gleam of intelligence, "it
is you who have paid this money."

"You, Lala?"

"No one else could have paid it," said Arnold.

"But I thought--I thought--" said Iris.

"You thought I had no money at all. Children, I have some. One may
live without money in Hindostan, but in England even the Philosopher
cannot meditate unless he can pay for food and shelter. I have money,
Iris, and I have paid the usurer enough to satisfy him. Let us say no
more."

"Oh, Lala!" The tears came to Iris's eyes. "And now we shall go on
living as before."

"I think not," he replied. "In the generations of Man, the seasons
continue side by side; but spring does not always continue with
winter."

"I know, now," interrupted Mr. Emblem, suddenly waking into life and
recollection; "I could not remember at first. Now I know very well,
but I cannot tell how, that the man who stole my papers is my own
grandson. James would not steal. James is curious; he wants to read
over my shoulders what I am writing. He would pry and find out. But he
would not steal. It doesn't matter much--does it?--since I was able to
repair the loss--I always had a most excellent memory--and Iris has
now received her inheritance; but it is my grandson Joe who has stolen
the papers. My daughter's son came home from Australia when--but this
I learned afterward--he had already disgraced himself there. He ran
into debt, and I paid his debts; he forged my name and I accepted the
bill; he took all the money I could let him have, and still he asked
for more. There is no one in the world who would rob me of those
papers except Joseph."

Now, the door was open to the staircase, and the door of communication
between the shop and the house-passage was also open. This seems a
detail hardly worth noting; yet it proved of the greatest importance.
From such small trifles follow great events. Observe that as yet no
positive proof was in the hands of the two conspirators which would
actually connect Iris with Claude Deseret. The proofs were in the
stolen papers, and though Clara had those papers, who was to show that
these papers were actually those in the sealed packet?

When Mr. Emblem finished speaking, no one replied, because Arnold and
Lala knew the facts already, but did not wish to spread them abroad:
and next, because to Iris it was nothing new that her cousin was a bad
man, and because she thought, now that the Man in Possession was gone,
they might just as well forget the papers, and go on as if all this
fuss had not happened.

In the silence that followed this speech, they heard the voice of
James down-stairs, saying:

"I am sorry to say, sir, that Mr. Emblem is ill upstairs, and you
can't see him to-day."

"Ill, is he? I am very sorry. Take him my compliments, James. Mr.
Frank Farrar's compliments, and tell him--"

And then Mr. Emblem sprung to his feet, crying:

"Stop him! stop him! Go down-stairs, some one, and stop him! I don't
know where he lives. Stop him! stop him!"

Arnold rushed down the stairs. He found in the shop an elderly
gentleman, carrying a bundle of books. It was, in fact, Mr. Farrar
come to negotiate the sale of another work from his library.

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Arnold, "Mr. Emblem is most anxious to
see you. Would you step upstairs?"

"Quick, Mr. Farrar--quick," the old man held him tight by the hand.
"Tell me before my memory runs away with me again--tell me. Listen,
Iris! Yet it doesn't matter, because you have already--Tell me--" He
seemed about to wander again, but he pulled himself together with a
great effort. "You knew my son-in-law before his marriage?"

"Surely, Mr. Emblem; I knew your son-in-law, and his father, and all
his people."

"And his name was not Aglen, at all?" asked Arnold.

"No; he took the name of Aglen from a fancied feeling of pride when he
quarreled with his father about--well, it was about his marriage, as
you know, Mr. Emblem; he came to London, and tried to make his way by
writing, and thought to do it, and either to hide a failure or
brighten a success, by using a pseudonym. People were more jealous
about their names in those days. He had better," added the
unsuccessful veteran of letters, "he had far better have made his
living as a--as a"--he looked about him for a fitting simile--"as a
bookseller."

"Then, sir," said Arnold, "what was his real name?"

"His name was Claude Deseret, of course."

"Iris," said Arnold, taking her hand, "this is the last proof. We have
known it for four or five days, but we wanted the final proof, and now
we have it. My dear, you are the cousin of Clara Holland, and all her
fortune, by her grandfather's will, is yours. This is the secret of
the safe. This was what the stolen papers told you."




CHAPTER XIV.

THE HAND OF FATE.


At the first stroke of noon next day, Arnold arrived at his cousin's
house in Chester Square. He was accompanied by Iris, by Lala Roy, and
by Mr. Frank Farrar.

"Pray, Arnold, what is meant by all this mystery?" asked Clara,
receiving him and his party with considerable surprise.

"I will explain all in a few minutes, my dear Clara. Meanwhile, have
you done what you promised?"

"Yes, I wrote to Dr. Washington. He will be here, I expect, in a few
minutes."

"You wrote exactly in the form of words you promised me?"

"Yes, exactly. I asked him to meet me here this morning at a quarter
past twelve, in order to discuss a few points connected with Iris's
future arrangements, before he left for America, and I wrote on the
envelope, 'Immediate and important.'"

"Very well. He will be sure to come, I think. Perhaps your cousin will
insist upon another check for fifty pounds being given to him."

"Arnold, you are extremely suspicious and most ungenerous about Dr.
Washington, on whose truth and disinterested honesty I thoroughly
rely."

"We shall see. Meanwhile, Clara, I desire to present to you a young
lady of whom we have already spoken. This is Miss Aglen, who is, I
need hardly say, deeply anxious to win your good opinion. And this is
Lala Roy, an Indian gentleman who knew her father, and has lived in
the same house with her for twenty years. Our debt--I shall soon be
able to say your debt--of gratitude to this gentleman for his long
kindness to Miss Aglen--is one which can never be repaid."

Clara gave the most frigid bow to both Iris and Lala Roy.

"Really, Arnold, you are talking in enigmas this morning. What am I to
understand? What has this gentleman to do with my appointment with Dr.
Washington?"

"My dear cousin, I am so happy this morning that I wonder I do not
talk in conundrums, or rondeaux, or terza rima. It is a mere chance, I
assure you. Perhaps I may break out in rhymes presently. This evening
we will have fireworks in the square, roast a whole ox, invite the
neighbors, and dance about a maypole. You shall lead off the dance,
Clara."

"Pray go on, Arnold. All this is very inexplicable."

"This gentleman, however, is a very old friend of yours, Clara. Do you
not recognize Mr. Frank Farrar, who used to stay at the Hall in the
old days?

"I remember Mr. Farrar very well." Clara gave him her hand. "But I
should not have known him. Why have we never met in society during all
these years, Mr. Farrar?"

"I suppose because I have been out of society, Miss Holland," said the
scholar. "When a man marries, and has a large family, and a small
income, and grows old, and has to see the young fellows shoving him
out at every point, he doesn't care much about society. I hope you are
well and happy."

"I am very well, and I ought to be happy, because I have recovered
Claude's lost heiress, my cousin, Iris Deseret, and she is the best
and most delightful of girls, with the warmest heart and the sweetest
instincts of a lady by descent and birth."

She looked severely at Arnold, who said nothing, but smiled
incredulously.

Mr. Farrar looked from Iris to Miss Holland, bewildered.

"And why do you come to see me to-day, Mr. Farrar--and with Arnold?"

"Because I have undertaken to answer one question presently, which Mr.
Arbuthnot is to ask me. That is why I am here. Not but what it gives
me the greatest pleasure to see you again, Miss Holland, after so many
years."

"Our poor Claude died in America, you know, Mr. Farrar."

"So I have recently heard."

"And left one daughter."

"That also I have learned." He looked at Iris.

"She is with me, here in this house, and has been with me for a week.
You may understand, Mr. Farrar, the happiness I feel in having with me
Claude's only daughter."

Mr. Farrar looked from her to Arnold with increasing amazement. But he
said nothing.

"I have appointed this morning, at Arnold's request," Clara went on,
"to have an interview, perhaps the last, with the gentleman who
brought my dear Iris from America. I say, at Arnold's request, because
he asked me to do this, and I have always trusted him implicitly, and
I hope he is not going to bring trouble upon us now, although I do
not, I confess, understand the presence of his friends or their
connection with my cousin."

"My dear Clara," said Arnold again, "I ask for nothing but patience.
And that only for a few moments. As for the papers, you have them all
in your possession?"

"Yes; they are locked up in my strong-box."

"Do not, on any account, give them to anybody. However, after this
morning you will not be asked. Have you taken as yet any steps at all
for the transference of your property to--to the rightful heir?"

"Not yet."

"Thank goodness! And now, Clara, I will ask you, as soon as Dr.
Washington and--your cousin--are in the drawing-room, to ring the
bell. You need not explain why. We will answer the summons, and we
will give all the explanations that may be required."

"I will not have my cousin vexed, Arnold."

"You shall not. Your cousin shall never be vexed by me as long as I
live."

"And Dr. Washington must not be in any way offended. Consider the
feelings of an American gentleman, Arnold. He is my guest."

"You may thoroughly rely upon my consideration for the feelings of an
American gentleman. Go; there is a knock at the door. Go to receive
him, and, when both are in the room, ring the bell."

Joe was in excellent spirits that morning. His interview with Lala Roy
convinced him that nothing whatever was known of the papers, therefore
nothing could be suspected. What a fool, he thought, must be his
grandfather, to have had these papers in his hands for eighteen years
and never to have opened the packet, in obedience to the injunction of
a dead man! Had it been his own case, he would have opened the papers
without the least delay, mastered the contents, and instantly claimed
the property. He would have gone on to use it for his own purposes and
private gain, and with an uninterrupted run of eighteen years, he
would most certainly have made a very pretty thing out of it.

However, everything works well for him who greatly dares. His wife
would manage for him better than he could do it for himself. Yet a few
weeks, and the great fortune would fall into his hands. He walked all
the way to Chester Square, considering how he should spend the money.
There are some forms of foolishness, such as, say, those connected
with art, literature, charity, and work for others, which attract some
rich men, but which he was not at all tempted to commit. There were
others, however, connected with horses, races, betting, and gambling,
which tempted him strongly. In fact, Joseph contemplated spending this
money wholly on his own pleasures. Probably it would be a part of his
pleasure to toss a few crumbs to his wife.

It is sad to record that Lotty, finding herself received with so much
enthusiasm, had already begun to fall off in her behavior. Even Clara,
who thought she discovered every hour some new point of resemblance in
the girl to her father, was fain to admit that the "Americanisms" were
much too pronounced for general society.

Her laugh was louder and more frequent; her jests were rough and
common; she used slang words freely; her gestures were extravagant,
and she walked in the streets as if she wished every one to notice
her. It is the walk of the Music-Hall stage, and the trick of it
consists chiefly in giving, so to speak, prominence to the shoulders
and oscillation to the skirts. In fact, she was one of those ladies
who ardently desire that all the world should notice them.

Further, in her conversation, she showed an acquaintance with certain
phases of the English lower life which was astonishing in an American
girl. But Clara had no suspicion--none whatever. One thing the girl
did which pleased her mightily.

She was never tired of hearing about her father, and his way of
looking, standing, walking, folding his hands, and holding himself.
And constantly more and more Clara detected these little tricks in his
daughter. Perhaps she learned them.

"My dear," she said, "to think that I ever thought you unlike your
dear father!"

So that it made her extremely uncomfortable to detect a certain
reserve in Arnold toward the girl, and then a dislike of Arnold in the
girl herself. However, she was accustomed to act by Arnold's advice,
and consented, when he asked her, to arrange so that Arnold might meet
Dr. Washington. As if anything that so much as looked like suspicion
could be thought of for a moment!

But the bell rang, and Arnold, followed by his party, led the way from
the morning room to the drawing room. Dr. Joseph Washington was
standing with his back to the door. The girl was dressed as if she had
just come from a walk, and was holding Clara's hand.

"Yes, madam," he was saying softly, "I return to-morrow to America,
and my wife and my children. I leave our dear girl in the greatest
confidence in your hands. I only venture to advise that, to avoid
lawyers' expenses, you should simply instruct somebody--the right
person--to transfer the property from your name to the name of Iris.
Then you will be saved troubles and formalities of every kind. As for
me, my home is in America--"

"No, Joseph," said Lala Roy gently; "it is in Shadwell."

"It is a lie!" he cried, starting; "it is an infernal lie!"

"Iris," said Arnold, "lift your veil, my dear. Mr. Farrar, who is this
young lady? Look upon this face, Clara."

"This is the daughter of Claude Deseret," said Mr. Farrar, "if she is
the daughter of the man who married Alice Emblem, and went by the name
of Aglen."

Clara turned a terrified face to Arnold.

"Arnold, help me!"

"Whose face is this?" he repeated.

"It is--good Heavens!--it is the face of your portrait. It is Claude's
face again. They are his very eyes--" She covered her face with her
hands. "Oh, Arnold, what is it! Who is this other?"

"This other lady, Clara, is a Music-Hall Singer, who calls herself
Carlotta Claridane, wife of this man, who is not an American at all,
but the grandson of Mr. Emblem, the bookseller, and therefore cousin
of Iris. It is he who robbed his grandfather of the papers which you
have in your possession, Clara. And this is an audacious conspiracy,
which we have been so fortunate as to unearth and detect, step by
step."

"Oh, can such wickedness be?" said Clara; "and in my house, too?"

"Joe," said Lotty, "the game is up. I knew it wouldn't last."

"Let them prove it," said Joe; "let them prove it. I defy you to prove
it."

"Don't be a fool, Joe," said his wife. "Remember," she whispered,
"you've got a pocketful of money. Let us go peaceably."

"As for you, Nigger," said Joe, "I'll break every bone in your body."

"Not here," said Arnold; "there will be no breaking of bones in this
house."

Lotty began to laugh.

"The gentle blood always shows itself, doesn't it?" she said. "I've
got the real instincts of a lady, haven't I? Oh, it was beautiful
while it lasted. And every day more and more like my father."

"Arnold," cried poor Clara, crushed, "help me!"

"Come," said Arnold, "you had better go at once."

"I won't laugh at you," said Lotty. "It's a shame, and you're a good
old thing. But it did me good, it really did, to hear all about the
gentle blood. Come, Joe. Let us go away quietly."

She took her husband's arm. Joe was standing sullen and desperate. Mr.
Chalker was right. It wanted very little more to make him fall upon
the whole party, and go off with a fight.

"Young woman," said Lala Roy, "you had better not go outside the house
with the man. It will be well for you to wait until he has gone."

"Why? He is my husband, whatever we have done, and I'm not ashamed of
him."

"Is he your husband? Ask him what I meant when I said his home was at
Shadwell."

"Come, Lotty," said Joe, with a curious change of manner. "Let us go
at once."

"Wait," Lala repeated. "Wait, young woman, let him go first.
Pray--pray let him go first."

"Why should I wait? I go with my husband."

"I thought to save you from shame. But if you will go with him, ask
him again why his home is at Shadwell, and why he left his wife."

Lotty sprung upon her husband, and caught his wrists with both hands.

"Joe, what does he mean? Tell me he is a liar."

"That would be useless," said Lala Roy. "Because a very few minutes
will prove the contrary. Better, however, that he should go to prison
for marrying two wives than for robbing his grandfather's safe."

"It's a lie!" Joe repeated, looking as dangerous as a wild boar
brought to bay.

"There was a Joseph Gallop, formerly assistant purser in the service
of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company," continued
the man of fate, "who married, nine months ago, a certain widow at
Shadwell. He was turned out of the service, and he married her because
she had a prosperous lodging-house."

"Oh--h!" cried Lotty. "You villain! You thought to live upon my
earnings, did you? You put me up to pretend to be somebody else. Miss
Holland"--she fell upon her knees, literally and simply, and without
any theatrical pretense at all--"forgive me! I am properly punished.
Oh, he is made of lies! He told me that the real Iris was dead and
buried, and he was the rightful heir; and as for you"--she sprung to
her feet and turned upon her husband--"I know it is true. I know it is
true--I can see it within your guilty eyes."

"If you have any doubt," said Lala, "here is a copy of the
marriage-certificate."

She took it, read it, and put it in her pocket. Then she went out of
the room without another word, but with rage and revenge in her eyes.

Joseph followed her, saying no more. He had lost more than he thought
to lose. But there was still time to escape, and he had most of the
money in his pocket.

But another surprise awaited him.

The lady from Shadwell, in fact, was waiting for him outside the door.
With her were a few Shadwell friends, of the seafaring profession,
come to see fair play. It was a disgraceful episode in the history of
Chester Square. After five minutes or so, during which no welsher on a
race-course was ever more hardly used, two policemen interfered to
rescue the man of two wives, and there was a procession all the way to
the police-court, where, after several charges of assault had been
preferred and proved against half a dozen mariners, Joseph was himself
charged with bigamy, both wives giving evidence, and committed for
trial.

His old friend, Mr. David Chalker, one is sorry to add, refused to
give bail, so that he remained in custody, and will now endure
hardness for a somewhat lengthened period.

"Clara," said Arnold, "Iris will stay with you, if you ask her. We
shall not marry, my dear, without your permission. I have promised
that already, have I not?"

THE END.




A YACHTSMAN'S YARN.


"I've knocked off the sea now for some years, but I was yachting along
with all sorts of gentlemen and in all sorts of craft, from three to
one hundred and twenty tons, ever since the top of my head was no
higher than your knee; and as boy, man, and master, I'll allow there's
no one who has seen much more than I have. Yet, spite of that, I can
recall but one extraordinary circumstance. Daresay when I've told it
you, you won't believe it; but I sha'n't be able to help that. Truth's
truth, no consequence how sing'lar its appearance may be; and so now
to begin.

"No matter the port, no matter the yacht's name, no matter her owner's
calling, no matter nothing. Terms and dates and the like shall be
imaginary, and so let the vessel be a schooner of one hundred tons
called the 'Evangeline,' and her owner Mr. Robinson, and me, who was
captain of her, Jacob Williams. This'll furnish a creep you may go on
sweeping with till Doomsday without raising what's dead and gone,
though not forgotten, mind ye, from the bottom. Well, for a whole
fortnight had the 'Evangeline' been moored in a snug berth alongside a
pier wall. The English Channel was wide there, and it didn't need much
sailing to find the Atlantic Ocean. I began to think all cruising was
to come to an end; for Mr. Robinson was a man fond of keeping the sea,
and I had never found a fortnight's lying by to his taste at all. But
matters explained themselves after I'd seen him two or three times
walking about with a very fine-looking female party. Mr. Robinson was
a bachelor, his age I dare say about forty, with handsome whiskers,
and one of those voices that show breeding in a man; ay, and the
humblest ear that hears 'em recognizes them. I didn't take much notice
of _her_, though I reckoned her large black eyes the beautifullest I
had ever beheld in a female countenance. She seemed young--not more
than eight-and-twenty--with what they call a fine figure, though,
speaking for myself, I never had much opinion of small waists. Give
me _bong poine_, as my old master, Sir Arthur Jones, used to say; and
he ought to have known, for he had been studying female beauty for
eighty year, and died, I reckon, of it.

"I considered it to be a case of courting, for she was a lady; there
was no mistaking that; she held her head up like one, and dressed as
real ladies do, expensively but plainly--ay, old Jacob knows; he
didn't go yachting for years for nothing. But it wasn't for me to form
opinions. My berth was an easy one--just a sprawl all day long with a
pipe in my mouth, and a good night's rest to follow; and that was all
it was my duty to think about.

"Well, one afternoon Mr. Robinson comes aboard alone, and says to me,
'Williams, at what hour will the tide serve to-morrow night?'

"'Why, sir,' says I, after thinking, 'there'll be plenty of water at
nine o'clock.'

"'Then,' says he, 'see all ready, Williams, to get away to-morrow at
that hour. We're off to ----,' and he names a Mediterranean port.

"Right, sir,' says I, though wondering a bit to myself, for the season
was pretty well advanced, and I couldn't have guessed, from what I
knew and had heard of him, that he would have pushed so far south.

"Well, at half past eight that evening the deck was hailed by a boat
alongside, and up he comes handing a lady on board, thickly veiled,
and they both went below as if they were in a hurry. Some parcels and
a bit of a bandbox or so were chucked up to us by the watermen, who
then shoved off. There was a nice little off-shore breeze a-blowing,
and soon after nine we were clear of the harbor and sailing quietly
along, the sea smooth and the moon rising red out of a smother of
mist. Mr. Robinson came on deck and looked aloft to see what sail was
made; I was at the tiller, and stepping up to me, he says--

"'What d'yer think of the weather, Williams?'

"'Why,' says I, 'it seems as if it was going to keep fair.'

"'There can't come too much wind for me,' says he, 'short of a
hurricane. Don't spare your cloths, let it blow as it may. You
understand that?'

"'Quite easily,' says I.

"Now, this order I took to be as singular as our going to the
Mediterranean, for Mr. Robinson was never a man to carry on; there was
no racing in him; quiet sailing was his pleasure, and what his hurry
was all of a sudden I couldn't imagine, though I guessed that the
party in the cabin might have something to do with it. She came on
deck after we had been under way about three quarters of an hour, this
time without a veil, with what they call a turban hat on her head.
There was plenty of moonlight, and I tell you that the very shadow she
cast, and that lay like a carving of jet on ivory, looked beautiful on
the white deck, so fine her figure was. Lord, how her big eyes
flashed, too, when she drew my way and turned 'em to the moon! Being a
sober, 'spectable man myself, with correct views on the bringing up of
daughters, it seemed to be a queer start that if so be this young lady
was keeping company with Mr. Robinson--being courted by him, you
know--that her mother or some female connection wasn't along with her.
P'raps they were married, I thought; might have been spliced that very
morning. She had no gloves on, and whenever she walked with Mr.
Robinson near to me, I'd take a long squint at her left hand; but
there was no distinguishing a wedding-ring by moonshine, and even had
it been broad daylight it would have been all the same, for the jewels
lay so thick on her fingers you'd have fancied them sparkling with
dew.

"Well, all that night it blew a soft, quiet wind, but for hours next
day 'twas all dead calm, a light swell, the sunlight coming off the
water hot as steam, and the yacht slewing round and round as if, like
the rest of us, she was trying to find out where the wind meant to
come from next. I never saw any man fret more over a calm than Mr.
Robinson did over that. The lady didn't appear discomposed; she sat
under the awning reading, and once when Mr. Robinson turned to look at
her she ran her shining black eyes with a smiling roll around the sea,
that was just the same as if she had said, 'Isn't it big enough?' for
hang me if even I couldn't read the language in them sparklers of hers
when she chose to lift the eyelashes off their meaning, unaccustomed
as Jacob Williams ever was to female ways and the customs they pursue!
But Mr. Robinson couldn't keep quiet. He kept on asking of me when I
thought the wind was coming, and he was constantly getting up and
staring round, and I'd notice he was always letting his cigar go out,
which is a sure sign that either a man don't care about smoking, or
else he's got something weighing upon his spirits. P'raps, thought I,
it's stipulated that he's not to get married anywhere but in the port
we're bound to, and that the license don't run so long as to allow for
calms; but this I said to myself, with a wink at my own thoughts, for,
though there's a good many things in this 'ere yearth that I don't
understand, I must tell you Jacob Williams wasn't born without a mind.

"Well, time went on, and then a head-wind sprung up, with a short,
spiteful sea. I kept the yacht under a press, according to orders, and
the driving of her close-hauled, every luff trembling and the foam to
leeward as high as the rail, fairly smothered the vessel forward;
whilst as to her movements, it was dreary and aching enough, I can
tell you, the wind sweeping out of clouds of spray forward and
splitting with shrieks upon the ropes, and the canvas soaking up the
damp till every stretch might have been owned for the matter of color
by a coalman. 'Twas 'bout ship often enough, Mr. Robinson being full
of anxiety and impatience, and watching the compass for a shift of
wind as if he was a cat and there was a mouse in the binnacle. I could
have sworn the handsome party would have been beam-ended by the dance;
it turned the stomachs of two of the crew, anyhow, and one of them
said that if he had known the 'Evangeline' was to cross the bay, he'd
have found another ship; yet the lady took no notice of the weather.
She'd come up dressed in waterproofs, and her beautiful face shining
with the big eyes in it out of a hood; and the more the sea troubled
the schooner, the more the vessel labored and showed herself uneasy,
the more the lady would look pleased, laughing out at times, with
plenty of music in her voice, I allow, but with a something in it and
in the gleaming stare she'd keep on the plunging and streaming bows,
that made me calculate--don't know why, I'm sure--that lovely as she
was and beautiful as she was shaped, there was no more heart inside of
her than there's pearls in cockles.

"Well, we had two days of this, passing a good many vessels; both
steam and sail, that were getting all they could out of what was
baffling us; then there was a shift of wind; it fell light, everything
turned dry, and we went along with all cloths showing, sailing about
five knots--not more, and I don't think less. When the change of
weather came Mr. Robinson looked more cheerful. Seemed happier, he
did, and I overheard him say to the party as they stood looking over
the starn at the wake that ran away in two white lines with a gull, or
two circling within a stone's throw in waiting for whatever the cook
had to heave overboard--I heard him say:

"'Every mile'll make it more difficult; besides,' says he, with a
sweep of his hand, 'what a waste this is! Williams,' he sings out to
me, 'how fur off's the horizon?'

"'Why,' I answered, 'from this height I should say a matter of six
mile and a half.'"

'And how fur distant, Captain Williams,' says the lady, smiling
sweetly, and pretty nigh confusing my brains by the beautiful look she
gave me, 'would a vessel like ours be seen?'

"I took time to think, with a squint at our mastheads--for we carried
long sticks--and said, 'Well, call it twelve mile, mum. It's
impossible to speak to a nicety.'

"'And what,' I heard Mr. Robinson observe, as I turned away, 'is
twelve miles in this here watery wilderness of leagues?'

"'And then she gave a laugh, as if some one had made her feel glad;
and it was all like music and poetry, I can tell you, her laughing,
and his softness, and the water smooth, and the yacht sailing along as
if she enjoyed it, like a hard-worked vessel out for a holiday.

"Time passed till it come on four o'clock on the afternoon of that
day. There was a redness in the western heavens that betokened more
wind, though the sun still stood high. Meanwhile the breeze hung
steady. There was the smoke of a steamer away on our starboard
quarter, and there was nothing else in sight. I took no notice of it,
for smoke's not uncommon nowadays on the ocean; but whatever the
vessel might be, the glances I'd take at her now and again made me see
she was driving through it properly; for three-quarters of an hour
after we had sighted it, the smoke was abeam, and the funnel raised
up, showing that her course was something to the eastward of ours. I
pointed the glass at her, and made out a yellow chimney and
pole-masts--hull still below the horizon.

"'Either a yacht, sir, or a Government dispatch boat--something of
that kind, sir,' says I to Mr. Robinson, who was sitting near me with
the lady.

"He jumped up and took a look, and whilst he was working away with the
telescope, the breeze comes along right out of the red sky abeam where
the steamer was, with twice its former strength, roughening the blue
water into hollows, and bowing down the yacht till the slope of her
deck was like a roof. The crew jumped about shortening canvas, and the
yacht began to snore as she felt the wind. On a sudden, and as if the
steamer had only just then spied us, she altered her course by three
or four points, as one could see by the swift rising of her hull,
till, whilst the sun was still hanging a middling height over the sea
line, you could see the whole of the vessel--a long, low craft of
about one hundred and fifty tons--sweeping through the seas like an
arrow, the smoke streaming black and fat from her small, yellow
funnel, and her hull sinking out of sight one moment and reappearing
the next in a sort of jump of the whole foaming wash, as if, by Jove,
her screw would thrust her clean out of the water.

"The lady looked at her with a sort of indifference; but Mr. Robinson
was pale enough as he handed me the glass, and said, 'Williams, see if
you know her.'

"I took a look at her, and answered, 'It's hard to tell those steamers
till you see their names, sir; but if she's not the Violet,
belonging to General Coldsteel (of course these are false names),
she's uncommonly like her. But, law bless us! how they're driving
her! Why, there'll be a bust up if they don't look out. They'll blow
the boilers out of her!'"

'Indeed, I never before saw any vessel rush so. She'd shear clear
through some of the larger seas, and you didn't need watch her long to
make you reckon you'd seen the last of her. Then Mr. Robinson, talking
like a man half in a rage, half in a fright, orders me to pack sail on
the schooner; but it was already blowing a single-reef breeze, and I
had no idea of losing our spars, and so I told him very firmly that
the yacht had all she needed, and that more would only stop her by
burying her: and I had my way. But we were foaming through it, too; we
wanted no more pressure; the freshening wind had worked the schooner
into a fair nine knots, and it was first-rate sailing too, considering
the character of the sea and the weight of the breeze. 'Twas now
certain beyond all question that the steamer meant to close us, though
I thought she had a queer way of doing it, for sometimes she'd head
right at us, and then put her helm down and keep on a course parallel
with ours, forging well ahead and then shifting the helm for a fresh
run at us. There was no anxiety that I could see in the lady's looks,
but Mr. Robinson was quite mightily bothered and worried and pale
enough to make me suppose that all this meant a pursuit, with a
capture to follow; and it was certain that whatever intentions the
steamer had, there was nothing in the night which was approaching to
promise us a chance of sneaking clear, for the sky was pure as glass,
and it wouldn't be long after sundown before the moon would be filling
the air with a light like morning.

Well, sir, fathom by fathom the steamer had her way of us. She had
drawn close enough to let Mr. Robinson make out the people abroad. As
for me, I was at the helm; for there was something in the maneuvering
of the steamer that made me suspicious, and I wasn't going to trust
any man but myself at the tiller. We held on as we were; we couldn't
improve the schooner's speed by bringing the wind anywhere else than
where it was; and no good was to be done by cracking on, even though
it had, come to our dragging what we couldn't carry; for the steamer's
speed was a fair fourteen if it was a mile, and our yacht was not
going to do that, you know, or anything like it. The moon had arisen,
and the sea ran like heaving snow from the windward, and by this time
the steamer was about half a mile ahead of us, about three points on
the weather bow. She was as plain as if daylight lay on her. All the
time the party and Mr. Robinson had kept the deck, she taking a view
now and then of the steamer with an opera-glass.

"Suddenly I yelled out, 'Mr. Robinson, by all that's holy, sir, that
vessel there means to run us down! Lads,' I shouted, 'tumble aft
quick, and see the boats all ready for lowering!'

"The lady jumped up with a scream, and seized hold of Mr. Robinson's
arm, who seeming to forget what he was about, shook her off, and fell
to raving to me to see that the steamer didn't touch us. By thunder,
sir, there was the cowardly brute slanting her flying length as though
to cross our hawse, but clearly aiming to strike us right amidships.
I shouted to the men to make ready and 'bout ship, and a minute after
I shoved the tiller over, and the yacht rounded like a woman waltzing.
But before we had gathered way the steamer was after us. The lady sent
up scream after scream. Mr. Robinson stood motionless, seeing as plain
as I that if the steamer meant to sink us there was no seamanship in
this wide world that could stop her; and I saw the men throwing off
their shoes and half stripping themselves, ready for what was to come.

"The steamer headed dead to strike our weather-beam; she rushed at us
with the foam boiling over her bows; once more I chucked the schooner
right up into the wind, and the steamer went past us like a rocket
under our stern. I looked at her and sha'n't ever forget what I saw.
There was a white-haired man, with white whiskers and bareheaded,
roaring and raging at us in the grasp of three or four seamen. 'Twas
like a death-struggle. A chap who looked as if he had just seized the
wheel was grinding it hard over to get away from us; and so the
steamer fled past, more like a nightmare than a reality, and in a few
minutes was standing with full speed to the norrard, where, in less
than a quarter of an hour, she faded slick out of sight.

"It was some time after I had left the 'Evangeline' and was at home
before I got to know the meaning of this here wonderful adventure. The
party, it turned out, was no less than the wife of the general as
owned the 'Violet,' and she was running away with Mr. Robinson. May be
our men had talked about our going to the Mediterranean, but anyhow
the general who was in London at the time, got scent that his wife had
bolted with Mr. Robinson in the 'Evangeline,' and in less than
twenty-four hours he was after us in his steamer. He tracked us by
speaking the vessels we passed; and the light airs and calms we had
encountered easily allowed him to overhaul quickly. And it turned out
that when he had fairly sighted us, he sent the man at the wheel
forward, and took the helm himself. The crew dursn't express their
wonder aloud, though they knew he was no hand at steering, not to
mention the mad agitation he was in, and they let him have his way
when he headed the steamer for us, expecting that he merely wished to
close us in order to speak; but when I put my helm down and the
steamer passed, and they spied the general rounding his craft
evidently to run us down, they threw themselves upon him to save their
own lives as well as ours. That was the sight I saw as the steamer
rushed past. A few moments after they had gone clear the poor old
fellow was seized with an attack of apoplexy, which killed him right
off, and thereupon they headed right away to England with the dead
body aboard.

"What do you think of this for a yarn? Would any one suppose such
vengefulness could exist in a white-haired man that had known his
seventieth birthday? What did he want to go and try and drown me and
my mates for? _We_ weren't running away with the female party. But the
world's full of romantic capering, sir; and I tell you what it
is--'tain't all fair sailing even in yachts, modest and pretty as the
divarsion is."









        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN LUCK AT LAST ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

