produced from images generously made available by the
Library of Congress, Manuscript Division.)









[TR: ***] = Transcriber Note</p>
[HW: ***] = Handwritten Note</p>




SLAVE NARRATIVES

_A Folk History of Slavery in the United States
From Interviews with Former Slaves_

TYPEWRITTEN RECORDS PREPARED BY
THE FEDERAL WRITERS' PROJECT
1936-1938
ASSEMBLED BY
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS PROJECT
WORK PROJECTS ADMINISTRATION
FOR THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
SPONSORED BY THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

_Illustrated with Photographs_

WASHINGTON 1941




VOLUME XV

TENNESSEE NARRATIVES

Prepared by
the Federal Writers' Project of
the Works Progress Administration
for the State of Tennessee




INFORMANTS


Batson, Frances             1

Casey, Julia                3
Chappel, Cecelia            5
Childress, Wiley            9

Falls, Robert              11

Gaines, Rachel             17
Goole, Frankie             19
Gray, Precilla             24
Greer, Jenny               27
Grisham, Emma              28

Hudson, Measy              31
Hyde, Patsy                33

Kannon, Ellis Ken          37

Martin, Scott              40
Matthews, Ann              43
Moore, Rev. John           47
Moss, Andrew               49
Moss, Mollie               55

Odell, Andy                60

Parker, Laura Ramsey       62

Reece, Naisy               64

Simpkins, Millie           66
Star, Joseph Leonidas      70

Thomas, Dan                74

Watkins, Sylvia            76

Young, Narcissus           80




INTERVIEW
FRANCES BATSON
1213 Scovel St.
Nashville, Tennessee


"I dunno jes how ole I ez. I wuz baw'n 'yer in Nashville, durin'
slabery. I must be way pas' 90 fer I member de Yankee soldiers well.
De chilluns called dem de 'blue mans.' Mah white folks wuz named
Crockett. Dr. Crockett wuz our marster but I don't member 'im mahse'f.
He d'ed w'en I wuz small. Mah marster wuz mean ter mah mammy w'en her
oler chilluns would run 'way. Mah oler br'er went ter war wid mah
marster. Mah younger br'er run 'way, dey caught 'im, tuk 'im home en
whup'd 'im. He run 'way en wuz nebber found."

"We wuzn't sold but mah mammy went 'way, en lef' me en I got up one
mawnin' went ter mah mammy's room, she wuz gon'. I cried en cried fer
her. Mah Missis wouldn't let me outa' de house, fer fear I'd try ter
find her. Atter freedum mah br'er en a Yankee soldier kum in a waggin
en git us. Mah white folks sed, I don' see why you ez takin' dez
chilluns. Mah brudder said, 'We ez free now.' I member one whup'in mah
missis gib me. Me en her daughter slipped 'way ter de river ter fish.
We kotch a fish en mah missis had hit cooked fer us but whup'd us fer
goin' ter de river."

"Whar de Buena Vista schul ez hit useter be a Yankee soldiers Barrick.
Eber mawnin' dey hadder music. We chilluns would go on de hill, (whar
the bag mill ez now) en listen ter dem. I member a black hoss de
soldiers had, dat ef you called 'im Jeff Davis he would run you."

"I member de ole well on Cedar Street, neah de Capitol, en six mules
fell in hit. Dat wuz back w'en blackberries wuz growin' on de Capitol
Hill. En Morgan Park wuz called de pleasure gyarden. En hit wuz full
ob Yankee soldiers. Atter de war dere wuz so many German peeple ober
'yer, dat fum Jefferson Street, ter Clay Street, wuz called Dutch
town."

"I wuzn't bawn w'en de sta'rs fell. We didn't git nothin' w'en we wuz
freed. Dunno much 'bout de Klu Klux Klan."

"Mah mammy useter tell me how de white folks would hire de slaves out
ter mek money fer de marster en she tole me sum ob de marsters would
hide dere slaves ter keep de Yankees fum gittin' dem."

"I don' b'leeve in white en black ma'iages. Mah sistah ma'ied a lite
man. I wouldin' marry one ef hit would turn me ter gold. Dunno nothin'
'bout votin', allus tho't dat wuz fer de men."

"I can't think ob any tales er nuthin 'bout ghos'. 'Cept one 'bout a
marster tyin' a nigger ter a fence en wuz beatin' 'im. A Yankee kum
'long made 'im untie de nigger en den de nigger beat de white man."

"Dis young peeples ez tough. I think half ob dem'll be hung, de way
dey throw rocks at ole peoples. Dat's why I's crippled now, a white
boy hit me wid a rock. I b'long ter de Methodist Chuch."

"Since freedum I'se hired out, washed en cooked fer diff'ent peeple.
De only song I member: 'Hark Fum de Ground dis Mournful Sound.'"




INTERVIEW
JULIA CASEY
811 9th Avenue, So.
Nashville, Tennessee


I wuz bawn in West Tennessee en wuz six y'ars ole w'en war broke out.

Mah Missis wuz Miss Jennie McCullough en she ma'ried Eldridge Casey.
Mah Missis's mammy wuz a widder en she gib me, mah mammy, man sistah
Violet, mah two br'ers Andrew en Alfred ter Miss Jennie fer a wed'un
gif'. Missis Jennie en Marster Eldridge brung us ter Nashville 'fore
de war sta'ted.

Mah Missis wuz good ter us. I'se bin w'll tuk keer ob, plenty ter eat
en warm clothes ter w'ar. Right now I'se got on long underw'ar en mah
chemise.

Mah mammy d'ed fust y'ar ob freedum. Dey tuk her 'way in a two-hoss
waggin, 'bout four o'clock one evenin'. Dere wuz no hurses er caskets
den. W'en mah mammy d'ed, I still stayed wid Missis Jennie. She raised
me. Dat's why folks say I'se so peculiar. De Yankee soldiers tuk mah
sistah en two br'ers 'way durin' de war. I ez de mammy ob seven
chilluns. All d'ed now but one.

Mah white folks didn't send me ter schul but I'se l'arned a few things
ob how ter act. Don't ax me 'bout der young people. Dey ez pas' me. No
manners 'tall.

In slavery days you didn't hab ter worry 'bout yo clothes en rations
but dese days you hab ter worry 'bout eve'ything.

I 'longs ter de Baptist Chuch. Useter go ter camp-meetin's en hab a
big time wid good things ter eat. Didn't go ter de baptizin' much.
Dey would leave de chuch singin' en shoutin'. Dere ez three days in
September dat we hab dinnah on de groun' en all Baptist git tergedder.
We calls hit de 'sociation.

I'se neber voted cose dat ez de man's job. Mah frens hab nebber had
political jobs. Don't b'leeve in ma'rige ob white en black en hit
shouldn't be 'lowed.

Since freedom mah main job wuz cookin' but I'se done washin' en
ironin'. Atter mah health started failing, I done a lot ob nusin'.

I'se aint abul ter wuk fur de las' five y'ars en de white folks hab
he'ped me. De relief gibes me groc'eys, coal en pays mah rent. I hope
ter git de ole age pension soon. Mah ole favo'ite song ez "Mazing
Grace, How Sweet hit Sounds."




INTERVIEW
CECELIA CHAPPEL
705 Allison Street
Nashville, Tenn.


"I'se bawn in Marshall County, Tennessee. I'm de olest ob ten chilluns
en I'se 102 ya'rs ole. I feels lak I'se bin 'yer longer dan dat. Mah
mammy wuz brought ter Nashville en sold ter sum peeple dat tuck her
ter Mississippi ter live."

"Mah Marster en Missus wuz named Bob en Nancy Lord. Eve'y slave had
ter say Missus en Marster en also ter de white babies. I still says
hit, en ef I kum ter yo do'r, I nebber kums in 'till you ax me. Lots
ob mah folks seze ter me dat I ez too ole fash'on en I seze I don'
keer I wuz raised wid manners en too ole ter change."

"Our Marster gib us good food en clothes. I wuz l'arnt how ter nit,
weav, sew en spin. On rainy days we wuz gib a certain 'mount ob
weavin' ter do en had ter git hit don'. I dunno how ter read er rite.
De white folks didn' 'low us ter l'arn nuthin'. I declar' you bettuh
not git kotch wid a papah in you han'. Ef I had half a chance lak you
chilluns hab, I'd go ter bed wid mah books."

"Our Marster 'lowed us ter go ter chuch. I went bar'foot en had a rag
tied 'roun mah haid en mah dress kum up ter mah 'nees. Dat
preacher-man would git up dere en tell us "Now you min' yo Marster en
Missis en don' steal fum dem." I stayed wid mah Missis fer a long time
atter I got freedum en I cried lak a fool w'en I had ter leave dem.
Mah Missis seze "You ez jes as free as I ez," but I allus had good
clothes en good food en I didn' know how I'd git dem atter I lef'
her."

"Mah white folks wuz tight on us but, as ole as I ez, I offun think
dat day nebber hit a lick dat I didn' need. Ef'n dey hadn' raised me
right, I might hab got in meaness en bin locked up half de time, but I
ain't nebber bin 'rested, en I'se 'ferd ob de policemans. De fiel'
slaves wuz whup'd in de fiel's by de oberseer en de Marster en Missis
did hit at de house."

"I tell you we had a hahd time. Mah Missis woulden' let dem sell me. I
wuz a nuss en house gal. I wuz whup'd wid a bull whup, en got cuts on
mah back menny a time. I'se not shamed ter say I got skyars on mah
back now fum Marster cuttin' hit wid dat bull whup. Mah Missis also
whup'd me. W'en de Missis got ready ter whup me, she would gib us sum
wuk ter do, so she would kind ob git ober her mad spell 'fore she
whup'd us. Sum times she would lock us up in a dark closet en bring
our food ter us. I hated bein' locked up. Atter dey tuk me out ob de
house, I wuked in de fiel' lak de urthurs. Long 'fore day break, we
wuz standin' in de fiel's leanin' on our hoes waitin' fer daylite en
waitin' fer de horn ter blow so we would start ter wuk. Ef'n we
wan'ed ter go ter any place we had ter hab a pass wid our Marster's
name on hit en ef you didn' hab hit, you got tore ter pieces en den
you Marster tore you up w'en you got home."

"One story mah daddy useter tell us wuz 'bout a slave named Pommpy. He
wuz allus prayin' fer de good Lawd ter tek 'im 'way. One nite he wuz
down on his 'nees prayin', "Good Lawd, kum en tek po Pommpy out ob his
misery." De Marster ob Pommpy 'year'd 'm en de Marster made a leetle
noise en Pommpy seze, "Who ez dat?" En his Marster seze, "Hits de Lawd
kum ter tek po Pommpy out ob his misery." Pommpy crawl under de bed en
seze, "Pommpy has bin gon' two er three days."

"'Nurther story: A partridge en a fox 'greed ter kil' a beef. Dey kilt
en skinned hit. B'fo dey divide hit de fox said, "Mah wife seze sen'
her sum beef fer soup," so he tuck a piece ob hit en carried hit down
de hill, den kum back en said mah wife wants mo' beef fer soup. He kep
dis up 'til all de beef wuz gon' 'cept de libber. De fox kum back en
de partridge seze now lets cook dis libber en both ob us eat hit. De
partridge cooked de libber, et hits part rite quick, en den fell ovuh
lak hit wuz sick; de fox got skeered en said dat beef ez pizen en he
ran down de hill en started bringin' de beef back en w'en he brought
hit all back, he lef' en de partridge had all de beef."

"Don't member much now 'bout de Klu Klux Klan en nothin' 'bout slave
'risings at any place. I don' member 'bout de sta'rs fallin', but I
did see de comet, en hit looked lak a sta'r wid a long tail; atter
freedum, I nebber year'd ob no slave gettin' land er money en I dunno
nothin' 'bout de slave mart 'yer fer I didn' git ter kum ter town."

"Since freed, I hab nussed, cooked en don' diff'unt things. I wuk'ed
fer one family fifteen y'ars en didn' miss a day. I has stayed at dis
place fer de las' five y'ars. I had a stroke en wuz in de hospit'l a
long time. I cain' git out; en 'roun' 'yer in de house, I has ter walk
wid a stick."

"I ain' nebber voted. One day sum men kum 'yer ter tek me ter vote. I
tole dem w'en I got ready ter be a man, I would put on overalls."

"I'se a member ob de Missionary Baptist Chuch. I ain' bin fer a long
time kaze I ain' able ter go. De ole song I members ez "Dixie Land,"
en "Run Nigger Run, de Pat-a rollers Will Git You."

"Oh Lawdy! I think sum ob is young peeple ain' no count w'ile sum ob
dem ez alright. I think each color should ma'rie his own color. Hit
makes me mad ter think 'bout hit. Ef de good Lawd had wanted dat, he
would hab had us all one color."

"Fer a long time de relief gib me a quart ob milk a day, but now all I
has ez w'at mah sistah Harriett gibs me. She sin' got much wuk en sum
days we don' hab much ter eat. Ef mah Missis wuz livin' I wouldin' go
hongry."




INTERVIEW
WILEY CHILDRESS
808 Gay St.
Nashville, Tennessee


"I'se 83 Y'ars ole en wuz bawn a slave. Mah mammy b'longed ter de
Bosley's en mah daddy b'longed ter de Scales."

"W'en Miss Jane Boxley ma'ried Marster Jerry Scales, me en mah mammy,
br'er en sistah wuz gib ter Miss Jane."

"Durin' de war mah Missis tuk mah mammy en us chilluns wid her ter de
mount'ins 'till de war wuz gon'. Did'nt see no soldiers. Don't member
now nuthin' 'bout dem Klu Klux men en don't member de ole songs er
'bout slaves votin'."

"Dunno 'bout de young persons, white er black, dey ez all so wild
now."

"W'en we all wuz freed we had nuthin en no place ter go, so dat mah
mammy lived wid our Missis five y'ars longer."

"De only story dat I member mah people tole me 'bout wuz on Fedd, a
slave on de next plantation. He wuz a big man en wuz de strongest man
neah dat part ob de kuntry. He wouldin' 'low nobody ter whup 'in. De
Marster framed 'im by tellin' 'im ter bring his saddle hoss en w'en he
kum wid de hoss several men 'peahrd en tole Fedd dat dey wuz gonna
whup 'im. He struck one ob de mans so hahd dey had ter hab de doctuh.
De Marster said let 'im 'lone he's too strong ter be whup'd. I'll hab
ter shoot 'im. One time Fedd run 'way en de white men whar he stopped
know'd he wuz a good fighter en made a $250.00 bet dat nobody could
lick 'im. A nigger fum de iron wuks fought Fedd en Fedd won. De iron
wuks nigger wuz kilt right dere."

"'fore Freedum de slaves wuz promused forty acres ob land w'en freed
but none eber got hit, en I 'year'd ob no one gittin' any money. I
dunno nuthin' ob de slave 'risin's, ghostus er dreams, but I member
mah folks talkin' 'bout fallin' sta'rs en a comet but I don' member
now w'at dey said."

"I'se wuk'd at a lot ob diff'ent jobs since mah freedum. I wuk'd at de
Maxwell House 15 years as store room porter, en hit wuz de only
wo'th-while hotel in Nashville at dat time. I wuk'd fuh de City fuh
menny y'ars en den I wuk'd fuh Foster & Creighton 'till dey wore me
out. I off'n think ob deze diff'nt men dat I wuk'd fuh but dey ez all
de'd. De las' job I had wuz buildin' fiers en odd jobs fuh a lady up
de street. She would gib me food en coal. She ez de'd now."

"I'se not able ter wuk now en all I has ez a small groc'ey order dat
de relief gibs me. Dey keep promisin' ter gib me de Old Age Pension en
I wish dey would hurry hit up."




_SUBJECT_
_SLAVE STORIES_

ROBERT FALLS
608 South Broadway
Knoxville, Tennessee

Interviewed by

Della Yoe, Foreman
Federal Writers' Project,
First District, WPA
Room # 215 Old YMCA Building
State and Commerce Streets.
Knoxville, Tennessee


Robert Falls was born on December 14, 1840, in the rambling one-story
shack that accomodated the fifteen slaves of his Old Marster,
[HW: Harry] Beattie Goforth, on a farm in Claiborne County, North
Carolina. His tall frame is slightly stooped, but he is not subjected
to the customary infirmities of the aged, other than poor vision and
hearing. Fairly comfortable, he is spending his declining years in
contentment, for he is now the first consideration of his daughter,
Mrs. Lola Reed, with whom he lives at #608 S. Broadway, Knoxville,
Tennessee. His cushioned rocking chair is the honor seat of the
household. His apology for not offering it to visitors, is that he is
"not so fast on his feet as he used to be."

Despite Uncle Robert's protest that his "mind comes and goes", his
memory is keen, and his sense of humor unimpaired. His reminiscences
of slave days are enriched by his ability to recreate scenes and
incidents in few words, and by his powers of mimicry. "If I had my
life to live over," he declares, "I would die fighting rather than be
a slave again. I want no man's yoke on my shoulders no more. But in
them days, us niggers didn't know no better. All we knowed was work,
and hard work. We was learned to say, 'Yes Sir!' and scrape down and
bow, and to do just exactly what we was told to do, make no difference
if we wanted to or not. Old Marster and Old Mistress would say, 'Do
this!' and we don' it. And they say, 'Come here!' and if we didn't
come to them, they come to us. And they brought the bunch of switches
with them."

"They didn't half feed us either. They fed the animals better. They
gives the mules, ruffage and such, to chaw on all night. But they
didn't give us nothing to chaw on. Learned us to steal, that's what
they done. Why we would take anything we could lay our hands on, when
we was hungry. Then they'd whip us for lieing when we say we dont know
nothing about it. But it was easier to stand, when the stomach was
full."

"Now my father, he was a fighter. He was mean as a bear. He was so bad
to fight and so troublesome he was sold four times to my knowing and
maybe a heap more times. That's how come my name is Falls, even if
some does call me Robert Goforth. Niggers would change to the name of
their new marster, every time they was sold. And my father had a lot
of names, but kep the one of his marster when he got a good home. That
man was Harry Falls. He said he'd been trying to buy father for a long
time, because he was the best waggoner in all that country abouts. And
the man what sold him to Falls, his name was Collins, he told my
father, "You so mean, I got to sell you. You all time complaining
about you dont like your white folks. Tell me now who you wants to
live with. Just pick your man and I will go see him." Then my father
tells Collins, I want you to sell me to Marster Harry Falls. They made
the trade. I disremember what the money was, but it was big. Good
workers sold for $1,000 and $2,000. After that the white folks didn't
have no more trouble with my father. But he'd still fight. That man
would fight a she-bear and lick her every time."

"My mother was sold three times before I was born. The last time when
Old Goforth sold her, to the slave speculators,--you know every time
they needed money they would sell a slave,--and they was taking them,
driving them, just like a pack of mules, to the market from North
Carolina into South Carolina, she begun to have fits. You see they had
sold her away from her baby. And just like I tell you she begun having
fits. They got to the jail house where they was to stay that night,
and she took on so, Jim Slade and Press Worthy--them was the slave
speculators,--couldnt do nothing with her. Next morning one of them
took her back to Marse Goforth and told him, "Look here. We cant do
nothing with this woman. You got to take her and give us back our
money. And do it now,' they says. And they mean it too. So Old Marse
Goforth took my mother and give them back their money. After that none
of us was ever separated. We all lived, a brother and two sisters and
my mother, with the Goforths till freedom."

"And do you know, she never did get over having fits. She had them
every change of the moon, or leastways every other moon change. But
she kept on working. She was a hard worker. She had to be. Old
Mistress see to that. She was meaner than old Marster, she was. She
would sit by the spinning wheel and count the turns the slave women
made. And they couldn't fool her none neither. My mother worked until
ten o'clock almost every night because her part was to 'spend so many
cuts' a day, and she couldnt get through no sooner. When I was a
little shaver, I used to sit on the floor with the other little
fellows while our mothers worked, and sometimes the white folks girls
would read us a Bible story. But most of the time we slept. Right
there on the floor. Then later, when I was bigger, I had to work with
the men at night shelling corn, to take to town early mornings."

"Marster Goforth counted himself a good old Baptist Christian. The one
good deed he did, I will never forget, he made us all go to church
every Sunday. That was the onliest place off the farm we ever went.
Every time a slave went off the place, he had to have a pass, except
we didnt, for church. Everybody in thet country knowed that the
Goforth niggers didn't have to have no pass to go to church. But that
didn't make no difference to the Pattyroolers. They'd hide in the
bushes, or wait along side of the road, and when the niggers come from
meeting, the Pattyroolers's say, 'Whar's your pass'? Us Goforth
niggers used to start running soon as we was out of church. We never
got caught. That is why I tell you I cant use my legs like I used to.
If you was caught without no pass, the Pattyroolers give you five
licks. They was licks! You take a bunch of five to seven Pattyroolers
each giving five licks and the blood flows."

"Old Marster was too old to go to the war. He had one son was a
soldier, but he never come home again. I never seen a soldier till the
war was over and they begin to come back to the farms. We half-grown
niggers had to work the farm, because all the famers had to give,--I
believe it was a tenth--of their crops to help feed the soldiers. So
we didnt know nothing about what was going on, no more than a hog. It
was a long time before we knowed we was free. Then one night Old
Marster come to our house and he say he wants to see us all before
breakfast tomorrow morning and to come on over to his house. He got
something to tell us."

"Next morning we went over there. I was the monkey, always acting
smart. But I believe they liked me better than all of the others. I
just spoke sassy-like and say, "Old Marster, what you got to tell us"?
My mother said, "Shut your mouth fool. He'll whip you!" And Old
Marster say,--"No I wont whip you. Never no more. Sit down thar all of
you and listen to what I got to tell you. I hates to do it but I must.
You all aint my niggers no more. You is free. Just as free as I am.
Here I have raised you all to work for me, and now you are going to
leave me. I am an old man, and I cant get along without you. I dont
know what I am going to do." Well sir, it killed him. He was dead in
less than ten months."

"Everybody left right now, but me and my brother and another fellow.
Old Marster fooled us to believe we was duty-bound to stay with him
till we was all twenty-one. But my brother, that boy was stubborn.
Soon he say he aint going to stay there. And he left. In about a year,
maybe less, he come back and he told me I didnt have to work for Old
Goforth, I was free, sure enough free, and I went with him and he got
me a job railroading. But the work was too hard for me. I couldnt
stand it. So I left there and went to my mother. I had to walk. It was
forty-five miles. I made it in a day. She got me work there where she
worked."

"I remember so well, how the roads was full of folks walking and
walking along when the niggers were freed. Didnt know where they was
going. Just going to see about something else somewhere else. Meet a
body in the road and they ask, 'Where you going'? 'Dont know.' 'What
you going to do'? 'Dont know.' And then sometimes we would meet a
white man and he would say, 'How you like to come work on my farm'?
And we say, 'I dont know.' And then maybe he say, "If you come work
for me on my farm, when the crops is in I give you five bushels of
corn, five gallons of molasses, some ham-meat, and all your clothes
and vittals whils you works for me." Alright! That's what I do. And
then something begins to work up here, (touching his forehead with his
fingers) I begins to think and to know things. And I knowed then I
could make a living for my own self, and I never had to be a slave no
more."

"Now, Old Marster Goforth, had four sisters what owned slaves, and
they wasnt mean to them like our Old Marster and Mistress. Some of the
old slaves and their folks are still living on their places right to
this day. But they never dispute none with their brother about how
mean he treat his slaves. And him claiming to be such a Christian!
Well, I reckon he's found out something about slave driving by now.
The good Lord has to get his work in some time. And he'll take care of
them low down Pattyroolers and slave speculators and mean Marsters and
Mistress's. He's took good care of me in the years since I was free'd,
only now, we needs Him again now and then. I just stand up on my two
feet, raise my arms to heaven, and say, 'Lord, help me!' He never
fails me. I asked him this morning, didnt I Lola? Asked him to render
help. We need it. And here you come. Lola, just watch that lady write.
If you and me had her education, we'd be fixed now wouldnt we? I never
had no learning."

"Thank you Lady! (tucking the coin into his pocket wallet, along with
his tobacco.) And thank you for coming. It does me a heap of good to
see visitors and talk about the old times. Come again, wont you? And
next time you come, I want to talk to you about old age pensions. I
come here from Marian, N.C. three years ago, and they tell me I have
to live here four, before I gets a pension. And as I done left North
Carolina, I cant get a pension from them. But maybe you can tell me
what to do. I likes this place. And I do hopes I get a pension before
I gets to be a 'hundred."




INTERVIEW
RACHEL GAINES
1025 10th Ave. N.
Nashville, Tennessee


"Lawdy! I'se dunno how ole I ez. B'leeves I'se 'round 95 ter 100
y'ars. De fust thing I members ez I wuz tuk in a waggin ter Trenton,
Kentucky en sold ter Dr. Bainbridge Dickerson jest lak dey sold cows
en hosses. Mah sistah wuz sold in de same way at Bowling Green,
Kentucky ter 'nuther Marster."

"I wuz sold only one time in mah life en dat wuz w'en Marster
Dickinson bought me. Atter freedum wuz 'clared de Marster tole all his
slaves dat dey could go wharever'y dey pleased but ef'n dey couldn't
mek dere own livin' ter kum ter 'im en he would he'ps dem."

"Missus Dickinson kep' me dere kaze I wuz nuss ter dere son Howard who
wuz sho a wild one. I member how he would tote out fried chicken, pig
meat en uthuh good stuff ter us darkies. Dey 'greed ter pay me $35.00
a yeah (en keep) en hit wuz gib me eve'y Christmus mawning. Dey
treated me good, gib me all de clothes en uthuh things I needed ez
ef'n I wuz one ob de fam'ly."

"Eve'y two weeks de Marster would sen' fer Jordan McGowan who wuz de
leader ob a string music ban'. Dey would git dere Friday nite early en
de slaves would dance in de grape house dat nite en all day Saturday
up ter midnite. You don't hab now as good dance music en as much fun
as de ole time days had. We allus had a big barbecue er watermelon
feast eve'y time we had a dance. Neber 'gin 'll dere be as good times
as we useter hab. In mah time we neber y'ard ob wukouses er pen but
now dey ez all filled."

"I kin see now in mah mind de ole ice house on de plantation. In de
wint'r de slaves would fill hit wid ice dey got off de crik en hit wuz
not used 'til warm wedder cum. 'nother thing I members ez de
"Pat-a-rollers" (she refers to the Police Patrol of that day) who
would kotch en whup runaway slaves en slaves 'way fum dere own
plantations widout a pass wid dere Marsters name signed on hit."

"I member w'en Nashville fust had street cars pulled 'long by hosses
er mules en I also member de ole dummy cars, run by steam, ter
Glendale Park also New Town (now called West Nashville)."

"We had sum bad en good luck signs but I'se fergettin' sum, but I'se
members 'bout a black cat crossin' ovuh de path in frunt ob you dat
you sho would hab bad luck. W'en dat happened ter me, I would spit on
de ground, turn 'round en back ober de place de cat crossed en de "bad
luck" wuz gon' fum me. Ef'n you found a ole hoss shoe dat had bin
drapt'd by de hoss, hit meant good luck. Sum peeples, white en black,
w'en dey fin' a hoss shoe, dey would tack hit up on de frunt door
frame wid de toe ter de groun'."

"Atter de Marster en Missus d'ed, I went ter Nashville en made mah way
fur menny y'ars by washin' en ironin' fer white peeple but atter I
went blind I kum 'yer ter live wid mah daughter."




INTERVIEW
FRANKIE GOOLE
204 5th Ave. So.
Nashville, Tenn.


"I wuz bawn in Smith County on uther side ob Lebanon. Ah'll be 85
y'ars ole Christmas Day.

Mah ole Missis wuz named Sallie, en mah Marster wuz George Waters. Mah
mammy's name wuz Lucindia, she wuz sold fum me w'en I wuz six weeks
ole, en mah Missis raised me. I allus slept wid her. Mah Missis wuz
good ter me, but (her son) mah Marster whup'd me.

Dunno ob any ex-slaves votin' er holdin' office ob any kin.

I member de Ku Klux Klan en Pat-a-rollers. Dey would kum 'roun en whup
de niggers wid a bull whup. Ef'n dey met a niggah on de road dey'd
say, "Whar ez you gwin dis time ob mawnin'?" De slaves would say, "We
ez gwine ovuh 'yer ter stay aw'ile," en den dey would start beatin'
dem. I'se stod in our do'er en 'yeard de hahd licks, en screams ob de
ones dat wuz bein' whup'd, en I'd tell mah Missis, "Listen ter dat!"
She would say, "See, dat ez w'at will happen ter you ef'n you try ter
leave." I member one nite a Ku Klux Klan rode up ter our do'er. I tole
mah Missis sum body wuz at de do'er wantin' ter know whar mah Marster
wuz. She tole 'im he wuz d'ed en her son had gon' 'way dat mawnin'. He
hunted all thro de house, en up in de loft, en said whar ez de
niggers? Mah Missis tole i'm [TR: 'im] dey wuz down in de lettle
house. He went down dere, woke dem up, axed dem 'bout dere Marster en
den whup'd all ob dem. Ef de had de Ku Klux Klan now dere wouldin' be
so menny peeples on de kounty road en in de pen.

I useter drive up de cows en mah feet would be so cole en mah toes
cracked open en bleedin', en I'd be cryin' 'til I got almos' ter de
house den I'd wipe mah eyes on de bottom ob mah dress, so de Marster
wouldin' know dat I had bin cryin'. He'd say, "Frankie ain't you
cryin'?" I'd say, "No suh." "Ez you cole?" "Yes, sir." He would say
kum on en warm.

W'en de niggers wuz freed, all ob mah Missis slaves slipped 'way,
'cept me. One mawnin' she tole me ter go down en wake dem up, I went
down en knocked, no body said nuthin'. I pushed on de do'er--hit kum
op'n--en I fell in de room en hurt mah chin. I went back ter
Missis--en she sezs, "W'at ez de matter wid you?" I sezs, "Uncle John
en all ob dem ez gon'; I pushed on de do'er en fell in." She sezs you
know dey ez not gone, go back en git dem up. I had ter go back, but
dey wur'ent dere.

No, I don't member de sta'rs fallin'.

Mah Missis didunt gib me nuthin, cept mah clothes, en she put dem in a
carpet bag. Atter freedom mah mammy kum fum Lebanon en got me. Ah'll
neber fergit dat day--Oh Lawdy! I kin see her now. Mah ole Missis'
daughter-in-law had got a bunch ob switches ter whup me, I wuz
standin' in de do'er shakin' all ovuh, en de young Missis wuz tellin'
me ter git mah clothes off. I sezs, "I se'd a 'oman kum'g thro de
gate." Mah Missis sezs, "Dat ez Lucindia" en de young Missis hid de
switches. Mah mammy sezs I'se kum ter git mah chile. Mah Missis tole
her ter let me spend de nite wid her, den she'd send me ter de Court
House at 9 o'clock next mawnin'. So I stayed wid de Missis dat nite,
en she tole me ter alluz be a good girl, en don't let a man er boy
trip me. I didunt know w'at she mean but I allus membered w'at she
sai. I guess I wuz 'bout 12 y'ars ole w'en I lef' mah Missis en mah
mammy brought me ter Nashville en put me ter wuk. De mawnin' I lef'
mah Missis, I went ter de Court House en met mah mammy; de Court room
wuz jammed wid peeple. De Jedge tole me ter hold my right hand up, I
wuz so skeered I stuck both hands up. Jedge sezs, "Frankie ez dat yo
mammy?" I sezs, "I dunno, she sezs she ez." (W'at did I know ob a
mammy dat wuz tuk fum me at six weeks ole). He sezs, "Wuz yo Marster
good ter you?" I sezs, "Mah Missis wuz, but mah Marster wasn't--he
whup'd me." De Jedge said, "Whar did he whup you?" I tole him on mah
back. He sezs, "Frankie, ez you laughin'?" I sezs, "No, sir." He said
ter mah mammy, "Lucindia tek dis chile en be good ter her fer she has
b'en mistreated. Sum day she can mek a livin' fer you." (En thank de
Lawd I did keep her in her ole days en wuz able ter bury her.) At dat
time money wuz called chin plaster en w'en I lef' out ob de court room
diff'ent peeple gib me money en I had mah hat almos' full. Dat was de
only money I had gib ter me.

I nussed Miss Sadie Pope Fall; she ma'ried Mat Gardner. I also nussed
Miss Sue Porter Houston. I den wuk'd at de Bline Schul.

De fust pa'r ob shoes I eber had wuz atter I kum ter Nashville. Dey
had high tops en wuz called bootees. I had sum red striped socks wid
dem.

De ole songs I member:

"De Ole Time 'ligion."
"I'm Goin' ter Join de Ban."

W'en dey would sing deze songs hit would almos' mek you ha'r stand up
on yo haid, de way dem peeples would jump en shout!

I member w'en sum ob de slaves run 'way durin' slavery.

I dunno any tales; mah mammy wasn't a 'oman ter talk much. Maybe ef
she had bin I would hab had an easier time. As far as I know de
ex-slaves hab had diff'ent kinds ob wuk since dere freedum. No, I ain'
nebber se'd any ghos'. I'se bin in de woods en dark places, but didn't
see nothin', en I'se not goin' ter say I did kaze I might git
par'lized.

I went ter schul one y'ar at Fisk in de y'ar 1869.

De last man I wuk'd fer wuz at de Link Hotel. Den I started keepin'
boarders. Hab fed all deze Nashville police. De police ez de ones dat
hep'ed git deze relief orders fer me. I hab lived on dis street fer 60
years. I lived 22 y'ars whar de Hermitage Laundry ez. Dat ez whar I
got de name "Mammie." W'iles livin' dere I raised eighteen chilluns
white en black, en sum ob dem iz good ter me now.

I had sum papah's 'bout mah age en diff'ent things, but w'en de back
waters got up, dey got lost. I didn't hab ter move but I kep prayin'
en talkin' ter de Lawd en I b'leeve he 'Yeard me fer de water didn't
git in mah house.

I member w'en de yellow fever en de cholera wuz 'yer, in 1870 en 1873.
Dey didn't hab coffins nuff ter put dem in, so dey used boxes en piled
de boxes in waggins lak hauling wood.

I'se aint worth a dime now w'en hit kums ter wukin' fer I'se aint able
ter do nuthin, thoo I can't complain ob mah livin' since de relief has
bin takin' keer ob me.

Dis young peeples, "Oh mah Lawd!" Dey ain' worth talkin' 'bout. I
tries ter shame deze 'omen, dey drink (I call hit ole bust haid
whiskey), en do such mean things. I'se disgusted at mah own color. Dey
try ter know ter much, en dunno muthin', en dey don' do 'nuff wuk.

I nebber voted en dunno nothin' 'bout hit. Hab nebber had any frens in
office. Cain' member nothin' 'bout re'structon. I hab bin sick en
still don' feel right. Sumtimes I feels krazy.

Hab bin tole dat black cat crossin' road in frunt ob you wuz bad luck.
I nebber did b'leeve in any signs. Ef I ez ter hab bad luck, ah'll hab
hit.

I b'long ter de Baptist Chuch.

De culored peeples useter hab camp meetin's, en dey'd last fer two
weeks. Lawd hab mercy did we hab a time at dem meetin's, preachin',
singin', en shoutin'. En ovuh sum whar neah dey would be cookin'
mutton en diff'ent good things ter eat. Sum ob dem would shout 'til
dere throats would be sore en hit seemed dat sum ob dem niggahs didn't
keer ef dey got home ter wuk er not.

I sumtimes wish fer de good ole days. Deze days folks don't hab time
fer 'ligion. De dog-gone ole radio en udder things ez takin' hits
place.

Oh Lawdie how dey did baptize down at de wha'f! De Baptist peeple
would gather at de wha'f on de fust Sunday in May. Dey would kum fum
all de Baptist Chuches. Would leave de chuch singin' en shoutin' en
keep dat up 'til dey got ter de river. Hab seen dem wid new clothes on
git down on de groun en roll en git covered wid dirt. Sum ob dem would
almos' luze dere clothes, en dey'd fall down lak dey wuz dying.

Deze last few y'ars dey hab got ter stylish ter shout.




INTERVIEW
Precilla Gray
807 Ewing Ave.
Nashville, Tenn.


I think I'se 107 Y'ars ole. Wuz bawn in Williamson County 'fore de
Civil wah. Guess de reason I hab libed so long wuz cose I tuk good
keer ob mahself en wore warm clo'es en still do, w'ar mah yarn
pettycoats now. Hab had good health all mah life. Hab tuk very lettle
medicine en de wust sickness I eber had wuz small-pox. I'se bin a
widah 'bout 70 y'ars.

Mah mammy d'ed w'en I wuz young but mah daddy libed ter be 103 y'ars
ole. I nebber went ter schul a day in mah life, ma'ied 'fore freedum
en w'en I got free, had ter wuk all de time ter mek a libin' fer mah
two chillen. One libes in California en I lives wid de uther,
tergedder wid mah great, great, grandson, five y'ars ole, in
Nashville.

Mah fust marster en missis wuz Amos en Sophia Holland en he made a
will dat we slaves wuz all ter be kep' among de fam'ly en I wuz heired
fum one fam'ly ter 'nother. Wuz owned under de "will" by Haddas
Holland, Missis Mary Haddock en den Missis Synthia Ma'ied Sam Pointer
en I libed wid her 'til freedum wuz 'clared.

Mah fust mistress had three looms en we had ter mek clothes fer ev'ery
one on de plan'ashun. I wuz taught ter weav', card, spin en 'nit en
ter wuk in de fiel's. I wuz 'feared ob de terbacker wums at fust but
Aunt Frankie went 'long by me en showed me how ter pull de wum's head
off. Hab housed terbacker till 9 o'clock at nite. Our marster whupped
us w'en we needed hit. I got menny a whuppin'.

Marster Amos wuz a great hunter en had lots ob dogs en me en mah
cousin had de job ob cookin' dog food en feedin' de dogs. One day de
marster went huntin' en lef three dogs in de pen fer us ter feed. One
ob de dogs licked out ob de pan en we got a bunch ob switches en
started wearin' de dogs out. We thought de marster wuz miles 'way w'en
he walked up on us. He finished wearin' de bunch ob switches out on
us. Dat wuz a whuppin' I'll nebber fergit.

W'en I wuz heired ter Missis Synthis, I wuked in de fiel's 'til she
started ter raise chillens en den I wuz kep in de house ter see atter
dem. Missis had a lot ob cradles en dey kep two 'omen in dat room
takin' keer ob de babies en lettle chillens 'longin' ter dere slaves.
Soon as de chillens, wuz seven y'ars ole, dey started dem ter
'nittin'.

Marster Sam Pointer, husband of Missis Synthis, wus a good man en he
wuz good ter us en he fed en clothed us good. We wore yarn hoods,
sha'ls, en pantletts which wuz 'nit things dat kum fum yo shoe tops
ter 'bove yo knees.

De marster wuz also a 'ligious man en he let us go ter chuch. He
willed land fer a culled chuch at Thompson Station. I 'longs ter de
foot washin' Baptist, called de Free Will Baptist. De marster bought
mah husband William Gray en I ma'ied 'im dere.

W'en de Civil wah wuz startin' dere wuz soldiers an tents eve'ywhar. I
had ter 'nit socks en he'ps mek soldiers coats en durin' de wah, de
marster sent 100 ob us down in Georgia ter keep de Yankees fum gittin'
us en we camped out durin' de whole three y'ars.

I member de Klu Klux. One nite a bunch ob us went out, dey got atter
us. We waded a big crik en hid in de bushes ter keep dem fum gittin'
us.

Hab gon' ter lots ob camp-meetin's. Dey'd hab lots ob good things ter
eat en fed eberbody. Dey'd hab big baptizin's down at de Cumberland
Riber and menny things.

W'en freed, our white folks didn't gib us nuthin'. We got 'way en
hired out fer an'thin' we could git. Nebber knowed ob any plantashuns
[TR: illegible, possibly "men"] be divided. D'ant member 'bout slave
'risings en niggers voting en wuz not ole er'nuff ter member de
sta'rs fallin'. Songs we use'ter sing wuz, "On Jordan's Bank I Stand
en Cast a Wistful Eye en Lak Drops ob Sweat, Lak Blood Run Down, I
Shed mah Tears."

I try not ter think 'bout de ole times. Hit's bin so long ago so I
don' member any tales now.

I'se had a lot ob good times in mah day. Our white folks would let us
hab "bran dances" an we'd hab a big time. I has nebber voted en I
think dat ez a man's wuk. Don't b'leeve in signs, I hab allus tho't
whut ez gwine ter be will be, en de only way ter be ez de rite way.

Eber since slavery I'se cooked fer peeple. I cooked fer Mr. Lea Dillon
fifteen y'ars. Wuked at de Union Depot fer y'ars. Five y'ars fer Dr.
Douglas at his Infirmary en I cooked fer en raised Mrs Grady's baby.
Hab wuked fer diff'ent folks ovuh town ter mek mah livin'. I ain't bin
able ter wuk fer eight y'ars. Dunno how much I weigh now, I hab lost
so much. (she weighs now at least 250 pounds). All de ex-slaves I know
hab wuked at diff'ent jobs lak I has.




INTERVIEW
EX-SLAVES
JENNY GREER
706 Overton, Street.
Nashville, Tennessee


"Am 84 y'ars ole en wuz bawn in Florence, Alabama, 'bout seben miles
fum town. Wuz bawn on de Collier plantashun en Marster en Missis wuz
James en Jeanette Collier. Mah daddy en mammy wuz named Nelson en Jane
Collier. I wuz named atter one ob mah Missis' daughters. Our family
wuz neber sold er divided."

"I'se bin ma'ied once. Ma'ied Neeley Greer. Thank de Lawd I aint got
no chilluns. Chilluns ez so bad now I can't stand dem ter save mah
life."

"Useter go ter de bap'isin's en dey would start shoutin' en singin'
w'en we lef' de chuch. Went ter deze bap'isin's in Alabama, Memphis,
en 'yer in Nashville. Lawdy hab mercy, how we useter sing. Only song I
members ez 'De Ole Time 'ligion.' I useter go ter camp meetin's.
Eve'rbody had a jolly time, preachin', shoutin' en eatin' good
things."

"We didn't git a thing w'en we wuz freed. W'en dey said we wuz free
mah people had ter look out fer demselves."

"Don' member now 'bout K.K.K. er 'structshun days. Mah mammy useter
tell us a lot ob stories but I'se fergot dem. I'se neber voted en
dunno ob any frens bein' in office."

"No mam, no mam, don't b'leeve in diff'ent colurs ma'rin. I member one
ole sign--'bad luck ter empty ashes atter dark.'"

"I'se hired out wuk'n in white folks house since freedum. I'se a widow
now en live 'yer wid mah neice en mah sistah."




INTERVIEW
EMMA GRISHAM
1118 Jefferson St.
Nashville, Tennessee


"I wuz bawn in Nashville. I'se up in 90 y'ars, but I tell dem I'se
still young. I lived on Gallatin Pike long 'fore de war, an uster se'd
de soldiers ride by."

"Mah marsters name wuz Wm. Penn Harding. Mah daddy wuz sold at Sparta,
Tennessee 'fore I wuz bawn en Marster Harding bought 'im. Mah mammy
erready 'longed ter de Hardings."

"I don' member much 'bout slavery I wuz small, but I know I wore a
leetle ole slip wid two er three bottons in frunt. Mammy would wash me
en I'd go out frunt en play wid de white chilluns."

"W'en de fightin' got so heavy mah white peeple got sum Irish peeple
ter live on de plantation, en dey went south, leavin' us wid de Irish
peeple."

"I wuz leetle en I guess I didn't think much 'bout freedum, I'd allus
had plenty ter eat en w'ar."

"Dunno ob any slaves gittin' nuthin at freedum."

"Our white folks didn't whup mah peeple; but de oberseers whup'd de
slaves on uther plantations."

"De Yankees had camps on de Capitol hill. En dere wuz soldier camps in
east Nashville en you had ter hab a pass ter git thro?"

"I member w'en de pen wuz on 15th en Chuch, en de convicts wuk'd
'round de Capitol."

"I went ter schul at Fisk a short time, w'en hit wuz neah 12th en
Cedar, en a w'ile down on Chuch St. Mah teacher allus bragged on me
fer bein' clean en neat. I didn't git much schuling, mah daddy wuz lak
mos' ole folks, he though ef'n you knowd yo a, b, c's en could read a
line, dat wuz 'nuff. En he hired me out. Dunno w'at dey paid me, fer
hit wuz paid ter mah daddy."

"I wuz hired ter a Mrs. Ryne fer y'ars, whar de Loveman store ez now.
Dere wuz a theatre whar Montgomery Ward store ez, a lot ob de theatre
peeple roomed en bo'ded wid Mrs. Ryne, en dey would gib me passes ter
de sho' en I'd slip up in de gall'ry en watch de sho'. I couldn't read
a wud but I 'joy'd goin'. Mah daddy wuz a driver fer Mr. Ryan."

"I nussed fer a Mrs. Mitchell en she had a boy in schul. One summer
she went 'way. A Mrs. Smith wid 10 boys wanted me ter stay wid her
'til Mrs. Mitchell got back en I staid en laked dem so well dat I
wouldin go back ter Mrs. Mitchell's."

"I went ter Memphis en ma'ied George Grisham in 1870. He jinned de
army, as ban' leader, went ter San Antonio, Texas en I kum back ter
Mrs. Smith's en stayed 'til her mammy lost her mind. Mah husband d'ed
in Texas, fum heart truble. All his things wuz sent back ter me, en
eve'y month I got a $30.00 pension fer me en mah daughter. W'en she
wuz 16 dey cut hit down en I only git $12.00 now."

"I edj'cated mah daughter at Fisk; en she's bin teachin' schul since
1893. She buy dis place en we live tergedder. We hab good health en
both ez happy. I hab a 'oman kum eve'y Monday en wash fer us."

"De ole songs I member ez:

"Harp fum de Tomb dis Mournful Sound."
"Am I a soldier ob de Cross."

"Ole signs ez: Dream ob snakes, sign ob de'th.--Ef a hen crows a sign
ob de'th.--Sneeze wid food in mouth means de'th.--Ef a black cat
crosses de road, walk backwards 'til you git pas' whar hit crossed.
Mah parents useter tell lots ob tales but I can't think ob dem."

"Oh honey, I dunno w'at dis young peeples ez kum'n ter. Dey ez so
diff'ent fum de way I wuz raised. I don't think much ob dis white en
black mar'ages. Hit shouldn't be 'lowed."

"I 'long ter de Missionary Baptist."




INTERVIEW
MEASY HUDSON
1209 Jefferson St.
Nashville, Tennessee


"Wuz bawn' in North Carolina en I'se 90 y'ars ole in November. W'en
war broke out we kum ter Tennessee en hab bin 'yer eber since. Wuz
'yer w'en old Hood fi'rd de cannons. He said he wuz kum'n 'yer ter
Christmas dinnah, but he didn't do hit."

"Mah white folks wuz named Harshaw. Marster Aaron Harshaw d'ed en we
wuz willed ter his chilluns en dat we wuz not ter be whup'd er 'bused
in anyway. We wuz sold, but long 'fore de war mah daddy wuz freed en
mah manny wuz not freed, but kep' a slave."

"De marster's chilluns wuz small en eber New Y'ar Day, we wuz put on a
block en hired out ter de high bidduh, en de money spent ter school de
marster's chilluns."

"I wuz tole dat sum ob de white peeples wuz so mean ter dere slaves
dat de slaves would tek a pot en turn hit down in a hollow ter keep
dere whites fum yearin' dem singin' en prayin'. De Ku Klux wuz bad on
de ex-slaves at fust."

"De white folks 'fore de war had w'at dey called "Muster" en I would
go down wid dem. I would dance en de folks would gib me money er gib
me candy en durin' de war de soldiers wuz de prettiest things."

"Got nuthin' at freedum en wuz not lookin' fuh nuthin'. Ef marster had
lived he might hab gib us sump'in. He wuz a good man en good ter us.
Eber since mah freedum, I'se wuk'd as a laundress. Wuk'd fer one
fam'ly ober 21 y'ars. 'Bout two y'ars ago I lefted a tub, en hurt
mahself. I'se not able ter wuk now. I hab bin ma'ied twice en I'se
voted three times."

"I went ter schul at Fisk, a short time, w'en hit wuz on 12th Avenue,
but I diden' git ter go long 'nuff ter git en edj'cation."

"Jis 'fore de Civil War I members de comet. Hit wuz lak a big sta'r
wid a long tail. Eve'body said hit wuz a sign ob Judgement Day."

"Bad luck signs: Ef'n a picture falls, hit's a sign ob de'th--bad luck
ter step ovuh a broom--ef a clock stop runnin' en later hit strike,
dat means de'th."

"Sum ob de young peeple terday ez good but sum ob dem don't wan'ter be
nuthin'. De last war ruined mos' ob de white en de black."

"I b'leeves in de Baptist 'ligion en 'longs ter de Baptist Church, 9th
Avenue N. on Cedar Street. De white 'oman I wuk'd fuh wan'ed me ter
join de Christian (colored) chuch. Only song I now members ez "On
Jordans Banks I Stand." "Don't think dis marrin' ob whites wid blacks
should be 'lowed en think eve'y culor should stay ter hits-sef."

"I don't member now 'bout any stories tole back in ole times. Our
white folks wuz Christians en tried ter teach us right en dey diden'
tek up much time tellin' stories."




INTERVIEW
PATSY HYDE
504 9th Avenue N.
Nashville, Tennessee


"Dunno how ole I ez. I wuz bawn in slavery en b'longs ter de Brown
family. Mah Missis wuz Missis Jean R. Brown en she wuz kin ter Abraham
Lincoln en I useter y'ar dem talkin' 'bout 'im livin' in a log cabin
en w'en he d'ed she had her house draped in black. Marster Brown wuz
also good ter his slaves. De Missis promus Marster Brown on his de'th
bed nebber ter let us be whup'd en she kep her wud. Sum ob de
oberseers on urthur plantations would tie de slaves ter a stake en gib
dem a good whup'in fer sump'in dey ought not ter done."

"All cul'ed people wore cotton goods en de younger boys run 'round in
der shurt tails. Mah Missis nit all de white chilluns stockin' en she
made me sum. I had ter hold de yarn on mah hans w'en she wuz nittin'.
I members one time I wuz keepin' flies off de table usin' a bunch ob
peacock feathers en I went ter sleep standin' up en she tole me ter go
back ter de kitchen." "I went en finish mah nap."

"One day ole Uncle Elick woke Marster Brown fum his atter-noon nap
tellin' 'im dat de prettiest men dat I ever seed wuz passin' by on de
road. He went ter de winder en said, "Good Gawd, hit's dem damn
Yankees." Mah white folks had a pretty yard en gyarden. Soldiers kum
en camped dere. I'd slip ter de winder en lissen ter dem." "W'en dey
wuz fightin' at Fort Negley de cannons would jar our house. De
soldier's ban' play on Capitol Hill, en play "Rally 'roun' de Flag
Boys, Rally 'roun de Flag."

"De slaves would tek dere ole iron cookin' pots en turn dem upside
down on de groun' neah dere cabins ter keep dere white folks fum
hearin' w'at dey wuz sayin'. "Dey claimed dat hit showed dat Gawd wuz
wid dem."

"In slavery time peeples b'leeved in dreams. I members one nite I
dreamed dat a big white thing wuz on de gatepost wida haid. I tole mah
mammy en she said, "Gawd wuz warning us." De ma'rige cer'mony in de
days ob slavery wuz by de man en 'oman jumpin' ovuh a broom handle
tergedder."

"I don' member much 'boud de Ku Klux Klan, but I does member seein'
dem parade one time in Nashville." (She evidently refers to the Klan's
last parade in 1869 in Nashville, immediately preceeding the
disbandment of the Klan at Fort Negley.)

"I members dat de northern soldier's ban' would play Union Ferever,
Rally 'roun de Flag, en Down Wid de Traitors en up Wid de Sta's en
Stripes."

"De songs I members ez:

I'se a Soldier ob de Cross.
Follow de Lamb.
I would not Live Allus.
I Axs not ter Stay."

"I member w'en de stars fell. Hit wuz so dark en eberbody wuz skeered,
en I member a comet dat looked lak a big red ball en had sump'in lak a
tail on hit. Eber one wuz skeered en wuz 'feard hit would hit de
groun' en burn de worl' up. I member de fust street lites in
Nashville. W'en de lamp mans would kum 'round en lite de lamps dey
would yell out "all ez well" en I also members de Southern money goin'
out en Yankee money kum'n in, en also w'en dere wuzn't any coal 'yer
en eve'ythin' wuz wood en mos' ob dis town wuz in de woods."

"De slaves wuz tole dey would git forty ak'rs ob groun' en a mule w'en
dey wuz freed but dey nebber got hit. W'en we wuz free we wuz tuned
out widout a thing. Mah grandmammy wuz an "Ole mammie" en de Missis
kep her. Atter freedum a lot ob Yankee niggah gals kum down 'yer en
hire out."

"W'en I wuz a young girl hund'eds ob people went ter de wharf at de
foot ob Broadway on de fust Sunday in May ob eber'y year fer de annual
baptizin' ob new members inter de Baptist (culored) churches ob de
city. Thousands ob white people would crowd both sides ob de
Cumberland Riber, Broadway en de Sparkman Street Bridge ter witnus de
doin's. On leavin' de chuches de pastor would lead de parade ter de
wharf. Dey would sing en chant all de way fum de chuch ter de river en
sum ob de members would be ovuhkum wid 'ligious feelin' en dey would
hop up en down, singin' en shoutin' all de time, or may be dey would
start ter runnin' down de street en de brethern would hab ter run dem
down en bring dem back."

"We useter hav' dem champ meetin's en dey wuz "honeys," en I enjoy dem
too. We wore bandanna handkerchiefs on our haids en long shawls ovuh
our shoulders. At deze meetin's dey had all kinds ob good things ter
eat en drink."

"Atter mah freedum I dun washin' en Ironin' fer white families. Neber
ma'ried but I neber worries no matter w'at happens en dat's may be
cause ob mah livin' so long."

"Things ter day ez mighty bad. Not lak de ole days. Worl' ez gwin ter
end soon."

"Atter I got ter feeble ter do washin' en ironin' fer mah livin', I
went ter de Relief Office ter git dem ter he'ps me, but dey wouldn't
do a thing. I had no place ter go er no money ter do wid. Dis culid
'oman tuk me in en does all she can fer me but now she ez disable ter
wuk en I dunno w'at ter do. Ef'n I could git a small grocer order each
week til I git de ole Age Pension hit would he'p lots."




INTERVIEW
ELLIS KEN KANNON
328 5th Avenue N.
St. Mary's Church
Nashville, Tennessee


"I dunno jes how ole I ez. I wuz bawn in Tennessee as a slave. Mah
mammy kum frum Virginia. Our marster wuz Ken Kannon."

"Our Mistress wouldn't let us slaves be whup'd but I member mah daddy
tellin' 'bout de Overseer whuppin' 'im en he run 'way en hid in a log.
He tho't de blood hounds, he heered 'bout a half mile 'way, on his
trail could heer 'im breathe but de hounds nebber fin' 'im. Atter de
hounds pas' on, mah daddy lef' de log hidin' place en w'en he got ter
a blacksmith shop, he se'ed a white man wid a nigger who had handcuffs
on en w'en de white man tuk off de handcuffs, de nigger axed mah daddy
whar he wuz gwine en he tole 'im back ter mah Mistress en de nigger
sezs I ez too. Mah daddy slipped 'way fum 'im en went home."

"W'en I wuz a young boy, I didn't wear nothin' but a shirt lak all
urthur boys en hit wuz a long thing lak a slip dat kum ter our knees.
Our Mistress had a big fier place en w'en we would kum in cole she
would say ain't you all cole. (You all was always used in the plural
and not singular as some writers have it). W'ile we wuz warmin' she
often played de organ fer us ter heer."

"I waited on mah Marster 'til he d'ed. Dey let me stay rite wid de
body. Mah Mistress, Mammy ob de Marster, wuz in bad health at dat
time, en 'fore we sta'ted ter de graveyard, I put a feather bed in de
car'age en got a pitcher ob water ready en 'fore we git dere she got
awful sick."

"Durin' slavery de slaves hadder keep quiet en dey would turn a kittle
upside down ter keep de white folks 'yearin dere prayers en chants.
W'en a slave wanted ter go ter 'nother plantation he had ter hab a
pass. Ef' dey disobeyed dey got a whuppin, en ef dey had a pass widout
de Marsters signature dey got a whuppin. _Ef'n dey had ter hab passes
now dere wouldin' be no meaness_."

"I member de Klu Klux Klan kumin ter mah daddy's home axin fer water
en dey would keep us totin' water ter dem fer fifteen ter twenty
minutes. Dey didn't whup er hurt any ob us. I also member 'yearin mah
mammy en daddy tellin' us 'bout de sta'rs fallin'. I member de comet.
Hit wuz a big ball en had a long tail."

"I hab 'yerd dem tell 'bout Mr. Robertson. He wuz mean ter his slaves
en dey sezs dey could see a ball ob fier rollin' on de fence en w'en
dey would git ter de spring, a big white thing lak a dog would crawl
under de rock. De slaves wuz natur'ally superstitious en b'leeved in
dreams, ole sayings en signs. I hab mahse'f se'ed things dat I ain't
onderstan'. Hab almost seen de things dat (apostle) John seed."

"Dunno nuthin 'bout any ob de ex-slaves voting er de Nat Turner
'Bellion."

"Atter freedum mos' ob de slaves wuk'd fer dere livin' jes as I ez. De
men in de fiel's, de 'omen in de house. I wuk'd at a hotel in
McMinnville en one day, I wuz keepin' de flies off de table wid a
brush made frum fine strips ob papah en de string broke en hit fell
on de table. One man jumped up grabbed a cheer sayin' ah'll knock you
down wid dis cheer."

"De slave 'pected ter git 40 akers ob land en a mule but nobody eber
got hit as fur as I know. We didn't git nuthin. Our white peeple
wuzzent able ter gib us anyting. Eve'ythin' dey had wuz tuk durin' de
wah. Dey wuz good ter us an stuck wid us en mah peeple stayed wid mah
Mistress."

"Dis young gineratshun ob niggers, I 'clare dey ez jes 'bout gon'. Dey
won't wuk, all's stealin' en mabe wuk long 'nuff ter git a few clothes
ter strut 'round in. I may be wrong but dat ez mah hones' pinion."

"De songs--I member ez:

De Ole Ship ob Zion.
Do You Think You'll be Able ter tek me Home."

"I has bin 'yer fifteen y'ars en hab wuked onder two Priests en now
wukin under de third. Dey hab all bin nice ter me. Hab neber had any
trubble wid white peeple en you'd be sprized how good dey ez ter me.
Dey don't treat me lak a nigger."

"Eber since I got mah freedum en 'fore I got dis chuch job, I dun all
kinds ob odd jobs, waited on tables, pressin' clothes en anyting else
dat kum 'long, but sum jobs wuz small pay but hit kep me 'live."

"Don't member any slave uprisin's. Our peeple wuz good ter us."




INTERVIEW
SCOTT MARTIN
438 Fifth Ave., No.


"I'se 90 y'ars ole and wuz bawn in slavery in Sumner County, Tennessee
and I b'long to Marster Dr. Madison Martin an' mah Misses Mary. And I
wuk'd wid de stock an' wuz de houseman."

"I hab neber been in any truble, neber 'rested en neber bin in jail. I
knows how ter behave, but de young peeples ob terday ain' dun rite en
dey don' 'mounts ter much. Dar am a few dat am all rite. In de ole
days dey wer' bettuh dan dey ez terday. De white and black ougher not
ma'rie."

"I has voted two times, but I disremembers who I voted fer. Neber
hadney frens in office en I nebr met any of de Klu Klux men. I didn'
go out much en I neber wuz kotched w'en I did git out. I heered lots
'bout nigger uprisin' but dey wuz away off."

"I b'long ter de Missionary Baptist chuch an' I useter preach in mah
chuch 'ouse en udders w'en called. Once a y'ar I wud be at de
Cumberland Riber wha'f en' baptiz' culled peeples all da'. We useter
hab camp meetin' in de ole days en hab good things ter eat en I would
preach all day. I went ter schul two sessions en den I went to wuk."

"I member de fust street kar line that run on East side of Cumberland
Riber ter East end ob de ole wood bridge dat de 'arly settlers build.
De kars wer' pulled by hosses en' mules. De whites en blacks mixed
tergedder en den de law made de whites rid' in frunt en the blacks in
de rearuh. I think dat wuz rite, but sum ob mah race wuz mad 'bout
hit. I wuz on a kar one day and mules run'd 'way en de ole red mule
got loose frum de kar en run'd ober a mile 'fore dey ketched him en
dey brot 'im ba'k en de kar' pas' on. I members de ole L & N Railroad
on de East side. W'en my folks wud ride de train dey had 'ter hold me
tite or I wuld git 'way frum dem en run en hide 'hind sum logs. I wuz
scar'et ter ride on de kars."

"Atter freedum de slaves had'n no truble ter go whar dey wan'. Menny
lef' but menny stay wid der ole marsters. I stay wid my marster tell
he d'ed. I den kum an' lib wid mah daddy on Lebanon Road. Atter dat I
libed on Gallatin Road an' den I kum ter Nashville, an' wuk wid pic'
and shovel on streets, sewers an' udder jobs. I heered dem sez dat de
slaves wud git lan', hoss, money er sumpin' but I neber heerd ob
nobody gittin nuthin'. Dere wuz not slave 'raisings eroun' whar I
wuz."

"De fallin' st'ars wuz 'fore mah time, but I'se heer'd mah daddy tole
'bout hit. I se'd de comet wid hit shinnin' tail an' I fust b'leevd
sumbody put hit up dere."

"Good luck sign wuz w'en a stray cat kum ter yo' house an' stay dere.
Bad luck sign wuz a black kat crossin' yo' path in frunt ob yer. Ter
ke'p frum havin' de bad luck yo' back up pas' whar hit crossed yer
path en den spit an' yer hab no bad luck."

"Dem air ships luk nice but dey ez spoke 'boud in de Holy Bible, dat
sum day dere wud be flyin' things in de air'h an' I think dat dese
things am it. De otomobeels kiver nuder passag' in de Bible which seze
de peeple 'll rid' on de streets widout hosses en mules."

"Mah fav'rite songs am "I Gwine to Jine de Gideon Band," and "Keep Yo'
Lits Bunnin'."

"Ter ole now ter wuk an' mah haid don' se'm ter be tergedder an' I'se
gits he'ps frum de Welfare."




INTERVIEW
ANN MATTHEWS
719 9th Ave. South
Nashville, Tennessee


"I wuz bawn in Murfreesboro on Stones River. I dunno how ole I ez en
hit meks me 'shamed ter tell peeple dat, but mah mammy would hit me in
de mouth w'en I'd ax how ole I wuz. She say I wuz jes' tryin' ter be
grown."

"Mah mammy's name wuz Frankie en mah daddy wuz Henry Ken Kannon. Don'
member much 'bout mah mammy 'cept she wuz a sho't fat Indian 'oman wid
a turrible tempah. She d'ed, durin' de war, wid black measles."

"Mah daddy wuz part Indian en couldn't talk plain. W'en he go ter de
store he'd hab ter put his han' on w'at he want ter buy. He d'ed eight
months 'fore de Centennial."

"Our marster en missis wuz Landon en Sweenie Ken Kannon. Dey wuz good
ter us, en we had'n good things ter eat."

"I member de Yankee en Southern soldiers. One day me en mah young
missis, en sum chilluns went up ter de road en we se'ed sum Yankee
soldiers kumin', I clum'ed on de fence, de urthurs run 'way en hid.
One ob de soldiers sezs ter me, 'Lettle girl who wuz dat wid you,' en
I sezs, 'Hit wuz Miss Puss en sum chilluns.' He laughed en sezs, 'You
ez brave ain' you?'"

"Our missis let us go ter chuch. I 'long ter de chuch ob Christ."

"I dunno ob but one slave dat got lan' er nothin' w'en freedum wuz
'clared. We didn't git nuthin at freedum. Mah daddy went back in de
woods en built us a saplin house en dobbed hit wid mud. Atter freedum
mah daddy went 'way, en we chilluns staid in dat house in de woods by
oursel's. Dere wuz two weeks we didn't see a bit ob bre'd. I went up
w'at ez called de nine mile cut neah Tullahoma, en axed a 'oman ef she
would let us hab sum bre'd. She gib me sum meat en bre'd, en tole me
ter kum back. I went back home en we et sump'in, en I went back ter de
'oman's house, she gib me a sack ob flour en a big piece ob midlin'
meat. We wuz skeered, bein' dere 'lone so I would set up wile mah
br'ers slep', den I'd sleep in de daytime. One nite sumbody knocked at
de do'er en hit wuz mah daddy en he had two sacks ob food, en de
urthur chilluns got up en we et a big meal."

"I useter 'yer de folks talk 'bout de sta'rs fallin', but dat happen'
'fore I wuz bawn."

"I didn't go ter schul, mah daddy wouldin' let me. Said he needed me
in de fiel wors den I needed schul. I wuz allus sassy en stubbun. I
run 'way fum mah daddy en kum ter Nashville. I stayed at a schul on
Franklin Pike, run by Mrs. McGathey. I wuz de only cul'ed person dere.
Dey wuz good ter me en eve'y Chrismus I would git a big box ob clothes
en things."

"In Manchester de Klu Klux Klan wore big high hats, red handkerchiefs
on dere faces en red covers on dere hosses. Dey tuk two niggers out ob
jail en hung dem ter a chestnut tree."

"One nite w'en I wuz gwine wid mah daddy fum de fiel' home, we met sum
ob de K.K.K. en dey said, 'Ain't you out late Henry? En who ez dat gal
wid you?' Mah daddy said, 'We ez gwine home fum wuk, en dis ez mah
daughter.' Dey said, 'Whar has she bin, we ain't nebber se'ed her.' He
told dem, 'I'd bin in Nashville.' Dey said dey'd be back dat nite but
we didn't see dem."

"W'en I wuz in Manchester I promus de Lawd I wouldin' dance. But one
nite I wuz on de ball floor, dancin' fum one end ob de room ter de
urthur en sump'in sezs go ter de do'er. I didn't go right den en 'gin
hit sezs you ez not keepin' yo promus. I went ter de do'er en you
could pick a pin off de groun' hit wuz so light. In de sky wuz de
prettiest thing you ebber se'ed, so many culors, blue, white, green,
red en yellow."

"Since freedum I'se wuked wid diff'ent peeple, cookin' en keepin'
house. I'se de mammy ob three chilluns. Two ob dem ez 'way fum 'yer,
en I live 'yer wid mah daughter."

"Old songs, I member ez:

Dark wuz de Nite.
I'll Live wid Gawd Forever, Bye en Bye.
Fum dis Earth I go, Oh Lawd, W'at Will 'kum ob Me."

"So yer wan't me ter tell you de truf? I think de young peeple ez
nothin'. Dey think dey ez smaht. Most ob de ex-slaves I'se knowed has
cooked en nussed, done laundry wuk; wuked in fiel's en diff'ent
things."

"I'se neber voted en hab neber paid any 'tention ter de niggers
gittin' ter vote. Don't hab any frens in political office. Can't
member any tales er signs."

"I don't b'leeve in dese mixed white and black families en hit
shouldn't be 'lowed."

"Durin' slavery de white folks didn't want de niggahs ter sing en
pray, but dey would turn a pot down en meet at de pot in de nite en
sing en pray en de white folks wouldn't 'yer dem."

"Ef a slave died de white folks wouldn't let nobody set up wid de body
'cept de niggers ob dat plantation, but urthur slaves would slip in
atter dark, set up en den slip back ter dere plantation 'fore day."

"W'en I useter go ter camp meetin' dey had big dinnahs en spread hit
on de groun'. Dey preached, sung, shouted en eve'ybody had a good
time."

"Fum de camp meetin's dey would go ter de wharf en baptize. Dey would
tie handkerchiefs 'roun dere haids. W'en dey wuz dipped under de water
sum ob dem would kum up shoutin'."


A TALE

One time de preacher wuz in de river fixin' ter baptize a man.
Eve'ybody wuz singin' ole time 'ligion. A 'oman sung, "I don' lak dat
thing 'hind you." Bout dat time de pahson en de udder man se'd an
alligator. De parson sezs, "No-By-God I Don't Either." He turned de
man loose en dey both run 'way.




INTERVIEW
REV. JOHN MOORE
809 7th Avenue So.
Nashville, Tennessee


"I wuz bawn in Georgia (exact time not known) en mah mammy wuz half
Indian en mah daddy a slave. Both ob dem owned by William Moore. Sum
time atter dat Marster Moore sold mah daddy en den de Moore Sistuhs
looked atter me en wuz allus good ter me. "Lawdy, dey wuz good white
folks."

"Durin' slavery times de slaves would hab ter git fum dere marster a
pas' 'fore dey could visit dere own people on de uther plantations.
Ef'n you had no pass you would git in trouble ef caught wid out one
which allus ment a good whuppin' w'en dey returned. At dat time menny
slaves would run 'way en hide in caves en menny ob dem would go by de
"ondergroun' railroad" ter Canada whar slavery wuz not recognized."
(The underground railroad consisted of hiding places throughout the
states to Canada and the slaves would make the trip under cover from
station to station.)

"De slaves would slip out at nite ter private meetin's en turn a pot
bottom up on de groun' en leave a little hole under hit so de sound ob
dere talkin' would go onder de pot en no one would 'year whut dey wuz
talkin' 'bout."

"De ex-slaves ob de better class did vote en de white peeple stuck wid
de good cul'ed folks. I don' member now 'bout de Nat Turner
'Bellion."

"Atter freedum de slaves wuz 'lowed ter stay on de plantation en
'lowed ter farm en gib half dey made. Atter slavery I useter wuk fer
fifty cents en git a peck ob meal, three pounds ob bacon en a quart ob
syrup which would las' a week."

"De Ku Klux Klan's plan wuz ter whup all white er cul'ed people dat
didn't stay at home en support dere families but would run 'roun en
live a bad life. W'en de Klan would be passin' through de slaves would
call dem ghostus."

"One nite mah br'er en me wuz sleepin' in de dining room. Sumpin woke
us an we seed sumpin' dat kum through de yard en got hold ob sum
blocks. Dat thing didn't hab no haid en didn't hab no tale en looked
lak hit wuz backin' up on all four legs. Nex mawnin' we could fin' no
tracks ob whuteber hit wuz en de gate wuz also fasened."

"Dis young peoples 'cordin' ter de Bible ez on de broad road ter ruin.
Dey think dey ez as good as de white people but dey ez classed as
niggahs in mah eyes."

"Caint member any ob de ole songs now."




SUBJECT--EX-SLAVE STORIES

Andrew Moss
#88 Auburn Streets
Knoxville, Tennessee


"One ting dat's all wrong wid dis world today," according to Andrew
Moss, aged negro, as he sits through the winter days before an open
grate fire in his cabin, with his long, lean fingers clasped over his
crossed knees, "is dat dey ain no 'prayer grounds'. Down in Georgia
whar I was born,--dat was 'way back in 1852,--us colored folks had
prayer grounds. My Mammy's was a ole twisted thick-rooted muscadine
bush. She'd go in dar and pray for deliverance of de slaves. Some
colored folks cleaned out knee-spots in de cane breaks. Cane you know,
grows high and thick, and colored folks could hide de'seves in dar, an
nobody could see an pester em."

"You see it was jes like dis. Durin' de war, an befo de war too, white
folks make a heap o fun of de colored folks for alltime prayin.
Sometime, say, you was a slave en you git down to pray in de field or
by de side of de road. White Marster come 'long and see a slave on his
knees. He say, 'What you prayin' 'bout?' An you say, 'Oh, Marster I'se
jes prayin' to Jesus cause I wants to go to Heaven when I dies.' An
Marster say, 'Youse my negro. I git ye to Heaven. Git up off'n your
knees.' De white folks what owned slaves thought that when dey go to
Heaven de collored folk's would be dar to wait on em. An ef'n it was a
Yank come 'long, he say too, 'What you prayin' 'bout?' You gives de
same 'sponse. An he say, 'We'se gwine save you. We goin' to set you
free. You wants to be free, dont you?' 'Yessir, Boss!' 'Well den, Yank
say, come go 'long wid me.' Ain no use keep sayin' 'Please sir Boss,
I'll have to arsk my Master.' Yank say, 'what you mean, Marster? You
aint got no Marster. We's settin' you free.'"

"Sometimes dey takes a' tie a rope 'round you, and they starts ridin'
off but dey dont go too fas' so you walks behind. Sometimes 'long
comes another Yank on a horse an he arsk, 'Boy ain you tired?' 'Yessir
Boss.' 'Well den you git up here behind me and ride some.' Den he wrop
de rope all 'round de saddle horn. Wrops and wrops, but leaves some
slack. But he keeps you tied, so's you wont jump down and run away. An
many's de time a prayin' negro got took off like dat, and want never
seen no more."

"'Course ef'n you goes wid em, you 'member your trainin' and 'fore you
leaves de field, you stacks your hoe nice, like you was quittin' de
days work. Dey learned the little'uns to do dat, soon's dey begins to
work in de fields. Dey had little hoes, handles 'bout de size of my
arm, for de little fellers. I've walked many a mile, when I was a
little feller, up and down de rows, followin' de grown folks, an
chopping wid de hoe 'round de corners whar de earth was soft so de
little uns could hoe easy. Whoopee! Let dat dinner horn blow, and evy
body stacks dey hoes, nince, neat stacks standin up, and starts to
run. Some eats in dey own cabins, but dem what eats at de big house,
sets down at a long table, and gets good grub too! Evy night, our
Marster give us evy one a glass o whiskey. Dat's to keep off decease.
Mornins' we had to all drink tar water for de same purpose. Dat want
so tasty."

"My Marster's name was George Hopper. Dat man paid taxes on more'n
two-thousand acres of land in two counties. I lived in dem two
counties. Was born in Wilkes and raised in Lincoln County, Georgia. We
called it de middle-south. My Marster he never did marry. Lots of
folks didnt, dey jes took up wid one another. Marster Hopper had five
children by my grandmother. She was his house woman, dat's what he
call 'er. An when he died he willed her and all dem chilluns a house,
some land, and a little money. He'd of left em a heap more money and
ud been one of the richest men in the country, ef'n de war hadn't
broke out. When it was over he had a barrel full of 'Federate
greenbacks. But t'want no count. He done broke den. One day my uncle,
he was the colored overseer, he went to Danbury, six miles from whar
we lived at, and he paid $5 for a pound of coffee. Dat was befo de
North whupped de South, and dey had'n killed-down de money value for
de South."

"Talk about hard times! We see'd em in dem days, durin' de war and
most specially after de Surrender. Folks dese days dont know what
trouble looks like. We was glad to eat ash-cakes and drink parched
corn and rye 'stead o coffee. I've seed my grandmother go to de smoke
house, and scrape up de dirt whar de meat had drapped, and take it to
de house fer seasonin. You see, both armies fed off'n de white folks,
and dey cleaned out dey barns and cellars and smoke houses when dey
come. One time, when de Yanks was on de way to Augusta, I was picking
up chips to make the supper fire, when I see'd em comin'. I hit it out
from dar and hide behind two little hills down by de big spring. After
awhile my brother find me and he tell me to come on back to the house
and see dem white mens dance. De Yanks kep' comin' and dey eat all
night. By daylight they was through marchin past."

"An den come de Rebels. When dey come we had five-thousand bushel of
corn, one-hundred head o hogs, three-hundred and fifty galons of syrup
'en sech. When dey left, they took an set fire to evything, to keep it
away from the Yanks, aimin to starve em out o dat country. Dat's what
dey done. Some of dem Rebs was mean as the Yanks. And dat was bein'
mean. Some called de Yanks, 'de Hornets', 'cause dey fight so. Take a
Yank an he'd fight acrost a buzz saw and it circlin' fifty mile a
minute."

"Dat time when the Yanks was goin' to Augusta, an I went to black my
Marster's boot,--he'd give us a two-cent peice, big as a quarter--for
boot blackin, I say, 'Marster who is dem soldiers?' An he say to me,
'Dey's de Yankees, come to try to take you awy from me.' An I say,
'Looks like to me Marster, ef'n dey wants to take us dey'd arsk you
fer us.' Marster laughed and say, 'Boy! Dem fellers dont axes wid
words. Dey does all dey talkin' wid cannons.' Did you know that a
white woman shot de first cannon dat was ever fired in de state o
Georgia? She was a Yankee Colonel's wife, dey say, named Miss Anna, I
dunno the rest o her name. She wants to be de first to fire a cannon
she say, to set the negroes free. Dat was befo' de war, begin. De roar
of dat cannon was in folkes ears for more'n five days and nights."

Uncle Andrew gave a little grunt as he lifted himself out of his
chair. His little frame seemed lost in the broad-shouldered lumber
jacket that he wore. He had laid aside the paper sack from which he
had been eating, when the visitor came, and removed an old stocking
cap from his head. When the visitor suggested that he keep it on, as
he might catch cold he replied, "I dont humor myself none." The
sunlight fell upon his head and shoulders as he stood, to steady
himself on his feet. Traces of his ancestry of Indian blood,--one of
his grandfathers was a Cherokee Indian,--were evident in his features.
His skin is jet-black, but his forehead high and his nose straight,
with nostrils only slightly full. There was dignity in his bearing and
beauty in his face, with its halo of cotton-white hair and beard, cut
short and neatly parted in the middle of his chin.

Walking about the room, he called the visitor's attention to family
portraits on the walls. Some were colored crayons, and a few were
enlarged snap-shots. Proudly he pointed to the photograph of a
huge-sized Negro man, apparently in his thirties, and said, "He was
our first comins'. Reckon he took after his great granddaddy, who was
eight feet tall and weighed twe-hundred and fifty pounds. That man's
arms was so long, when dey hung down by his side, his fingers was
below his knees. Dis grandfather was free-born. My father, Dave Moss,
he was sold three times. He had twenty-five children. But he had two
wives. As I aforesaid, folks didn't always marry in dem days, jes took
up wid one another. My mother was his title-wife. By her, he jes had
me and my two full-brothers an one sister. My mother died two years
after de war. My father give my sister to my grandmother. Jes give 'er
to 'er."

"How come I live in Knoxville, I was a young man, when I started off
from Georgia, aimin to go over de mountains to Kentucky whar I heard
dey pay good wages. I stopped in Campbell country, Tennessee wid
another feller, an' I see'd a pretty gal workin' in de field. An I
say's, I'm goin' to marry dat gal. Sho 'nough me an her was married in
less dan six months. Her Marster build us a log house and we lived dar
'till we come to Knoxville, Tennessee. Now, all o my boys is dead. Evy
one o em worked for Mr. Peters (Peters and Bradley Flour Mills, of
Knoxville)--and dey all died workin' fer him. So Mister Willie, he say
he gwine let me live here, in de company house, the rest o my days."

The four room frame house stands near a creek at the dead end of an
alley on which both whites and negroes live. The huge double bed,
neatly made, stands between two windows from which there is an
unobstructed view of the highway traversing north and south through
northern Knoxville, several blocks away from Andrew's home. "I jes lay
down on dat bed nights and watch them autimobiles flyin by. Dey go
Blip! Blip! and Blip! An I say to my self, 'Watch them fools!' Folkes
ain got de sense dey's born wid. Ain smart like dey used to be. An
times ain good like dey was. Ef'n it hadnt been for some of dem crazy
fools, actin up and smarty, me an my wife'd be gittin maybe a hun'ered
an' more dollars a month, 'stead o the fifteen we gits 'tween us for
ole' age help. They'd ought to let Rosevelt alone. An its his own
folks as is fitin' 'im. He is a big man even ef he is a Democrat. I'm
a Republican though. Voted my first time for Blaine."

"Yes I votes sometimes now, when dey come gits me. An befo I got sick,
I would ride the street car to town. An I goes down to de Court House,
and when I see dem cannons in deyard I cain keep from cryin'. My wife
arsk me what make me go look at dem cannon ef'n dey makes me cry. An I
tells her I cry 'bout de good and de bad times dem cannon bringed us.
But no cannons or nothin' else, seems like going to bring back de good
old times. But I dont worry 'bout all dese things much. Accordin' to
de Good Book's promise, weepin' may endure for a night, den come joy
in de mornin. An I knows dat de day's soon come when I goes to meet my
folks and my Lord an Marster in his Heaven, whar dey ain no more
weepin.'"




SUBJECT--EX-SLAVE STORIES

Aunt Mollie Moss
# 88- Auburn Street,
Knoxville, Tennessee


There is no street sign or a number on any of the ramshackled frame
cottages that seemingly lean with the breezes, first one direction,
then another, along the alley that wind's through the city's
northernmost boundary and stops its meanderings at the doorstep of
"Uncle Andrew Moss" and his wife, "Aunt Mollie."

The City Directory of Knoxville, Tennessee officially lists the Moss
residence as # 88 Auburn Street. It rests upon its foundations more
substantially, and is in better kept condition than its neighbors. In
lieu of a "reg'lar" house number, the aged negro couple have placed a
rusty automobile lisence tag of ancient vintage conspicuously over
their door. It is their jesture of contempt for their nearest white
neighbors who "dont seem to care whedder folkses know whar dey lib an
maybe don wants em to."

As for Aunt Mollie, she holds herself superior to all of her
neighbors. She "Ain got no time for po white trash noway." She shoo'ed
two little tow-headed white girls from her doorstep with her broom as
she stood in her door and watched a visitor approach. "G'wan way frum
here now, can be bodder wid you chillun messin ups my front yard. Take
yo tings an go on back to yo own place!"

"Dats way dey do," she mummled as she lead the visitor inside the
cottage, through the dining-room and kitchen into the living-room and
bedroom. "Don know what I gwine do when come summer time. Keeps me all
time lookin out for dem chilluns. Dey's dat troublesome. Brings trash
in on my flo what I jes scoured, an musses 'roun, maybe tryin to steal
sumpin an me watchin em too. Dey wasnt teached manners and 'havior in
odder folkses houses like what I war."

When Aunt Mollie learned that it was to hear her story of how she was
trained in manners end behaviorism, that the visitor had come, and to
hear something of her recollections of slave days, her belligerent
mood vanished. The satisfied manner in which she drew up chairs before
the fire, took a pinch of snuff and settled her skirts, indicated that
was going to be quite a session. She leaned her elbows on her knees,
held her head between the palms of her hands and fumbled in her cloudy
memory to gather a few facts to relate.

Uncle Andrew, the more intelligent of the two, and quick to seize upon
his opportunity, began his reminiscences immediately, saying "Honey,
wait now," when his wife thought herself well organized to talk, and
frequently broke into his narrative. "Wait untell I gits through. Den
you can talk." Aunt Mollie would frown and grunt, mumble to herself as
she rocked back and forth in her chair. She pulled the two long braids
of brown silky hair, streaked with white, and tied at the ends with
cotton strings. She spat vigorously into the fire, kept muttering and
shuffling her feet, which were encased in men's shoes.

At last it came Aunt Mollie's turn to talk war-times. Uncle Andrew,
well pleased with his recital, retired to his corner by the hearth and
listened "mannerdly"--after first warning the visitor in a gentle
undertone, that "My wife she ain got much mem'ry an she don hear
good." Aunt Mollie's rambling reminiscences backed up his statement.
She began.

"Reckon I mus be 'bout eighty-two, three year old. I dunno exactly. Ef
I knowed whar to find em, deys some my white folkes lib in dis town.
Seem like I can 'member dey names. I b'longed to Marster Billy Cain,
and was raised on his farm in Campbell county, Tennessee. Oh, 'bout
six, seven mile from Jacksboro. Wish I could go back dar some time.
Ain been dar sence me an Moss married an live eight, ten or some more
years in a log cabin he built for us. We was married March 7, de day
atter Cleveland was 'lected presi-dent. In 1885 did you say? Well,
reckon you're right. I ain had no schoolin an I can 'member lots o
tings I used to know."

"Billy Cain worked me in de fields. An his wife Miss Nancy say she
gwine stop it, 'cause I was so pretty she fraid somebody come steal
me." Aunt Mollie buried her face in her apron and had a good laugh.
"Dey said I was de pretties' girl anywhars about. Had teeth jes like
pearls. Whoops! Look at em now. Ain got 'nuff left to chaw wid. You
notices how light-complected I is? My own father was a full-blooded
Cherokee Indian. De Yanks captured him an killed him."

"I was hoein in de field dat time Moss com 'long and see me and say he
gwine marry me. An, jes like he tell you, we was married in less dan
six months. We been livin togedder evy since and we gits along good.
We have had blessins' and got a lot to be thankful for. Could have
more to eat sometimes, but we gits along someways. I am a good cook.
Miss Nancy she teached me all kinds o cookin, puttin up berries, makin
pickles and bakin bread and cake an evy'ting. Her ole man Cain give us
good grub dem days. Monday mornins' we go to de Cains to git rations
for de week. Dey gib us three pounds wheat, a peck o meal, a galon o
molasses, two pound o lard, two pound o brown sugar, rice an evy'ting.
I use to have plates an china white folks gib me. White woman come one
day, say she wan buy 'em. Took plum nigh all I had. Did'n pay me much
o nothin' either."

"Yes, Lord. I does 'member 'bout de war. I've see'd de blue an I've
see'd de grey. In 1862 I see'd de soldiers formin' in line. I was a
great big girl. Dem swords glisen' like stars. Can' member whar dey
was goin dat time. But I ain forgit de times soldiers come foragin.
Dey got all dey wanted, too. Hep' dey sef's an dont pay for it, never.
Soldier see a chicken go under de house, he plop down and shoot, and
den call me to crawl under de house and fetch it out." Aunt Mollie
buried her head in her apron again and laughed like a child. "Lordy
how scared I was of de old gander dat blowed at me, whilst I was
tryin' to drag 'em out alive, when I see'd de soldiers comin'."

"Billy Cain, he was brudder-in-law to Old Townslee, who lived on a
plantation in Alabama. How come my mother was give to Cain an come to
Tennessee, was one mornin' Old Townslee rode his horse out under a
tree to blow up de slaves. Blow de horn you know, to call 'em to work.
Somebody shot 'im. Right off his horse. It was so dark, 'fore
daylight, an' couldnt see and dey never did find out who shot 'im.
Heap o white folks had enemies dem days. So de slaves he owned was
divided munxt his chilluns. My mother was one of nine dat come to
Billy Cain dat way."

"Talk 'bout your shootin jest for devilment. Lemme tell you 'bout old
men John Wynn. He live down dar 'bout ten mile from whar Moss lived
when he was a boy. I've heard em tell it many a time. Dey say John
Wynn had 185 slaves. Evy time it come George Washington's birthday,
Old Wynn he had a feast and invite all de slaves! He celebratin! he
say. He seta a long table wid all kind good tings to eat. An he count
de slaves, so's to be sure dey all come. An' den he'd take an pick out
one and shoot him! Den he say, "Now youse all can go 'head an eat.
Throw dat nigger 'side an we bury im in mornin'." And he walks off to
de big house. No! He wasn't drunk. Jes de debil in 'im. Well, he shot
ten, twelve, maybe thirty dat way. An den de white folks hanged 'im to
a tree. Hanged im t'well he was good and dead, dey did."

"Now folkes can 'joy dey victuals wid sech goin's on. De slaves git
so's dey scared to hear de bell ring. Don' know what it mean. Maybe
death, maybe fire, maybe nudder sale o some body. Gwine take 'em way.
But when de bell ring dey had to come. Let dat ole bell ring and de
woods was full o negroes. Maybe 500 hundred come from all over date
county."

Aunt Mollie was beginning to ramble and babble incoherently, her
memories of her own and the experiences of others all confused in her
mind. When she had about finished a story about how one of the slave
women, "bust de skull" of the head of her marster,'" 'cause she was
nussin a sick baby an' he tell her she got to git out in dat field an
hoe" and the gory details of what the shovel did to the white
marster's head, it was time for the visitors to close the interview.

Both Uncle Andrew and Aunt Mollie followed the visitor to the front
door, and wished her "All de luck in de world. An thank you for
comin'. An come see us agin, nudder time."




INTERVIEW
ANDY ODELL
1313 Pearl Street
Nashville, Tennessee


"I wuz bawn east ob Spring Hill, Tennessee. I dunno in w'at y'ar, but
I wuz a ful' grown man w'en I wuz freed. (This will make him about 96
years old.). I wuz an onlies' chile en I nebber knowed mah daddy. Mah
mammy wuz sold 'way fum me. She ma'ied a man named Brown en dey had
seven chillun."

"At fust I 'longed ter Marster Jim Caruthers. W'en his daughter ma'ied
Fount Odell, I wuz willed ter her en den mah marsters wuz Fount en
Albert Odell who wuz br'ers. Mah white folks let us go ter chuch. I
b'leeves in de Baptist 'ligion. I nebber knowed any slave dat had ter
hide ter sing er pray. I members de comet en hit wuz a sta'r wid a
long tail en looked lak hit wuz burnin'. De sta'rs fell 'fore I wuz
bawn." (The stars fell in 1833).

"We had ter hab passes en if you didn't hab one, you got whupped. Mah
marster let me go ter chuch wid' out a pass. I members de Klu Klux
Klan but dey nebber bothered me, tho I 'yeard a lot 'bout dem. Dey
called demselves "White Caps" en said dey wuz rite fum de grave. W'en
a slave got whupped hit wuz cose dey disobey dere white folks en de
overseer whupped dem. I though mah white folks wuz awful mean ter me
sumtime."

"I nebber b'leeved in ghos' but hab yeard lots 'bout dem. Lots of
peeples did b'leeve in dem back in dem times. Uster sing a lot but I
dunno names ob dem now. I dunno w'at ez gwine ter 'kum ob dis young
crowd. I sho don't think diff'ent culers oughter ma'rie. De Lawd
didn't mean fer hit ter be dun. Dunno ob any slave 'risin's in
Virginia er any uther place. Don't member now de tales en sayin' ob de
ole times."

"Member well w'en de war broke out en how dey had big dinners en
marched 'round ovuh de fiel's, gittin' ready fer de war. I had a br'er
kilt in de war en mah mammy got a lettle money fum 'im. Also member
dat w'en mah mammy got de money she bought me a hat."

"I don't git nuthin at freedum en I dunno ob any slaves gittin' any
land er money. I know dat w'en we wuz freed Marster Albert called us
slaves in en said, "You all ez as free as I ez, but you can stay 'yer
en wuk fer me ef'n you want ter." I staid wid 'im a good w'ile attar
freedum."

"Since freedum I hab plowed, hoed, cut wood, en wuk'd in quarries
pecking rock. Hab nebber wuk'd in town fer I dunno de things 'bout
town. I hab voted almost eve'y election since freedum 'til dese last
few years. I hab had two frens in office but both ez de'd now. I uster
think 'omen shouldn't vote, but I guess hit ez alri'te."




INTERVIEW
LAURA RAMSEY PARKER
715 Gay St.
Nashville, Tennessee


"I'se 87 y'ars ole. Wuz bawn in slavery. Wuz freed w'en de slavery
stopped. Mack Ramsey wuz mah marster en he wuz sho good ter his
slaves. He treated dem as human bein's. W'en he turned his slaves
'loose he gib dem no money, but gib dem lands, clothin' en food 'til
dey could brang in dere fust crop. Mah daddy rented a strip ob land
'til he wuz able ter buy de place. He lived on de same fer menny
y'ars."

"W'en I wuz ole er'nuff I wuz taught ter spin en weav. I bucum de nuss
ter de marster's onlies' chile. Soon atter I wuz freed, I went ter
Wisconsin, but only wuz dere fer a y'ar, den I kum back ter Tennessee
en Nashville. I settled in dis house en I'se bin livin' in hit fer
ovuh fifty y'ars. Dere wuz no uther houses 'round 'yer at de time. I
own de place. Hab wuk'd all mah life seem ter me. At one time I wuz a
chambermaid at de Nicholson House now de Tulane en later 'kum a sick
nuss, a seamstress, dressmaker but now I pieces en sells bed quilts. I
does mah own housekeepin' en washin'."

"I don't member now, very much 'bout de Ku Klux Klan. I do member dat
one nite dey passed our home en I grab'ed a shotgun en said dat I wuz
gwine ter shoot dem ef dey kum on de place. I members de Battle ob
Murfreesboro, but I'se got no membrances ob any slave uprisin'."

"I think very lettle ob de younger ginerashon. Dere's many things ter
day dat should be changed, but I'se 'yer en can't do nuthin' ter
change hit. I's min'in mah own business. I puts mah faith en trust in
Gawd's han's; en treats mah nabers right; en lives honest. I 'longs
ter de Christian Chuch, but don't wan'ter be called a "Campbellite."

"De songs I members ez:

Am I a Soldier ob de Cross.
Am I Bawn ter Die?
'Tis 'Ligion Dat Can Gib."




INTERVIEW
NAISY REECE
710 Overton St.
Nashville, Tennessee


"I wuz bawn in slavery, in Williamson County, guess I'se 'bout 80
y'ars ole. Think I wuz fou' w'en de wah started."

"Mah mammy en daddy wuz Mary en Ennock Brown."

"Mah missis en marster wuz Polly en Randall Brown."

"Dunno ob any ob our fam'ly bein' sold. W'en freedum wuz declar' we
wuz tu'n loose wid nothin'. Mah daddy tuk us down in de kuntry, raised
crops en made us wuk in de fiel'."

"I'se cooked a leetle fer urther peeple, but mos' ob mah wuk has bin
laundry. I didn't go ter schul much. I dunno w'at ter say 'bout de
younger gineratshun; dere ez sich a diff'unce now ter w'at hit wuz
w'en I wuz a girl. Dunno any tales dat I useter 'year."

"Didn't see any Klu Klux Klan, but I alluz got skeered en hid w'en
we'd 'year dey wuz kumin'. I 'long ter de Baptist Church. I neber went
ter menny camp-meetin's, but went ter a lot ob baptizins."

"Mammy tole us how de sta'rs fell en how skeered eberybody got. I saw
de long tail comet."

_Signs_: "Good luck ter git up 'fore day-lite ef'n youer gwin sum
place er start sum wuk." "Bad luck ter sweep flo' atter dark en sweep
de dirt out."

_Songs_: "I Couldn't Hear Anybody Pray."
       "Ole Time 'Ligion."
       "Cross De Riber Jordan."

"I'se neber voted, en hab neber had any frens in office. Neber knowed
nothin' 'bout de slave mart er de 'structshun days."




INTERVIEW
MILLIE SIMPKINS
"BLACK MAMIE"
1004 10th Avenue, No.
Nashville, Tennessee


I claims I's 109 ye'ars ole en wuz bawn neah Winchester, Tennessee.
Mah marster wuz Boyd Sims en mah missis wuz Sarah Ann Ewing Sims. Mah
mammy wus named Judy Ewing en mah daddy wuz Moses Stephens en he wus
"free bawn." He wuz de marster's stable boy en followed de races. He
run 'way en nebber kum back.

Mah fust missis wuz very rich. She had two slave 'omen ter dress her
eve'y mawnin' en I brought her breakfust ter her on a silvah waitah.
She wuz ma'ied three times, her second husband wuz Joe Carter en de
third wuz Judge Gork.

Mah fust missis sold me kaze I wuz stubborn. She sent me ter de "slave
yard" at Nashville. De yard wuz full ob slaves. I stayed dere two
weeks 'fore marster Simpson bought me. I wuz sold 'way fum mah husband
en I nebber se'd 'im 'gin. I had one chile which I tuk wid me.

De slave yard wuz on Cedar Street. A Mr. Chandler would bid de slaves
off, but 'fore dey started biddin' you had ter tek all ob yo Clothes
off en roll down de hill so dey could see dat you didn't hab no bones
broken, er sores on yer. (I wouldin' tek mine off). Ef nobody bid on
you, you wuz tuk ter de slave mart en sold. I wuz sold dere. A bunch
ob dem wuz sent ter Mississippi en dey had dere ankles fas'end
tergedder en dey had ter walk w'iles de tradahs rid.

W'en I wuz sold ter marster Simpkins, mah second mistress made me a
house slave en I wuked only at de big house en mah wuk wus ter nuss en
dress de chilluns en he'ps mah missis in her dressin'.

De young slaves wuz hired out ter nuss de white chilluns. I wuz hired
as nuss girl at seven y'ars ole en started cookin' at ten. I nebber
had a chance ter go ter schul.

I'm de mammy ob 14 chilluns, seven boys en seven gals. I wuz next ter
de olest ob four chillun. Mah missis useter hire me out ter hotels en
taverns.

Sum marsters fed dare slaves meat en sum wouldin' let dem hab a bite.
One marster we useter 'yer 'bout would grease his slaves mouth on
Sunday mawnin', en tell dem ef any body axed ef dey had meat ter say
"yes, lots ob hit".

W'en dey got ready ter whup dem dey'd put dem down on a pit widout any
clothes, stand back wid a bull whup en cut de blood out. I member de
niggers would run 'way en hide out.

De only fun de young folks had wuz w'en de ole folks had a quiltin'.
W'ile de ole folks wuz wukin' on de quilt de young ones would git in
'nuther room, dance en hab a good time. Dey'd hab a pot turned down at
de do'er ter keep de white folks fum 'yearin' dem. De white folks
didn't want us ter l'arn nothin' en ef a slave picked up a lettle
piece ob papah, dey would yell "put dat down you--you wan't ter git in
our business."

De white folks wouldin' let de slaves pray, ef dey got ter pray hit
wuz w'iles walkin' 'hind de plow. White folks would whup de slaves ef
dey 'yeard dem sing er pray.

I wuz a big girl w'en dey build de Capitol. I played on de hill 'fore
hit wuz built en I toted blocks fum dere w'en hit wuz bein' built. I
wuz livin' in Dickson County w'en Fort Donelson wuz tuk. I seed de
fust gun boat dat kum up de Cumberland River. I wuz standin' in de
Do'er w'en I se'd hit kumin', but hit didn't tek me long ter git back
in de back ob de house. I wuz skeered dey would shoot.

Mah marster run a fer'y en atter de gun boat kum up de riber, he got
skeered en gib mah ole man de fer'y, en w'en de soldiers kum ter tek
Fort Negley he set dem 'cross de river.

A man at Ashland City dat made whisk'y would hab Mr. Simpkins bring a
load ob logs up ter Ashland City en den bring a load ob whiskey down
en hide hit so de Yankees would'nt git hit.

Mah marster had a fish trap at de mouth ob Harper en w'en de gun boat
passed dey shot thro' de trap.

I wuz right 'yer w'en de Civil wah wuz gwin on, en de soldiers wuz
dressed up en beatin' de drums.

No honey we didn't git nothin' w'en we wuz freed. Jes druv 'way widout
nothin' ter do wid. We got in a waggin en druv ter nuther man's
plantashun. Mah ole man made a crap dere. Sum ob de slaves might hab
got sump'in but I dunno nobody dat did. I wuz skeered ter op'n mah
do'er atter dark on 'count ob Ku Klux Klan, dey wuz red hot.

I member w'en de sta'rs fell. I wuz small but de ole folks run out en
looked at dem, kum back set down en cried, dey tho't hit me'nt de
worl' wuz kumin' ter an end.

De peeple wuz skeered w'en dey se'd de comet wid de long tail. Dey
tho't hit wuz a sign ob wah.

I'se cooked eve'y since I wuz freed. I stayed in Henry Galbles kitchen
five long y'ars, en since I'se had dese strokes hit's broke me up
'till I kin do nothin'. I 'long ter de Methodist Church. I think de
young peeples ez turrible, en dis white en black mar'iags not be
'lowed.

De songs I member ez:

"Dark wuz de Night".
"Good Ole Daniel".

I'se nebber voted but I'se electioneered fer dem. Hab nebber had any
frens in office.

I wuz 'yer w'en Henry Clay en James K. Polk wuz runnin'. I wuz hired
at de ole City Hotel ovuh on de river. I wuz din'in room servant dere.
Mah marster would hab me sing a song fer him 'bout de Democrats.
"Hooray de kuntry ez risin'; rise up en drown ole Clay en his pizen".
I guess ole Clay wuz a right good fellow but he played cards wid de
niggers in de cellar.

De only thing I member 'bout de 'structshun time wuz sum ob de whites
didn't wan' de niggers ter vote.

I stays 'yer wid mah daughter. Dat ez de only support I hab since I
had deze strokes en bin unable ter do fer mahse'f.




_Ex-Slave Stories_

Subject: _Joseph_ _Leonidas_ _Star_,
# 133 Quebec Place,
_Knoxville_, _Tennessee_


If the poetic strain in the Dunbar Negroes of the south is an
inheritance and not "just a gift from On High," Knoxville, Tennessee's
aged Negro Poet,--born Joseph Leonidas Star,--but prominently known in
the community as "Lee" Star, Poet, Politician and Lodge Man,--thinks
that Georgia's poetic genius Paul Lawrence Dunbar, "maybe took his
writin' spells" from him.

"My grandfather and Paul Lawrence Dunbar's grandfather was cousins. He
were a much younger man than I am, for I was eighty-one years old the
twenty-sixth of December, 1937. So I reckon I give it down to my
kin-man. But it seem to me, that Poets is just born thataway. Po'try
is nothin' but Truth anyway, and it's Truth was sets us free. And that
makes me a free-born citizen bothways and every ways. I were born
free. I were always happy-natured and I expect to die thataway. One of
my poems is named, 'Be Satisfied!' and I say in it that if a man's got
somethin' to eat, and teeth to bite, he should be satisfied. You cant
take your goods with you. Old man Rockefeller, when he died here
awhile back, went away from here 'thout his hat and shoes. That's the
way its goin' to be with all us, no matter what our color is."

"The people 'round here calls me "Lee" Star, and I want to tell you,
Lee Star is a free-born man. But of course, things bein' as they were,
both my mother and father were slaves. That is for a few years. They
lived in Greenville, Tennessee. My mother, Maria Guess, was free'd
before the emancipation, by the good words of her young white
mistress, who told 'me [TR: 'em] all when she was about to die, she
wanted 'em to set Maria free, 'cause she didn't want her little
playmate to be nobodys else's slave. They was playmates you see. My
mother was eleven years old when she was freed."

"When she was about fourteen and my father Henry Dunbar wanted to
marry he had to first buy his freedom. In them times a slave couldn't
marry a free'd person. So he bought his freedom from his Marster Lloyd
Bullen, and a good friend of Andrew Johnson, the presi-dent. My father
an' him was friends too. So he bought his freedom, for just a little
of somethin' I disremember what, 'cause they didn't aim to make him
buy his freedom high. He made good money though. He was a carpenter,
blacksmith, shoe maker and knowed a lot more trades. His Master was
broadhearted, and good to his slaves, and he let 'em work at anything
they want to, when they was done their part of white folks
chore-work."

"Both my father and mother was learned in the shoe makin' trade. When
they come to Knoxville to live, and where I was born, they had a great
big shoe shop out there close to where Governor Brownlow lived.
Knoxville just had three streets, two runnin' east and west and one
run north and south. I well remember when General Burnside come to
Knoxville. That was endurin' the siege of Knoxville. Before he marched
his men out to the Battle of Fort Saunders, he stopped his solider
[TR: soldier] band in front of our shoe shop and serenaded my mother
and father. I was a little boy and I climed up on the porch bannisters
and sat there and lissen' to that music."

"I remember another big man come here once when I was a boy and I
served the transient trade at a little eatin' place right where the
Atkin Ho-tel is now. Jeff Davis come there to eat, when he stopped
over between trains. That was in 1869. No, I disremember what he eat
or how he behave. He didnt seem no different from any other man. He
was nince lookin' wore a long tail coat and his boots was plenty
blacked. He favored pictures of Abraham Lincoln. Was about
middle-height and had short, dark chin-whiskers. I were very busy at
the time, an' if they was any excitement I didnt know it."

"Yes, I've seen many a slave in my day. One of my boy playmates was a
slave child. His name is Sam Rogan and he lives now at the County Poor
Farm. I make it a point not to dwell too much on slave times. I was
learned different. I've had considerable schoolin', went to my first
school in the old First Presbyterian church. My teachers was white
folks from the North. They give us our education and give us clothes
and things sent down here from the North. That was just after the
surrender. I did see a terrible sight once. A slave with chains on him
as long as from here to the street. He was in an ole' buggy, settin'
between two white men and they was passin' througn Knoxville. My
mother and father wouldnt lissen' to me tell 'em about it when I got
home. And I hope I forget everything I ever knowed or heard about
salves [TR: slaves], and slave times."

Joseph Leonidas Star, no longer works at the shoemakers trade. He
writes poetry and lives leisurely in a three room frame shanty, in a
row of shabbier ones that face each other disconsolately on a typical
Negro alleyway, that has no shade trees and no paving. "Lee's" house
is the only one that does not wabble uneasily, flush with the muddy
alley. His stands on a small brick foundation, a few feet behind a
privet hedge in front, with a brick wall along the side in which he
has cemented a few huge conch shells.

After fifty-four years residence here, a political boss in his ward,
and the only Negro member of the Young White Men's Republican League,
Star's influence in his community is attested by the fact that when he
"destructed", the Knoxville City Council to "please do somethin' about
it, Knoxville being too big a city to keep callin' street's alleys,"
the City Council promptly and unanimously voted to change the name of
King's Alley to Quebec Place.

When the interviewer called, Star's door was padlocked. But he
appeared soon, having received word by the grape-vine system that some
one "was to see him",--"They told me it was the Sherriff" he laughed.
He came down the long muddy alley at a lively clip. He claimes he is
able to walk about 20 miles each day, just to keep in condition. He
wore a broad-brimmed black "derby-hat", a neatly pressed serge suit in
two tones, a soiled white pleated shirt and a frazzled-edged black bow
tie. His coat lapels and vest-front were adorned with badges and
emblems, including his Masonic pins, a Friendship Medal, his
Republican button and a silver crucifix. The Catholic church,
according to Lee, is the only one in Knoxville which permits the black
man to worship under the same roof with his white brothers.

Many of Star's poems have been published in the local and state
papers. He keeps a record of deaths of all citizens, and has done so
for sixty years. He calls the one, which records murders and hanging,
his "Doomsday Book", and "encoached" in it he claims is an accurate
date record of all such events of importance in his lifetime. His
records are neatly inscribed in a printing form and very legible. His
conversation is marked by grammatical incongruities, but he does not
speak the Negro dialect.




INTERVIEW
DAN THOMAS
941 Jefferson Street
Nashville, Tennessee


"I wuz bawn in slavery in 1847 at Memphis, Tennessee en mah marster
wuz Deacon Allays. Mah mammy wuz de cook at de big house. Mah mammy
d'ed soon atter I wuz bawn, en de Missis had me raised on a bottle.
Marster en Missis treatus all dere slaves kindly en plenty ter eat en
eve'y one wuz happy. I dunno nuthin 'bout mah daddy er whar he went. I
hab no kin in dis worl'. All I eber yeard wuz dat all mah folks kum
fum Africa. Mah Missis would tell me dat I mus' be good en mine en
eberbody will lak' you en ef she d'ed, dey would tek keer ob me. Dat
ez w'at dey hab don."

"I wuked 'round de house 'tel I wuz 'bout ten y'ars ole en de Marster
put me ter wuk in his big whiskey house. W'en I got 'bout 21 y'ars
ole, I would go out ter collect bills fum Marster's customers en hit
tuk me 'bout a week ter git all 'round. I wuzn't 'lowed ter tek money
but had ter git dere checks. I also wuked 18 y'ars as bar tender.
Marster en Mistress d'ed 'bout four y'ars 'fore whiskey went out ob de
United States. I stay wid dem 'til dey d'ed."

"Atter de Marster en Missis d'ed de doctor sezs I would hab ter leave
Memphis on 'count ob my health. I kum ter Nashville en got a job at de
"Powder Plant" durin' de Worl' War, en stayed dere 'til hit wuz ovuh.
I den gets wuk at Foster en Creighton in Nashville 'till dey tole me
dat I wuz too ole ter wuk. I makes mah livin' now by haulin' slop en
pickin' up things dat de white folks throw in dere trash pile en sum
ob hit I sell ter de papah en junk dealers. De white peeple he'p me
now also."

"I se'd dem sell a lot ob slaves in Mississippi, jes' lak hosses en
hogs, one time w'en de Marster en Mistress made a trip down dere. Lots
ob times dey made trips 'round de kuntry en dey allus tuk me 'long. I
se'd sum cru'l Marsters dat hitched up dere slaves ter plows en made
dem plow lak hosses en mules did."

"Atter de slaves got dere freedum, dey had ter look atter demselves,
so dey would wuk on plantations till dey got so dey could rent a
place, lak you rent houses en farms terday. Sum got places whar dey
wuk'd fer wages."

"I voted three times in mah life but lawdy dat wuz a long time ago. I
voted fer Teddy Roosevelt en Woodrow Wilson, en mah last vote wuz
'bout two y'ars pas'."

"Hab no tales handed down by mah peeple. W'en I would try ter git
info'mation, atter I got o'ler, all dey would say wuz, "You wuz raised
on a bottle en hab no peeple ob you own."

"Oh mah goodness! Hit jes par'lises me ter see how dem young peeple ez
doin' terday. Lawdy hab mercy but dere ez as much diff'ent fum ole
times as day en nite en hit looks lak things hab gone astray. Wuz tole
lots 'bout de Ku Klux Klan en how dey would catch en whup de cul'ed
peeple, but mah white folks made me stay in en dey neber got me."

"I member seein' Andrew Jackson, General Grant en Abraham Lincoln,
member seein' General Andrew Jackson git'in ready fer war by marchin'
his soldiers erroun'. I se'd 'im ride his big white hoss up en down
ter see how dey marched."

"One song I lack'd best ob all wuz, 'Mah ole Mammy ez De'd en Gon','
'Let me Sit B'neath de Willow Tree.' Don't member uther songs now."




INTERVIEW
Sylvia Watkins
411 14th Avenue N.
Nashville, Tennessee.


I'se said ter be 91 y'ars ole. I wuz young w'en de War wuz goin' on. I
wuz bawn in Bedford County. Mah mammy wuz named Mariah. She had six
chillun by mah daddy en three by her fust husband.

Mah missis wuz named Emily Hatchet en de young missises wuz Mittie en
Bettie, dey wuz twins. We had good clothes ter w'ar en w'en we went
ter de table hit wuz loaded wid good food en we could set down en eat
our stomachs full. Oh Lawd I wish dem days wuz now so I'd hab sum good
food. Ob course, we had ter wuk in de fiel's en mek w'at we et.

Wen we'd finish our day's wuk our missis would let us go out en play
hide en seek, Puss in de corner, en diff'ent games.

Mah mammy wuz sold in Virginia w'en she wuz a gurl. She sezs 'bou 60
ob em wuz put in de road en druv down 'yer by a slave trader, lak a
bunch ob cattle. Mah mammy en two ob mah sistahs wuz put on a block,
sold en carried ter Alabama. We neber 'yeard fum dem nomo', en dunno
whar dey ez.

I wuz willed ter mah young missis w'en she ma'ried. I wuz young en, ob
course, she whuped me, but she wasn't mean ter me. I needed eve'y
whupin' she eber gib me, cause I wuz allus fightin'. Mah missis allus
called me her lettle nig.

Mah daddy could only see mah mammy Wednesday en Saturday nites, en
ef'n he kum wid'out a pass de pat-rollers would whup 'im er run 'im
'til his tongue hung out. On dem nites we would sit up en look fer
daddy en lots ob times he wuz out ob bref cose he had run so much.

Mah white folks had a loom en we wove our own clothes. I wuz nuss en
house girl en l'arned how ter sew en nit. Mah young missis wuz blind
'fore she died. I useter visit her once a Ye'r en she'd load me down
wid things ter tek home, a linsey petticoat, ham bones, cracklins en
diff'ent things. She died 18 years ago almos' a 100 ye'r ole.

De white folks wouldn't let de slaves hab a book er papah fer fear
dey'd l'arn sumpin', en ef dey wan'ed ter pray dey'd tu'n a kettle
down at dere cabin do'er. I member yearin' mah mammy pray "Oh Father
op'n up de do'ers en sho us lite." I'd look up ter de ceiling ter see
ef he wuz gonna op'n up sumpin'; silly, silly me, thinkin' such. I's
'longs ter de Missionary Baptist chuch but I don't git ter go very
off'n.

I wuz tole 'fore freedum dat de slaves would git a mule, land en a new
suit, but our missis didn't gib us a thing. She promis' me, mah
br'rer, en three sistahs ef'n we would stay wid her a ye'r, en he'p
her mek a crop she would gib us sump'in ter start us a crop on w'en we
lef' her.

Mah daddy's marster wus named Bob Rankin, he gib mah daddy a hog, sum
chickens, let him hab a cow ter milk en land ter raise a crop on. He
wan'ed mah daddy ter git us tergedder ter he'p daddy raise a crop but
since mah missis had promised us so much, daddy let us stay wid her a
ye'r. On de nite mah daddy kum fer us, mah missis sezs I've not got
nuthin ter gib you, fer I won't hab nobody ter do nuthin fer me. We
went wid our daddy. We lived dere on Marster Rankin's farm fer ye'rs
in fact so long we tho't de place 'longed ter mah daddy. We had a
house wid big cracks in hit, had a big fier place, a big pot dat hong
on de fier en a skillet dat we cooked corn bread in. Had a hill ob
taters under de house, would raise up a plank, rake down in de dirt
git taters, put dem in de fier ter roast. We had meat ter eat in de
middle ob de day but none at mawnin' er nite. We got one pair ob shoes
a ye'r, dey had brass on de toes. I uster git out en shine de toes ob
mine, we called hit gol' on our shoes. We wuked in de fiel' wid mah
daddy, en I know how ter do eberting dere ez ter do in a fiel' 'cept
plow, I wuz allus ter slender ter hold a plow. We had grease lamps. A
thing lak a goose neck wid platted rag wick in hit. Would put grease
in hit.

Durin' slavery ef one marster had a big boy en 'nuther had a big gal
da marsters made dem libe tergedder. Ef'n de 'oman didn't hab any
chilluns, she wuz put on de block en sold en 'nuther 'oman bought. You
see dey raised de chilluns ter mek money on jes lak we raise pigs ter
sell.

Mah mammy tole me 'bout de sta'rs fallin' en den I se'ed de second
fallin' ob sta'rs. Dey didn't hit de groun' lak de fust did. I member
de comet hit had a long tail. I lef' mah daddy en kum ter Nashville
wid missis Nellie Rankin, (daddy's young missus) in 1882; hab bin 'yer
eber since. I'se dun house wuk fer a lot ob peeples. Kep house fer a
'oman in Belle Meade fer 14 ye'rs. Now I'se aint able ter do nothin.
I'se bin ma'ried twice. Ma'ried Jimm Ferguson, libed wid 'im 20 ye'ars
he d'ed. Two ye'ars later I mar'ed George Watkins, lived wid him 8
ye'ars; two ye'ars ago he died. I'se neber had any chilluns. I kep
wan'in ter 'dopt a lettle gal, de fust husban' wouldn't do hit. 'Bout
5-1/2 ye'ars ago de second husban' George kum in wid a tiny baby, sezs
'yer ez a boy baby I 'dopted. I sezs dat ez you own baby cose hits jes
like yer. He denied hit, but eben now de boy ez e'zackly lak George.
He's six ye'rs ole en gwine ter school. I'se got mah hands full tryin'
ter raise 'im 'lone. W'en George died he had a small inshorance
policy. I paid mah taxes, I owns dis home, en bought mahself three
hogs. I sold two en kilt one. Den I got three mor' jes' a short time
ago. Sum kind ob zeeze got among dem en dey all d'ed.

Yas I'se voted four er five times, but neber had any frens in office.
I don' think dis white-black mar'iage should be 'lowed. Dey should be
whupped wid a bull whup.

As far as I know de ex-slaves hab wuked at diff'ent kins ob jobs en
now sum I know ez in de po-house, sum git' in relief order en urthers
ez lak mahself, hab dere homes en gettin' 'long bes' dey kin. I needs
milk en cod liver oil fer dis lettle boy but can't buy it.

I dunno nothin' 'bout slave uprisin's. De songs I member ez:

"All Gawds Chilluns up Yonder."
"I want ter Shout Salvation."
"Down by de River Side."




INTERVIEW
NARCISSUS YOUNG
Rear 532 1st Street No.
Nashville, Tennessee


"I'se 96 y'ars ole. Bawn in slavery en mah marster wuz Isham Lamb en
mah missis wuz Martha Lamb. Mah mammy d'ed w'en I wuz three y'ars ole
en I wuz raised in de house 'til I wuz big 'nuff ter wuk out in de
fiels wid de uthers. Mah missis l'arn me ter sew, weav en spin. I also
he'lped ter cook en wuk in de house. Atter I got big'er I went ter
chuch wid mah white folks en had ter set wid urther slaves in dat part
ob de chuch whar nobody but slaves would be 'lowed. In slavery I'se
git no money fer wuk'n but I don' steal as mah white folks sho gib me
en de uther slaves plenty good things ter eat. Clothes good 'nuff fer
anybody, candy, en we went ter parties en urther places, en w'at else
could I'se wan'?"

"Mah missis l'arned me ter pray, "Now I lay me down ter sleep. I pray
de Lawd mah soul ter keep, but if I should die 'fore I wake, I pray de
Lawd mah soul ter tek." I jined de Primitive Baptist Chuch w'ile young
en b'en dere ebe'y since."

"I member de ole song back dere, "Rock a Bye Baby, Yo Daddy's gon' a
Huntin' ter git a Rabbit Skin ter put de Baby in."

"I wuz whup'd by mah missis fer things dat I ought'n dun, but dat wuz
rite. De hahdest whup'in she eber gib me wuz 'bout two hen aigs. I had
gathured de aigs in a bucket en tuk dem ter de house en I se'd de big
fier in de fier-place so I tuk out two ob de aigs en put dem in de hot
ashes ter bake. Mah missis se'd de aigs en axed who put dem dere. I
tole her I didunt do hit, but she knowed I did. So she tole me she
don' keer 'bout de two aigs, but dat she wuz gwine ter whup me fer
tellin' a lie. Dey don't raise chilluns lak dat now."

"I don't b'leeve in Niggers en whites ma'rin' en I wuz raised by de
"quality" en I'se b'leeves eber one should ma'rie in dere culor."

"I think de young peeples ob ter day ez dogs en sluts, en yer kin
guess de rest."

"One day 'bout 12 o'clock we se'd de Yankee soldiers pas' our house.
De missus hid her fine things, but dey don' kum on de place. All us
Niggers run ter de cellar en hid. We found de sugah barrels en we
scracht 'round fer sum sugah ter eat."

"One time de Ku Klux Klan kum ter our house but dey harm nobody. Guess
day wuz lookin' fer sum slave er sum one fum 'nother plantation widout
dere marster's pass."

"I se'd a lot ob sta'rs fall one time but dey neber teched de groun'.
En I members seein' a comet wid a long bright shinin' tail."

"Atter freedom all de slaves lef' de plantation but I stayed dere a
long time. I kum ter Nashville ovah thurty y'ars ago en I'se wuk'd as
cook en house wuk'r twenty y'ars fer one party; eleben y'ars fer
'nother, en menny y'ars fer 'nother. I knows you won't b'leeve me but
at one time I weigh ovuh 400 pounds, but now I'm nothin' but skin en
bon'. (She weighs at least 200 pounds now). I bekum feeble en couldn't
wuk out, en eber since den I'se bin kum' up a mountain, but now I git
he'ps by de Social Security."


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Corrected the typos per handwritten instructions. The inconsistencies
in spelling and punctuation have been left as in the original text,
except for adding the missing opening and closing quotation marks for
consistency in certain interviews.

One word at the bottom of page 25 was illegible, but upon careful
examination at high magnification, and considering that the other
interviewers asked whether families were divided, my best guess is
the word may be men: Nebber knowed ob any plantashuns men be divided.









        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SLAVE NARRATIVES: A FOLK HISTORY OF SLAVERY IN THE UNITED STATES FROM INTERVIEWS WITH FORMER SLAVES, VOLUME XV, TENNESSEE NARRATIVES ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

