


Transcribed from the 1831 edition by David Price, email ccx074@pglaf.org





                          THE GIPSIES' ADVOCATE;
                                   OR,
                               OBSERVATIONS
                                  ON THE
                  ORIGIN, CHARACTER, MANNERS, AND HABITS
                                    OF
                           The English Gipsies:


                           TO WHICH ARE ADDED,
                       MANY INTERESTING ANECDOTES,
                                  ON THE
              SUCCESS THAT HAS ATTENDED THE PLANS OF SEVERAL
                  BENEVOLENT INDIVIDUALS, WHO ANXIOUSLY
                     DESIRE THEIR CONVERSION TO GOD.

                             BY JAMES CRABB,

                    AUTHOR OF "THE PENITENT MAGDALEN."

     "The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which is lost."
           "Let that mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus."

                                 LONDON:

    SEELEY, FLEET STREET; WESTLEY AND DAVIS, AVE-MARIA-LANE; HATCHARD,
   PICCADILLY; LINDSAY AND CO., SOUTH STREET, ANDREW STREET, EDINBURGH;
         COLLINS, GLASGOW; WAKEMAN, DUBLIN, WILSON AND SON, YORK.

                                  1831.

                  BAKER AND SON, PRINTERS, SOUTHAMPTON.

                                    TO
                         THE JUDGES, MAGISTRATES,
                                   AND
                           Ministers of Christ,
                                  AS THE
              ORGANS OF PUBLIC JUSTICE, AND REVEALED TRUTH,
                          THE GIPSIES' ADVOCATE
                                 IS MOST
                   RESPECTFULLY AND SINCERELY DEDICATED
                                    BY
                               THE AUTHOR.




PREFACE.


The Author of the following pages has been urged by numerous friends, and
more particularly by his own conscience, to present to the Christian
Public a brief account of the people called Gipsies, now wandering in
Britain.  This, to many readers, may appear inexpedient; as Grellman and
Hoyland have written largely on this neglected part of the human family.
But it should be recollected, that there are thousands of respectable and
intelligent christians, who never have read, and never may read either of
the above authors.  The writer of the present work is partly indebted for
the sympathies he feels, and which he wishes to awaken in others toward
these miserable wanderers, to various authors who have written on them,
but more particularly to Grellman and Hoyland, who, in addition to the
facts which came under their own immediate notice, have published the
observations of travellers and others interested in the history of this
people.  A list of these authors may be seen in the Appendix.

But his knowledge of this people does not entirely depend on the
testimony of others, having had the opportunity of closely examining for
himself their habits and character in familiar visits to their tents, and
by allowing his door to be free of access to all those encamped near
Southampton, when they have needed his help and advice.  Thus has he
gained a general knowledge of their vicious habits, their comparative
virtues, and their unhappy modes of life, which he hopes the following
pages will fully prove, and be the means of placing their character in
the light of truth, and of correcting various mistakes respecting them,
which have given rise to many unjust and injurious prejudices against
them.

The Author could have enlarged the present work very considerably, had he
detailed all the facts with which he is well acquainted.

His object, however, was to furnish a work which should be concise and
cheap, that he might be the means of exciting among his countrymen an
energetic benevolence toward this despised people; for it cannot be
denied that many thousands of them have never given the condition of the
Gipsies a single thought.

Such a work is now presented to the public.  Whether the author has
succeeded, will be best known to those persons who have the most correct
and extensive information relative to the unhappy race in question.
Should he be the honoured instrument of exciting in any breasts the same
feelings of pity, mercy, love and zeal for these poor English heathens,
as is felt and carried into useful plans for the heathens abroad, by
christians of all denominations; he will then be certain that, by the
blessing of the Redeemer, the confidence of the Gipsies will be gained,
and, that they will be led to that Saviour, who has said, _Whosoever
cometh unto me_, _I will in no wise cast him out_.




CHAP. I.  On the Origin of the Gipsies.


Of the Origin of these wanderers of the human race, the learned are not
agreed; for we have no authentic records of their first emigrations.
Some suppose them to be the descendants of Israel, and many others, that
they are of Egyptian origin.  But the evidence adduced in confirmation of
these opinions appears very inconclusive.  We cannot discover more than
fifty Hebrew words in the language they speak, and they have not a
ceremony peculiar to the Hebrew nation.  They have not a word of Coptic,
and but few of Persian derivation.  And they are deemed as strangers in
Egypt at the present time.  They are now found in many countries of
Europe, Asia, and Africa, in all of which they speak a language _peculiar
to themselves_.  On the continent of America alone are there none of them
found.  Grellman informs us that there were great numbers in Lorraine,
and that they dwelt in its forests, before the French Revolution of 1790.
He supposes that there are no less than 700,000 in the world, and that
the greatest numbers are found in Europe.  Throughout the countries they
inhabit, they have kept themselves a distinct race of people in every
possible way.

They never visit the Norman Isles; and it is said by the natives of
Ireland, that their numbers are small in that country.  Hoyland informs
us, that many counties in Scotland are free of them, while they wander
about in other districts of that country, as in England.  He has also
informed us, sec. 6, of a colony which resides during the winter months
at Kirk Yetholm in the county of Roxburgh. {10}

Sir Thomas Brown, in his work entitled "VULGAR ERRORS," says, that they
were seen first in Germany, in the year 1409.  In 1418, they were found
in Switzerland; and in 1422, in Italy.  They appeared in France, on the
17th August, 1427.  It is remarkable that, when they first came into
Europe, they were black, and that the women were still blacker than the
men.  From Grellman we learn, that "in Hungary, there are 50,000; in
Spain, 60,000; and that they are innumerable in Constantinople."

It appears from the statute of the 22nd of Henry VIII, made against this
people, that they must at that time have been in England some years, and
must have increased much in number, and in crime.  In the 27th of that
reign, a law was made against the importation of such persons, subjecting
the importer to 40_l_ penalty.  In that reign also they were considered
so dangerous to the morals and comfort of the country, that many of them
were sent back to Calais.  Yet in the reign of Elizabeth, they were
estimated at 10,000. {11a}

Dr Walsh says, that the Gipsies in Turkey, like the Jews, are
distinguishable by indelible personal marks, dark eyes, brown complexion,
and black hair; and by unalterable moral qualities, an aversion to
labour, and a propensity to petty thefts. {11b}

The celebrated traveller, Dr Daniel Clarke, speaks of great numbers of
Gipsies in Persia, who are much encouraged by the Tartars.  Formerly, and
particularly on the Continent, they had their counts, lords, and dukes;
but these were titles without either power or riches.

The English Gipsies were formerly accustomed to denominate an aged man
and woman among them, as their king and queen; but this is a political
distinction which has not been recognized by them for many years.

If we suppose the Gipsies to have been heathens before they came into
this country, their separation from pagan degradation and cruelty, has
been attended with many advantages to themselves.  They have seen neither
the superstitions of idolatry, nor the unnatural cruelties of heathenism.
They are not destitute of those sympathies and attachments which would
adorn the most polished circles.  In demonstration of this, we have only
to make ourselves acquainted with the fervour and tenderness of their
conjugal, parental, and filial sensibilities,--and the great care they
take of all who are aged, infirm, and blind, among them.  Were these
highly interesting qualities sanctified by pure religion, they would
exhibit much of the beauty and loveliness of the christian character.  I
am aware that an opinion is general, that they are cruel to their
children; but it may be questioned if ebullitions of passion are more
frequent among them, in reference to their children, than among other
classes of society; and when these ebullitions, which are not lasting,
are over--their conduct toward their children is most affectionate.  The
attachment of Gipsy children to their parents is equally vivid and
admirable; it grows with their years, and strengthens even as their
connections increase. {12}  And indeed the affection that sisters and
brothers have one for the other is very great.  A short time since, the
little sister of a Gipsy youth seventeen years of age, was taken ill with
a fever, when his mind became exceedingly distressed, and he gave way to
excessive grief and weeping.

Those who suppose these wanderers of mankind to be of Hindostanee or
Suder origin, have much the best proof on their side.  A real Gipsy has a
countenance, eye, mouth, hands, ancle, and quickness of manners, strongly
indicative of Hindoo origin.  This is more particularly the case with the
females.  Nor is the above mere assertion.  The testimony of the most
intelligent travellers, many of whom have long resided in India, fully
supports this opinion.  And, indeed, persons who have not travelled on
the Asiatic Continent, but who have seen natives of Hindostan, have been
surprised at the similarity of manners and features existing between them
and the Gipsies.  The Author of this work once met with a Hindoo woman,
and was astonished at the great resemblance she bore in countenance and
manners to the female Gipsy of his own country.

The Hindoo Suder delights in horses, tinkering, music, and fortune
telling; so does the Gipsy.  The Suder tribes of the same part of the
Asiatic Continent, are wanderers, dwelling chiefly in wretched mud-huts.
When they remove from one place to another, they carry with them their
scanty property.  The English Gipsies imitate these erratic tribes in
this particular.  They wander from place to place, and carry their small
tents with them, which consist of a few bent sticks, and a blanket. {14}
The Suders in the East eat the flesh of nearly every unclean creature;
nor are they careful that the flesh of such creatures should not be
putrid.  How exactly do the Gipsies imitate them in this abhorrent choice
of food!  They have been in the habit of eating many kinds of brutes, not
even excepting dogs and cats; and when pressed by hunger, have sought
after the most putrid carrion.  It has been a common saying among
them--_that which God kills_, _is better than that killed by man_.  But
of late years, with a few exceptions, they have much improved in this
respect; for they now eat neither dogs nor cats, and but seldom seek
after carrion.  But in winter they will dress and eat snails, hedge-hogs,
and other creatures not generally dressed for food.

But the strongest evidence of their Hindoo origin is the great
resemblance their own language bears to the Hindostanee.  The following
Vocabulary is taken from Grellman, Hoyland, and Captain Richardson.  The
first of these respectable authors declares, that twelve out of thirty
words of the Gipsies' language, are either purely Hindostanee, or nearly
related to it.

The following list of words are among those which bear the greatest
resemblance to that language.

_Gipsy_.                _Hindostanee_.          _English_.
Ick, Ek,                Ek,                     One.
Duj, Doj,               Du,                     Two.
Trin, Tri,              Tin,                    Three.
Schtar, Star,           Tschar,                 Four.
Pantsch, Pansch,        Pansch,                 Five.
Tschowe, Sshow,         Tscho,                  Six.
Efta,                   Hefta, Sat,             Seven.
Ochto,                  Aute,                   Eight.
Desch, Des,             Des,                    Ten.
Bisch, Bis,             Bis                     Twenty.
Diwes,                  Diw,                    Day.
Ratti,                  Ratch,                  Night.
Cham, Cam,              Tschanct                The sun.
Panj,                   Panj,                   Water.
Sonnikey,               Suna,                   Gold.
Rup,                    Ruppa,                  Silver.
Bal,                    Bal,                    The hair.
Aok,                    Awk,                    The eye.
Kan,                    Kawn,                   The ear.
Mui,                    Mu,                     The mouth.
Dant,                   Dant,                   A tooth.
Sunjo,                  Sunnj,                  The hearing.
Sunj,                   Sunkh,                  The smell.
Sik,                    Tschik,                 The taste.
Tschater,               Tschater,               A tent.
Rajah,                  Raja,                   The prince.
Baro,                   Bura,                   Great.
Kalo,                   Kala,                   Black.
Grea,                   Gorra,                  Horse.
Ker,                    Gurr,                   House.
Pawnee,                 Paniee,                 Brook, drink, water.
Bebee,                  Beebe,                  Aunt.
Bouropanee,             Bura-panee,             Ocean, wave.
Rattie,                 Rat,                    Dark night,
Dad,                    Dada,                   Father.
Mutchee,                Muchee,                 Fish.

This language, called by themselves Slang, or Gibberish, invented, as
they think, by their forefathers for secret purposes, is not merely the
language of _one_, or a _few _of these wandering tribes, which are found
in the European Nations; but is adopted by the vast numbers who inhabit
the earth.

One of our reformed Gipsies, while in the army, was with his regiment at
Portsmouth, and being on garrison duty with an invalid soldier, he was
surprised to hear some words of the Gipsy language unintentionally
uttered by him, who was a German.  On enquiring how he understood this
language, the German replied, that he was of Gipsy origin, and that it
was spoken by this race in every part of his native land, for purposes of
secrecy. {16}

A well known nobleman, who had resided many years in India, taking
shelter under a tree during a storm in this country, near a camp of
Gipsies, was astonished to hear them use several words he well knew were
Hindostanee; and going up to them, he found them able to converse with
him in that language.

Not long ago, a Missionary from India, who was well acquainted with the
language of Hindostan, was at the Author's house when a Gipsy was
present; and, after a conversation which he had with her, he declared,
that, her people must once have known the Hindostanee language _well_.
Indeed Gipsies have often expressed surprise when words have been read to
them out of the Hindostanee vocabulary.

Lord Teignmouth once said to a young Gipsy woman in Hindostanee, _Tue
burra tschur_, that is, _Thou a great thief_.  She immediately replied;
No--_I am not a thief_--_I live by fortune telling_.

It can be no matter of surprise that this language, as spoken among this
people, is generally corrupted, when we consider, that, for many
centuries, they have known nothing of elementary science, and have been
strangers to books and letters.  Perhaps the secrecy necessary to effect
many of their designs, has been the greatest means of preserving its
scanty remains among them.  But an attempt to prove that they are _not_
of Hindoo origin, because they do not speak the Hindostanee with perfect
correctness, would be as absurd as to declare, that, our Gipsies are not
natives of England, because they speak very incorrect English.  The few
words that follow, and which occurred in some conversations the Author
had with the most intelligent of the Gipsies he has met, prove how
incorrectly they speak _our_ language; and yet it would be worse than
folly to attempt to prove that they are not natives of England.

Expencival _for_ expensive.

Cide _for_ decide.

Device _for_ advice.

Dixen _for_ dictionary. {18}

Ealfully _for_ equally.

Indistructed _for_ instructed.

Gemmem _for_ gentleman.

Dauntment _for_ daunted.

Spiteliness _for_ spitefulness.

Hawcus Paccus _for_ Habeas Corpus.

Increach _for_ increase.

Commist _for_ submit.

Brand, in his observations on POPULAR ANTIQUITIES, is of opinion that the
first Gipsies fled from Asia, when the cruel Timur Beg ravaged India,
with a view to proselyte the heathen to the Mohammedan religion; at which
time about 500,000 human beings were butchered by him.  Some suppose,
that, soon after this time, many who escaped the sword of this human
fury, came into Europe through Egypt; and on this account were called, in
English, GIPSIES.

Although there is not the least reason whatever to suppose the Gipsies to
have had an Egyptian origin, and although, as we have asserted in a
former page, they are strangers in that land of wonders to the present
day; yet it appears possible to me, that Egypt may have had something to
do with their present appellation.  And allowing that the supposition is
well founded, which ascribes to them a passage through Egypt into
European nations, it is very likely they found their way to that place
under the following circumstances.

In the years 1408 and 1409, Timur Beg ravaged India, to make, as has
already been observed, proselytes to the Mohammedan delusion, when he put
hundreds of thousands of its inhabitants to the sword.  It is very
rational to suppose, that numbers of those who had the happiness not to
be overtaken by an army so dreadful, on account of the cruelties it
perpetrated, should save their lives by flying from their native land, to
become wandering strangers in another.  Now if we assert that the Gipsies
were of the Suder cast of Asiatic Indians, and that they found their way
from Hindostan into other and remote countries when Timur Beg spread
around him terrors so dreadful, it is natural to ask, why did not some of
the other casts of India accompany them?  This objection has no weight at
all when we consider the hatred and contempt poured upon the Suder by all
the other casts of India.  The Bramins, Tschechteries, and Beis, were as
safe, though menaced with destruction by Timur Beg, as they would have
been along with the Suder tribes, seeking a retreat from their enemy in
lands where he would not be likely to follow them.  Besides, the other
casts, from time immemorial, have looked on their country as especially
given them of God; and they would as soon have suffered death, as leave
it.  The Suders had not these prepossessions for their native soil.  They
were a degraded people--a people looked on as the lowest of the human
race; and, with an army seeking their destruction, they had every motive
to leave, and none to stay in Hindostan.

It cannot be determined by what track the forefathers of the Gipsies
found their way from Hindostan to the countries of Europe.  But it may be
presumed that they passed over the southern Persian deserts of Sigiston,
Makran and Kirman, along the Persian Gulph to the mouth of the Euphrates,
thence to Bassora into the deserts of Arabia, and thence into Egypt by
the Isthmus of Suez.

It is a fact not unworthy a place in these remarks on the origin of this
people, that they do not like to be called Gipsies, unless by those
persons whom they have reason to consider their real friends.  This
probably arises from two causes of great distress to them--_Gipsies are
suspected and hated as the perpetrators of all crime_--_and they are
almost universally prosecuted as vagrants_.  Is it to be wondered at,
that to strangers, they do not like to acknowledge themselves as Gipsies?
I think not.

We will conclude our remarks on the origin of these erratic sons of Adam,
by adding the testimony of Col. Herriot, read before the Royal Asiatic
Society, Sir George Staunton in the chair.  That gentleman, giving an
account of the Zingaree of India, says, that this class of people are
frequently met with in that part of Hindostan which is watered by the
Ganges, as well as the Malwa, Guzerat, and the Decan: they are called
Nath, or Benia; the first term signifying a _rogue_--and the second a
_dancer_, or _tumbler_.  And the same gentleman cites various authorities
in demonstration of the resemblance between these Gipsies and their
neglected brethren in Europe.  Nor does he think that the English Gipsies
are so degraded as is generally supposed; in support of which he mentions
some instances of good feeling displayed by them under his own
observation, while in Hampshire.




CHAP. II.  Observations on the Character, Manners, and Habits of the
English Gipsies.


The origin of this people is by no means of so much importance as the
knowledge of their present character, manners and habits, with the view
to the devising of proper plans for the improvement of their condition,
and their conversion to christianity: for to any one who desires to love
his neigbour as himself, their origin will be but a secondary
consideration.

Fifty years ago the Gipsies had their regular journeys, and often
remained one or two months in a place, when they worked at their trades.
And as access to different towns was more difficult than at the present
day, partly from the badness of the roads and partly from the paucity of
carriers, they were considered by the peasantry, and by small farmers, of
whom there were great numbers in those days, as very useful branches of
the human family; I mean the industrious and better part of them.  At
that period they usually encamped in the farmers' fields, or slept in
their barns; and not being subject to the _driving system_, as they now
are, they seldom robbed hedges; for their fires were replenished with
dead-wood procured, without any risk of fines or imprisonments, from
decayed trees and wooded banks.  And it is proper to suppose, that, at
such a time, their outrages and depredations were very few.

It has already been stated that the Gipsies are very numerous, amounting
to about 700,000.  It is supposed that there are about 18,000 in this
kingdom.  But be they less or more, we ought never to forget--that they
are branches of the same family with ourselves--that they are capable of
being fitted for all the duties and enjoyments of life--and, what is
better than all, that they are redeemed by the same Saviour, may partake
of the same salvation, and be prepared for the same state of immortal
bliss, from whence flows to the universal church of Christ, that peace
which the world cannot take from her.  Their condition, therefore, at
once commands our sympathies, energies, prayers, and benevolence.

Gipsies in general are of a tawny or brown colour; but this is not wholly
hereditary.  The chief cause is probably the lowness of their habits; for
they very seldom wash their persons, or the clothes they wear, their
linen excepted.  Their alternate exposures to cold and heat, and the
smoke surrounding their small camps, perpetually tend to increase those
characteristics of complexion and feature by which they are at present
distinguishable.

It is not often that a Gipsy is seen well-dressed, even when they possess
costly apparel; but their women are fond of finery.  They are much
delighted with broad lace, large ear-drops, a variety of rings, and
glaring colours; and, when they possess the means, shew how great a share
they have of that foolish vanity, which is said to be inherent in
females, and which leads many, destitute of the faith, and hope, and
love, and humility of the gospel, into utter ruin.

A remarkable instance of the love of costly attire in a female Gipsy, is
well known to the writer.  The woman alluded to, obtained _a very large
sum of money_ from three maiden ladies, pledging that it should be
doubled by her art in conjuration.  She then decamped to another
district, where she bought a blood-horse, a black beaver hat, a new
side-saddle and bridle, a silver-mounted whip, and figured away in her
ill-obtained finery at the fairs.  It is not easy to imagine the
disappointment and resentment of the covetous and credulous ladies, whom
she had so easily duped.

Nor indeed are the males of this people less addicted to the love of gay
clothing, if it suited their interests to exhibit it.  An orphan, only
ten years of age, taken from actual starvation last winter, and who was
fed and clothed, and had every care taken of him, would not remain with
those who wished him well, and who had been his friends; but returned to
the camp from which he had been taken, saying, that he _would be a
Gipsy_, _and would wear silver buttons on his coat_, _and have topped
boots_; and when asked how he would get them, he replied--_by catching
rats_.

Some Gipsies try to excel others in the possession of silver buttons.
They will sometimes give as much as fifteen pounds for a set.  The
females too spend many pounds on weighty gold rings for their fingers.
The Author has by him, belonging to a Gipsy, three massy rings soldered
together, and with a half sovereign on the top, which serves instead of a
brilliant stone.  We pity a vain Gipsy whose eyes are taken, and whose
heart delights in such vulgar pomp.  Are not those equally pitiable, who
estimate themselves only by the gaiety, singularity, or costliness of
their apparel?  The Saviour has given us a rule by which we may judge
persons in reference to their dress, as well as in other ostensibilities
of character--_by their fruits ye shall know them_.

The Gipsies are not strangers to pawn-brokers shops; but they do not
visit these places for the same purposes as the vitiated poor of our
trading towns.  A pawnshop is their bank.  When they acquire property
illegally, as by stealing, swindling, or fortune-telling, they purchase
valuable plate, and sometimes in the same hour pledge it for safety.
Such property they have in store against days of adversity and trouble,
which on account of their dishonest habits, often overtake them.  Should
one of their families stand before a Judge of his country, charged with a
crime which is likely to cost him his life, or to transport him, every
article of value is sacrificed to save him from death, or apprehended
banishment.  In such cases they generally retain a Counsellor to plead
for the brother in adversity.

At other times they carry their plate about with them, and when visited
by friends, they bring out from dirty bags, a silver tea-pot, and a
cream-jug and spoons of the same metal.  Their plate is by no means
paltry.  Of course considerable property in plate is not very generally
possessed by them.

The Gipsies of this country are very punctual in paying their debts.  All
the Shop-keepers, with whom they deal in these parts, have declared, that
they are some of their best and most honest customers.  For the payment
of a debt which is owing to one of their own people, the time and place
are appointed by them, and should the debtor disappoint the creditor, he
is liable by their law of honour to pay double the amount he owes; and he
must pay it by personal servitude, if he cannot with money, if he wish to
be considered by his friends honest and respectable.  They call this law
_pizharris_.

There are few of these unhappy people that can either read or write.  Yet
a regular and frequent correspondence is kept up between the members of
families who have had the least advantage of the sort; and those who have
had no advantages whatever, correspond through the kindness of friends
who write for them.  Numerous are the letters which they receive from
their relatives in New South Wales, to which Colony so many hundreds of
this unsettled race have been transported.  Their letters are usually
left at one particular post-office, in the districts where they travel;
and should such letters not be called for during a long period, they are
usually kept by the post-master, who is sure they will be claimed, sooner
or later.  A long journey will be no impediment, when a letter is
expected; for a Gipsy will travel any distance to obtain an expected
favour of the kind.  They are never heard to complain of the heavy
expense of postage.

We have already observed that there are many genuine features of humanity
in the character of this degraded and despised people.  Their constantly
retaining an affectionate remembrance of their deceased relatives,
affords a striking proof of this statement.  And their attachment to the
horse, donkey, rings, snuffbox, silver-spoons, and all things, except the
clothes, of the deceased relatives, is very strong.  With such articles
they will never part, except in the greatest distress; and then they only
pledge some of them, which are redeemed as soon as they possess the
means.

Most families visit the graves of their near relatives, once in the year;
generally about the time of Christmas.  Then the depository of the dead
becomes a rallying spot for the living; for there they renew their
attachments and sympathies, and give and receive assurances of continued
good will.  At such periods however they are too often addicted to
feasting and intemperance.

The graves of the deceased of this people, are usually kept in very good
order in the various Church yards where they lie interred.  This is done
by the Sextons, for which they are annually remunerated.  Sometimes large
sums of money are expended on the erection of head-stones; and in one
instance a monument was erected in the County of Wilts at considerable
cost.  It is not very long since, that the parents of a deceased Gipsy
child, whom they loved very much, paid a great sum to have it buried in
the Church.

The Gipsies have a singular custom of burning all the clothes belonging
to any one among them deceased, with the straw, litter, &c, of his tent.
Whether this be from fear of infection, or from superstition, the Author
has not been able to learn.  Perhaps both unite in the continuation of a
custom which must be attended with some loss to them. {28}

Seldom do these mysterious sons and daughters of Adam unite themselves in
the holy obligations of marriage, after the form of the Established
Church of our land.  Nor, indeed, for so sacred a union, have they _any
ceremony at all_.  The parents on each side are consulted on such
occasions, and if their consent be obtained, the parties become, after
their custom, _husband and wife_.  Should the parents object, like the
thoughtless and imprudent persons in higher life, who flee to Gretna
Green, the Gipsy lovers also escape from their parents to another
district.  When the couple are again met by the friends of the female,
they take her from her protector; but if it appear that he has treated
her kindly, and is likely to continue to do so, they restore her to him,
and all objections and animosities are forgotten.

As it seldom happens that they now stay more than a few days in one
place, the Gipsy, his wife, and each of their children, may severally
belong to different parishes.  This is an objection to their ultimate
settlement in any one place.  It will be some time before this objection
can be removed: not till the present generation of Gipsies has passed
away, and their posterity cease to make the wilderness their homes,
choosing a parish for a permanent place of settlement.

It may naturally be expected that these inhabitants of the field and
forest, the lane and the moor, are not without a knowledge of the
medicinal qualities of certain herbs.  In all slight disorders they have
recourse to these remedies, and frequently use the inner bark of the elm,
star-in-the-earth, parsley, pellitory-in-the-wall, and wormwood.  They
are not subject to the numerous disorders and fevers common in large
towns; but in some instances they are visited with that dreadful scourge
of the British nation, the Typhus fever, which spreads through their
little camp, and becomes fatal to some of its families.  The small-pox
and measles are disorders they very much dread; but they are not more
disposed to rheumatic affections than those who live in houses.  It is a
fact, however, that ought not to be passed over here, that when they
leave their tents to settle in towns, they are generally ill for a time.
The children of one family that wintered with us in 1831, were nearly all
attacked with fever that threatened their lives.  This may be occasioned
by their taking all at once to regular habits, and the renunciation of
that exercise to which they have been so long accustomed, with some
disposing qualities in their change of diet and the atmosphere of a
thickly populated town.

This people often live to a considerable age, many instances of which are
well known.  In his tent at Launton, Oxfordshire, died in the year 1830,
more than a hundred years of age, James Smith, called by some, the King
of the Gipsies.  By his tribe he was looked up to with the greatest
respect and veneration.  His remains were followed to the grave by his
widow, who is herself more than a hundred years old, and by many of his
children, grand-children, great grand-children, and other relatives; and
by several individuals of other tribes.  At the funeral his widow tore
her hair, uttered the most frantic exclamations, and begged to be allowed
to throw herself on the coffin, that she might be buried with her
husband.  The religion of the Redeemer would have taught her to say, _The
Lord gave_, _and the Lord hath taken away_; _blessed be the name of the
Lord_.

A woman of the name of B--- lived to the reputed age of a hundred and
twenty years, and up to that age was accustomed to sing her song very
gaily.  Many events in the life of this woman were very remarkable.  In
her youth she was a noted swindler.  At one time she got a large sum of
money, and other valuable effects, from a lady; for which and other
offences, she was condemned to die.  A petition was presented to George
the Third, to use the Gipsy's own expression, who told the author, _just
after he had set __up business_, that is, begun to reign, and he attended
to its prayer.  The sentence was reversed, and her life was consequently
spared.  But, poor woman, she repented not of her sins; for she taught
her daughter to commit the same crimes for which she had been condemned;
so that her delivery from condemnation led to no salutary reformation.

The mutual attachment which subsists between the nominal husband and
wife, is so truly sincere, that instances of infidelity, on either side,
occur but seldom.  They are known strictly to avoid all conversation of
an unchaste kind in their camps, except among the most degraded of them;
and instances of young females having children, before they pledge
themselves to those they love, are rare.  This purity of morals, among a
people living as they do, speaks much in their favour.

The anxiety of a Gipsy parent to preserve the purity of the morals of a
daughter, is strongly portrayed in the following fact.  The author wished
to engage as a servant the daughter of a Gipsy who was desirous of
quitting her vagrant life; but her mother strongly objected for some
time; and when pressed for the reason of such objection, she named the
danger she would be in a town, far from a mother's eye.  It would be well
if all others felt for their children as did this unlettered Gipsy.
After having promised that the morals of the child should be watched
over, she was confided to his care.  And the author has known a Gipsy
parent correct with stripes a grown daughter, for mentioning what a
profligate person had talked about.

The following is an instance of conjugal attachment.  A poor woman, whose
eldest child is now under the care of the Society for the improvement of
the Gipsies, being near her confinement, came into the neighbourhood of
Southampton, to be with her friends, who are reformed, during the time.
This not taking place so soon as she expected, and having promised to
meet her husband at a distance on a certain day, he not daring to shew
himself in Hampshire, she determined on going to him; and having mounted
her donkey, set off with her little family.  She had a distance of nearly
fifty miles to travel, and happily reached the desired spot, where she
met her husband before her confinement took place.  The good people at
Warminster, near which place she was, afforded her kind and needful
assistance; and one well-disposed lady became God-mother to the babe, who
was a fine little girl; the grateful mother pledging that, at a proper
age, she should be given up to Christians to be educated.

Before this woman left Southampton, referring to many kind attentions
shewn her by the charitable of that place, she was heard to say,
_Well_--_I did not think any one would take such trouble for me_!

Professing to be church people whenever they speak of religion, the
Gipsies generally have their children baptized at the church near which
they are born, partly because they think it right, and partly, perhaps
chiefly, to secure the knowledge of the parish to which the child
belongs; for every illegitimate child is parishioner in the parish in
which it happens to be born.  They will sometimes apply to the parish
officers for something toward the support of a child, which they call
_settling the baby_.

The sponsors at baptism are generally branches of the same family, and
they speak of their God-children with pleasure, who in return manifest a
high feeling of respect for them, and superstitiously ask their blessing
on old Christmas-days, when in company with them.  It is worthy of remark
that all the better sort of Gipsies teach their children the LORD'S
PRAYER.

The anxiety evidenced by some parish officers to prevent these families
from settling in their districts, has occasionally led the Gipsies to act
unjustifiably by menacing them with the settlement of a number of their
families; but this, from their perpetual wandering, need never be feared.
Happy would it be for the Gipsies as a people, if these civil officers
did encourage them to stay longer in their neighbourhood; for they then
might be induced to commence and persevere in honest, industrious and
regular habits.  Not long ago thirty-five Gipsies came to a parish in
Hampshire, to which they belonged, and demanded of the overseers ten
pounds, declaring that, if that sum were not given them, they would
remain there.  Seven pounds were advanced, and they soon left the place.




CHAP. III.  The Character, Manners and Habits of the English Gipsies,
continued.


From the mode of living among the Gipsies, the parents are often
necessitated to leave their tents in the morning, and seldom return to
them before night.  Their children are then left in or about their
solitary camps, having many times no adult with them; the elder children
then have the care of the younger.  Those who are old enough gather wood
for fuel; nor is stealing it thought a crime.  By the culpable neglect of
the parents in this respect, the children are often exposed to accidents
by fire; and melancholy instances of children being burnt and scalded to
death, are not unfrequent.  The author knows one poor woman, two of whose
children have thus lost their lives, during her absence from her tent, at
different periods: and very lately a child was scalded to death in the
parish where the author writes.

The Gipsies are not very regular in attending to the calls of appetite
and hunger.  Their principal meal is supper, and their food is supplied
in proportion to the success they have had through the day; or, to use
their own words, _the luck they have met with_.

Like the poor of the land through which they wander, they are fond of
tea, drinking it at every meal.  When times are hard with them, they use
English herbs, of which they generally carry a stock, such as agrimony,
ground-ivy, wild mint, and the root of a herb called spice-herb.

The trades they follow are generally chair-mending, knife-grinding,
tinkering, and basket-making, the wood for which they mostly steal.  Some
of them sell hardware, brushes, corks, &c.; but in general, neither old
nor young among them, do much that can be called labour.  And it is
lamentable that the greatest part of the little they do earn, is laid by
to spend at their festivals; for like many tribes of uncivilized Indians,
they mostly make their women support their families, who generally do it
by swindling and fortune-telling.  Their baskets introduce them to the
servants of families, of whom they beg victuals, to whom they sell
trifling wares, and tell their fortunes, which indeed is their principal
aim, as it is their greatest source of gain.  They have been awkwardly
fixed, both servants and the Gipsy fortune-teller, when the lady of the
house has unexpectedly gone into the kitchen and surprised them while
thus employed; and sometimes, to avoid detection, the obnoxious party has
been hurried into a closet, or butler's pantry, where there has been much
plate.  Few are aware of the losses that have attended the conduct of
unprincipled servants in this, as in other respects.  It may be hoped
that few families would knowingly look over conduct so improper, so
dangerous.

Many of these idle soothsayers endeavour to persuade the people whom they
delude, that the power to foretell future events, is granted to them from
heaven, to enable them to get bread for their families.  It would be well
were the prognostications of these women encouraged only among servants;
but this is not the case.  They are often invited into gay and
fashionable circles, whom they amuse, if, by the information possessed by
the parties, they are not cunning enough to deceive.  They are well paid,
and are thus encouraged in their iniquity by those who ought to know, and
_teach them_ better.  But it is astonishing how many _respectable_ people
are led away with the artful flattery of such visitors.  They forget that
the Gipsy fortune-teller has often made herself acquainted with their
connexions, business, and future prospects, and consider not that God
commits not his secrets to the wicked and profane.  They use not the
reason heaven has given them, and are therefore more easily led astray by
these crafty deceivers.

They generally prophesy good.  Knowing the readiest way to deceive, to a
young lady they describe a handsome gentleman, as one she may be assured
will be her "husband."  To a youth they promise a pretty lady, with a
large fortune.  And thus suiting their deluding speeches to the age,
circumstances, anticipations and prospects of those who employ them, they
seldom fail to please their vanity, and often gain a rich reward for
their fraud.

They suit their incantations, or their pretended means of gaining
knowledge, to their employers.  Two female servants went into the camp of
some Gipsies near Southampton, to have their fortunes told by one well
known to the author, and a great professor of the art.  On observing them
to appear like persons in service, she said to a companion, _I shall not
get my books or cards for them_; _they are but tenants_.  And calling for
a frying-pan, she ordered them to fill it with water, and hold their
faces over it.  This being done, she proceeded to flatter and to promise
them great things, for which she was paid 1_s_ 6_d_ each.  This is called
the frying-pan fortune.  But it ought to be remembered that all
fortune-telling is quite as contemptible.

These artful pretenders to a knowledge of future events, generally
discover who are in possession of property; and if they be superstitious
and covetous, they contrive to persuade them there is a lucky stone in
their house, and that, if they will entrust to them, _all_, or a _part of
their money_, they will double and treble it.  Sorry is the author to say
that they often gain their point.  Tradesmen have been known to sell
their goods at a considerable loss, hoping to have the money doubled to
them by the supposed power of these wicked females, who daringly promise
to multiply the blessings of Providence.

If the fortune-teller cannot succeed in obtaining a large sum at first,
from such credulous dupes, she commences with a small one; and then
pretending it to be too insignificant for the planets to work upon, she
soon gets it doubled, and when she has succeeded in getting all she can,
she decamps with her booty, leaving her mortified victims to the just
punishment of disappointment and shame, who are afraid of making their
losses known, lest they should be exposed to the ridicule they deserve.
Parties in Gloucestershire, Dorsetshire, and Hampshire, have been robbed
in this manner of considerable sums, even as much as three and four
hundred pounds, the greatest part of which has been spent in Hampshire.

A young lady in Gloucestershire allowed herself to be deluded by a Gipsy
woman of artful and insinuating address, to a very great extent.  This
lady admired a young gentleman, and the Gipsy promised that he would
return her love.  The lady gave her all the plate in the house, and a
gold chain and locket, with no other security than a vain promise that
they should be restored at a given period.  As might be expected, the
wicked woman was soon off with her booty, and the lady was obliged to
expose her folly.  The property being too much to lose, the woman was
pursued, and overtaken.  She was found washing her clothes in a Gipsy
camp, with the gold chain about her neck.  She was taken up; but on
restoring the articles, was allowed to escape.

The same woman afterwards persuaded a gentleman's groom, that she could
put him in possession of a great sum of money, if he would first deposit
with her, all he then had.  He gave her five pounds and his watch, and
borrowed for her ten more of two of his friends.  She engaged to meet him
at midnight in a certain place a mile from the town where he lived, and
that he there should dig up out of the ground a silver pot full of gold,
covered with a clean napkin.  He went with his pick-axe and shovel at the
appointed time to the supposed lucky spot, having his confidence
strengthened by a dream he happened to have about money, which he
considered a favourable omen of the wealth he was soon to receive.  Of
course he met no Gipsy; she had fled another way with the property she
had so wickedly obtained.  While waiting her arrival, a hare started
suddenly from its resting place, and so alarmed him, that he as suddenly
took to his heels and made no stop till he reached his master's house,
where he awoke his fellow servants and told to them his disaster.

This woman, who made so many dupes, rode a good horse, and dressed both
gaily and expensively.  One of her saddles cost 30 pounds.  It was
literally studded with silver; for she carried on it the emblems of her
profession wrought in that metal; namely, a half-moon, seven stars, and
the rising sun.  Poor woman! _her_ sun is now nearly set.  Her sins have
found her out.  She has been in great distress on account of a son, who
was transported for robbery; but has never thought of seeking, as a
penitent, refuge in the God of mercy; for seeing one of her reformed
companions reading the New Testament, she exclaimed, _That book will make
you crazy_, at the same time calling her a fool for burning her
fortune-telling book.  Her condition is now truly wretched; for her
ill-gotten gains are all fled, and she is dragging out a miserable
existence, refusing still to seek the mercy of God, and despising those
who have made him their refuge.

Another woman, whom the author would also call a _bad_ Gipsy, who
likewise practised similar deceptions, having persuaded a person to put
his notes and money in a wrapper and lock it up in a box, she obtained
the liberty of seeing it in his presence, that she might pronounce
certain words over it; and although narrowly watched, she contrived to
steal it, and to convey into the box a parcel similar in appearance, but
which on examination, contained only a bundle of rubbish.  This money
amounted to several hundred pounds.  She was immediately pursued and
taken with the whole amount about her person.  She was also allowed to
escape justice, because the covetous old man neither wished to expose
himself, nor waste his money in a prosecution.

The daughter of this woman has followed the same evil and infamous
practices; and the crime has descended to her through several
generations.  Many circumstances like the above are hid to prevent the
shame that would assuredly follow their exposure.  But the day of Christ
will exhibit both these deceivers and their dupes, who are equally
heinous in the sight of God.  It were well if such characters had paid
more attention to the words of the apostle Paul--_And having food and
raiment_, _let us therewith be content_.  _They that will be rich_, _fall
into temptation_, _and a snare_, _and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts_, _which drown men in destruction_.  _The love of money is the root
of all __evil_; _which_, _while some have coveted after_, _they have
erred from the faith_, _and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows_.

Not to mention many other facts with which the author is acquainted, and
which he would relate, were he not likely thereby too much to enlarge his
work, he will conclude this chapter with observing, that, thankfulness to
Almighty God, for the blessings we enjoy, less anxiety about future
events, and more confidence in what God has revealed in his word and
providence, would leave no room for the encouragement of Gipsy
fortune-tellers, and their craft would soon be discontinued.




CHAP. IV.  The Character, Manners, and Habits of the English Gipsies,
continued.


Among this poor and destitute people, instances of great guilt, depravity
and misery are too common; nor can it be otherwise expected, while they
are destitute of the knowledge of salvation in a crucified and ascended
Saviour.  One poor Gipsy, who had wandered in a state of wretchedness,
bordering on despair, for nearly forty years, had not in all that time,
_heard of the Name which is above every name_; _for there is salvation in
no other_; till in his last days some Christian directed him to the
Bible, as a book that tells poor sinners the way to God.  He gave a woman
a guinea to read its pages to him; and he remunerated another woman, who
read to him the book of Common Prayer.  The last few years of his life
were marked by strong conviction of sin.  His children thought he must
have been a murderer.  They often saw him under the hedges at prayer.  In
his last moments he received comfort through a pious minister, who
visited him in his tent, and made him acquainted with the promises of the
gospel.

A similar instance has been related by a clergyman known to the author;
nor should the interview of GEORGE THE THIRD with a poor Gipsy woman, be
forgotten; for a brighter example of condescending kindness is not
furnished in the history of kings.  This gracious monarch became the
minister of instruction and comfort to a dying Gipsy, to whom he was
drawn by the cries of her children, and saw her expire cheered by the
view of that redemption he had set before her.

But how few are there of the tens of thousands of Gipsies, who have died
in Britain, that, whether living or dying, have been visited by the
minister or his people!  The father of three orphan children lately taken
under the Care of the Southampton Committee for the improvement of the
Gipsies, had lived an atheist, but such he could not die.  He had often
declared there was no God; but before his death, he called one of his
sons to him and said--_I have always said there was no God_, _but now I
know there is_; _I see him now_.  He attempted to pray, but knew not how!
And many other Gipsies have been so afraid of God, that they dreaded to
be alone.

It is a fact not generally known, that the Gipsies of this country have
not much knowledge of one another's tribes, or clans, and are very
particular to keep to their own.  Nor will those who style themselves
respectable, allow their children to marry into the more depraved clans.

The following are a few of the family names of the Gipsies of this
country:--Williams, Jones, Plunkett, Cooper, Glover, Carew (descendants
of the famous Bamfield Moore Carew), Loversedge, Mansfield, Martin,
Light, Lee, Barnett, Boswell, Carter, Buckland, Lovell, Corrie, Bosvill,
Eyres, Smalls, Draper, Fletcher, Taylor, Broadway, Baker, Smith, Buckly,
Blewett, Scamp, and Stanley.  Of the last-named family there are more
than two hundred, most of whom are known to the author, and are the most
ancient clans in this part of England.

It is a well-authenticated fact, that many persons pass for Gipsies who
are not.  Such persons having done something to exclude them from
society, join themselves to this people, and marrying into their clans,
become the means of leading them to crimes they would not have thought
of, but for their connection with such wicked people.  Coining money and
forging notes are, however, crimes which cannot be justly attributed to
them.  Indeed it has been too much the custom to impute to them a great
number of crimes of which they either never were guilty, or which could
only be committed by an inconsiderable portion of their race; and they
have often suffered the penalty of the law, when they have not in the
least deserved it.  They have been talked of by the public, and
prosecuted by the authorities, as the perpetrators of every vice and
wickedness alike shocking to civil and savage life.  Nor is this to be
wondered at, living as they do, so remote from observation and the walks
of common life.

Whoever has read Grellman's Dissertation on the Continental Gipsies, and
supposes that those of England are equally immoral and vicious, will be
found greatly mistaken.  The former are a banditti of robbers, without
natural affection, living with each other almost like brutes, and
scarcely knowing, and assuredly never caring about the existence of God;
some of them are even counted cannibals.  The Gipsies of this country are
altogether different; for monstrous crimes are seldom heard of among
them.

The author is not aware of any of them being convicted of house-breaking,
or high-way robbery.  Seldom are they guilty of sheep-stealing, or
robbing henroosts. {45}  Nor can they be justly charged with stealing
children; this is the work of worthless beggars who often commit far
greater crimes than the Gipsies.

They avoid poaching, knowing that the sporting gentlemen would be severe
against them, and that they would not be permitted to remain in the lanes
and commons near villages.  They sometimes take osiers from the banks and
coppices of the farmer, of which they make their baskets; and
occasionally have been known to steal a sheep, but never when they have
had any thing to eat, or money to buy it with; for according to a proverb
they have among themselves, _they despise those who risk their necks for
their bellies_.

The author however recollects a transgression of the sort in the county
of Hants.  Eight Gipsy men united in stealing four sheep: four were
chosen by lot for the purpose.  They sharpened their knives, rode to the
field, perpetrated the act, and before day-break brought to their camp
the sheep they had engaged to steal; and, before the evening of the same
day, they were thirty miles distant.  But when pressed by hunger, they
have been known to take a worse method than this.  For as the farmers
seldom deny them a sheep that has died in the field, if they apply for
it, _so many_ were found dead in this way, that a certain farmer
suspected the Gipsies of occasioning their deaths.  He therefore caused
one of these animals to be opened, and discovered a piece of wool in its
throat, with which it had been suffocated.  The Gipsies, who had no
objection to creatures that die in their blood, had killed all these
sheep in the above manner.

Horse-stealing is one of their principal crimes, and at this they are
very dextrous.  When disposed to steal a horse, they select one a few
miles from their tent, and make arrangements for disposing of it at a
considerable distance, to which place they will convey it in a night.  An
old and infirm man has been known to ride a stolen horse nearly fifty
miles in that time.  They pass through bye-lanes, well known to them, and
thus avoid turnpikes and escape detection.

Unless they are taught better principles than at present they possess,
and unless those on whom they impose, use their understandings, it is to
be feared that swindling also will long continue among them; for they are
so ingenious in avoiding detection.  When likely to be discovered, a
change of dress enables them to remove with safety to any distance.
Instances of this kind have been innumerable.  But as it is the aim of
this book to solicit a better feeling towards them, rather than expose
them to the continuation of censure, the writer will not enter into
further detail in reference to their crimes, than barely to shew the
great evils into which they have been led by many of those in high life,
who have long encouraged them in the savage practice of prize-fighting.
Pugilism has been the disgrace of our land, and our nobility and gentry
have not been ashamed to patronize it.

Not long ago a fight took place in this county which will be a lasting
disgrace to the neighbourhood.  One of the pugilists, a Gipsy, in the
pride of his heart, said during the fight, that he _never would be beaten
so long as he had life_.  The poor wretch fought till not a feature of
his countenance could be seen, his head and face being swollen to a
frightful size, and his eyes quite closed.  He attempted to tear them
open that he might see his antagonist; and was at last taken off the
stage.  Not satisfied with this brutal scene, the spectators offered a
purse of ten guineas for another battle.  This golden bait caught the eye
of another Gipsy, who, but a few months before, had ruptured a
blood-vessel in fighting.  Throwing up his hat on the stage, the sign of
challenge, he was soon met with a fellow as degraded as himself, but with
much more strength and activity.  He was three times laid prostrate at
the feet of his antagonist, and was taken away almost lifeless.  His
conqueror put a half-crown into his hand as he was carried off, saying,
it was a little something for him to drink.  About three months after
this, the author saw this poor Gipsy in his tent, in the last stage of a
consumption; but he was without any marks of true penitence.  Surely the
way of wickedness is full of misery!

What a disgrace is this demoralizing mode of amusement to our country!
Degrading to the greatest degree, it is nevertheless pursued with avidity
by all classes of people; and large bets are often depending on these
brutal exercises.  Gentlemen, noblemen, and even ladies, are, on such
occasions, mixed with the most degraded part of the community.  In the
instance referred to it is said, that fifty pounds were taken by
admitting carriages into the field in which the fight took place.  Where
were the peace-officers at this time?  Perhaps some of them spectators of
the horrid scene!

Verily our men of rank and fortune are guilty in encouraging these
shocking practices; and they are little better than murderers, who goad
their fellow-men on to fight by the offer of money.  Such persons are
frequently instruments of sending sinners, the most unprepared, into the
presence of a righteous God.  What an account will they have to give when
they meet the victims of their amusement at the bar of Christ!

The Gipsies often fight with each other at fairs, and other places where
they meet in great numbers.  This is their way of settling old grudges;
but so soon as one yields, the quarrel is made up, and they repair to a
public house to renew their friendship.  This forgiving spirit is a
pleasing trait in their character.




CHAP. V.  Further Account of the English Gipsies.


It has been the lot of Gipsies in all countries to be despised,
persecuted, hated, and have the vilest things said about them.  In many
cases they have too much merited the odium which they have experienced in
continental Europe; but certainly they are not deserving of universal and
unqualified contempt and hatred in this nation.  The dislike they have to
rule and order has led many of them to maim themselves by cutting off a
finger, that they might not serve in either the army or the navy: and I
believe there is one instance known, of some Gipsies murdering a witness
who was to appear against some of their people for horse-stealing: the
persons who were guilty of the deed have been summoned to the bar of
Christ, and in their last moments exclaimed with horror and despair,
"Murder, murder."  But these circumstances do not stamp their race
without exception as infamous monsters in wickedness.  Not many years
since several of their men were hung in different places for stealing
fourteen horses near Bristol, who experienced the truth of that
scripture, _be sure your sins will find you out_.  Indeed there is not a
family among them that has not to mourn over the loss of some relative
for the commission of this crime.  But even in this respect their guilt
has been much over-rated; for in many cases it is to be feared they have
suffered innocently.  There was formerly a reward of 40_l_ to those who
gave information of offenders, on their being capitally convicted.  Those
of the lower orders, therefore, who were destitute of principle, had a
great temptation before them to swear falsely in reference to Gipsies;
and of which it is known they sometimes availed themselves, knowing that
few would befriend them.  For the sake of the above sum, vulgarly, but
too justly called _blood-money_, they perjured themselves, and were much
more wicked than the people they accused.  But the Gipsies were thought
to be universally depraved, and no one thought it worth his while to
investigate their innocence.  Let us be thankful that many at the present
day look upon them with better feelings.

Very lately one of these vile informers swore to having seen a Gipsy man
on a horse that had been stolen; and although it came out on the trial,
that it was night when he observed him, and that he had never seen him
before, which ought to have rendered his evidence invalid, the prisoner
was convicted and condemned to die.  His life was afterwards spared by
other facts having been discovered and made known to the judge, after he
had left the city.

The Gipsies in this country have for centuries been accused of
child-stealing; and therefore it is not to be wondered at, that, when
children have been missing, the Gipsies should be taxed with having
stolen them.  About thirty years since, some parents who had lost a
child, applied to a man at Portsmouth, well known in those days, by the
name of Payne, or Pine, as an astrologer, wishing to know from him what
was become of it.  He told them _to search the Gipsy tents for twenty
miles round_.  The distressed parents employed constables, who made
diligent search in every direction to that distance, but to no purpose;
the child was not to be found in their camps.  It was however soon
afterwards discovered, drowned in one of its father's pits, who was a
tanner.  Thus was this pretended astrologer exposed to the ridicule of
those who but a short time before foolishly looked on him as an oracle.

On another occasion the same accusation was brought against the Gipsies,
and proved to be false.  The child of a widow at Portsmouth was lost, and
after every search was made on board the ships in the harbour, and at
Spithead, and the ponds dragged in the neighbourhood, to no effect, it
was concluded that the Gipsies had stolen him.  The boy was found a few
years afterwards, at Kingston-upon-Thames, apprenticed to a chimney
sweeper.  He had been enticed away by a person who had given him
sweet-meats; but not by a Gipsy.

I may be allowed here to say a word about this boy's mother.  She was a
good and pious woman, and had known great trials.  Her husband was
drowned in her presence but a short time before she lost her son in the
mysterious way mentioned; and before he was heard of, she was removed to
the enjoyment of a better world.  Her death was a very happy one, for it
took place while she was engaged in public worship.  _Many are the
afflictions of the righteous_, _but the Lord delivereth them out of them
all_.

Instances have been known of house-breakers leaving some of their stolen
goods near the tents of the Gipsies; and these being picked up by the
children, and found upon them, have been the cause of much unjust
suffering among them.  The grandfather of three little orphans now under
the care of the Southampton Committee, was charged with stealing a horse,
and was condemned and executed; although the farmer of whom he bought it,
came forward and swore to the horse being the same which he had sold him.
His evidence was rejected on account of some slight mistake in the
description he gave of it.  When under the gallows, the frantic Gipsy
exclaimed--_Oh God_, _if thou dost not deliver me_, _I will not believe
there is a God_!

The following anecdote will prove the frequent oppression of this people.
Not many years since, a collector of taxes in a country town, said he had
been robbed of fifty pounds by a Gipsy; and being soon after at Blandford
in Dorsetshire, he fixed on a female Gipsy, as the person who robbed him
in company with two others, and said she was in man's clothes at the
time.  They were taken up and kept in custody for some days; and had not
a farmer voluntarily come forward, and proved that they were many miles
distant when the robbery was said to be perpetrated, they would have been
tried for their lives, and probably hanged.  The woman was the wife of
Wm. Stanley, (who was in custody with her,) who now reads the Scriptures
in the Gipsy tents near Southampton.  Their wicked accuser was afterwards
convicted of a crime for which he was condemned to die, when he confessed
that he had not been robbed at the time referred to, but had himself
spent the whole of the sum in question.

Another Gipsy of the name of Stanley was lately indicted at Winchester,
for house-breaking, and had not his friends at great expense proved an
_alibi_, it is likely he might have been executed.  And in this way have
they been suspected and persecuted ever since the days of Henry the
Eighth.  They have been hunted like wild beasts; their property has been
taken from them; themselves have been frequently imprisoned, and in many
cases their lives taken, or what to many of them would be much worse,
they have been transported to another part of the world, for ever divided
from their families and friends.

In the days of Judge Hale, thirteen of these unhappy beings were hanged
at Bury St Edmonds, for no other cause than that they were Gipsies; and
at that time it was death without benefit of clergy, for any one to live
among them for a month.  Even in later days two of the most industrious
of this people have had a small pony and two donkeys taken away merely on
suspicion that they were stolen.  They were apprehended and carried
before a magistrate, to whom they proved that the animals were their own,
and that they had legally obtained them.  The cattle were then pounded
for trespassing on the common, and if their oppressed owners had not had
money to defray the expenses, one of the animals must have been sold for
that purpose.

Not long ago, one of the Gipsies was suspected of having stolen lead from
a gentleman's house.  His cart was searched, but no lead being found in
his possession, he was imprisoned for three months, for living under the
hedges as a vagrant; and his horse, which was worth thirteen pounds, was
sold to meet the demands of the constables.  And another Gipsy, who had
two horses in his possession, was suspected of having stolen them, but he
proved that they were legally his property.  He was committed for three
months as a vagrant, and one of his horses was sold to defray the
expenses of his apprehension, examination, &c.

While writing this part of the GIPSIES' ADVOCATE, the author knows that a
poor, aged, industrious woman, with whom he has been long acquainted, had
her donkey taken from her, and that a man with four witnesses swore that
it was his property.  The poor woman told a simple, artless tale to the
magistrates, and was not fully committed.  She was allowed two days to
bring forward the person of whom she bought it.  Conscious of her
innocence, she was willing to risk a prison if she could recover her
donkey, and establish her character.  After a great deal of trouble and
expense in dispatching messengers to bring forward her witnesses, she
succeeded in obtaining them.  They had no sooner made their appearance
than the accuser and his witnesses fled, and left the donkey to the right
owner, the poor, accused and injured woman.

It cannot be expected that oppression will ever reform this people, or
cure them of their wandering habits.  Far more likely is it to confirm
them in their vagrant propensities.  And as their numbers do not
decrease, oppression will only render them the dread of one part of their
fellow-creatures, while it will make them the objects of scorn and
obloquy to others.

It is the earnest wish of the author that milder measures may be pursued
in reference to the Gipsies.  To endeavour to improve their morals, and
instruct them in the principles of religion, will, under the divine
blessing, turn to better account than the hateful and oppressive policy
so long adopted.




CHAP. VI.  Further Account of the English Gipsies.


Many persons are of opinion in reference to the Gipsies, that, if all the
parishes were alike severe in forcing them from their retreats, they
would soon find their way into towns.  But if this were the case, what
advantage would they derive from it?  In large towns, in their present
ignorant and depraved state, would they not be still more wicked?  They
would change their condition only from bad to worse, unless they were
treated better than they now are, and could be properly employed; but
from the prejudice that exists among all classes of men against them,
this is not likely to be the case: they would not be employed by any,
while other persons could be got.  At a hop plantation, so lately as
1830, Gipsies were not allowed to pick hops in some grounds, while
persons as unsettled and undeserving, were engaged for that purpose.  Had
this been a parochial arrangement to benefit the poor of their own
neighbourhood, who were out of employ, it were not blameable.

If they were driven to settle in towns, and could not, generally
speaking, obtain employment, it might soon become necessary to remove all
their children to their own parishes; a measure not only very unhappy in
itself, but one to which the Gipsies would never submit.  Sooner would
they die than suffer their children to go to the parish workhouses.

The severe and unchristian-like treatment they meet with from many, only
obliges them to travel further, and often drives them to commit greater
depredations.  When driven by the constables from their station, they
retire to a more solitary place in another parish, and there remain till
they are again detected, and again mercilessly driven away.  But this
severity does not accomplish the end it has in view; their numbers remain
the same, and they retain the same dislike to the crowded haunts of man.
For they only visit towns in small parties, offering trifling wares for
sale, or telling fortunes; and this is done to gain a present support.

In this neighbourhood there was lately a sweeping of the commons and
lanes of the Gipsy families.  Their horses and donkeys were driven off,
and the sum of 3 pounds 5_s_ levied on them as a fine to pay the
constables for thus afflicting them.  In one tent during this distressing
affair, there was found an unburied child, that had been scalded to
death, its parents not having money to defray the expenses of its
interment.  The constables declared that it would make any heart ache to
see the anguish the poor people were in, when thus inhumanly driven from
their resting places; but, said they, _We were obliged to do our duty_.
To the credit of these men, thirteen in number, it should be mentioned,
that, with only one exception, they returned the fines to the people; and
one of them, who is a carpenter, offered a coffin for the unburied child,
should the parish be unwilling to bury it.

In this instance of their affliction and grief, the propensity to accuse
these poor creatures was strongly marked by a report charging them with
having dug a grave on the common in which to bury it; a circumstance very
far from their feelings and general habits.  The fact was, some person
had been digging holes in search of gravel, and these poor creatures
pitched their tent just by one of them.

It was supposed by many in this neighbourhood, that the poor wretches
thus driven away, were gone out of the country; but this was not the
case.  They had only retired to more lonely places in smaller parties,
and were all seen again a few days after at a neighbouring fair.  This
circumstance is sufficient to prove that they are not to be reclaimed by
prosecutions and fines.  It is therefore high time the people of England
should adopt more merciful measures towards them in endeavouring to bring
them into a more civilized state.  The money spent in sustaining
prosecutions against them, if properly applied, would accomplish this
great and benevolent work.  And without flattering any of its members,
the author thinks the Committee at Southampton have discovered plans,
wholly different to those usually adopted, which may prove much more
effectual in accomplishing their reformation; for by these plans being
put in prudent operation, many have already ceased to make the lanes and
commons their home; and their minds are becoming enlightened and their
characters religious.

In concluding this chapter it may not be improper to remark, that, bad as
may be the character of any of our fellow-creatures, it is very
lamentable that they should suffer for crimes of which individually they
are not guilty.  Let us hope that, in reference to this people, unjust
executions have ceased; that people will be careful in giving evidence
which involves the rights, liberties, and lives of their
fellow-creatures, though belonging to the unhappy tribes of Gipsies; and
above all, let us hope, that such measures will be pursued by the good
and benevolent of this highly favoured land, as will place them in
situations where they will learn to fear God, and support themselves
honestly in the sight of all men.




CHAP. VII.  Of the formation of the Southampton Committee, and the
success that has attended its endeavours.


Although the Gipsies, on account of their unsettled habits, their
disposition to evil practices, and that ignorance of true religion, which
is inseparably connected with a life remote from all the forms of
external worship, and from the influence of religious society, may be
said to be in a most lamentably wretched state; yet is their condition
not desperate.  They are rational beings, and have many feelings
honourable to human nature.  They are not as the heathens of other
countries, addicted to any system of idolatry; and what is of infinite
encouragement, they inhabit a land of Bibles and of Christian ministers;
and, although at present, they derive so little benefit from these
advantages, there are many of them willing to receive instruction.  The
following details, to which I gladly turn, will shew that, when _patient_
and _persevering_ means are used, Gipsies may be brought to know God; and
no body of people were ever yet converted to Christianity without means.
The following circumstances gave rise to the idea of forming a society
for the improvement of this people.

In March, 1827, during the Lent Assizes, the author was in Winchester,
and wishing to speak with the sheriff's chaplain, he went to the court
for that purpose.  He happened to enter just as the judge was passing
sentence of death on two unhappy men.  To one he held out the hope of
mercy; but to the other, _a poor Gipsy_, who was convicted of
horse-stealing, he said, _no hope could be given_.  The young man, for he
was but a youth, immediately fell on his knees, and with uplifted hands
and eyes, apparently unconscious of any persons being present but the
judge and himself, addressed him as follows: "_Oh_! _my Lord_, _save my
life_!"  The judge replied, "_No_; _you can have no mercy in this world_:
_I and my brother judges have come to the determination to execute
horse-stealers_, _especially Gipsies_, _because of the increase of the
crime_."  The suppliant, still on his knees, entreated--"_Do_, _my Lord
Judge_, _save my life_! _do_, _for God's sake_, _for my wife's sake_,
_for my baby's sake_!"  "_No_," replied the judge, "_I cannot_: _you
should have thought of your wife and children before_."  He then ordered
him to be taken away, and the poor fellow was _rudely dragged_ from his
earthly judge.  It is hoped, as a penitent sinner, he obtained the more
needful mercy of God, through the abounding grace of Christ.  After this
scene, the author could not remain in court.  As he returned, he found
the mournful intelligence had been communicated to some Gipsies who had
been waiting without, anxious to learn the fate of their companion.  They
seemed distracted.

On the outside of the court, seated on the ground, appeared an old woman,
and a very young one, and with them two children, the eldest three years,
and the other an infant but fourteen days old.  The former sat by its
mother's side, alike unconscious of her bitter agonies, and of her
father's despair.  The old woman held the infant tenderly in her arms,
and endeavoured to comfort its weeping mother, soon to be a widow under
circumstances the most melancholy.  _My dear_, _don't cry_, said she,
_remember you have this dear little baby_.  Impelled by the sympathies of
pity and a sense of duty, the author spoke to them on the evil of sin,
and expressed his hope that the melancholy event would prove a warning to
them, and to all their people.  The poor man was executed about a
fortnight after his condemnation.

This sad scene, together with Hoyland's Survey of the Gipsies, which the
author read about this time, combined to make a deep impression on his
mind, and awaken an earnest desire which has never since decreased, to
assist and improve this greatly neglected people.  The more he
contemplated their condition and necessities, the difficulties in the way
of their reformation continued to lessen, and his hope of success, in
case any thing could be done for them, became more and more confirmed.
He could not forget the poor young widow whom he had seen in such deep
distress at Winchester, and was led to resolve, if he should meet her
again, to offer to provide for her children.

Some weeks elapsed before he could hear any thing of her, till one day he
saw the old woman sitting on the ground at the entrance of Southampton,
with the widow's infant on her knee.  "Where is your daughter?" he
inquired.  "Sir," she replied, "She is my niece; she is gone into the
town."  "Will you desire her to call at my house?"  "I will, sir," said
the poor old woman, to whom the author gave his address.

In about an hour after this conversation, the widow and her aunt
appeared.  After inviting them to sit down, he addressed the young woman
thus:--"My good woman, you are now a poor widow, and I wished to see you,
to tell you that I would be your friend.  I will take your children, if
you will let me have them, and be a father to them, and educate them;
and, when old enough to work, will have them taught some honest trade."
"Thank you, sir," said she; "but I don't like to part with my children.
The chaplain at the prison offered to take my oldest, and to send her to
London to be taken care of; but I could not often see her there."  I
replied, "I commend you for not parting with her, unless you could
occasionally see her; for I suppose you love your children dearly."  "Oh!
yes, sir," said the widow.  The old aunt also added, "Our people set
great store by their children."  "Well," I replied, "I do not wish you to
determine on this business hastily; it is a weighty one.  You had better
take a fortnight for consideration, and then give me a second call."

How improbable did it then appear that this interview would ultimately
lead to so much good to many of her people!  When the fortnight expired,
the widow and her aunt again appeared, when the following conversation
took place.  "I am glad you are come again," said their friend.  "Yes,"
replied the widow, "and I will now let you have my Betsy;" and the aunt
immediately added, pointing to one of her grand-children, "I will let you
have my little _deary_, if you will take care of her.  Her father,"
continued she, "was condemned to die, but is transported for life, and
her mother now lives with another man."  The proposal was readily
accepted; and three days after, these two children were brought washed
very clean, and dressed in their best clothes.  It was promised the
women, that they should see their children whenever they chose, and all
parties were pleased.  The eldest of these children was six years of age;
the widow's little daughter, only three.  The first day they amused
themselves with running up and down stairs, and through the rooms of the
house.  But when put to bed at night, they cried for two hours, saying
that the house would fall upon them.  They had never spent a day in a
house before, and were at night like birds that had been decoyed, and
then robbed of their liberty.  A few kisses and some promises at length
quieted them, and they went to sleep.

After remaining with the author three days, they were removed to one of
the Infants' Schools, where they were often visited by the widow and her
aunt.  Soon after this the eldest girl was taken ill.  A medical
gentleman attended her at the tent, a little way from the town, whither
her grandmother had begged to remove her for change of air.  But the
sickness of this child _was unto death_.  She was a lovely and
affectionate girl, notwithstanding the disadvantages under which she had
necessarily laboured.  When on her bed, in the tent, suffering much pain,
she was asked by a gentleman, "Although you love Mr Crabb so much, would
you rather live with him, or die, and go to Jesus?"  She answered, "I
would rather die and go to Jesus."  Her death very much affected her
grandmother.  She would not leave the corpse, which she often
affectionately embraced, till persuaded she would endanger her own life.
This appeared a melancholy event to all who wished well to the Gipsies in
the neighbourhood of Southampton.  For the widow, fearing her child would
become ill and die too, immediately removed her from the school.  And
many of the Gipsy people treated the women with great contempt, for
giving up their children; and the prospects of doing them lasting good,
became very much beclouded.  It was however represented to them, that God
was doing all things for the best, and their spirits were soothed; and in
consequence, the little fatherless girl was again brought to the school.

After this event, the women remained a considerable time in the
neighbourhood, waiting to see if the little one, again given up to the
author, would be kindly treated.  By this detention they were often
brought into the company of good people, whose kindness gained their
confidence.  They began to listen to invitations to settle in the town,
and finally determined on doing so.  Even the _old_ woman, who had lived
under hedges for fifty years, and who had declared but a short time
before, that she would not leave her tent for a palace, now gladly
occupied a house; this greatly encouraged their friends, who well knew
that it was not a small sacrifice, for a Gipsy to give up what is thought
by them to be their liberty.

A short time before these women removed from under the hedges, the sister
of the unhappy man who had been executed, came out of Dorsetshire with
her three children, on her way to Surry, where she had been accustomed to
go to hop-picking.  Encamping under the same hedge with the widow and her
aunt, she was seen by the author in one of his visits to them.  He found
them one evening about six o'clock at dinner, and took his seat near
them; and while they were regaling themselves with broiled meat,
potatoes, and tea, the following interesting conversation took place.

"Sir," said the widow, "this is my sister and her children."  No one
could have introduced this woman and her little ones with more easy
simplicity than she did, while, by the smile on her swarthy countenance,
she exhibited real heartfelt pleasure.  "I am glad to see you, my good
woman;" said the author, "are these your children?"  "Yes, sir," replied
she, very cheerfully.  "And where are you going?"  "I am going into
Surry, sir."  "Have you not many difficulties to trouble you in your way
of life?"  "Yes, sir," answered she.  The author continued, "I wish you
would let me have your children to provide for and educate."  "Not I,
indeed," she replied sharply; "others may part with their children, if
they like, but I will never part with mine."  "Well, my good woman, the
offer to educate them has done no harm: let me hope it will do good.  I
would have you recollect that you have now a proposal made you of
bettering their present and future condition.  You and I must soon meet
at the judgment-seat of Christ, to give an account of this meeting; and
you know that I can do better for your little ones than you can."  She
was silent.  The author then addressed these people and left the tents.

The next day he visited the camp again, when the widow woman said, "Sir,
my sister was so _cut up_ (putting her hand to her heart), with what you
said last night, that she could not eat any more, and declared she felt
as she never had done before; and she has determined to come and live
with us at Michaelmas."  What was still better, in consequence of what
was said to this poor stranger, she did not go to the races, although she
had stopped near Southampton for that purpose.

From this time endeavours were made to confirm the woman's intentions to
stay at Southampton, and to place her children with the other.  She was
asked, why she would not stay at Southampton then?  "Why, to tell you the
truth," said she, "for it's no use to tell a lie about that, I don't want
to bring my children to you, like vagabonds; and as we shall earn a good
_bit_ of money at hopping, I shall buy them some clothes; and then, if
you will take me a room at Michaelmas, I will surely return and live in
Southampton, and my children shall go to school; but I will never give
them up entirely."  She continued with her sister till the house which
had been taken for the latter was ready; during which time a gentleman
from Ireland, then living near the encampment, had her children every day
to his house, and taught them to read.  The remembrance of him will be
precious to them for ever.  She came on the day appointed, and her
children were put to the Infants' School, where they have continued ever
since, clean and respectable, and very diligent in their learning.  They
often explain the Scriptures to their mother.  One of them has long been
a monitor in the school.  May she continue a credit to the institution in
which she has been so far educated.

Although the mother of these children is not yet decidedly pious, she is
very much improved.  She is now able to read her Testament with tolerable
ease, takes great pleasure in receiving instruction, and we hope is
deeply impressed with the importance of personal religion.  She attends
public worship diligently, and loves Christians, whom she once hated.
She weeps with abhorrence over past crimes, and says she would rather
have her hands cut off, than do as she has done.  For more than twelve
months after living at Southampton, she continued occasionally to tell
fortunes for the gain it brought her.  But a remarkable dream led her to
see the wickedness of this practice; for it so terrified her that she
rose from her bed, lighted a fire, and burnt the book in which she had
pretended to see the fortune of others.  Large sums of money had been
offered her for this volume; but, though in extreme poverty, she
determined to make any sacrifice, rather than enrich herself by its sale.
She dreamed that she was at the adult school, where she regularly
attended, and, that while she was reading her Testament, it changed into
a book of divination, and she began to tell the fortune of the lady who
was teaching her; and while thus employed, she thought she heard awful
thunderings, and the sound of trumpets; after which a tremendous tempest
ensued, during which she fancied herself in an extensive plain, exposed
to all the fury of the storm.  She then thought the day of judgment was
come, and that she was summoned to render up her account.  She awoke in
great terror, and as soon as she had a little recovered herself, arose
and followed the example of those we read of in the Acts of the
Apostles:--_And many of them which also used curious arts_, _brought
their books together_, _and burned them before all men_; _and they
counted the price of them_, _and found fifty thousand pieces silver_.
Acts xix. 19.

When relating this dream to a lady, she was asked whether she had
formerly been in the habit of seeking by any means, the aid of the devil,
in order to know future events; it having been asserted that many of the
Gipsies had done so.  She informed the lady that she never had done so,
and that she thought none of her people had any thing to do with him,
otherwise than by giving themselves up to do wickedly.  The devil tempted
them to do still worse; as those who neglect to seek to God for help,
must of course be under the power of the wicked one.




CHAP. VIII.  Of the plans pursued by the Southampton Committee, and the
success which has attended them, continued.


Sixteen reformed Gipsies are now living at Southampton, one of whom is
the aged Gipsy whose history has been published by a lady. {72}  There
are also her brother and four of his children, her sister, who has been a
wanderer for more than fifty years, and her daughter, three orphans, and
a boy who has been given up to the Committee by his mother, a woman and
her three children, and the young woman before mentioned, who has, since
her reformation, lost her two children by the measles.

In addition to those who have retired from a wandering life, and are
pursuing habits of honest industry, three other families, whose united
number is sixteen, begged the privilege of wintering with us in the
beginning of 1831.  These Gipsies regularly attended divine service twice
on a Sunday, and on the work-day evenings the adults went to school to
learn to read.  The children were placed at one of the Infants' Schools.
The prospects of doing one of the families lasting good, are rather dark,
as they are grown old and hardened in crime; but the condition of the
others is more encouraging.  The children, who would gladly have stayed
longer with us, were sickly; and it is apprehended, had not this been the
case, the parents would have continued longer, that they might have gone
to school.  Two women, mother and daughter, in one family, are much
interested in the worship of God, and already begin to feel the value of
their souls; and both regret that they are under the necessity of
submitting to the arbitrary will of the father.  One of them declared
that she could never more act as a Gipsy, and with weeping eyes she said,
that, she feared she never should be pardoned, or saved.  When directed
to go to Jesus, she replied, she knew not how to go to him.  In three
days they will leave us, and it will be a painful separation.  It was
very gratifying to the author to see so many Gipsies attend the house of
God, and he frequently recollected with pleasure, that promise of holy
Scripture, _For as the rain cometh down_, _and the snow from heaven_,
_and returneth not thither_, _but watereth the earth_, _and maketh it
bring forth and bud_, _that it may give seed to the sower_, _and bread to
the eater_: _so shall my word be that goeth forth of my mouth_: _it shall
not return unto me void_, _but it shall accomplish that which I please_,
_and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I send it_.  _For ye shall go
out with joy_, _and be led forth with peace_; _the mountains and the
hills shall break forth before you into singing_, _and all the trees of
the field shall clap their hands_.  _Instead of the thorn shall come up
the __fur tree_, _and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle
tree_: _and it stall be to the Lord for a name_, _for an everlasting sign
that shall not be cut off_.

Six of the children are at an Infants' School at Southampton, and three
others attend a charity school; and another is learning to be a coach
wheelwright.  This youth has behaved so well in his situation, that he
has been advanced by his master to a higher branch in the business.  His
fellow-workmen, who at first disliked him for being a Gipsy, have
subscribed money to assist him in the purchase of additional tools, to
which the foreman added five shillings, and the master _one pound_.  This
is a most encouraging circumstance.

The aged man who has been so many years reformed, is a basket maker.  He
often visits his brethren in their tents, under the direction of the
Committee, to give advice and instruction.  His sister, lately reclaimed,
takes care of the six Gipsy children, and is become very serious and
industrious; and though in the decline of life, she receives but one
shilling per week from the Committee.  Two instances of the gratitude of
this woman ought not to be omitted.

The author's horse having strayed from the field, a sovereign was offered
to any one who would bring it back to him.  Several persons sought for it
in vain.  This old Gipsy woman was sent in quest of it, and in two days
returned with the horse.  Of course she was offered the sovereign that
had been named as a reward; but she refused to take it, saying, she owed
the author more than that; yea, all that she had, for the comfort she was
then enjoying.  This was the language of an honest and grateful heart.
On being compelled to take it, she bought herself some garments for the
winter.

On another occasion, when she was coming from some place which she had
visited, and was detained on the road longer than she had expected, she
became penniless; yet would she not beg, lest it might be looked on as
one step towards turning back to habits she had entirely abandoned.  She
assured the author that she would rather have starved than return to her
old trade of begging; and besides, added she, "the people know that I am
one of your reformed Gipsies, and I will never bring a reproach upon my
best friends."

The young widow was taught to make shoes; but becoming depressed in
spirits after the death of her children, she has been placed in service.
And another young Gipsy woman has also obtained a situation as a servant.

But while the Committee has had to rejoice over the success that has
attended its efforts, it has also experienced great and manifold
disappointments.  But its members are not discouraged, and it is hoped
they never will be.

One young woman stayed with the Committee a month, and then ran away.
She was lamentably ignorant, and could never be brought to work. {75}
Another very promising in temper and habits, stayed in a family three
months, and then left them to live again with her parents, who encouraged
her to believe that she would be married to one of her clan.  It may be
hoped the knowledge she gained while in service may be useful to her at
some future time.  She is not, cannot be happy, and is sorry that she
left her service and her friends.  The father and mother have promised to
stay in Southampton through the next winter, which they will be
encouraged to do, with the hope of gaining instruction in the truths of
religion.

A woman, her four sons, and their grandmother, {76} joined the family of
reformed Gipsies for a short time, and we had considerable hopes of them
all, the two eldest boys excepted, who refused to work, and who grew much
more vicious than when under the hedges.  Their father had formerly been
sentenced to death, but by the interest of a friend, the sentence was
changed to fourteen years' hard labour on board the hulks at Portsmouth,
nearly nine of which had expired at the time his family came under the
direction of the Committee.  His wife intimating that if they were to
apply for his release, it might be granted, and that then he might govern
the boys, and make them work, his liberty was obtained.  But within three
days afterwards, he declared he would not constrain any of his children
to labour; they might do it or not, as they pleased.  And, in the course
of the week, he took them all away and went to Brighton.

A lady then staying at that place, and who had known this family at
Southampton, sent to the place where the Gipsies usually encamp, hoping
to recall some of them to a sense of their duty, but was informed that
the whole of the party had set off a few days before.  Early on the
following morning, a Gipsy called at the house of this lady, and offered
to tell the fortunes of the servants.  She was asked if she knew the
woman who was enquired for the preceding day?  She replied, that _she was
the very person_.  On hearing by whose servant she was addressed, she
became almost speechless with shame, and said, _I would rather have met
the king_.  On recovering, she expressed great delight and gratitude that
she was not forgotten by the lady, and declared she had been very unhappy
since she had left Southampton, and that the sin of fortune-telling
greatly distressed her mind; but that she knew not how to support her
family without it.  They had undergone many hardships.  The little boys,
she said, had frequently amused themselves with trying to spell the
different things about their tent, and were often wishing for their
Southampton fire.  The next morning she brought them to see their kind
benefactress.  The youngest of them, a fine promising boy, both as to
talent and disposition, was overjoyed at the meeting; his little eyes
were filled with tears, and he could scarcely speak.  He and his brother
were immediately provided with clothing, and sent to the School of
Industry; where, in addition to the religious instruction given them,
they were taught reading, writing, arithmetic, digging, &c.  Their master
has been much pleased with their progress.  The mother was afterwards
induced to stay at Brighton, being allowed a small sum weekly.  She has
been taught to read by some kind friends, and many hopes are entertained
of her conversion to God.  A letter has lately been received, which gives
a very interesting account of her increase in knowledge and improvement
in morals.

A very promising Gipsy youth, who was placed with a coach-maker in
Southampton, after working some time, cut his hand, and then relinquished
his employment, to wander with his father, who is a rat-catcher.  But it
is hoped that he, as well as others of his brethren who have returned to
their former courses, will be brought back, or find some other desirable
and permanent abode; that what has been done by this society may not
ultimately be lost.  Indeed, while writing this, I am happy to be able to
state, that the morals of this young man appear very correct, and that he
has, by constant application, learned to read tolerably well since he
left Southampton.  He supports himself by selling brushes, lines, and
corks, but talks very seriously of giving up his wandering habits to
return to us again.

Among the reclaimed Gipsies are three women who were notorious
fortune-tellers, and who doubtless have done much injury to the morals of
society.  They are now very promising; and there is a fair prospect of
their children being saved from much sin and misery, as they are placed
at Infants' Schools, where they are gradually acquiring useful scriptural
knowledge, and correctness of habits; in which, if they persevere, by the
grace of the Redeemer, their present and everlasting welfare will be
secured.  Such examples of success amply repay the Committee for the
trouble and expense already bestowed on the Gipsies; and it is hoped its
members will be stimulated to every exertion in their power by the good
done to those in a state of reformation and improvement, that the whole
wandering race may be led into the right way.




CHAP. IX.  Of the plans pursued by the Southampton Committee, and the
success which has attended them, continued.


A gipsy woman, of whose reformation we have already taken some notice,
having gone to solicit the assistance of the parish to which one of her
children belonged, met with many difficulties and troubles.  She was not
at this time destitute of the knowledge of religion.  She had learned to
read, and had become acquainted with the Scriptures, at an adult school,
and by attending at a place of worship; and these instructions were not
thrown away on her; for although she was frequently invited to eat and
drink in the tents of the Gipsies on her journey, she conscientiously
refused, fearing that what they were partaking of might not be honestly
obtained.  She informed them that her Testament had taught her better
habits than those she had formerly known.  Her children helped to keep
alive her religious impressions.  They often talked to her about the
school from which she had taken them, of their lessons, and the
observations of the master and mistress, on different parts of the
Scriptures, and at other times they catechised each other on the objects
that presented themselves on the road, in the same way they had been used
to in the Infants' Schools; to which they often begged their mother to
let them return.  These circumstances, she has since said, made her so
miserable that she felt she _could not live as she had done_.

Some time after this, she made a visit to a parish in which another of
her children was born, near Basingstoke.  She entered the cottage of an
old couple who sold fruit, &c.  Tea being proposed, the old woman
expressed her surprise that she had not seen her visitor for so long a
time, saying she was glad she was come, as she wanted her to tell her
many things, meaning future events.  She mentioned a great deal that
another Gipsy woman had told her, on which the reformed one
exclaimed--_Don't believe her_, _dame_.  _It is all lies_.  _She knows no
more about it than you do_.  _If you trust to what she says_, _you will
be deceived_.  The old woman was still more surprised, and asked _how
she_, who had so often told their fortunes, and had promised them such
good luck, could be so much altered?  The woman taking her Testament from
her bosom, replied, "I have learned from this blessed book, and from my
kind friends, _that all liars shall have their portion in the lake that
burneth with brimstone and fire_; and rather than tell fortunes again, I
would starve."  She then opened her book and began reading a chapter,
endeavouring to explain as she read, at which her host and hostess began
to weep.  She told them that though she knew she had been a great sinner,
and was one still, yet she never had felt so happy as then.  The old
woman observed, that _she_ could not say _she was happy_, and wished to
know what she must do to feel happy.  The Gipsy replied, you must leave
off selling on Sundays, and go to a place of worship, and learn to read
the Testament, and to pray, and _then_ you will become happy.

This poor Gipsy woman, who was so anxious to instruct those she had many
times deceived, was soon after taken sick, at which time her distress of
soul was very great; and she then said, were she to die, her _soul could
not go to heaven_.

Many were her temptations, while in great poverty, to renew the practice
of fortune-telling.  Several genteel parties have visited her, and
sometimes offered her gold, tempting her to begin again the sins she had
for ever given up; but, much to her credit, she at all times resolutely
refused all such unholy gain.

At one time some very gay young women called on her, desiring to have
their fortunes told.  Her Testament lay on the table, which she had but a
short time before been reading, and pointing to it, she said--_That
book_, _and that only_, _will tell your fortunes_; _for it is God's
book_; _it is his own word_.  She reproved them for their sin, and said,
the Bible had told her, _all unrighteousness is sin_.  They then
requested she would not tell any one that they had called upon her.  She
replied--_Oh_! _you fear man more than God_!

A few days since, this reformed woman was sweeping the pavement in front
of her house, when two female servants came up, enquiring for the house
of the fortune-teller; mourning over them for their folly, she said--_My
dears_, _she cannot tell your fortunes_.  _I have been a professed
fortune-teller_, _and have deceived hundreds_.  She succeeded in
persuading them to go home.

At a meeting of Gipsies held at a gentleman's house, Jan. 1830, the
youngest child of this woman said to her mother, _Mammy_, _who be all
these folks_?  The mother replied, _They are Gipsies_.  _Was_ I _ever
like 'em_? asked the child.  _Yes_, said the mother, _you was once a poor
little Gipsy without stockings and shoes_, _and glad to beg a halfpenny
of any body_.  It is a circumstance not to be lamented, that the
condition even of a little child, has been so much bettered by the
exertions of the Committee.

In addition to the encouragement afforded us by this woman, giving up
with so much decision the practice of fortune-telling, the author must
not forget to mention an instance of her forbearance of temper under
provocation and outrage.  She had, when a vagrant, a quarrel with some of
her ignorant people of another tribe.  Meeting with them after her
reformation, she was severely beaten by them, and had her ear-drops torn
from her ears, while they contemptuously called her _Methodist_.  When
asked, why she did not bring her persecutors to justice, she replied,
_How can I be forgiven_, _if I do not forgive_?  _That is what my
Testament tells me_.

The young widow we have before mentioned, continued to tell fortunes for
some time after we had taken her children; but it pleased the Holy Spirit
to awaken her conscience, and to shew her the wickedness of such crimes,
by which she was led to true repentance and reformation of character.

After the death of both the children of this interesting individual, she
went into the service of a kind and pious lady in London.  For this
situation she was prepared by one of equal benevolence in Southampton,
who had her for some time in her own house for that purpose.  She
continued in this situation till the lady's death, and has since been in
other service, where she has conducted herself so well as to prove she is
become a sincere servant of Christ.




CHAP. X.  Some Remarks on the Sin of Fortune-telling.


The author will be pardoned, he is willing to hope, by the kind reader,
if he digress in one or two paragraphs in this part of his work,
purposely to expose the great wickedness of prognostication and
fortune-telling; as the whole is not only unsound, foolish, absurd and
false, but is most peremptorily forbidden in the Scriptures.

In the law of Moses it is commanded, that there should not be found among
the people, any that used divination, or that was an observer of the
times, or that was an enchanter: Deut. xiii. 10.  In the prophecies of
Malachi, the Lord has declared--_Thou shalt have no more soothsayers_:
Mal. v. 12.  Balaam and Balak were cursed of the Lord of Hosts; the
former for using enchantments, and the latter for employing Balaam in
this wicked work.  _Woe to them that devise iniquity_: Micah, ii. 1.
Those who employ unhappy Gipsy women, should think on the portion of the
liar; Rev. xxi. 8: for the person who tempts another to utter falsehood
by offering rewards, is equally guilty before God.  _A companion of fools
shall be destroyed_: Prov. xiii. 20.  _Though hand join in hand_, in sin,
_the wicked shall not go unpunished_: Prov. xvi. 5.  _The destruction of
the transgressors and the sinners shall be together_: Isai. i. 28.  It
may be safely affirmed that the sin of those persons, who trifle with
Gipsy women in having their fortunes told by them, nearly resembles that
of the first king of Israel; who, by consulting, in his trouble, a wicked
woman, who pretended to supernatural power, filled up the measure of
those sins, by which he lost the protection of heaven, his crown, and his
life, and by which he involved his family in the most ruinous calamity.

Reader, have you encouraged any of these people in such crimes?  If you
have so far forgotten yourselves, the commands of God, and the curse that
awaits you and those who deceive themselves the same way; reflect, before
it be too late, on the evil into which you have willingly, wilfully, and
without the least reasonable excuse, fallen, and on the guilt that must
of necessity attach to your consciences thereby.  Should you never meet
those you encouraged to sin in this world, and therefore never have an
opportunity of warning them of their danger, yet must you meet at the bar
of Christ; and if then loaded with the weight of the sin in question, how
awful will be your condition!  Yourself and a fellow creature turned out
for ever from God, and heaven, and hope!  You may find mercy _now_, if
you, by faith in the Redeemer, _seek for it_; and who can tell but if you
sincerely pray for those you led into sin, but that the mercy of which
you part take, may find out them!  May it even be so, to your everlasting
comfort!

Some have supposed that this contemptible practice was first introduced
into Europe by the Gipsies: but such persons are greatly mistaken.  In
the dark ages of superstition, in which this wandering people came to our
part of the world, prognostication and fortune-telling were carried on to
an infinite extent; and so enraged were the deceivers of those days
against the Gipsies, that they proclaimed they knew nothing of the _art_;
that they were deceivers and impostors.

It were well if the Gipsies were _now_ the only persons addicted to such
wickedness; but this is not the case; for it is well known that almost
every town is cursed with an astrological, magical, or slight-of-hand
fortune-teller.  There are two now in Southampton; and their wretched
abodes are visited not only by vain and ignorant servants, but often by
those who belong to the higher circles, and not unfrequently by those who
drive their carriages.

To conclude this chapter, it may be safely said, that the sort of
wickedness in question, is not only forbidden in the Scriptures, and will
add much to the guilt of an impenitent death; but that it is calculated
to give us the most airy anticipations, or oppress us with the most
unreasonable despair.  _Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof_; why
should we then afflict ourselves about ill-fortune in future years?  If
we _seek_, as the first great object of life, _the kingdom of heaven_,
_all _[necessary] _things shall be added_.  And why should we deceive
ourselves with gay and splendid expectations?  _Riches make themselves
wings and soon fly away_.




CHAP. XI.  Plans suggested to the pious and benevolent for promoting a
Reformation among the Gipsies.


As no event happens without a cause, so no good is accomplished without
means.  It is in the power of man as an instrument, frequently to make
his fellow-creatures either happy or miserable.  And it may safely be
asserted, that much of the ignorance, depravity, and consequent misery
found in the world, are occasioned by the want of a united and
persevering application of the energies of Christians, to the reformation
of the most debased classes of Society.  This backwardness to perform
that which is good, with respect to our fellow men, must be accounted
for, by the want of faith in God's word, and the little influence we
allow the religion of the Saviour to have on our own hearts.  It may also
be occasioned by the strong evidences we have of the corruption of human
nature, and the little good we see attend the labours of others: and we
are often likewise discouraged because our own efforts fail.  On these
accounts, how often do we sigh for opportunities of doing good, whilst we
neglect the openings of Providence in little things, which would
frequently lead to the accomplishment of most important usefulness.  Dr
Johnson used to say, "He who waits to do a great deal of good at once,
will never do any."  Good is done by degrees.  However small in
proportion the benefit which follows _individual attempts_ to do good, a
great deal may thus be accomplished by perseverance, even in the midst of
discouragements and disappointments.  The first missionaries who visited
England, had to contend with all the frightful cruelties of savage life,
and the more horrid rites of Druidical worship.  But now, though much
wickedness abounds in England, it is, in a religious point of view, the
paradise of the earth.  May all those who wish to diffuse the genuine
influences of Christianity among the poor Gipsies, imitate the example of
the adorable Saviour, who _made himself of no reputation_, that he might
enlighten the most ignorant, and impart happiness to the most miserable.

It will not be denied that the Gipsies are capable of feeling the
influence, and appreciating the worth of the Gospel: and no one will
doubt that the earlier the plans are adopted for their improvement, the
sooner will this desirable work be accomplished.

The reader is requested to pay particular attention to the following
suggestions.

The establishment of an Institution to supply instruction to the Gipsies
by regular Ministers, or Missionaries, would be of but little use.
Indeed such a measure could scarcely be carried into effect.  For the
Gipsies, beside associating in very small companies, are perpetually
driven from place to place.  To supply them, therefore, with regular
instruction, a preacher would be necessary to every family; who would
condescend to their mode of life, travel when they travelled, rest when
they rested, and be content with the ground and straw for his bed, and a
blanket tent for his covering!  All this would subject them to great
personal inconvenience, and at the same time be very expensive and highly
improper.  Neither would it be possible for ministers to be appointed
occasionally and alternately to visit the Gipsies in different counties.
For it might often happen that, before intelligence could be forwarded to
those appointed to give them instruction, they might be removed by a
peace officer, or have set out on a journey of several miles distance.
Benevolent, zealous, and prudent persons may do much by visiting the
camps near towns; and the most suitable parts of the day for promoting
this object, are morning and evening.  But the most simple and easy plans
of instruction should invariably be adopted.

To those persons who are afraid of visiting the Gipsies, lest they should
be insulted, abused, and robbed, the author may be allowed to say that
they have not the least grounds for such fears.  In Scotland this fear is
quite as general among the religious people as it is in England; and in
that country the inhabitants are even afraid to prosecute them for their
depredations and crimes.  In England ladies are frequently known to visit
their camps singly, when more than a mile from towns, and to sit and read
and converse with them for a considerable time, with the greatest
confidence and safety.

There is not the least prospect of doing them good, by forcing
instruction upon them.  About the year 1748, the Empress Theresa
attempted the improvement of the Gipsies in Germany, by taking away, by
force, all their children of a certain age, in order to educate and
protect them; but such an unnatural and arbitrary mode of benevolence,
defeated its own object; and this is not to be wondered at: the souls of
the free resist every effort of compulsion, whether the object be good or
bad.  Compulsatory instruction, therefore, would do no good among the
Gipsies.  But they are easily won by kindness, and whoever wishes really
to benefit them, must convince them that this is his intention, by
patiently bearing with the unpleasing parts of their characters, and by a
willingness to lessen their distresses so far as it is in his power.
Such kindness will never be lost upon them.  Nor would the author
recommend their being encouraged to live in Towns, except they are truly
desirous of leading a new life, as it is almost certain that their morals
would be greatly corrupted thereby: and they would be capable of more
extensive injury to society, should they take to their wandering habits
again.

A correspondent of a friend of the author, has just communicated the
following particulars, which prove the truth of the above remarks.

There is in the neighbourhood of Harz, at Nordausen, a colony of Gipsies,
to whom a Missionary has been sent from Berlin.  His last letter speaks
very favourably of their disposition to receive the word of life.  The
manner of his introduction to them was by no means likely to ensure him a
favourable reception.  "Here," said the person who brought him among
them, "you have a Missionary, who is come to convert you; now mind and be
converted, or you shall go to prison."  The effect this foolish speech
produced on the Gipsies may be easily imagined, and likewise how useless
it rendered the situation of the Missionary who desired to labour among
them.  They took to flight whenever they saw him approach, and thus,
humanly speaking, there appeared not the least prospect of success, as
the seed of the word could not so much as be sown.  But HE, who alone is
able to turn the heart, mercifully looked upon the work, and directed him
to the right means effectually to bring it about.

The Gipsies were obliged to cultivate the land on which they were
permitted to reside; but being quite ignorant of agriculture, they were
at a loss how to proceed.  The missionary undertook himself to give them
advice and assistance in the work.  Seeing the success that attended his
labours, they began to be much more diligent in the cultivation of their
grounds, while their confidence daily increased in their missionary, and
they became more accessible and willing to be taught.  At last they asked
him for what reason the people at Berlin had sent him among them? and
when he told them, they were overpowered with gratitude, and melted into
tears.  Their attachment to him and the friends who had sent him, became
stronger and stronger.  In some cases, it may be true, the conquest of
their prejudices against the missionary, might proceed from the
advantages they reaped by attending to his advice; and this is much to
their credit, and is a most desirable improvement.  It is hoped they will
soon be led to attend sincerely to his religious instructions.

A gentleman resident in one of the towns of Hampshire, was agreeably
surprised one sabbath morning, by seeing a number of Gipsies at public
worship; and on being induced to converse with them, was pleased to find
that they regularly attended divine service at Southampton, and other
places.  He directed them to move their tents into a more commodious
situation in one of his own fields.  This unusual act of kindness, which
however required no great sacrifice on his part, made so deep an
impression on the hearts of this people, as is not likely to be
forgotten: they will speak of his kindness as long as they live.  This,
as well as the instances we have mentioned already in this work, and many
more which we may not notice, shew that we are not without opportunities
of observing their gratitude for those favours that have been bestowed
upon them.

They receive with willingness one of their own people, who is now a
reformed and pious character, living at Southampton, and whom we have
named in a former page.  They now rejoice, too, in the assurance that a
great number of good Christians pity and love them, and are seeking to
promote their present and everlasting happiness.

It is therefore much to be wished, that committees of ladies or gentlemen
were formed in every town in the kingdom, and their attention directed to
this neglected class of British subjects.  An active person might be
found in every place, to act under the sanction of such committees, who
should visit their tents, instruct them in the Scriptures, and pray with
and for them (the latter he should never neglect) by which means he would
gain their confidence, and would always be looked on as a friend.  Such a
person should not be ashamed to speak kindly to them when he meets them
in the street, or on the road.  Indeed at all times he should converse
with them plainly and affectionately about the great love of the
Redeemer, in coming into this our world, to suffer and die for guilty
sinners, of whom they make a number.  But all the labour should not be
confined to one person.  Every member of these committees should be alive
to this good work; as also all Christians, and especially ministers.

But should there not be sufficient energy and benevolence in all towns to
form a committee, two or three who are well disposed to the object, may
unite together and accomplish a great deal.  And should there not be
found more than one person thus benevolently disposed, let not that one
be discouraged.  The single talent must not be neglected, should it be
only the power to give a cup of cold water, or to speak one word about
the water of life to a necessitous and perishing Gipsy; for it may not,
cannot be in vain.  Reader, are you doing what you can in this humble
way?  It may be, you would rather ascend the pulpit and preach to
well-informed Christians, or visit the ignorant in your own town!  This
is well; but the other should not be left undone.  The wanderers in the
wilderness are not to be forgotten; the outcasts of society are to be
sought after.  Let us imitate our adorable Redeemer, _who went about
doing good_, and who sought those who were not the least desirous of
finding him.  As an encouragement to British Christians, who are alive to
the happiness of the Gipsies, they should know that there are many among
them desirous of a new mode of life, as will appear by an application
lately made to the author.

                                          "_Bristol_, _Oct._ 11_th_, 1830.

    "My dear Sir,

    "I am unwilling to let a parcel go to Southampton, without sending
    you a line to give you a little information respecting H---, of whom
    I made enquiry if she had called on the friends to whom I directed
    her?  This was done by her; but she could obtain no employment.  Both
    H--- and her husband conduct themselves in a very satisfactory
    manner.  A young lady, I hope, will employ her soon; and, perhaps, in
    time she may get into regular work; but at present, she gets very
    little, and it is very necessary that the man should have employment.
    The cork trade is now over; (he used to sell corks.)  They can have
    the loan of a donkey for two months for nothing, and that being the
    case, I told H--- to look out for a small cart, which I desired her
    to hire for a week, and sell coals and potatoes in small quantities.
    {97}  I have felt fearful lest you should think me too busy; but
    necessity has compelled me to do something, or they must have almost
    _starved_; and I cannot bear the thought of their wanting bread;
    knowing it must be a great temptation for them to return to their old
    habits.  The man appears much altered for the better.  He said one
    day, when they wanted food, that he would rather beg than oblige his
    wife to return to fortune-telling.  H--- tells me that her husband
    and she live happily, and that they have had words but once since
    they left their vagrant life.  I am also happy to discover in her
    pleasing evidences of honesty, as she pays her weekly rent often
    before it is due, when she has money, fearing that she may spend it
    in food.  Job, their son, has no work, but I hope that he will be
    able to help his father.  Do, my dear Mr Crabb, pray for this little
    branch of your family.  I have received two pounds for your Infants'
    Schools, from Mr ---, and would send it now, but I have been obliged
    to expend a considerable part of it on these poor Gipsies.  Do write
    to me when you can, and give me advice respecting this poor family."

    The author must remark that, since the above letter was received,
    others also have been sent from two ladies in that neighbourhood,
    which give the Southampton committee great pleasure.  The following
    are extracts.

    "I have seen Mr ---, and have had a pleasing interview with Miss ---,
    relating to the poor wanderers you wrote to me about.  I have had the
    man and woman at my house.  After having heard H--- read, I told her
    'that the leprosy she had been reading of, represented the evil of
    our sinful heart; that we were born with it; that it prevailed in
    every part of the soul; and that we had lived always under its
    influence.'  She exclaimed, _dear me_! _ I never heard the like of
    that before_! _now it seems good for me to know this_.  She wept
    much.  When I told her of the love of Christ, she appeared struck
    with her own extreme ingratitude.  Her expressions were so simple and
    full of pathos, that my heart was quite overcome.  She ran out of the
    room for her husband, and on her return, said, "ah! _do talk_ to my
    poor husband, just what you said to me."  I found him not so
    interesting, but desirous of leaving his wandering life for ever, and
    get employment if possible.  They have made some flower baskets for
    me; and hoping they may obtain orders for more, I have recommended
    them to my friends.  I have heard of another family, consisting of
    fourteen souls, who encamp on Bedminster Down, and there by God's
    help, I intend to send a minister of Jesus, to try what can be done
    for them.  There is also another family expected, who have a house of
    _their own_ at Bedminster, and who winter there.  Should the Lord
    bless our humble endeavours, we must have a regular Committee, and
    set about our work in a workman-like manner; nothing short of a
    Colony will satisfy me.  I intend to introduce this interesting
    subject at a party this evening, and hope the Lord will open the
    hearts of his people, to do good to those poor benighted wanderers."

The author has also just received from a clergyman in Scotland, a most
interesting account of a colony of Gipsies in that country, where, I am
happy to observe, they do not seem so much hunted as in England.  And as
the severity of their winters drive them into houses for three months,
during that season, there is offered a fair opportunity to both ministers
and kindly disposed Christians to do them good.  The letter alluded to is
most gladly inserted with the view to encourage the Christian
denominations of England to imitate the benevolence, zeal, and industry
of their much respected brethren the Scotch.

                                     "_Yetholm Hall_, _Dec._ 11_th_, 1830.

    "My dear Sir,

    "Through the report of the Society for ameliorating the condition of
    that unfortunate race, the Gipsies, I am acquainted with your name,
    and with your benevolent exertions in their behalf.  As the minister
    of a parish in which perhaps the largest colony of this people in
    Scotland reside, and naturally, therefore, very much interested in
    any plan that promises to improve their condition, I take the liberty
    of writing you; not so much for the purpose of answering the numerous
    queries subjoined to the report, as of requesting your advice and
    opinion, with regard to what plan might be adopted for the
    improvement of the colony, placed, in some degree, under my care and
    superintendence.  I have but lately been called to the ministerial
    office, and appointed to the pastoral care of this parish; and
    previous to the period of my appointment, I had no opportunity of
    being acquainted with the character and habits of the Gipsies.  Your
    longer acquaintance with this people, and experience, may suggest to
    me some useful hints on the subject, should you take the trouble to
    notice this letter.  The number of Gipsies in the parish of Yetholm
    is about 100.  You are no doubt already in some degree acquainted
    with the Gipsies of Kirk Yetholm, from the interesting notices
    furnished by Mr Smith, of Kelso, and published in HOYLAND'S SURVEY,
    and in one of the earliest numbers of Blackwood's Magazine.  And his
    account of them is substantially correct to this day.  It would
    appear that the Gipsy population of this place is fluctuating.  In
    1798, there were only 59.  In 1818, when Mr Smith wrote, there were
    109.  In 1830, there are 100.  And in a few years more, this number
    may be considerably diminished or increased.  The greater part of
    them are "muggers," or "potters," who carry earthen-ware about the
    country for sale.  There are two horn spoon makers; all the others
    are abroad from their head quarters, of Kirk Yetholm, from eight to
    nine months in the year.  The history of some of the individuals and
    families of the clan, would furnish something very interesting.  One
    of the family of the Taa's is still denominated the "King."  The
    number of children belonging to each family is generally large.
    There may be thirty children under twelve years of age.  The parents
    express themselves very anxious that their children should be
    educated, and are willing, for this purpose, to leave them at home
    all the summer; and farther, that they should be trained to some
    occupation different from their own.  Many of the parents declare,
    that they would willingly remain at home, could they be supplied with
    constant employment.  Of late, the greater number of them have
    occasionally attended church, and some of them continue to attend
    most regularly when at home.  A considerable number of the younger
    children also, when at home, attend our Sabbath School.  I have
    likewise assisted the parents to send most of their children to the
    Day School: still, however, these children are at home scarcely three
    months in the depth of winter.  Several families have not returned
    yet.  Their education, therefore, even were they sent regularly to
    school, during this time, would be very limited.  And besides, by
    attending the parents to the country, they contract an attachment to
    their loose, wandering life, which must tend to perpetuate the
    peculiarities of the tribe.  A few weeks ago I was requested by Dr
    Baird, the Principal of the University, and one of the ministers of
    Edinburgh, to write out a pretty full account of these my
    parishioners.  This I have done.  The account, however, was written
    so hastily, that I had not time even to correspond with you on the
    subject, before doing so, as my object in writing to you was chiefly
    to propose some plan which might be adopted for their improvement, on
    which you might give me some useful information.  In this account, I
    have proposed that a fund or subscription should be raised for the
    purpose of keeping the children at home during those months their
    parents are traversing the country, for paying their school wages,
    and, if possible, for giving a salary to a teacher to superintend
    their education, and that a small additional sum be occasionally in
    readiness for paying an apprentice-fee with the boys.  This account
    may probably be published.  I am in hopes, also, that the Principal
    will interest himself in the cause.  Should the account be published,
    the proof-sheet may be sent down to me, ere long, in which case I
    should wish to hear from you before that time, as I may have then an
    opportunity of supplying any hint, or otherwise altering the plan
    proposed, from your kind communication.  The sum which I conceived
    would be required for the purpose was about a hundred pounds per
    annum.  Mr B---, of Killau, with whom, I believe, we both have the
    pleasure of being acquainted, has more than once wished me to open a
    correspondence with you on this subject.  He also is interested in
    the cause, and promises to use his influence with others.  I think he
    told me that some more detailed account of your plan was published,
    or preparing for the press, in which various alterations and
    improvements had been made.  This was an additional reason for my
    wishing to hear from you, before submitting to the people of Scotland
    any plan on the subject.  I should wish to know how the cause
    prospers with you, and what number you have at present under your
    care.  I am extremely interested for this unfortunate people, and any
    information therefore with regard to what is doing elsewhere, would
    be acceptable.  May He prosper the cause, whose blessing alone can
    render our labours effectual!

    I remain, my dear Sir,

                                             With much respect and esteem,
                                                              Yours truly,
                                                               JOHN BAIRD.

"P. S.--I have just received a letter from Principal Baird, informing me
that my account of the Gipsies of Kirk Yetholm, will be published, and a
proof for correction be sent to me shortly.  It will be published in a
new statistical account of Scotland, which will ensure for it a very
extensive circulation, especially among the ministers of the established
church of Scotland."

Another letter relating to the Gipsies of Yetholm, has been received from
the same clergyman, extracts of which may be seen in the Appendix.




CHAP. XII.  Plans suggested to the pious and benevolent, for promoting a
Reformation among the Gipsies, continued.


It is usual, in Southampton, for a few pence to be given to a child who
informs any of the members of the Committee when a family of Gipsies
begin to erect their tents on the common, that they may immediately be
visited by our Reader.  This may be done elsewhere.  It may be well, too,
to buy a basket, or any other article they may honestly have to dispose
of, when opportunity offers; but it is not well to bestow money on them,
unless in sickness or want.  When their wives are confined, a favourable
opportunity offers to bring into action the sympathies of compassion in
other females; and what gratitude would such an instance of tenderness
beget!  These poor women have frequently been heard to exclaim, while
tears filled their eyes, _How kind_, _how good to us_! for favours very
much less!

The author has seldom met with instances of ingratitude, though he is
obliged to record one.  He was interested in the reformation of a Gipsy
family that encamped, a short time since, about five miles from
Southampton, whom he visited early on a Monday morning.  Reaching the
camp, accompanied by the old Gipsy he has often mentioned in the course
of this work, he said to them, "Since you would not come to see me, I am
come to see you."  The camp, consisting of eight persons, gave him a
cordial reception, the husband excepted, who said, he did not want his
company.  "You certainly do not mean what you say," said his friend; to
which he ungratefully replied, "I never speak words without meaning."  In
a good-natured way he was questioned as to the truth of his being a
Gipsy, accompanied with the remark, that Gipsies were seldom ungrateful
for the favours which were shown them.  In half an hour after, he left
the camp very angrily.  This man had been released from many years'
imprisonment, through the author's intercession; but having associated
with thieves so long, the worst principles of his heart were drawn forth.
Before he left the camp, he said he had no care about his children, but
to feed and clothe them.  "Then you only treat your children as a man
does his dogs and pigs."  He replied, that "such treatment was good
enough."  This is a common sentiment; for the generality of parents have
no further care about their children than to feed and clothe them.  Such
persons are not perhaps aware how nearly they come to that dreadful state
of mind and heart, of which this ungrateful Gipsy so wickedly boasted.

After he had left the party, those who remained attended to conversation
and prayer, when one of the women wept bitterly on account of her sin of
fortune-telling.  The author has since been informed that this poor man
expresses his sorrow for his uncalled-for behaviour.

The plans adopted in Southampton, for the conversion of the Gipsies in
Hampshire, are now generally known among their people.  Not long ago, an
old woman brought four orphans of a deceased relative from a great
distance, in order to place them under the care of the Committee.  On
this occasion the old woman thus addressed the author.  "Are you Mr
Crabb?"  Being told, yes, she continued--"Mr Chas. Stanley, a Gipsey,
desired me to bring you these poor orphans."  The author being assured
that they were orphans, promised, after some conversation, to visit their
tent the following day.  He did so, and never can he forget the
distressing scene he then witnessed.  It was winter, and the weather was
unusually cold, there being much snow on the ground.  The tent, which was
only covered with a _ragged_ blanket, was pitched on the lee side of a
_small_ hawthorn bush.  The children had stolen a few _green_ sticks from
the hedges, but they would not burn.  _There was no straw_ in the tent,
and only one blanket to lay betwixt six children and the frozen ground,
with nothing to cover them.  The youngest of these children was three,
and the eldest, seventeen years old.  In addition to this wretchedness,
the smaller children were nearly naked.  The youngest was squatted on the
ground, her little feet and legs bare, and gnawing a frozen turnip, which
had been stolen from an adjoining field.  None of them had tasted bread
for more than a day.  The moment they saw their visitor, the little ones
repeatedly shouted, "Here is the _gemman come for us_!"  Some money was
given to the oldest sister to buy bread with, at which their joy was
greatly increased.  Straw was also provided for them to sleep on, four
were measured for clothes, and, after a few days, they were placed under
the care of one of our reformed Gipsies.  The youngest child died,
however, a short time after, in consequence of having been so neglected
in infancy.

The children were cleanly washed and newly clothed, before they were
removed from the common.  Perhaps they had never been thoroughly washed
before.  The oldest sister would not give up her wandering habits; and
the oldest boy chose to go back to the camp again; so that the Committee
had soon only three of them in charge.  And these were so filthy in their
habits for a long time, that it was very disagreeable to be near them.
It is hoped that, though they have lost their earthly parents, they may
be led, through this event, to God their heavenly Father.  These children
were soon baptized, and two of them are improving at one of the Infants'
Schools.

A short account of their parents may not be out of place here.  The
mother was a great fortune-teller and swindler.  She once robbed a poor
shepherd in Dorsetshire of twenty pounds, by promising to fill his box
with money.  Their father was a most depraved character.  Their life and
practices are well described in the language of the Apostle, _Let us eat
and drink_, _for to morrow we die_.  1 Cor. xv. 32.  The man was the
buffoon of their company, and became more depraved every year.  They
often had a great deal of money, which was, no doubt, obtained through
dishonest means.  On one occasion, he and many other Gipsies, entered the
parlour of a small public house on the borders of Hants, when emptying
the contents of a dirty purse into an half-pint cup, he nearly filled it
with sovereigns; and declared, they would not leave the house, till they
had spent it all.  His wife, at this time, who was intoxicated, was
robbed of all the money she had got from the poor credulous shepherd,
excepting one pound.

The same man once put 150 sovereigns into his kettle, to treat himself
with what he called, _gold water_, for his tea; a piece of folly and
wickedness only equalled by a fact with which the author is well
acquainted, when an old man had his gold put under his pillow, and often
shown to him, when he was dying.  We need not wonder, therefore, that the
children of this Gipsy couple should be so ignorant, depraved, and
destitute.  For money that is ill-gotten, and squandered in extravagance,
entails a double curse on the parties concerned.  But to return to the
subject of this chapter.

To visit the Gipsies in their tents is of great importance.  Clergymen of
the Establishment, dissenting ministers, and home missionaries, have at
various times done this, and conversed freely with them on the Christian
religion; and it has _not been in vain_.  Indeed, nothing that is done,
through Jesus Christ, purposely to please God, and benefit the wretched,
can fail to produce a good effect.  The Rev. Messrs Hyatt and Cobbin, who
were deputed by the Home Missionary Society, to visit many parts of
England, to enquire into the condition of this people, had no doubt, but
that much good may be done among them, if proper means are pursued.  It
has many times been proved, that to attempt to raise them in society,
without the influence of religious instruction, would be improper.  They
have not sufficient principles of honesty, nor purity of conduct, till
they are taught those principles, and changed, by religion.  One, among
several instances, may be named.

A young female Gipsy, remarkable for the beauty of her person, was much
noticed by a lady of rank.  She was made to sit many times for her
portrait, was introduced into the drawing-room, and became of consequence
as one of the family.  She might have done well, had she not given up all
her prospects by running away with a Gipsy youth, for whom she had an
attachment, and with whom she has ever since lived in great misery.  If
less attention had been paid to her beauty, and more to the cultivation
of right principles, she might now have been reformed, religious, and
happy.

To those who wish to forward the instruction of the children of these
wanderers, which is of vast importance, the use of tins with letters and
monosyllables stamped upon them, is recommended.  A little ink or paint
will be necessary to make the letters visible.  This plan would save much
expense, and render elementary books unnecessary.  They could not be
torn, as books generally are.  The pieces thrown away by the tinman, if
the corners were taken off, would answer every purpose.  To induce those
children, who cannot be got from the tent, to learn from these tins, the
visitor might promise them an old garment, or some other trifle.  Should
the Gipsies conduct themselves properly, when thus visited, a little
willow-wood may be given them to encourage them in industry, and forward
the manufactory of baskets.  And it might be well were a small piece of
ground devoted to the growth of willows, in neighbourhoods frequented by
them, on purpose to encourage them thereby.  It might be adviseable, too,
to give them testimonials on a card, of good conduct, when about to
remove to another district, which might serve as an introduction to
benevolent persons, and those interested in their welfare in other
places; and this means would effectually prevent all imposition, keep up
the attention of the good among them, and would constantly bring them
before the notice of christian society.  Such kindness would be felt by
the Gipsies, and, in time, might produce a good effect.  This method has
been attended to by the Southampton Committee.

The great object that Christians should have in view, should be to
instruct them in the blessed truths of the Christian religion, imbue them
with a happy sense of honesty and morality, and then reclaim them wholly
from their unsettled and wandering habits; for until they have some
knowledge of religion, and some anxiety to reform, they would only be
worse by being brought constantly before the bad examples that would be
set them in towns.  Of course, such a change _cannot be fully
accomplished in the present generation_; it cannot be expected.  But
their conversion to God will wholly be accomplished in time, if all
Christians do their duty, depending on the influence of the Holy Spirit.

From what has been said in this chapter, it will appear, that, visiting
their tents to pray for, and instruct them, teaching such children to
read as cannot get to public schools, and prevailing on all who are able
to do so, to attend public worship; are the principal things to be
attempted, in this great and good undertaking.  Those Christians who wish
for opportunities of doing good to the Gipsies in and about London, will
find many of them in the suburbs in the months of April, May, and June,
when they generally find work in the market gardens.  In the months of
July and August they move into Sussex and Kent, and are engaged in the
harvest.  And in the month of September, _great numbers_ of them are to
be found in the hop-districts of Kent, Sussex and Surry, where they find
employment.  During the winter, many of them settle in London,
Westminster, Bristol, and other large towns, when a good opportunity is
presented for teaching, both to the children and adults of this class,
the elements of reading, and the principles of true religion.  For the
information of those who may wish to visit the Gipsies in London and
Bristol, during the winter, the author thinks it his duty to name the
streets where they generally reside.

Tottenham-court Road; Battle Bridge; Paddington; Bolton Street; Church
Lane; Church Street; Kent Street, Borough; New Street; White Street;
Banbridge Street; Shore-ditch; Tothill-fields; and Tunbridge Street.  In
Bristol they are principally found in Saint Phillip's, Newfoundland
Street, Bedminster, and at the March and September fairs.

At the Ascot and Epsom races, they may be met in large numbers; and if a
benevolent, kind, and zealous minister of Christ were to visit them at
their encampments at these seasons, and explain to them the facts,
doctrines, and blessings of the Gospel, much good might be done.  The
morning would be the happiest time to visit these Gipsies, as they are
too often at races, inebriated before night.  It is presumed little could
be said to profit them in a state of intoxication, and many of the women
are then employed either in swindling or fortune-telling.

Should the sympathies of the British public be efficiently directed to
the Gipsies of this country, it may call forth the zeal of other nations
to improve their still more degraded condition on the Continent, where
more than half a million of them wander, ignorant as the heathens of all
that is necessary to salvation.  Those of this country loudly call upon
us for instruction, which may easily be given them.  Let all who have
either time, money, or ability, give a helping hand; and, above all,
assist by their unfeigned and earnest prayers.  It may be very advisable
to pray publicly for them in places of worship, and at the family altar,
after visiting them in the highways and hedges.  It might impress those
of them who attend, with a grateful sense of the gracious care of God,
and lead Christian congregations to think more of them, and to do more
for them.  May the merciful God of heaven and of earth, hasten the happy
period, when the Gipsies of this, and of all other countries, shall
embrace, and love, and be obedient to the Gospel of the gracious
Redeemer!




CHAP. XIII.  Further Account of encouraging interviews with Gipsies, and
interesting Correspondence.


The author laments that he has passed so many years of his life wholly
careless of the Gipsies of this country.  Having travelled many times
through England, he has had frequent opportunities of seeing them.  But,
till now, he looked on their conversion as a hopeless case, and nearly
wholly neglected them.  He has already stated the manner his attention
was first roused to consider their condition and necessities more
particularly, and he reflects with pleasure on the kindness of Providence
in leading him to witness those events which called for sympathy towards
them; and on the mercy of God so apparent in blessing the labours of
himself and others in their behalf.

The late Rev. Legh Richmond felt a deep interest in the conversion of
this people.  To awaken the sympathies and energies of his countrymen to
that subject, he composed the following hymn on their behalf.

    THE GIPSIES' PETITION.

    Oh! ye who have tasted of mercy and love,
       And shared in the blessings of pardoning grace;
    Let us the kind fruits of your tenderness prove,
       And pity, oh! pity the poor Gipsy race

    For long have we wandered, neglected and wild,
       Esteemed by all people as wretched and base;
    Nor once on our darkness has light ever smiled;
       Then pity, oh! pity the poor Gipsy race.

    Like you, we have lost that pure gem, which, when lost,
       Not the mines of Golconda {115} can ever replace;
    To redeem it the blood of a Saviour it cost:
       Then pity, oh! pity the poor Gipsy race.

    Like us, you were wild in the sight of your God;
       But he looked, and he loved, and he pitied your case;
    The Redeemer has cleansed you in streams of his blood;
       Then pity, oh! pity the poor Gipsy race.

    Ye, who have found mercy, that mercy display;
       Ye sons of adoption, your origin trace;
    And then sure you cannot your face turn away,
       But will pity and pray for the poor Gipsy race;

    That we may form part of that numerous throng,
       Redeemed from destruction by infinite grace;
    And mingle with you in the heavenly song;
       Then pity, oh! pity the poor Gipsy race.

It has been the custom of the author to have a yearly meeting of the
Gipsies at his own house, which is then open to all their families.
Here, early in the year 1830, those who were in the lanes and on the
common near Southampton, met many of their kind and religious friends,
who are interested in their happiness.  The morning was agreeably spent
in a religious service, conducted for their spiritual benefit; after
which some attention was paid to their temporal wants.  Forty-eight of
them, all nearly related to each other, who were at that time assembled
in the neighbourhood to renew their family friendships, attended on this
occasion, and were much pleased with the services in which they engaged.
Different portions of the Scriptures were read and expounded to them,
after which they had a plain and familiar address.  It was a pleasure to
meet these people at a throne of grace.  After partaking of bread and
cheese and ale, during which they conducted themselves very properly, a
blanket was presented to the proprietor of each tent, a pair of stockings
to every individual, and a quantity of calico for changes for the
children.  There were thirteen reformed Gipsies among them, who spent the
rest of the day in reading the Scriptures to their brethren at their own
houses.

These people expressed themselves very gratefully.  One of the families,
of whom the mother could read, begged a bible.  Some weeks after this
bible had been given, the family was visited in its tent, when this copy
of the Holy Scriptures was shewn to him, who observed many of the pages
doubled down to mark the passages with which the reader had been
impressed.  The father of the family said--"I will never rest till I can
read that book through."  This poor man now attends divine service
whenever he has an opportunity, although he strongly opposed, at one
time, the reading of the Scriptures in his tent.

A lady, who was present at this meeting, asked one of the reformed
Gipsies, how she had felt herself on that morning?  She replied--"I never
was so happy;" and, after a short silence, continued--"The dinner we had
last year, was much better than that we had to-day, as it was roast beef
and plum-pudding; but what I heard then, of the minister's address, was
only the word of man to me; but to-day, it has been the word of God; I am
sure it has."

Although it may be feared, that to many Gipsies then present, the reading
of the Scriptures, and the familiar address, were only as _the words of
man_, yet is there reason to hope they understood it, and that they will
benefit thereby.

This woman had an only surviving brother who was killed in fighting, and
whose death was instantaneous.  She was exceedingly distressed, and
observed, in reference to this awful circumstance, "I should not have
thought of his soul after death, at one time; but now I can read my
Testament, I am sure that none can go to heaven but those who are born
again."  And she made an observation, too, of the utmost importance,
shewing the great necessity there is for the Gipsies to be taught to
read.  _My being able to read myself_, said she, _has a great deal more
effect upon me_, _than it would if another read it to me_, _and I could
not read_; _for now_ I AM SURE IT IS IN THE BOOK.  She carries her
Testament in her pocket when she goes a journey, and reads it to her
former companions, when she meets them on the road; and if they express
any wonder at the change that has taken place, she refers them to the
Scriptures as the cause, and her kind friends at Southampton, as the
instruments.

The following circumstance lately occurred, and will shew the improvement
that has taken place in her daughters.  One of them had been sent by her
mother to receive the weekly sum allowed her.  On receiving the money,
she said, "This is twopence too much, sir."  Being accustomed now and
then to give her a few pence towards buying a Testament, she was told to
keep it for that purpose.  "I thank you," said she, "I have got a
Testament, now, and mother has given her's to my next sister, since she
has had a bible; and my youngest sister had a Testament given her at the
Sunday School: but one of us is saving money to buy a hymn-book with; I
will give _her_ the twopence."

This incident, trifling as it may seem to some, will not fail to gratify
others, whose hearts are anxiously desirous of improving the Gipsies.

In the autumn of 1830, the author felt a strong desire to visit Farnham,
where were, at that time, thousands of poor people assembled to pick
hops, among whom were many Gipsies.  Stanley was sent a few days before
to make known his intentions of preaching to them on the evening of a
fixed day.  While at Farnham, Stanley ate, drank, and slept in some of
their camps, by which he gained their confidence and affection.

During the author's stay he accompanied Stanley to various
hop-plantations, where great numbers of the most wretched part of the
community are employed in the hopping season.  Great numbers of tracts
were distributed among them, while the author entered into many free and
familiar conversations with them.  Many were found very much depraved;
but none were more depraved among the Gipsies, than many of the other
class; for they were blasphemers of God and his religion.  One man, like
many of old, stirred up the people to reject and despise the truth.  He
said, "No one would get any thing by praying to God;" and, "if people
wanted bread on a Sunday, it would be better for them to steal a mess of
potatoes, and wood to cook them with, than go to church."  Some of the
poor shuddered at his boldness, and contempt of God's law.  With much
impudence he declared, "that he knew a man who put his dough into the
oven on a Sunday without heating it, and then went to church to pray that
God would bake it for him; but that the fool was disappointed."  The
minister said to him--"You know that you have told a wilful lie.  You
never knew such a man.  There is not one of these little children will
believe you."  He appeared confounded at this unexpected rebuke.  May
this sinner repent and be saved!

Among the hop-pickers of Farnham were many Gipsies the visitors had long
known; and their smiling faces spoke the gladness of their hearts and the
warmth of their gratitude, when they were noticed by their friends
affectionately and kindly; nor had they forgotten the favours that had
been shewn them at Southampton.

Those of the Gipsies who were not acquainted with the object the author
had in view, in paying them a visit, were much alarmed when enquiries
were made for the Gipsies in the hop-grounds; supposing they were pursued
by the magistrates.  One youth told Stanley, that he knew not whether to
run, or stay where he was; but recollecting to have been _in no spray
lately_, he resolved on staying.  When Stanley spoke to him in his own
language, and introduced the minister, all his fears vanished.  The
Gipsies were astonished that any one should travel forty miles to see
them.

Their public meeting was after the labours of the day, near one of the
hop-grounds, about half an hour after sun-set.  A few small candles gave
light to a small tenement, used as a lodging place for the hop-gatherers,
where the congregation was accommodated.  A few of the inhabitants of
Farnham, and some of the female Gipsies, who were much delighted to
mingle with them in the worship of God, were put inside, and the men,
with such women and children as could not get in, stood outside, the
place being very much too small for so great a number of people.  The
preacher stood on the threshold of the door and addressed the people, of
whom those without could only be seen now and then, as an adjacent wood
fire cast at intervals upon them an intermitting light.  The Rev. Mr
Johnson kindly attended, and assisted in the devotional part of the
service; and some of his congregation obligingly assisted in the singing.

On this occasion the Gospel of Christ was addressed to many who had never
before heard an exposition of the blessed word of God.  The sermon was
from Psalm lxxxvi. 5.  After service the Gipsies were exhorted to seek
for opportunities of attending the house of God; to beg of some minister
a bible for every tent; and to ask every one who may come near them to
read certain of its pages to them.

During the address, many of _their crimes_ were enlarged upon, and their
dread of, and liability to punishment for them in this world; and they
were urged to call on the God of all compassion and mercy, for help and
for forgiveness, by that all-powerful motive, that he will never be
inattentive to the prayers of the most helpless, wretched, and guilty
sinner, when presented to God by faith in our only mediator, Jesus
Christ.

Stanley, who, after the service, accompanied the Gipsies to their tents,
found that the sermon afforded conversation for the whole evening.  One
of them said, "The minister has told us every thing, as though he had
lived with us."  Another observed, "If it be all true what the gentleman
has said, not a Gipsy can be saved."  A third exhorted his children
"never to say bad words again."  The little creature replied--"Then I
hope my _grandfer_ (grandfather) will never swear any more."  Many of
them talked of the evils of fortune-telling, and some resolved on going
to Southampton, to see the reformed Gipsies.

During the stay of the minister in that neighbourhood, eighty of them
were visited, among whom was a dying woman, who very gladly received
instruction, and heard prayer.  A minister, in the neighbourhood, had
been asked to visit her, but had neglected to do so.

The author must not forget to acknowledge the kindness of the farmers who
assisted him in the distribution of tracts, &c. &c., and who solicited
that some might be left them for that purpose.

This visit afforded an opportunity to contradict many false reports of
the treatment with which the Gipsy children had met in the Infants'
Schools at Southampton.  It was said that they were all confined, and
would at a future period be transported.  This shews how easily people
who deceive others, are imposed on themselves.

The following letter was addressed to the author by a Gipsy woman when
she was in great trouble of mind.  It is presented to the reader just as
it was received, and may be found interesting to the friends of their
cause.

    "Sir,

    "I Hope you will Excuse Me for Riun These few Lines too you, I did
    Not Now where To Cend to My Sister, I Have Been very Il and my
    Familee.  My Children Ave Had The Measils, They are Got Well from
    That.  I am Sorry to hinform you I Have Had A Shockin Accedent To my
    Little Girl, She was Burnd to Death.  I Give My Luv To My Son Job.
    Plese to Give My Luv to My Sister Paishince, and Hur Childern.  Plese
    to Give My Luv To My Ant Pheny, and Plese to Lett Me Now How My Cuzin
    James doos Go on, Plese to Lett Me Now How My Unkil Charls and His
    Famly Is.  Wm Duff Gives His Best Rispecs To All.  Plese To Tel My
    Sister too Anser This Letter By Returne of Post.  I Am So unappy in
    My Mind Till I Do Hear From Er.  Dear Sister, I Have Mett With so
    Much Trubel Sinc I Saw you Last, That I Am Sorre To inform you.
    Plese to Tel my Child from Me To Bee A Good Boy, and Think Imself Wel
    off Wher He Is.  My Distris and My Trubel Makes Me Think More of My
    Sister.  Ples To Direct the Letter To Be Left At The Post Offis, for
    Haryett Duff, Till Caulld for, in Bristil.  Plese To Give My Luv To
    My Son Job.  So No More At Prezint from your Umble Sarvint.  Plese
    God I Am Coming To See You Some time This Munth.

    "My Littel Girl Met The Accedent Wednesday, April 23, 1828."

The following letter, too, refers to the writer of the above.

                                                _Bristol_, _August_, 1830.

    "My dear Sir,

    "As I know that you are deeply interested in every circumstance
    relating to the Gipsies, I trouble you with the following anecdote.
    In the month of January last, when walking in the city of Bristol, I
    met a Gipsy woman, who accosted me with the usual salutation of her
    race, "Shall I tell you your fortune?"  I enquired her name, and then
    said, "You well know that you are not able to tell me my fortune; and
    I am sorry to see you carrying on such deception."  I then
    endeavoured to speak to her about the importance of considering her
    eternal welfare, and of seeking the salvation which is in Christ
    Jesus; at the same time pointing out the certain condemnation she was
    bringing upon herself, by willingly following the _multitude to do
    evil_, even carrying _a lie in her right hand_.  She urged that her
    trade (which she acknowledged to be built on deceit and falsehood)
    was her only support; and that she must starve if she followed my
    advice.  I reminded her that she would be like Dives, if she gained
    the whole world and lost her own soul; but that were she indeed to
    honour God, by giving up her wicked trade, because she knew that it
    was displeasing to him, he would never suffer her to want any good
    thing.  After much more conversation, she assured me that she would
    never tell fortunes again, and would discontinue her evil habits of
    life.  I told her that I could not allow her to make to me any
    promise of the kind; for she did not know her wickedness, nor the
    power which could alone prevent her from committing sin.  I again
    besought her to avail herself of the means of instruction within her
    power.

    Before leaving the city, I commended her to the care of some pious
    friends, who were interested in my account of her, and who kindly
    promised not to lose sight of her.  Since that time I have received
    very pleasing accounts from them respecting her.  They have purchased
    materials in order that she may be able to support herself by
    basket-making, which she has begun; and I trust she has relinquished
    her former trade.  She is making progress in reading, and constantly
    attends the preaching of the Gospel.  I hope also that she is really
    in earnest for the welfare of her soul.  I earnestly wish that every
    one would take an interest in the same; and I should be much rejoiced
    if the circumstance which I have just mentioned, should be the means
    of encouraging any one to notice those Gipsies with whom they may
    occasionally meet, and to exert themselves in saving them from their
    present degraded condition.

    "I am, my dear Sir,
       "Yours respectfully,
          * * * * *

_Wm. Stanley's Letter to the Author_.

    "Hon. Sir,

    "As you wish me to give you some account of the Gipsies, I gladly
    comply with your request.  I am a poor individual of that wandering
    race, called Gipsies; yet, by the mercies of God, I was _rescued_
    from that wandering life.  In my _youthful days_ I entered into the
    Wiltshire militia, when it pleased God to bring me under the
    preaching of the Gospel at Exeter; and it was the means of awakening
    my conscience.  _From that time I have often been led to bepity the
    sad state of the people whereof I made a part_.  I have given them
    the best instruction that lay in my power, and by reading the
    Scriptures to them; but with very little visible effect for many
    years.  Neither did I think, till lately, that there were any of them
    in the world, that cared for their souls, till the year 1827; when I
    was quite _overcome with love to God_, _to find that the Lord had put
    it into the hearts of his dear people at Southampton_, _to pity them
    in their forlorn condition_; and now wonder not if I am at a loss for
    words to speak the feeling of my heart; for, since that time I have
    seen _seventeen or eighteen_; _nay_, _from twenty to thirty_; _nay_,
    _from forty to fifty attend divine worship_; and _add_ to this the
    many happy hours I have spent with them in their tents near
    Southampton, in reading and praying with them; and some of them that
    six months ago would not stay in their camp on my approach to them,
    but would go away swearing, will now receive me gladly, and produce a
    Bible or a Testament, which _had_ been given to them, and desire me
    to read it to them, saying, this book was given to me by our dear
    friends in Southampton.  But, _dreadful to relate_, I find some
    children, _from three years old to fifteen_, who never _said a prayer
    to their God_; who never heard any one pray, and who _was_ never in a
    church or chapel, nor have heard of the name of Christ, but in
    blaspheming; and these are the inhabitants of England!  Oh, England!
    England! they are living and dying without God: no wonder if they
    draw down the divine vengeance of Heaven on the land!

    "Many of these poor _ignorant mortals_ do not know that they are
    doing wrong by fortune-telling; and being informed that it is
    displeasing to God, and ruinous to their own souls, they will say, it
    is _of no service for me to give attendance to religion_, for I am
    forced to ruin my soul for every morsel of bread I eat; but if God
    spares my life I will leave it off as soon as I can; while others who
    are both ignorant and hardened in their crimes, have told me it was
    the gift of God to them, by which they were to gain their living.
    Surely they call _darkness light_!  Many of my people who join in
    talk with me, declare, that if the Bible which I read to them be
    true, there cannot be many saved.  But they say that a reformation is
    needful, and this is promised by them; and I am in great hopes that
    the time is at hand.  Oh, Lord! work for thine own glory, and stir up
    the minds of thy people in all parts of the land, that they may help
    forward this good work amongst these poor wanderers!

    "Their ignorance and their crimes seem to have increased of late
    years.  When I was a boy, I well recollect their parting expressions,
    which _was_ so common amongst them--_Artmee Devillesty_, which
    is--_God bless you_.  But now it is _truly awful_; it is _darkness
    itself_, _for they now ask God to send them good luck_ in their
    crimes.  I _myself_ thought for many years, _till __I heard the
    Gospel_, _that God was like some great gentleman_, _living at a great
    distance from us_; but I had not a thought that he was every where
    present to notice the conduct of his creatures, or to hear prayer.
    The ignorance of _my people_ is a loud call to Christians to assist;
    and, blessed be God, they find that assistance in Southampton.  The
    Bible has often been taken away from Southampton in the Gipsies'
    pack, and I have seen it when they have returned, preserved with a
    great deal of care, and produced for me to read, with great delight
    on their part.

    "Surely this blessed book will not be idle, but will do _wonders_
    amongst them, _through God's grace_.  I see the effects already; do
    you say, how?  I answer, _Was it ever known_, _till now_, that
    Gipsies assembled on the sabbath day on the common and in the lanes
    for divine worship?  Did you ever see them come to town on a sabbath
    day in such great numbers as they now do, when encamping near
    Southampton?  Some of the most ignorant of them are now learning to
    read the Scriptures.  This is the beginning of good days.  Oh! the
    good this will do to _my people at large_!  Nothing of importance
    took place in their camp all last summer, _and I almost fainted under
    the discouragement_; but of late _it shows another face_; and I make
    no doubt but it will spread, and I shall soon see greater things than
    these.

    I am, hon. Sir,
    Your most obliged and humble Servant,
    WILLIAM STANLEY."

    "P. S.--On examining the different _branches of my family_, I find
    upwards of 200 of us in different parts of England."

This poor man, when a soldier, and in the habit of attending divine
service, as a part of his duty, often heard his comrades speak of the
text, on their return to the barracks.  He one day made up his mind to
bring home the text also, the next time he went to church.  He heard with
attention, and when he returned to the barracks, he said, "I've got the
text now."  "What is it, Stanley?" he was asked by a comrade, when he
answered, "The 19th day of the month, and the 95th Psalm."  When relating
this to the author, he added, "I had the mortification to be laughed at
by all my comrades who witnessed my ignorance."  Do not many professing
Christians come away from the house of God as ignorant as this poor
Gipsy?  Or if they have been taught to know and remember the text, it is
all they attend to.  This man's mind did not long remain in this dark
state.  After the above event he learned to read, and one day, taking up
a Testament from the barracks' table, he read a portion of it, (for so he
expressed himself)  _The sublimity of the language struck his mind with
astonishment_, and he said, _I will buy that book if I can_.  His comrade
asked him three halfpence for it; and he was glad of his purchase;
although the Testament was very much torn.  The Holy Scriptures were
scarce in those days, a copy of which could seldom be bought by the poor;
nor, indeed, would the word of life have been useful to them, as not one
in a hundred could read.

Soon after this, he was invited to attend a Wesleyan chapel in Exeter,
where a funeral sermon was to be preached by the Rev. Wm. Aver.  The text
was, _Let me die the death of the righteous_, _and let my last end be
like his_.  While the minister was describing the happiness of the
righteous, divine light shone upon his soul, he felt that _he_ was not
that character, and that there was no prospect of his dying happily,
unless he possessed it.  This sermon was the means of his conversion.




CHAP. XIV.  Interesting particulars of the Gipsies, related by a
Clergyman.


The following account is selected from a tract published in York, in
1822, detailing several interesting visits that a Yorkshire clergyman
made to some of the camps of that wandering and neglected people.  Were
the author of the little book known, application would have been made to
him, for permission to reprint these extracts.  But it is hoped he will
excuse the liberty taken, as the design is to _induce other clergymen and
ministers to go and do likewise_.  This clergyman, having fallen in with
a gang of Gipsies on the road, who were travelling to their place of
encampment, addressed a young female among them, and found her not
ignorant of religion.  "How," said the clergyman, "did you obtain the
knowledge of religion?"  "Sir," answered she, "in the depth of winter,
the men folks only travel; the women and children belonging to my family
and party, always live in the town.  In those seasons I have gone with
some of our relatives, who live there, and are religious people, to the
worship of God: in that way I have learned these things."

"This was a practical comment on the text which says, _The entrance of
the word giveth light_; _it giveth __understanding to the simple_.  After
giving her some suitable advice, and with it his benediction, he left
her; but not without hopeful expectations that the seeds of grace were
sown in her heart.

"He next overtook the grandmother and several of her grandchildren.  She
was pleased at his noticing her, and answered his enquiries with modesty
and propriety.  She corroborated what her daughter had said, and in her
answers discovered not only an acquaintance with the general truths of
the Gospel, but a feeling sense of their importance.  She said, 'I love
to go to church, and do go _now_, sir, when I can; but do not always meet
with the right doctrines: my prayers I offer up night and morning, under
the hedge.  I hope God Almighty hears my prayers.'  The clergyman
observed, that sincere prayer was acceptable to God any where, equally
under the hedge, as in the parlour, or in the church.  When arrived at
their camp, he promised them a Bible, as they had none, and directed some
of the party to call at the friend's house in the neighbourhood where he
was staying.  Soon after his return thither, a knock was heard at the
door, when it was announced, 'Two Gipsies, sir, are come for a Bible.'
On going out, he found in the hall the young man who could read, and a
younger brother, a fine boy of about fourteen years of age."  The
gentleman who wrote the account, adds as follows:--

"Their countenances were very animated and expressive; there seemed to be
a ray of heavenly brightness resting upon them; and while I gave them a
charge how to read the sacred gift, they were much affected: the boy, in
particular, listened with eager attention, fixing his eyes first on me,
then on the Bible.  After I had inscribed their names in the title-page,
they departed with my blessing; and what is better--with the blessing of
God."

At another part of the year, this clergyman returned to the same spot
where he had before been so delightfully engaged in attempting to benefit
the poor Gipsies.  He found out another camp, and thus writes of them.

"On my approach to the camp (where was a group of nearly naked children,)
the Gipsy girls rose up, and, in a modest and respectful manner, answered
my questions; while the little swarthy group of children gathered around
me.  To one of these girls I said, 'How is it that you bear such a
wandering and exposed life?'  In reply, she said, 'Sir, it is _use_;
_use_ is second nature.'  'But have you any religion?  Do you think about
God, about judgment, and eternity?  Do you know how to pray?'  She
answered, 'I say my prayers, sir, night and morning.'  I then said, 'can
any of your people read?'  'Yes, sir,' she replied, 'one of our men that
is not here, can read very well.'  'Have you a Bible among you?'  'No,
sir; we should be thankful for one, sir.'"

On leaving the camp, the clergyman promised to call on them again, when
the other part of the family should be returned from the town, where they
were gone to vend their wares.

"On my return to the encampment," says he, "I was met by two men who came
out to greet me.  I asked them kindly of their names.  They informed me
it was Bosvill.  The women and children were now collected around me.  I
inquired who among them could read.  Captain Bosvill, for so I called
him, answered me, 'My wife, sir, can read any thing in English.'  I was
glad to hear this, and asked them if they had any books.  Bosvill went to
a package and brought forth his stock, fragments of an old Testament, and
an old spelling-book.  'And what use do you make of your spelling book?'
asked I.  'My wife,' replied Bosvill, 'when she has time, teaches the
children their letters.'  I now shewed them the Bible I had in my pocket,
saying, that as it was so holy and blessed a book, it ought not to be
given in an indifferent and common manner; and asked, if I were to ride
over in the evening to give it them, and to explain to them its use,
whether they would be all together to hear me.  'Yes, yes;' was the
reply, from many voices.  I appointed seven o'clock for the purpose.  I
then distributed amongst them some tracts, containing passages for every
day in the week, and also the tract of Short Sermons; for which they were
very thankful.  I told them that I intended to give them a Bible in the
evening, a book which few of them had ever seen, and which fewer
understood.  I was pleased with the modesty of their deportment, and with
their eagerness for instruction.  Surely they are a people whose hearts
the Lord has prepared for the reception of his word.

"At the hour appointed, I put the Bible in my pocket, and rode again to
the camp.  The evening was particularly fine: the sun, hidden behind some
thick fleecy clouds, had thrown around a mild and pleasing tint; the
birds were every where singing their evening song; the ploughman was
'whistling o'er the lea;' and nature, after the labours of the day, was
preparing for her wonted rest.  It was a fit time for meditation, prayer,
and praise.  Such an evening, perhaps, as that which led the patriarch of
old to meditation, when he lifted up his eyes and saw the returning
servants of his father bringing home his future wife.  As I drew near to
the camp, I began to revolve in my mind the best way of making them
acquainted with the importance of the most essential doctrines contained
in the holy book I was about to give them.  On my arrival, I found that I
had been long expected.  The men, however, were not there; they were gone
to water a horse, which they had lent all the day to a farmer; but a
tawny girl ran with great speed, barefooted, and brought them to the
camp.  I now dismounted, and gave my horse, with my stick, to the care of
one of the men.  The family circle was formed into an irregular circle
round some pale embers, some of them sitting cross-legged on the grass,
and others standing.  I placed myself so as to have the women and
children chiefly before me.  The woman who could read, was seated
opposite me: the men, the tents, and the package to the right; while the
horses and asses belonging to the tribe, were quietly grazing at a short
distance in the lane.  All was solemn stillness; all was attentive
expectation.  As I took from my pocket the Bible, the eyes of the whole
company were instantly fixed upon it.  This book, said I, which I bring
you, is the book of God; it is sent from heaven to make poor miserable
and dying man happy.  I then spoke a short time on God; on creation; how
God created man upright; how he was once happy in paradise; the way in
which he sinned, and broke the law of his Maker, and became guilty,
polluted, and exposed to death and hell; that to save men from this
dreadful state, God devised a plan of mercy; that he sent his Son, and
the Scriptures of truth, which shew unto us the way of salvation.  This
was something of the outline of my lecture; but I added the
responsibility of men to read the book, and to seek to understand it.  I
solemnly charged them, by the sacred book itself, and by the account
which they, at the day of judgment, must give to God for it, to make the
most sacred and constant use of it, by reading it together daily in their
camp.  In the course of my discourse, I stopped, and said,--'Now do you
understand what I say?'  Captain Bosvill's wife replied, 'We understand
you, sir; but we have not the same words which you have.'  In conclusion,
I spoke of the coming judgment, when they and all men must stand and be
judged at the righteous bar of God.  The Bible was then delivered to the
care of the captain of the gang, and of his wife, the woman who could
read.

"Now, I said, let us all kneel down on the grass, and pray for God's
blessing with this holy book.  Instantly a female brought from her tent a
small piece of carpet, and spread it before me on the grass, for me to
kneel upon; and then all kneeling down, I prayed that the minds of these
miserable outcasts of society might be enlightened, to discover the
exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the blessedness and efficiency of the
Saviour; that the sacred book given them through the influence of the
Holy Ghost, might lead them into the way of righteousness, and finally
guide them to everlasting life.  When we rose from our knees, gratitude
was seen in every countenance, and expressed by every tongue.  '_God
bless you_, _sir_; _thank you_, _sir_;' echoed throughout the camp."

The next evening this clergyman went again to the camp, when one of the
Gipsies came to meet him, and informed him of the arrival of some of
their relatives.  "I shook hands with them," says the clergyman, "and
asked of their welfare.  Never was a king received with a more hearty
welcome, or with greater attention and respect.

"As I was expected, the utmost order, cleanliness, and quiet, prevailed
throughout the camp; and all were dressed in their best clothes to
receive me.  The arrangement of my congregation was much the same as the
preceding evening.  I spoke to them of the blessed Jesus; his birth, his
ministry, his death, passion, and grace; and his glory at his second
coming _in the clouds of heaven_, _to judge the world in righteousness_.
I spoke also of death, and of the immortality of the soul.

"I had not proceeded far in my lecture, before several farmers and
passengers, some on horse back, and others on foot, joined my
congregation.

"Before concluding my address, I said, 'It may seem singular to some of
you that a stranger should interest himself on your behalf in the way I
have done; and it might be expected that I should give some reasons for
doing as I have.  My chief reason is a sense of duty.  Gipsies have long
been neglected, and left to perish in their sins; but Gipsies have souls
equally precious as others, and of equal price in the sight of God.  Who,
I asked, cares for the souls of Gipsies? who uses means for their
instruction in righteousness?  Yet must it be equally our duty to care
for them, and to endeavour their conversion and happiness, as to plan
societies, obtain subscriptions, and send out missionaries to the
heathen.'

"I said, moreover, that, 'supposing, when I first saw your camp, I had
rode by you on the other side, and taken no notice of you, nor felt an
interest in your welfare; and after that, had met you at the bar of
judgment; what would have been the language with which you might have
addressed me at that awful period?  Might you not have charged the misery
of your eternal condemnation upon me, and said, The curse we are doomed
to bear, thoughtless man, might, perchance, have been prevented by you?
You saw us when riding by our camp lying in ignorance, and unbelief: you
might have rode up to us, and imparted instruction to our perishing
souls; because to you were committed the oracles of God, and you knew the
way to heaven.  But, no, _cruel man_, our state excited in you no
compassion, or desire for our salvation.  In your conduct there was no
imitation of your Lord and Master.  Go, cruel man, and if heaven you
enter, let your felicity be embittered by the recollection of neglect to
the Gipsy wanderers, whom Providence had placed in your way, that you
might direct them to God, but which you neglected.'  In conclusion, I
again referred to the holy Bible, which I had given them; and again
repeated the way to use it.  After which I said, Now we will conclude
with prayer, as we did last evening.  Immediately the same female who
before brought the carpet, again spread it, with great civility, for me
to kneel upon; and again I offered up a solemn prayer for the salvation
of these lost and perishing mortals.  The greatest seriousness and awe
rested upon the assembly.  Surely the prayer was registered in heaven,
and shall, in time not far distant, be answered.--Come, and take these
heathens for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
thy possession.--When I proposed to take leave of my swarthy flock, it
was not without feelings of attachment on both sides.  I had observed
several of them much affected under my discourse, and now they manifested
it more openly.  As I shook hands with them, I said, 'You see, I did not
come among you to give you money.  I considered religious instruction of
the most value; therefore I have endeavoured to impart it.'  'Sir,'
replied several, 'we did not want your money; your instruction is better
to us than money; and we thank you for coming.'  The camp now resounded
with voices, saying, 'Thank you, sir; God bless you, sir;' and every
countenance seemed to glow with gratitude.  The young branches of the
family seemed to think a great honour and blessing had been conferred
upon them.

"As I mounted my pony to come away, I observed one of the females, a fine
young woman about twenty-five years of age, the same that brought the
carpet from the package, and spread on the grass for me to kneel upon, to
retire from the rest.  She walked slowly near to the hedge, and appeared
evidently much distressed.  Her expressive eyes were lifted up to heaven,
while the big tears rolling down her cheeks, were wiped away with her
long black tresses.  I thought--Here, surely, are some of the first
fruits!--Thus did the woman, who was a sinner, weep, and with her hair
wipe away the tears from the feet of her Saviour.  May those tears be as
acceptable to God: may the same Redeemer bid her go in peace!  Her
conduct attracted the notice of her family, and she was asked the reason
of her sorrow.  At first she could scarcely speak; but at length
exclaimed, 'Oh!  I am a sinner!'  Then lifting up her eyes to heaven, she
wept aloud, and again wiped away the falling tears with her hair.  'But
did you not know that before? we are all sinners.  What have you done to
cause you so much distress?'  She made no reply, but shook her head and
wept."

The author of the GIPSIES' ADVOCATE, who, for the encouragement of his
readers, has embodied the above interesting paragraphs in his work,
sincerely hopes and prays that all ministers of Christ will, ere long, be
led to imitate this clergyman in his benevolent and Christian attempts to
benefit by the influence of religion and the word of God, the lost, and
ignorant, and miserable, and perishing among mankind.




CHAP. XV.  Interesting visits to Gipsy camps, including an Anecdote of
his late beloved MAJESTY, GEORGE THE THIRD.


The following account is extracted from the Home Missionary Magazine for
June, 1823.

_March_, 1823.  "Sir,

"If the following facts should afford any encouragement to the benevolent
intentions of the Home Missionary Society, which has, for one of its
objects, the improvement of the state of the _poor Gipsies_, my end in
relating them will be amply answered.

"On Saturday evening, in the month of October, the narrator followed
several Gipsy families.  Being arrived at the place of their encampment,
his first object was to gain their confidence.  This was accomplished;
after which, to amuse their unexpected visitant, they shewed forth their
night diversions in music and dancing; likewise the means by which they
obtained their livelihood, such as tinkering, fortune-telling, and
conjuring.  That the narrator might be satisfied whether he had obtained
their confidence or not, he represented his dangerous situation, in the
midst of which, they all with one voice cried, 'Sir, we would kiss your
feet, rather than hurt you!'  After manifesting a confidence in return,
the master of this formidable gang, about forty in number, was challenged
by the narrator for a conjuring match.  The challenge was instantly
accepted.  The Gipsies placed themselves in the circular form, and both
being in the middle, commenced with their conjuring powers to the best
advantage.  At last the narrator proposed the making of something out of
nothing.  This proposal was accepted.  A stone which never existed, was
to be created, and appear in a certain form in the middle of a circle
made on the turf.  The master of the gang commenced, and after much
stamping with his foot, and the narrator warmly exhorting him to cry
aloud; like the roaring of a lion, he endeavoured to call forth nonentity
into existence.  Asking him if he could do it? he answered, 'I am not
strong enough.'  They were all asked the same question, which received
the same answer.  The narrator commenced.  Every eye was fixed upon him,
eager to behold this unheard-of exploit; but (and not to be wondered at,)
he failed!--telling them, he possessed no more power to _create_ than
themselves.  Perceiving the thought of insufficiency pervading their
minds, he thus spoke:--"Now, if you have not power to create a poor
little stone, and if I have not power either; what must that power be,
which made the whole world out of nothing?--men, women, and children!
that power I call God Almighty."

The night's diversion having received a change, the golden moment was
eagerly seized to impress on their minds the infinite power, holiness,
and justice of their Creator.  This being done, the origin of sin, and
the immortality of the soul, were, in the second place, impressed on
their minds.  Then followed the awful effects of sin, and the soul's
eternal punishment in hell, because of offending this great God, whose
holiness could not look on sin, and whose justice would punish it.
Representing the soul's eternal punishment by the wrath of an incensed
God, never did the preacher before witness such an effect; the poor
Gipsies, with tremulous voice, crying, '_Did you ever hear the like_! _
What ever shall we do_?'  These expressions gave new energies to the
preacher, and still brighter hopes of a good effect.  Going on with the
awful representation, and in the act of turning, as if to leave them, he
bade them the long farewell.  'Never, never more to meet till we meet in
hell!  Oh! what a dreadful thing it is, my fellow-sinners, that we have
to part in this world with the thought of meeting in an eternal world of
pains, never to see God! never to see heaven! never to see any thing to
comfort our poor souls!  Oh! we are lost, lost, poor souls, we are lost
for ever!--farewell!'  In the act of leaving them, these poor creatures
cried, 'Not yet, Sir, not yet.'  Now was the glorious moment come, which
the preacher eagerly anticipated of proclaiming the glad tidings of
salvation through a crucified Saviour.  Asking how long they would stand
to hear the way of escape from the wrath to come, they instantly lifted
up their voices, answering, 'All night, Sir, all night.'  Then the
preacher, without much persuasion, exhibited a Saviour, in all his
sufferings, merits, death, and glory.  They were sorry that such a good
being should suffer so much; but the preacher took care to show the
absolute necessity of his sufferings.  Their manner bespoke an imperfect
idea of a substitute.  This was soon made clear to their understandings
by comparisons, when the master of the gang cried, 'I see it, I see it!'
He was asked what he saw?  'I see Jesus Christ getting between us and
God, and satisfying our great God's justice by dying instead of us.'
This truly made the preacher's heart glad, seeing the great plan of
salvation was so clearly understood by those who declared (although in a
land of light,) they never heard of Jesus Christ before.

"The preacher sang the hymn:--

    "How condescending, and how kind
    Was God's eternal Son, &c,"

and then ended with prayer.  They solicited him to return on the sabbath
morning; he did so, and, as he hopes, under the influence of the Holy
Spirit.  The master gratefully accepted of a bible; for though the
Gipsies could not read, a little boy was among them, who was not a Gipsy,
that could read remarkably well, having been taught at a Sunday school at
Hastings, in Sussex.  They all joyfully anticipated the pleasure of going
to the Rev. J. Carter's Chapel, of Braintree, in the afternoon, but met
with a disappointment, arising from an unexpected decampment.  About one
month after, in the latter end of November, two Gipsy women called on the
narrator, earnestly entreating him to go and preach to them, which they
called conversation.  Asking the reason, why they entreated this favour?
their answer was, 'We have heard much about your conversation, sir, and
we should like to hear it.  Come, do come, and we will be all ready to
receive you.'  Asking who they were that told them of the conversation
just mentioned, they said, 'some of our people, Sir, that you were with
about a month since.  They told us a great deal about your conversation,
and we should so much like to hear it.  Oh! sir, do come to us poor
creatures, for we have an invitation for you, if you would condescend to
take it, to meet with the Gipsies on Christmas day.'  That night, the
narrator walked a few miles to their camp, and in their smoky tent
preached Jesus Christ the only way of salvation, to these poor, despised,
neglected creatures.  After being with them two hours and a half, he bade
them farewell, and going behind a hedge, anxious to know what effect the
new unheard of doctrines would produce on their minds, he listened for a
short time.  In the midst of conversation with each other, one of them
said, 'Well, I know this, if I could get a house near where that
gentleman lives, and could live by my business, I would send all my
children to that school there, and hear him as long as ever I could
live.'  While they were conversing about Adam and Eve, and the evil
effects of sinning against God; one of the women said, 'However, you see,
all the punishment that us women get, is sorrow and pains in
child-bearing.'  'Stop, stop,' says one of the men, 'that won't do, Ann,
that won't do.  If sorrow and pains in child-bearing be all the
punishment that women are to have, what punishment must those women have
that do not bear children?  You are quite wrong, Ann; you women are as
bad as _us_.'  This led on to a further discovery, and the conversation
among themselves was truly interesting.

"One of the children telling a lie, the mother touched it on the head,
saying, 'What are you telling lies about?  Have you forgotten what the
gentleman said to night?  You will go to hell, if you tell any more lies.
Let me never hear you tell another, you bad lad, for God will not take
you to heaven.'

"These, and several remarks about Jesus Christ, afforded no small
pleasure to the preacher, and he hopes that these facts will afford no
small encouragement to the Home Missionary Society.

                                                         "Your very humble
                                                                  Servant,
                                                                "J. H. C."

Before the author relates one of the most extraordinary anecdotes with
which he is acquainted, one, of which a King and a dying Gipsy are the
characters, he will relate another interesting account of a visit to a
Gipsy camp, which will, it is hoped, prove that such visits are not in
vain, when made in dependence on the Divine blessing.  A Gipsy, in great
distress of mind, and with weeping eyes, came to inform him of one of
their people, who was in great anguish of mind, and entreated him to
visit them at the camp, which was several miles distant.  The request was
gladly complied with.  On arriving at the tent, he found a woman sitting
in a melancholy attitude on the ground; and distress and anguish were
strongly marked in her countenance.  She appeared quite indifferent to
any thing that was said; and kept herself apparently engaged with the
sticks and brands around the fire near the mouth of the tent.  The man
also appeared very melancholy.  We learned that the cause of their
distress was jealousy on the part of the man, who was called her husband.
The circumstance which gave rise to those unhappy feelings had taken
place several years before; yet the poor man has been so unhappy, that he
has often intended to destroy both himself and his wife; and not many
days before this visit to the camp, he had threatened to execute his
purpose.  The author talked and prayed with him, and exhorted him to look
to God for strength and grace.  Their repeated conversations were made
useful to him, and those miserable feelings were subdued, and he now
lives happily with the woman he had before hated, even to an intention of
murder.  This is another evidence, although a distressing one, that a
want of chastity is evil in their sight.

"A king of England, of happy memory, who loved his people and his God,
better than kings in general are wont to do, occasionally took the
exercise of hunting.  Being out one day for this purpose, the chase lay
through the shrubs of the forest.  The stag had been hard run; and, to
escape the dogs, had crossed the river in a deep part.  As the dogs could
not be brought to follow, it became necessary, in order to come up with
it, to make a circuitous route along the banks of the river, through some
thick and troublesome underwood.  The roughness of the ground, the long
grass and frequent thickets, gave opportunity for the sportsmen to
separate from each other; each one endeavouring to make the best and
speediest route he could.  Before they had reached the end of the forest,
the king's horse manifested signs of fatigue and uneasiness; so much so,
that his Majesty resolved upon yielding the pleasures of the chase to
those of compassion for his horse.  With this view, he turned down the
first avenue in the forest, and determined on riding gently to the oaks,
there to wait for some of his attendants.  His Majesty had only proceeded
a few yards, when, instead of the cry of the hounds, he fancied he heard
the cry of human distress.  As he rode forward, he heard it more
distinctly.  'Oh, my mother! my mother!  God pity and bless my poor
mother!'  The curiosity and kindness of the king led him instantly to the
spot.  It was a little green plot on one side of the forest, where was
spread on the grass, under a branching oak, a little pallet, half covered
with a kind of tent; and a basket or two, with some packs, lay on the
ground at a few paces distant from the tent.  Near to the root of the
tree he observed a little swarthy girl, about eight years of age, on her
knees, praying, while her little black eyes ran down with tears.
Distress of any kind was always relieved by his Majesty, for he had a
heart which melted at 'human woe;' nor was it unaffected on this
occasion.  And now he inquired, 'What, my child, is the cause of your
weeping?  For what do you pray?'  The little creature at first started,
then rose from her knees, and pointing to the tent, said, 'Oh, sir! my
dying mother!'  'What?' said his Majesty, dismounting, and fastening his
horse up to the branches of the oak, 'what, my child? tell me all about
it.'  The little creature now led the King to the tent:--there lay,
partly covered, a middle-aged female Gipsy, in the last stages of a
decline, and in the last moments of life.  She turned her dying eyes
expressively to the royal visitor, then looked up to heaven; but not a
word did she utter; the organs of speech had ceased their office; _the
silver cord was loosed_, _and the wheel broken at the cistern_.  The
little girl then wept aloud, and, stooping down, wiped the dying sweat
from her mother's face.  The King, much affected, asked the child her
name, and of her family; and how long her mother had been ill.  Just at
that moment another Gipsy girl, much older, came, out of breath, to the
spot.  She had been at the town of W---, and had brought some medicine
for her dying mother.  Observing a stranger, she modestly courtsied, and,
hastening to her mother, knelt down by her side, kissed her pallid lips,
and burst into tears.  'What, my dear child,' said his Majesty, 'can be
done for you?'  'Oh, sir!' she replied, 'my dying mother wanted a
religious person to teach her, and to pray with her, before she died.  I
ran all the way before it was light this morning to W---, and asked for a
minister, _but no one could I get to come with me to pray with my dear
mother_!'  The dying woman seemed sensible of what her daughter was
saying, and her countenance was much agitated.  The air was again rent
with the cries of the distressed daughters.  The King, full of kindness,
instantly endeavoured to comfort them: he said, 'I am a minister, and God
has sent me to instruct and comfort your mother.'  He then sat down on a
pack, by the side of the pallet, and taking the hand of the dying Gipsy,
discoursed on the demerit of sin, and the nature of redemption.  He then
pointed her to Christ, the all sufficient Saviour.  While the King was
doing this, the poor creature seemed to gather consolation and hope: her
eyes sparkled with brightness, and her countenance became animated.  She
looked up; she smiled; but it was the last smile; it was the glimmering
of expiring nature.  As the expression of peace, however, remained strong
in her countenance, it was not till some little time had elapsed, that
they perceived the struggling spirit had left mortality.

"It was at this moment that some of his Majesty's attendants, who had
missed him at the chase, and who had been riding through the forest in
search of him, rode up, and found the King comforting the afflicted
Gipsies.  It was an affecting sight, and worthy of everlasting record in
the annals of kings.

"His Majesty now rose up, put some gold into the hands of the afflicted
girls, promised them his protection, and bade them look to heaven.  He
then wiped the tears from his eyes, and mounted his horse.  His
attendants, greatly affected, stood in silent admiration.  Lord L--- was
now going to speak, when his Majesty, turning to the Gipsies, and
pointing to the breathless corpse, and to the weeping girls, said, with
strong emotion, 'Who, my lord, who, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto
these?'"




CHAP. XVI.  Further interesting Correspondence.


    "Dear Sir,

    "In answer to your inquiries, I have to say, that within my
    knowledge, little or nothing has as yet been accomplished for the
    Gipsies.  The Home Missionaries have frequently paid flying visits to
    their camps, and prayed, read, preached and distributed tracts.  In
    all cases they have been treated with much respect, and their labour
    has been repaid with the most sincere marks of gratitude.  But I
    never met with very warm support in carrying on this object, but was
    often exposed to some sarcastical insinuations or sardonic smiles
    from those who thought the attempt to ameliorate the condition of the
    Gipsies, only Quixotic.

    "I think their wandering life is one very great impediment in the way
    of improving the Gipsy tribes, and yet they are so attached to it,
    that, when taken into families, as servants, they will not stay.  Nor
    can any good be done to their children; for, like all wild people,
    the parents are attached to them to a fault; so that they cannot
    allow them to be absent from them even to enjoy the instruction of a
    school, suspecting that such a separation might end in their final
    disunion.

    "Were a distinct society formed to effect a reformation among the
    Gipsies, many of the nobility, and other classes of the higher
    orders, would no doubt subscribe.  There is a feeling among them on
    the subject, and many times the formation of a society has been on
    the tapis.  The Gipsies are singularly attached to the Establishment,
    and many of them are married at the parish churches; and it is a pity
    the episcopalian body have not taken them up.  There is a prejudice
    against them which I think is unfounded; but I cannot enter into
    details in a mere letter.  People look on them as vagabonds, and
    _they_ seem shy in return; and hence they continue a kind of outcast
    body in a civilized country.

    "If any further steps are taken, and if I can in any way assist in
    promoting your good object, you may command my services.

    "I am, dear sir, respectfully yours,

    "I. COBBIN."

_Extracts from the Letter of a Clergyman's Lady_.

    "Sir,

    "My best thanks are due to you for your compliance with my request;
    and, in return, I beg to assure you, that I consider your answer to
    my friend's objection, as quite satisfactory and efficient.  I
    rejoice to hear that God has been pleased to bless the endeavours and
    earnest exertion of the Scripture-readers (to the Gipsies) with
    success.  To behold sixteen, and afterwards twenty-one Gipsies
    voluntarily attending Divine worship, must have conveyed feelings of
    heartfelt gratitude to the heart of every Christian, and at the same
    time encourage him to persevere in earnest prayer to the Father of
    mercies, to pour his holy Spirit into their souls, that they might
    become the true and faithful followers of the Redeemer.  You say you
    would be glad to receive any intelligence respecting this interesting
    people; by which I am led to suppose that an account of an interview
    which I had with some of them, may not be unacceptable; an interview
    that was highly pleasing and satisfactory, as I found them less
    ignorant of spiritual concerns, and to possess better qualities, than
    I had imagined.

    "Having sent for two women, (the heads of the camps) I received them
    in a cottage in the town of ---, and after allowing them some
    refreshment, proceeded to put the different questions to them that
    are inserted in the Observer.  They told me that their family,
    altogether, consisted of eighteen persons, who travelled about the
    country in three camps; that the men found it difficult to obtain
    regular employment; that sometimes, during the winter, they made
    cabbage-nets, and mended culinary utensils; that in the summer, men
    and women were occasionally employed in making hay, &c.  These women
    appeared very destitute of necessary clothing, which they said they
    found great difficulty in obtaining.  They appeared careful to speak
    the truth, alleging that it hurt their consciences to speak
    otherwise.  On the question being put to them, whether they
    appropriated to themselves the property of those near whom they
    encamped? they candidly confessed that they sometimes took a little
    straw, hay, and sticks; but no fowls or any other live-stock.  They
    shewed a very affectionate disposition and warm feelings towards
    their children.  The eldest of them assured me, that if any in their
    camp became orphans, she considered herself more bound to provide for
    them than her own, as the former needed it the more, being destitute.
    She did not object to their gaining instruction, if it came in the
    way, and she wished to be read to herself, and appeared to take much
    pleasure in listening to my explanations of the important doctrines
    of religion.  They said that none of their party could read, but that
    they were sometimes visited by a relative who was a good scholar.
    She said, too, that she always kept in her possession a _godly book_,
    for the purpose of asking, as opportunity offered, a traveller to
    read to them.  She assured me, too, (which I rather doubted,) that
    they constantly attended Divine worship, when encamped near enough to
    churches; that they send for the nearest clergyman _to preach_ to the
    dying, and that they never omit having their babes _full christened_,
    excepting in cases of sickness, when the child is only baptized: and
    should such child die, they obtain the services of a parochial
    clergyman to inter it.  They said, thinking, no doubt, to please me,
    that they did not like the Ranters, but that they thought well of the
    _church folks_.  I fear that, though they had a general knowledge of
    the Supreme Being, they were sadly ignorant of the most important
    point of Christianity, namely, the all-sufficient sacrifice that was
    made for the whole world.  While I expatiated to them on the day of
    judgment and the final doom of man, displaying the extreme and
    exquisite happiness of the righteous part of the human family, and
    the dreadful misery of the wicked, the younger of them, who appeared
    indisposed, was considerably agitated.  They then said, that they
    were not in the habit of swearing, but occasionally did so, though
    they were aware it was very wicked.  When travelling, they told me
    that they avoid breaking the sabbath; and that they visit all places
    included in the district through which they wander, three times per
    year, from which plan they seldom deviate.  I inquired if they would
    like to settle in cottages, and gain their livelihood by industry.
    They replied, that _if house-rent_, _clothes_, _food_, _and all other
    necessaries were found them_, they would; but that they would not
    settle on any other condition.

    "I am desirous of obtaining your opinion respecting the plan I have
    lately formed to benefit this people; for, should you approve of it,
    it will be carried into immediate execution.  I thought it would be
    very advantageous to offer an adequate remuneration to a pious person
    who would devote every half-day to reading and explaining the
    Scriptures to the old, and teaching the young to read.  I was aware
    that it would be difficult to obtain one, who, while he would teach
    the young to read, and explain the Scriptures to the aged, would be
    wise enough to give wholesome advice to every case of mental
    distress, and be gifted to guide the first steps of those who are
    disposed to be good, in the way of Christian godliness.  After much
    anxiety and many attempts, I at length succeeded in meeting with a
    person most disinterestedly pious; one who was willing to accede to
    any proposal to benefit his fellow-creatures.  He appears to attach
    little importance to himself, but to have much confidence in God, in
    reference to his exertions.  He is really desirous to promote the
    immortal interests of the poor people to whom his attention has been
    directed, and is pious, zealous and intelligent.  He, however, cannot
    devote himself to this work more than three days per week.  He will
    visit all Gipsy camps for seven or eight miles round.

    "Some clear, forcible, simple, religious tracts, such as are likely
    to instruct and awaken, with the Scriptures, would, perhaps, be of
    service.  I shall hold out rewards of clothes and books to those of
    whom I hear the best accounts, and shall endeavour to meet them, a
    few at a time, in a cottage, at least once per year.  Will you let me
    know whether you think I am doing right?"

_Extracts of a Letter from a man of plain_, _but pious character_,
_addressed to the Southampton Committee_.

    "Gentlemen,

    "It is natural for me to suppose that you expect, by this period, to
    hear something of the success that has attended my labours on the
    common among the people called Gipsies.  I visit them three or four
    times a-week, besides going among them on sabbath days.  I go from
    tent to tent, and talk to them on religious subjects, read and
    explain the word of God to them, so far as I am able, and pray with
    them.  At such times they thankfully receive what I humbly
    communicate to them, and often, with tears and gratitude, wonder that
    I should think of them in their poor degraded state.  I hope some of
    them may be brought to the knowledge of God."

After some other pleasing details, this humble person concludes his
letter thus:

    "With regard to the children, I meet with here and there _one_ among
    them that can read, but it is very little.  These children, however,
    are desirous, I may say very desirous to have some little books.  To
    such I have given books, till I have none left.  I could have given
    away, where desired, and with the prospect of knowing they might be
    useful, many more, had I possessed them.  Upon the whole I think
    there is cause for much encouragement.

    "I am, gentlemen, your humble servant,
       "* * * * *"

A clergyman, a most valuable correspondent, observes, while addressing
the Committee, through the author:

    "In speaking to the Gipsies on the road side, and offering a tract, I
    have never but once met with impertinence.  It is probable that the
    individual had been impertinently treated, first, by people called
    Christians.

    "Dr More has well said, with respect to the Jews, 'If Christians had
    believed and acted like Christians, it would have been a miracle if
    the Jews had not been converted.'

    "This observation is equally applicable to the Gipsies of England;
    for, if Christian denominations did their duty, they would cease to
    be Gipsies."




CHAP. XVII.  Concluding Remarks.


Had the author availed himself of all the facts relating to the addresses
which have been given in different places by clergymen, home
missionaries, and other ministers, and published all the letters of an
interesting nature addressed to himself and the Southampton Committee, in
reference to the Gipsies, together with the gratitude they have shown for
such Christian attentions, it might have gratified many readers; but
these pages would thereby have been increased to too great a number.

But, before concluding this little work, he desires to impress upon the
reader, the necessity there is of engaging in the great work of the
conversion of the poor Gipsies.

Why do not all ministers, and all good people unite in it?  May we not
conclude that they do not feel the value of their souls as they ought, if
they do not perform all that is in their power for this end?  Both
ministers and their congregations are too lukewarm.  We are discouraged
by difficulties under the influence of unbelief, and we often say, How
can these things be accomplished?  Every Christian is called by his
Saviour to attempt the instruction of his fellow-creatures; and no common
excuse, such as business, poverty, a want of time, acknowledged
ignorance, and a want of talent, can justify us in neglecting the attempt
to speak a word of advice, or reproof, or promise, to our
fellow-creatures.  This is the duty of every Christian, and if done in
faith, Almighty God will bless the effort.

To the magistrates the author would make a most ardent appeal on behalf
of the despised members of the Gipsy family.  Most respectfully and most
earnestly does he entreat them to pity their destitute condition, when
brought before them as vagrants, and from which they have been so often
made to suffer; for, sooner would the wild creatures of the forest be
tamed, than those branches of the human family be brought, through
coercion, to dwell in houses and follow trades, who were born under the
hedges, and have, through life, made unfrequented solitudes their homes.
Much better would it be for the magistrates to encourage the education of
their children, with the view to improve and reform the rising
generation.  The author hopes and prays that they may.  _Blessed are the
merciful_, _for they shall obtain mercy_.

If we all felt the importance and necessity of discharging our Christian
duties as the sailor and the soldier do in their different stations, no
difficulties would deter us; but God expects every _Christian_ to do his
duty.  A celebrated commander once called his officers together, and
said, "We must carry such a garrison."  The officers said, "It is
impossible; the attempt would be vain."  The general replied, "It can,
and must be done, for I have the order in my pocket."  Oh! ye ministers
of Christ! you have the order lying on your table, and in your desks, at
this moment; read it in the Bible:--_Go ye into the highways and hedges_,
_and compel them to come in_, _that my house may be filled_.  Luke xiv.
23.  The duty is ours: have we done it?  Have we done it as opportunities
have presented themselves?  Have we done it as we ought?  Yea, more; have
we sought for opportunities to instruct souls?  Our adorable Master did
so.  He came from heaven to earth, to seek and to save them who were
lost.  Private Christians! you also have your order from the high throne
of heaven, in your houses, perhaps unnoticed; or, it may be, you have not
rightly interpreted these orders to their full extent.  Others may have
acted the coward's part, and thrown these orders aside.  Would a soldier
or a sailor thus serve his king and country?  If you saw your countrymen
perishing on your shores by shipwreck, or likely to be destroyed by fire,
would you not be anxious to assist both the virtuous and the wicked?
Gipsies are perishing around you; hear their cries, ere they are plunged
into eternity; and attend to these orders from the King of Kings:--

_Thou shalt not avenge_, _nor bear any grudge against the children of thy
people_; _but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself_.  Leviticus, xix.
18.  _The stranger that dwelleth with you shall be as one born amongst
you_, _and thou shalt love him as thyself_; xxxiv. 5.  _Beware of
hardness of heart toward thy poor brother_.  Deut. vii. 15, 9.  _Be ye
therefore __merciful_, _as your Father who is in heaven is merciful_.
Luke vi. 36.  _For he raiseth up the poor out of the dust and lifteth the
needy out of the dunghill_.  Psalm cxiii. 7.  _Therefore all things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you_, _do ye even so to them_;
_for this is the law and the prophets_.  Matt. vii. 12.  _Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself_.  Matt. xix. 19.  And who is thy neighbour?
Read the parable of the Good Samaritan, and _Go and do likewise_.  Luke
x. 15.

The author will finally conclude by observing, that England will have a
great deal to answer for in reference to the Gipsies of past generations.
For, from a very moderate calculation that he has made, 150,000 of these
outcasts have passed into the eternal world, uninformed, unacquainted
with God, since they came to this country.  May the present, and
succeeding generations, be wiser than the past!




APPENDIX.


Since the GIPSIES' ADVOCATE was put to press, the author, as might
naturally be expected on a subject so interesting as the conversion of
the Gipsies, has had many other pleasing communications.  From his
Bristol correspondents he has been favoured with several of delightful
interest, in reference to a small colony in that neighbourhood; and these
state that several of the Gipsies not only begin to evidence an aversion
to their former life, but increase in seriousness, and in habits of
industry.  And happy is he to say, that several influential Christians of
that city are growing in the interest they manifest to these outcasts of
society; for they are endeavouring to improve every opportunity of
affording them instruction.  It is with peculiar pleasure too, the author
learns, that the students of the Baptist Academy of the above-named city,
are not dead to the affecting necessities of this poor people.  Some of
the students of that academy spent the whole of one day in endeavouring
to find one of their large encampments, of which they had had some
previous information, and spent the evening in giving such instruction as
appeared to them to be the best calculated to enlighten and reform the
people to whom they were so anxious to do good; some of them occupying
themselves with the children, and others with the adults.  May their
example have its due influence on surrounding Christians!

The author must not forget to mention here, that he has been apprised by
the clergyman in Scotland, whose letter forms so interesting a part of
the ninth chapter, that the account he mentioned to him, as gaining
insertion in a statistical publication, has not been published, he
believes, in consequence of the death of the gentleman who had interested
himself for its insertion in the work referred to; but that he hopes it
may meet the public eye in a short time.

And now, having redeemed the pledge which he gave his friends about
twelve months since; having furnished them with a history of the Gipsies,
such a one as he hopes will be beneficial to the race, whose conduct,
condition, and necessities it narrates; he will conclude by thanking
those kind friends who have unintentionally contributed to the interest
of these pages, and by asking the continuation of their favours, with a
view to give increasing interest to an intended second edition.  He would
not forget publicly to solicit, likewise, the correspondence of ladies
and gentlemen who may be in possession of facts or plans likely to
interest the public towards the Gipsies.

The author now commits these pages to the all-influential blessing of
God, earnestly praying that these poor, hard-faring wanderers, whose
character he has endeavoured to delineate, may be speedily rescued from
their present forlorn condition, and, that they may eventually be
conducted to the mansions of eternal bliss, where neither storm nor
tempest shall any longer afflict them, but where they shall join with the
ransomed of the Lord, in ascribing _blessing_, _and honour_, _and glory_,
_and power_, _unto him that sitteth upon the throne_, _and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever_.

                                 THE END.




LIST OF AUTHORS
WHO HAVE WRITTEN ON THE GIPSIES.


H. M. G. GRELLMAN'S DISSERTATION ON THE GIPSIES.  Translated by M.
Rapier.

HOYLAND'S SURVEY OF THE GIPSIES.

TWISS'S TRAVELS IN SPAIN.

SWINBURNE'S TRAVELS IN ITALY.

DR C. D. CLARK'S TRAVELS IN RUSSIA.

CAPT. DAVID RICHARDSON.  Referred to in the seventh volume of _Asiatic
Researches_.

SIR THOMAS BROWN'S VULGAR ERRORS.

While these are the leading authors, whose works are either composed in,
or translated into English, it may impress us with the importance by
which the Gipsies have been viewed, to know, that nearly 200 have written
about them in other languages.




ERRATA.


Page Line

31, 24, _For_ 'would be in a town,' _read_, 'would be in, in a town.'

55, 30, _For_ 'dispatching,' _read_, 'despatching.'

                  BAKER AND SON, PRINTERS, SOUTHAMPTON.




Footnotes:


{10}  See a late account of this Colony in a subsequent page.

{11a}  See Hoyland, pages 78, 79, and 80.

{11b}  We should not forget that the grace of God can change their hearts
and morals.  The facts contained in this book are very encouraging
examples of the power of divine grace upon the heart and character of the
Gipsy people.  The reader would do well to turn to the following
scriptures--Isaiah, XI. 6, 7, 8, 9.  1 Cor. VI. 9, 10, 11.

{12}  Children, after grown up to men and women, have an affection for
their parents somewhat childish.  A young Gipsey man known to the author,
when his mother stays longer from the camp than usual, expresses his
anxiety for her return, by saying--_Where is my mum_?  _I wish my mum
would come home_.

{14}  Some of those Gipsies who have families, and a little property,
provide themselves with a cart, or waggon, as most convenient for a
warehouse for their goods, and more comfortable than a tent to dwell in
during winter.

{16}  "Should any be inclined to doubt, which I scarcely suppose
possible, the identity of the Gipsy or Cingari, and Hindostanee
languages, still it will be acknowledged as no uninteresting subject,
that tribes wandering through the mountains of Nubia, or the plains of
Romania, have conversed for centuries in a dialect precisely similar to
that spoken at this day, by the obscure, despised, and wretched people in
England, whose language has been considered as a fabricated gibberish,
and confounded with a cant in use among thieves and beggars; and whose
persons have been, till within the period of the last year, an object of
the persecution, instead of the protection of our laws."--Extract from a
letter of William Marsden, Esq. addressed to Sir Joseph Banks, F. R. S.,
and read to the Society of Antiquaries in London, 1785.

{18}  "The gentleman spoke dixen to me," said a Gipsy to the Author; that
is, long hard words.

{28}  May not this be a proof of their Hindostanee origin?  There is this
difference, however--the clothes, &c. of the deceased Gipsy, are burnt
instead of his body!

{45}  One Gipsy, I believe, has been convicted of having some stolen
poultry in his tent; but he had received it from the thief.  No other
fact of the sort has come to my knowledge.

{72}  Sold by Seeley, and by Westley and Co, London; Clark, Bristol;
Binns, Bath; and Lindsay and Co, Edinburgh.

{75}  I ought to say perhaps, that though this young and ignorant woman
ran away, she did not go with any thing that was not her own; for she
left behind her a bonnet that had been lent her, while she had nothing
more on her head than a piece of cloth.

{76}  The latter was the daughter of the dying Gipsy, an account of whom
may be seen in the tract numbered 803, and published by the Tract
Society.

{97}  The friends of this good cause at Bristol, now think that manual
labour is far more conducive to their conversion than hawking any article
whatever: the above plan is therefore totally abandoned for labour.

{115}  A district in East India celebrated for diamonds.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GIPSIES' ADVOCATE ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

