




  [Transcriber's Note:
  The printed book was extremely consistent in both spelling and
  punctuation. Errors and uncertain passages are listed at the end
  of the text.]

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *


  Mrs. _Mary Eales_'s

  RECEIPTS.


  CONFECTIONER to her late
  MAJESTY Queen _ANNE_.


  [Decoration]


  _LONDON:_

  Printed for J. BRINDLEY, Bookseller, at the _King's-Arms_
    in _New Bond-Street_, and Bookbinder to Her Majesty
    and His Royal Highness the Prince of _Wales_; and
    R. MONTAGU at the _General Post-Office_, the Corner
    of _Great Queen-Street_, near _Drury-Lane_.

      MDCCXXXIII.




  [Decoration]


  THE

  CONTENTS.

  To dry Angelica                                   Page 1
  To preserve green Apricocks                            2
  To make Goosberry Clear-Cakes                          3
  To make Goosberry-Paste                                4
  To dry Goosberries                                     5
  To preserve Goosberries                                6
  To dry Cherries                                        7
  To make Cherry-Jam                                     8
  To dry Cherries without Sugar                       ibid.
  To dry Cherries in Bunches                             9
  To make Cherry-Paste                                  ib.
  To preserve Cherries                                  10
  To dry Currants in Bunches, &c.                       11
  To make Currant Clear-Cakes                           12
  To preserve red Currants                              13
  To make Currant Paste, either red or white            ib.
  To preserve white Currants                            14
  To preserve Rasberries                                15
  To make Jam of Rasberries                             16
  To make Rasberry-Paste                                ib.
  To make Rasberry Clear-Cakes                          17
  To make Rasberry-Drops                                18
  To dry Apricocks                                      ib.
  To dry Apricocks in Quarters or Halves                19
  To make Paring-Chips                                  20
  To preserve Apricocks                                 21
  To make Apricock Clear-Cakes                          22
  To make Apricock-Paste                                23
  To make Apple-Jelly for all Sorts of Sweet-Meats      ib.
  To make Apricock-Jam                                  24
  To preserve green Jennitins                           ib.
  To dry green Plums                                    25
  To dry Amber, or any white Plums                      26
  To dry black Pear-Plums, or Muscles,
      or the _Great Moguls_                             28
  To preserve black Pear-Plums or Damascenes            30
  To preserve white Pear-Plums                          ib.
  To make white Pear-Plum Clear-Cakes                   31
  To make white Plum-Paste                              32
  To make red Plum Clear-Cakes                          33
  To make red Plum-Paste                                34
  To dry Plums like the _French_ Plums,
      with Stones in them                               ib.
  To dry Peaches                                        35
  To make Peach-Chips                                   36
  To preserve or dry Nutmeg-Peaches                     37
  To preserve Cucumbers                                 ib.
  To dry green Figs                                     39
  To dry black Figs                                     40
  To preserve Grapes                                    41
  To dry Grapes                                         ib.
  To dry Barberries                                     42
  To preserve Barberries                                43
  To make Barberry-Drops                                ib.
  To make white Quince-Marmalet                         44
  To make red Quince-Marmalet                           45
  To preserve whole Quinces                             46
  To make Quince-Chips                                  47
  To make Quince-Paste                                  48
  To make Quince Clear-Cakes                            ib.
  To preserve Golden or _Kentish_-Pippins               49
  To preserve whole Oranges or Lemmons                  50
  To dry Oranges in Knots, or Lemmons                   52
  To make _China_-Chips                                 54
  To make Orange-Paste                                  ib.
  To make Orange-Drops                                  55
  To make Orange-Marmalet                               56
  To make Orange or Lemmon Clear-Cakes                  ib.
  To make Pomegranate Clear-Cakes                       58
  To make Orange-Halves, or Quarters,
      with the Meat in them                             59
  To preserve Citrons.                                  60
  To make Citron-Marmalet                               61
  To candy Orange-Flowers                               ib.
  To make Rock-Sugar                                    63
  To make Fruit-Biscuit                                 65
  To make all Sorts of Sugar-Paste                      66
  To make Chocolate-Almonds                             67
  To make Wormwood-Cakes                                ib.
  To make Honycomb-Cakes of Orange-Flower-Violet
      of Cowslips                                       68
  To make Ice Almond-Cakes                              ib.
  To make Bean'd-Bread                                  69
  To make Orange or Lemmon-Puffs                        70
  To make Almond-Paste, either Bitter or Sweet          71
  To make little round Ratafea-Puffs                    72
  To make Brown Wafers                                  ib.
  To make Almond-Loaves                                 73
  To make Chocolate-Puffs                               74
  To make Ratafea-Drops, either of Apricock-Kernels,
      or half Bitter and half Sweet-Almonds             ib.
  To make all Sorts of Sugar-Puffs                      75
  To make Almond-Paste                                  ib.
  To make long Biscuit                                  76
  To make Spunge-Biscuit                                77
  To make round Biscuit with Coriander-Seeds            78
  To make Hartshorn-Jelly                               79
  To make Lemmon-Jelly                                  ib.
  To make Butter'd Orange                               80
  To make Eringo-Cream                                  ib.
  To make Barley-Cream                                  81
  To make Ratafea-Cream                                 ib.
  To make Almond-Butter                                 82
  To make a Trifle                                      ib.
  To make all Sorts of Fruit-Cream                      83
  To make Sack-Posset, or Sack-Cream                    ib.
  To make Blamange                                      84
  Lemmon-Cream, made with Cream                         85
  To make Citron-Cream                                  ib.
  To make Pistato-Cream                                 86
  To make Clouted-Cream                                 ib.
  To make a very thick, raw Cream                       87
  To make _Spanish_-Butter                              ib.
  To make Orange-Butter                                 88
  To make Almond-Butter                                 89
  To make Trout-Cream                                   ib.
  To make Almond-Cream                                  90
  To make Raw-Almond, or Ratafea-Cream                  91
  To make Chocolate-Cream                               ib.
  To make Sego-Cream                                    92
  To ice Cream                                          ib.
  To make Hartshorn-Flummery                            93
  To make perfum'd Pastels                              94
  To burn Almonds                                       95
  To make Lemmon-Wafers                                 ib.
  To candy little green Oranges                         97
  To candy Cowslips, or any Flowers or Greens,
      in Bunches                                        ib.
  To make Caramel                                       98
  To make a good Green                                  99
  To Sugar all Sorts of small Fruit                     ib.
  To scald all Sorts of Fruit                          100


  [Decoration]


  [Illustration]


Mrs. _EALES_'s

RECEIPTS.


_To dry ANGELICA._

Take the Stalks of Angelica, and boil them tender; then put them to
drain, and scrape off all the thin Skin, and put them into scalding
Water; keep them close cover'd, and over a slow Fire, not to boil,
'till they are green; then draining them well, put them in a very
thick Syrup of the Weight and half of Sugar: Let the Syrup be cold
when you put them in, and warm it every Day 'till it is clear, when
you may lay them out to dry, sifting Sugar upon them. Lay out but as
much as you use at a Time, and scald the rest.


_To preserve green APRICOCKS._

Take Apricocks before the Stones are very hard; wet them, and lay
them in a coarse Cloth; put to them two or three large Handfuls of
Salt, rub them 'till the Roughness is off, then put them in scalding
Water; set them over the Fire 'till they almost boil, then set them
off the Fire 'till they are almost cold; do so two or three Times;
after this, let them be close cover'd; and when they look to be
green, let them boil 'till they begin to be tender; weigh them, and
make a Syrup of their Weight in Sugar, to a Pound of Sugar allowing
half a Pint of Water to make the Syrup; let it be almost cold before
you put in the Apricocks; boil them up well 'till they are clear;
warm the Syrup daily, 'till it is pretty thick. You may put them in
a Codling-Jelly, or Hartshorn Jelly, or dry them as you use them.


_To make Goosberry CLEAR-CAKES._

Take a Gallon of white Goosberries, nose and wash them; put to them
as much Water as will cover them almost all over, set them on an hot
Fire, let them boil a Quarter of an Hour, or more, then run it thro'
a Flannel Jelly-Bag; to a Pint of Jelly have ready a Pound and half
of fine Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair Sieve; set the Jelly over the
Fire, let it just boil up, then shake in the Sugar, stirring it all
the while the Sugar is putting in; then set it on the Fire again,
let it scald 'till all the Sugar is well melted; then lay a thin
Strainer in a flat earthen Pan, pour in your Clear-Cake Jelly, and
turn back the Strainer to take off the Scum; fill it into Pots, and
set it in the Stove to dry; when it is candy'd on the Top, turn it
out on Glass; and if your Pots are too big, cut it; and when it is
very dry, turn it again, and let it dry on the other Side; twice
turning is enough. If any of the Cakes stick to the Glass, hold them
over a little Fire, and they will come off: Take Care the Jelly does
not boil after the Sugar is in: A Gallon of Goosberries will make
three Pints of Jelly; if more, 'twill not be strong enough.


_To make GOOSBERRY-PASTE._

Take the Goosberries, nose and wash them, put to them as much Water
as will almost cover them, and let them boil a Quarter of an Hour;
then strain them thro' a thin Strainer, or an Hair-Sieve, and allow
to a Pint of Liquor a Pound and half of fine Sugar, sifted thro' a
Hair-Sieve; before you put in the Sugar, set the Liquor on the Fire,
let it boil, and scum it; then shake in the Sugar, set it on the
Fire again, and let it scald 'till all the Sugar is melted; then
fill it into little Pots; when it is candy'd, turn it out on Glass;
and when it is dry on one Side, turn it again; if any of the Cakes
stick, hold the Glass over the Fire: You may put some of this in
Plates; and when it is jelly'd, before it candies, cut it out in
long Slices, and make Fruit-Jambals.


_To dry GOOSBERRIES._

Take the large white Goosberries before they are very ripe, but at
full Growth, stone and wash them, and to a Pound of Goosberries put
a Pound and half of Sugar, beat very fine, and half a Pint of Water;
set them on the Fire; when the Sugar is melted, let them boil, but
not too fast; take them off once or twice, that they may not break;
when they begin to look clear, they are enough: Let them stand all
Night in the Pan they are boil'd in, with a Paper laid close to
them; the next Day scald them very well, and let them stand a Day or
two; then lay them on Plates, sift them with Sugar very well, and
put them in the Stove, turning them every Day 'till they are dry;
the third Time of turning, you may lay them on a Sieve, if you
please; when they are pretty dry, place them in a Box, with Paper
betwixt every Row.


_To preserve GOOSBERRIES._

Take the white Goosberries, stamp and strain them; then take the
largest white Goosberries when they just begin to turn, stone them,
and to half a Pound of the Goosberries put a Pound of Loaf Sugar
beaten very fine, half a Pint of the Juice of that which is
strain'd, (but let it stand 'till it is settled and very clear) and
six Spoonfuls of Water; set them on a very quick Fire; let them boil
as fast as you can make them, up to the Top of the Pan; when you see
the Sugar as it boils look clear, they are enough, which will be in
less than half a quarter of an Hour: Put them in Pots or Glasses,
paper them close; the next Day, if they are not hard enough jelly'd,
set them for a Day or two on an hot Stove, or in some warm Place,
but not in the Sun; and when they are jelly'd, put Papers close to
'em; the Papers must be first wet, and then dry'd with a Cloth.


_To dry CHERRIES._

Stone the Cherries; and to ten Pound of Cherries, when they are
ston'd, put three Pound of Sugar very fine beaten; shake the
Cherries and Sugar well together, set them on the Fire, and when the
Sugar is well melted, give them a Boil or two; let them stand in an
earthen Pot 'till the next Day, then make them scalding hot, and,
when cold, lay them on Sieves; afterwards put them in an Oven not
too hot, where let them stand all Night, and then turn them, and put
them in again. Let your Oven be no hotter than it is after small
Bread or Pies. When they are dry, keep them in a Box very close,
with no Paper between them.


_To make CHERRY-JAM._

Take twelve Pound of ston'd Cherries, boil them, break them as they
boil; and when you have boiled all the Juice away, and can see the
Bottom of the Pan, put in three Pound of Sugar finely beaten, stir
it well, and let them have two or three Boils; then put them in Pots
or Glasses.


_To dry CHERRIES without Sugar._

Stone the Cherries, and set them on the Fire, with only what Liquor
comes out of them; let them boil up two or three Times, shaking them
as they boil; then put them in an earthen Pot; the next Day scald
them, and when they are cold lay them on Sieves, and dry them in an
Oven not too hot. Twice heating an Oven will dry any Sort of
Cherries.


_To dry CHERRIES in Bunches._

Take _Kentish_ Cherries, or _Morella_, and tye them in Bunches with
a Thread, about a Dozen in a Bunch; and when you have dry'd your
other Cherries, put the Syrup that they come out of to your Bunches;
let them just boil, cover them close, the next Day scald them; and
when they are cold, lay them in Sieves in a cool Oven; turn them,
and heat the Oven every Day 'till they are dry.


_To make CHERRY-PASTE._

Take Cherries, stone and boil them, breaking them well the while,
and boil them very dry; and to a Pound of Cherries put a Pound and a
Quarter of Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair Sieve; let the Cherries be
hot when you put in the Sugar; set it on the Fire 'till the Sugar is
well melted; put it in a broad Pan, or earthen Plates; let it stand
in the Stove 'till it is candy'd; drop it on Glass, and, when dry on
one Side, turn it.


_To preserve CHERRIES._

Either _Morella_ or _Carnations_, stone the Cherries: To _Morella_
Cherries, take the Jelly of white Currants, drawn with a little
Water; and run thro a Jelly-bag a Pint and a half of the Jelly, and
three Pounds of fine Sugar; set it on a quick Fire; when it boils,
scum it, and put in two Pounds of the ston'd Cherries; let them not
boil too fast at first, take them off some Times; when they are
tender, boil them very fast 'till they jelly, and are very clear;
then put them in the Pots or Glasses. The _Carnation_ Cherries must
have red Currants-Jelly; and if you can get no white Currants,
Codling-Jelly will serve for the _Morella_.


_To dry CURRANTS in Bunches or loose Sprigs._

When your Currants are ston'd and ty'd up in Bunches, take to a
Pound of Currants a Pound and half of Sugar; to a Pound of Sugar put
half a Pint of Water; boil your Syrup very well, and lay the
Currants into the Syrup; set them on the Fire, let them just boil,
take them off, and cover them close with a Paper; let them stand
'till the next Day, and then make them scalding hot; let them stand
two or three Days with the Paper close to them; then lay them on
earthen Plates, and sift them well with Sugar; put them into a
Stove; the next Day lay them on Sieves, but not turn them 'till that
Side drys, then turn them, and sift the other Side: When they are
dry lay them between Papers.


_To make CURRANT CLEAR-CAKES._

Strip the Currants, wash them, and to a Gallon of Currants put about
a Quart of Water; boil it very well, run it thro' a Jelly-bag; to a
Pint of Jelly put a Pound and half of Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair
Sieve; set your Jelly on the Fire, let it just boil; then shake in
the Sugar, stir it well, set it on the Fire, and make it scalding
hot; then put it thro' a Strainer in a broad Pan, to take off the
Scum, and fill it in Pots: When it is candy'd, turn it on Glass
'till that Side be dry; then turn it again, to dry on the other
Side.

Red and white Currants are done the same Way; but as soon as the
Jelly of the White is made, you must put it to the Sugar, or it will
change Colour.


_To preserve RED CURRANTS._

Mash the Currants, and strain them thro' a thin Strainer; take a
Pint of Juice, a Pound and half of Sugar, and six Spoonfuls of
Water; let it boil up, and scum it very well; then put in half a
Pound of ston'd Currants; boil them as fast as you can, 'till the
Currants are clear and jelly very well; put them in Pots or Glasses,
and, when they are cold, paper them as other Sweet-meats. Stir all
small Fruit as they cool, to mix it with the Jelly.


_To make CURRANT-PASTE, either Red or White._

Strip the Currants, and put a little Water to them, just to keep
them from sticking to the Pan; boil them well, and rub them thro' a
Hair Sieve: To a Pint of Juice put a Pound and a half of Sugar
sifted; but first boil the Juice after it is strain'd, and then
shake in your Sugar: Let it scald 'till the Sugar is melted; then
put it in little Pots in a Stove, and turn it as other Paste.


_To preserve WHITE CURRANTS._

Take the large white Currants, not the Amber-colour'd, strip them,
and to two Quarts of Currants put a Pint of Water; boil them very
fast, and run them thro' a Jelly-bag; to a Pint of Juice put in a
Pound and half of Sugar, and half a Pound of ston'd Currants; set
them on a quick Fire, let them boil very fast, 'till the Currants
are clear and jelly very well; then put them in Pots or Glasses;
stir them as they cool, to make the Currants mix with the Jelly:
Paper them down when almost cold.


_To preserve RASBERRIES._

Take the Juice of red and white Rasberries; (if you have no white
Rasberries, use half Codling-Jelly) put a Pint and half of the Juice
to two Pound of Sugar; let it boil, scum it, and then put in three
Quarters of a Pound of large Rasberries; let them boil very fast,
'till they jelly and are very clear; don't take them off the Fire,
for that will make them hard; a Quarter of an Hour will do them
after they begin to boil fast; then put them in Pots or Glasses: Put
the Rasberries in first, then strain the Jelly from the Seeds, and
put it to the Rasberries. When they begin to cool, stir them, that
they may not all lye upon the Top of the Glasses; and when they are
cold, lay Papers close to them; first wet the Paper, then dry it in
a Cloth.


_To make JAM of RASBERRIES._

Take the Rasberries, mash them, and strain half; put the Juice to
the other half that has the Seeds in it; boil it fast for a Quarter
of an Hour; then to a Pint of Rasberries put three Quarters of a
Pound of Sugar, and boil it 'till it jellies: Put it into Pots or
Glasses.


_To make RASBERRY-PASTE._

Mash the Rasberries, strain half, and put the Juice to the other
half with the Seeds; boil them fast for a Quarter of an Hour; and to
a Pint of Rasberries put half a Pint of red Currants, boil'd with
very little Water, and strain'd thro' a thin Strainer, or Hair
Sieve; let the Currants and Rasberries boil together a little while:
Then to a Pint of Juice put a Pound and a Quarter of sifted Sugar;
set it over the Fire, let it scald, but not boil; fill it in little
Pots, set it in the Stove 'till it is candy'd, then turn it out on
Glasses, as other Cakes.


_To make RASBERRY CLEAR-CAKES._

Take half Rasberries and half white Currants, almost cover them with
Water; boil them very well a Quarter of an Hour, then run them thro'
a Jelly-bag, and to every Pint of Jelly have ready a Pound and half
of fine Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair Sieve; set the Jelly on the
Fire, let it just boil, then shake in your Sugar, stir it well, and
set it on the Fire a second Time, 'till the Sugar is melted; then
lay a Strainer in a broad Pan to prevent the Scum, and fill it into
Pots: When it is candy'd, turn it on Glass, as other Clear-Cakes.


_To make RASBERRY-DROPS._

Mash the Rasberries, put in a little Water, boil and strain them,
then take half a Pound of fine Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair Sieve;
just wet the Sugar to make it as thick as a Paste; put to it twenty
Drops of Spirits of Vitriol, set it over the Fire, making it
scalding hot, but not to boil: Drop it on Paper it will soon be dry;
if it will not come off easily, wet the Paper. Let them lye a Day or
two on the Paper.


_To dry APRICOCKS._

Take four Dozen and a half of the largest Apricocks, stone them and
pare them; cover them all over with four Pound of Sugar finely
beaten; put some of the Sugar on them as you pare them, the rest
after: Let them lye four or five Hours, 'till the Sugar is almost
melted; then set them on a slow Fire 'till quite melted; then boil
them, but not too fast. As they grow tender, take them out on an
earthen Plate 'till the rest are done; then put in those that you
laid out first, and let them have a Boil together: Put a Paper close
to them, and let them stand a Day or two; then make them very hot,
but not boil; put the Paper on them as before, and let them stand
two Days, then lay them on earthen Plates in a Stove, with as little
Syrup on them as you can; turn them every Day 'till they are dry,
and scrape off the Syrup as you turn them; lay them between Paper,
and let them not be too dry before you lay them up.


_To dry APRICOCKS in Quarters or Halves._

Take four Pound of the Halves or Quarters, pare them, and put to
them three Pound of Sugar fine beaten; strew some on them as you
pare them, and cover them with the rest; let them lye four or five
Hours; afterwards set them on a slow Fire, till the Sugar is melted;
then boil them, but not too fast, 'till they are tender, taking out
those that are first tender; and putting them in again, let them
have a Boil together; then lay a Paper close to them, scald them
very well, and let them lye a Day or two in the Syrup: Lay them on
earthen Plates, with as little Syrup to them as you can, turning
them every Day 'till they are dry; at last, lay them between Paper
in Boxes.


_To make PARING-CHIPS._

As you pare your Apricocks, save the clearest Parings, and throw a
little Sugar on them; half a Pound is sufficient to a Pound of the
Parings; set them on the Fire, let them just boil up, and set them
by 'till the next Day; drain the Syrup from them, and make a Syrup
with a Pound of Sugar and almost half a Pint of Water; boil the
Sugar very well, and put as much to the Chips when it is cold as
will cover them; let them stand in the Syrup all Night, and the next
Day make them scalding hot; and when they are cold, lay them out on
Boards, sift them with Sugar, and turn them on Sieves.


_To preserve APRICOCKS._

Take four Dozen of large Apricocks, stone and pare them, and cover
them with three Pound of fine beaten Sugar, strewing some on as you
pare them; let them stand, at least, six or seven Hours, then boil
them on a slow Fire 'till they are clear and tender; if some of them
are clear before the rest, take them out, and put them in again when
the rest are ready. Let them stand, with a Paper close to them,
'till the next Day; then make Codling-Jelly very strong: Take two
Pints of Jelly, two Pound of Sugar, boil it 'till it jellies; and
whilst it is boiling, make your Apricocks scalding hot, and put the
Jelly to your Apricocks, and boil them together, but not too fast.
When the Apricocks rise in the Jelly, and they jelly very well, put
them into Pots or Glasses, with Papers close to them.


_To make APRICOCK CLEAR-CAKES._

Take about three Dozen of Apricocks, pare them, and put thereto a
Pound of fine Sugar, and boil them to Pieces; then put to them two
Quarts of Codling-Jelly, boil them together very fast for a Quarter
of an Hour; run it thro' a Jelly-bag, and to a Pint of Jelly put a
Pound and half of Sugar, sifted thro' a Hair Sieve; while the Jelly
boils, shake in your Sugar, and let it scald 'till the Sugar is
melted; then put it thro' a thin Strainer, in a broad earthen Pan;
fill it in Pots, and dry it as other Clear-Cakes. If you would have
some with Pieces in them, cut some of your dry'd Quarters small; and
when the Strainer has taken off the Scum, take some of the Jelly in
a Pan, put in the Pieces, make it scalding hot again, and fill it
out.


_To make APRICOCK-PASTE._

Take two Pound of Apricocks par'd, and a Pound of Sugar fine beaten,
let them lye in the Sugar 'till it is melted; then boil it well and
mash it very small; put to it two Pints of Codling-Jelly; let it
boil together; and to a Pound of it put a Pound and a Quarter of
sifted Sugar; let your Paste boil before you put your Sugar to it,
then let it scald 'till the Sugar is melted; fill it in Pots, and
dry it in the Stove, turning it as other Paste.


_To make APPLE-JELLY for all Sorts of SWEET-MEATS._

Let your Water boil in the Pan you make it in; and when the Apples
are par'd and quarter'd, put them into the boiling Water; let there
be no more Water than just to cover them, and let it boil as fast as
possible; when the Apples are all to Pieces, put in about a Quart of
Water more; let it boil at least half an Hour; and then run it thro'
a Jelly-bag: In the _Summer_, Codlings are best; in _September_,
Golden Runnets and _Winter_ Pippins.


_To make APRICOCK-JAM._

Take two Pound of Apricocks par'd, and a Pint of Codling-Jelly, boil
them very fast together 'till the Jelly is almost wasted; then put
to it a Pound and half of fine Sugar, and boil it very fast 'till it
jellies; put it into Pots or Glasses. You may make fresh Clear-Cakes
with this, and Pippin-Jelly, in the _Winter_.


_To preserve GREEN JENNITINS._

Cut out the Stalk and Nose, and put them in cold Water on a
Coal-Fire 'till they peel; then put them in the same Water, and
cover them very close; set them on a slow Fire 'till they are green
and tender; then, to a Pound of Apples take a Pound and half of
Sugar, and half a Pint of Water; boil the Syrup, put in the Apples,
and boil them fast, 'till they are very clear, and the Syrup very
thick, almost at a Candy; then put in half a Pint, or more, of
Codling-Jelly, and the Juice of a Lemon, boil it 'till it jellies
well, and put them in Pots or Glasses.


_To dry GREEN PLUMS._

Take the green Amber Plum, prick it all over with a Pin; make Water
boiling hot, and put in the Plums, be sure you have so much Water,
that it be not cold with the Plums going in; cover them very close,
and when they are almost cold, set them on the Fire again, but not
to let them boil; do so three or four Times; when you see the thin
Skin crack'd, fling in a Handful of Allum fine beaten, and keep them
in a Scald 'till they begin to be green, then give them a Boil close
cover'd: When they are green, let them stand all Night in fresh hot
Water; the next Day have ready as much clarify'd Sugar as will cover
them; drain your Plums, put them into the Syrup, and give them two
or three Boils; repeat it two or three Days, 'till they are very
clear; let them stand in their Syrup above a Week; then lay them out
on Sieves, in a hot Stove, to dry: If you would have your Plums
green very soon, instead of Allom, take Verdigreece finely beaten,
and put in Vinegar; shake it in a Bottle, and put it into them when
the Skin cracks; let them have a Boil, and they will be very soon
green; you may put some of them in Codling-Jelly, first boiling the
Jelly with the Weight in Sugar.


_To dry AMBER, or any WHITE PLUMS._

Slit your Plums in the Seam; then make a thin Syrup. If you have any
Apricock-Syrup left, after your Apricocks are dry'd, put a Pint of
Syrup to two Quarts of Water; if you have none, clarify
single-refin'd Loaf-Sugar, and make a thin Syrup: Make the Syrup
scalding hot, and put in the Plums; there must be so much Syrup as
will more than cover the Plums; they must be kept under the Syrup,
or they will turn red: Keep them in a Scald 'till they are tender,
but not too soft; then have ready a thick Syrup of the same Sugar,
clarify'd and cold, as much as will cover the Plums; let them boil,
but not too fast, 'till they are very tender and clear, setting them
sometimes off the Fire; then lay a Paper close to them, and set them
by 'till the next Day; then boil them again 'till the Syrup is very
thick; let them lye in the Syrup four or five Days, then lay them on
Sieves to dry: You may put some in Codling-Jelly, first boiling the
Jelly with the Weight in Sugar, and put in the Plums hot to the
Jelly. Put them in Pots or Glasses.


_To dry BLACK PEAR-PLUMS, or MUSCLES, or the GREAT MOGULS._

Stone your Plums, and put them in a large earthen Pot; make a Syrup
with a Pound of single-refin'd Sugar and three Pints of Water; or if
you have the Syrup the white Plums are dry'd out of, thin it with
Water, it will do as well as Sugar; boil your Syrup well, and when
it is cold enough to hold your Hand in it, put it to the Plums;
cover them close, and let them stand all Night; heat the Syrup two
or three Times, but never too hot; when they are tender, lay them on
Sieves, with the Slit downwards to dry; put them in the Oven, made
no hotter than it is after Bread or Pyes come out of it; let them
stand all Night therein; then open them and turn them, and set them
in a cool Oven again, or in an hot Stove, for a Day or two; but if
they are too dry, they will not be smooth; then make a Jam to fill
them with. Take ten Pound of Plums, the same Sort of your Skins, cut
them off the Stones, put to them three Pound of Powder-Sugar; boil
them on a slow Fire, keeping them stirring 'till it's so stiff, that
it will lye in a Heap in the Pan; it will be boiling at least four
or five Hours; lay it on Earthen Plates; when it is cold, break it
with your Hands, and fill your Skins; then wash every Plum, and wipe
all the Clam off with a Cloth: As you wash them, lay them on a
Sieve; put them in the Oven, make your Oven as hot as for your
Skins; let them stand all Night, and they will be blue in the
Morning. The great white Mogul makes a fine black Plum; stone them,
and put them in the Syrup with or after the black Plum; and heat the
Syrup every Day, 'till they are of a dark Colour; they will blue as
well as the Muscles, and better than the black Pear-Plums. If any of
these Plums grow rusty in the _Winter_, put them into boiling hot
Water; let them lye no longer than to be well wash'd: Lay them on a
Sieve, not singly, but one on the other, and they will blue the
better: Put them in a cool Oven all Night, they will be as blue and
fresh as at first.


_To preserve BLACK PEAR-PLUMS or DAMASCENES._

Take two Pound of Plums, and cut them in the Seam; then take a Pint
and half of Jelly, made of the same Plum, and three Pound and a half
of Sugar; boil the Jelly and Sugar, and scum it well; put your Plums
in a Pot; pour the Jelly on them scalding hot: When they are almost
cold, heat them again; so do 'till they are tender, and then let
them stand two or three Days, heating them every Day; then boil them
'till they look clear and jelly: Don't boil them too fast.


_To preserve WHITE PEAR-PLUMS._

Slit your Plums, and scald them in a thin Syrup; as for drying them,
put them in a thick Syrup of clarify'd Sugar, as much as will cover
them; let them boil very slow, 'till they are very clear, sometimes
setting them, off the Fire: They must have the Weight, or something
more, of clarify'd Sugar in the Syrup: When they are very tender and
clear, put to a Pound of Plums (when they are raw) a Pint of
Apple-Jelly, and a Pound of fine Sugar, and boil it 'till it
jellies; before your Plums are cold put them into the Jelly, but not
above half the Syrup they were boil'd in, and boil them together
'till they jelly well: Put them in Pots or Glasses, with Papers
close to them. You may keep some of them in Syrup, and put them in
Jelly as you use them.


_To make WHITE PEAR-PLUM CLEAR-CAKES._

Take a good Quantity of white Pear-Plums, as many as you think will
make three Pints, with as much boiling Water as will cover them;
boil them very fast, 'till they are all to Pieces; then have ready
three Pints of Apple-Jelly, and put it to the Plums, boiling them
very fast together; then run it thro' a Jelly-bag: To a Pint put a
Pound and half of sifted Sugar; first boil the Jelly, and shake in
the Sugar; let it scald on the Fire 'till it is melted; put it in
Pots in the Stove; dry and turn it as other Clear-Cakes.


_To make WHITE PLUM-PASTE._

Take a Pound of fine Sugar, and a Pint of Water, or more, as the
Quantity you intend to make requires; set it on the Fire, let it
boil, and set a Pan of Water to boil; when it boils, put in your
Plums; let them just boil, and then take them out with a Ladle, as
they flip their Skins off; take off the Skins, and put the Plums
into the Syrup; do this as fast as you can, that they may not turn:
Boil them all to Pieces; and to a Quart of Plums put a Pint of
Apple-Jelly; boil them well together, and rub it thro' a Hair Sieve;
to a Pint of this put a Pound and a half of sifted Sugar; let the
Jelly boil before you shake the Sugar, and let it scald 'till the
Sugar is well melted; skin it, put it in Pots, and dry it in the
Stove.


_To make RED PLUM CLEAR-CAKES._

Take white Pear-Plums, half White and half Black, or if you have no
Black, one third of Damsins, and as much Water as will cover them;
boil them very well; and to a Quart of the Plums put a Quart of
Apple-Jelly; boil them very well together; run it thro' a Jelly-bag;
to a Pint of the Jelly put a Pound and Half of Sugar; let the Jelly
boil, then shake in the Sugar; let it scald, but not boil; put it
thro' a thin Strainer in a broad Pan, to take off the Scum, and put
it in Pots in a Stove: When it is candy'd, turn it as other
Clear-Cakes: You may make it paler or redder, as you best like, with
more or less black Plums.


_To make RED PLUM-PASTE._

Take half white and half red Plums, as you did for the Clear-Cakes;
boil them with as much Water as will cover them; then, to a Quart of
Plums put a Pint of Apple-Jelly; let them boil well together; rub it
thro' an Hair Sieve; to a Pint of Jelly put in a Pound and half of
Sugar; boil the Jelly, and shake in the Sugar; let it scald 'till
the Sugar is melted, skin it well, and fill in Pots; dry it as other
Cakes: You may put some of this in Plates, and make Fruit-Jambals.


_To dry PLUMS like the FRENCH PLUMS, with Stones in them._

When you have laid out all your Plums that are to be stopt, put
white Pear-Plums, or any large black Plums, in an Earthen Pot, and
make your Plum-Syrup almost scalding hot; put it to the Plums, and
scald the Syrup every Day, 'till the Plums are tender and red; then
lay them on Sieves, and dry them in an Oven, turning them every Day
'till they are dry; then lay them between Papers, and keep them in a
dry Place.


_To dry PEACHES._

Stone the largest white _Newington_ Peaches, and pare them, and have
ready a Pan over the Fire with boiling Water; put in the Peaches,
and let them boil 'till they are tender; then lay them on a Sieve to
drain out all the Water; weigh them, and lay them in the Pan you
boil them in, and cover them with their Weight in Sugar; let them
lye two or three Hours; then boil them 'till they are clear, and the
Syrup pretty thick; set them by cover'd, with a Paper close to them;
the next Day scald them very well, setting them off the Fire and on
again, 'till the Peaches are thorough hot; repeat this for three
Days; then lay them on Plates to dry, and turn them every Day 'till
dry.


_To make PEACH-CHIPS._

Pare the Peaches, and cut them in thin Chips; to four Pound of Chips
put three Pound and a Half of fine beaten Sugar; let the Sugar and
Chips lye a little while, 'till the Sugar is well melted, then boil
them fast 'till they are clear; about half an Hour will do them
enough; set them by 'till the next Day, then scald them very well
two Days, and lay them on earthen Plates in a Stove; sift on them
fine Sugar, through a Lawn Sieve; turn them every Day, sifting them
'till almost dry; then lay them on a Sieve a Day or two more in the
Stove: Lay them in a Box close together, and when they have lain so
a Week, pick them asunder, that they may not be in Lumps.


_To preserve or dry NUTMEG-PEACHES._

Peel the Peaches, and put them in boiling Water; let them boil a
Quarter of an Hour; lay them to drain, weigh them, and to a Pound of
Peaches put a Pound of fine Sugar beaten very small; when the Sugar
is pretty well melted, boil them very fast 'till they are clear; set
them by 'till they are cold; then scald them very well; take to
every Pint of Peach a Pint of Codling-Jelly and a Pound of Sugar;
boil it 'till it jellies very well, then put in the Peaches and half
the Syrup; let them boil fast; then put them in Pots or Glasses: If
you wou'd dry them, scald them three or four Days, and dry them out
of their Syrup.


_To preserve CUCUMBERS._

Take Cucumbers of the same Bigness that you wou'd to pickle; pick
them fresh, green, and free from Spots; boil them in Water 'till
they are tender; then run a Knitting-needle through them the long
Way, and scrape off all Roughness; then green them, which is done
thus: Let your Water be ready to boil, take it off, and put in a
good Piece of Roach-Allum; set it on the Fire, and put in the
Cucumbers; cover them close 'till you see they look green; weigh
them, and take their Weight in single-refin'd Sugar clarify'd; to a
Pound of Sugar put a Pint of Water; put your Cucumbers in; boil them
a little close-cover'd; set them by, and boil them a little every
Day for four Days; then take them out of your Syrup, and make a
Syrup of double-refin'd Sugar, a Pound of Sugar and half a Pint of
Water to every Pound of Cucumbers; put in your Cucumbers, and boil
them 'till they are clear; then put in the Juice of two or three
Lemmons, and a little Orange-flower-water, and give them a Boil
altogether: You may either lay them out to dry, or keep them in
Syrup; but every Time you take any out, make the other scalding hot,
and they will keep two or three Years.


_To dry GREEN FIGS._

Take the white Figs at the full Bigness, before they turn Colour;
slit them at the Bottom; put your Figs in scalding Water; keep them
in a Scald, but not boil them 'till they are turn'd yellow; then let
them stand 'till they are cold; they must be close cover'd, and
something on them to keep them under Water; set them on the Fire
again, and when they are ready to boil, put to them a little
Verdigrease and Vinegar, and keep them in a Scald 'till they are
green; then put them in boiling Water; let them boil 'till they are
very tender; drain them well from the Water, and to every Pound
clarify a Pound and Half of single-refin'd Sugar, and when the Sugar
is cold put in the Figs; let them lye all Night in the cold Syrup;
the next Day boil them 'till they are very clear, and the Syrup
thick, and scald them every Day for a Week; then lay them to dry in
a Stove, turning them every Day; weigh your Figs when they are raw;
and when you clarify your Sugar, put half a Pint of Water to a Pound
of Sugar: If your Figs grow too dry, you may put them in their Syrup
again; they will look new to the End of the Year.


_To dry BLACK FIGS._

Weigh the Figs, and slit them at the Bottom; put them into boiling
Water, and boil them 'till they are very tender; drain them well
from the Water; then make a Syrup of clarify'd single-refin'd
Loaf-Sugar, with their Weight, and half a Pint of Water to a Pound
of Sugar; when the Syrup is cold put in your Figs; let them lye all
Night; the next Day boil them 'till they are very clear, and scald
them every Day 'till the Syrup is very thick; then lay them out as
you use them; but heat the Syrup after you have taken some out, or
they will not keep: If they grow too dry, you may put them in the
Syrup again, scalding the Syrup.


_To preserve GRAPES._

Peel the Grapes and stone them; put them in a Pan, cover them very
close; first let them boil, and set them sometimes on and off the
Fire, 'till they are very green; then drain all the Juice from them;
and to a Pint of Grapes put a Pound and a Half of Sugar, and half a
Pint of Apple-Jelly; let them boil very fast 'till they are clear,
and jelly very well: Put them in Pots or Glasses, with Paper close
to them.


_To dry GRAPES._

Take the large Bell-Grapes, just before they are ripe; stone them in
Bunches, and put them into scalding Water, covering them close with
Vine-Leaves, and a Cover on the Pan; keep them in a Scald, putting
them on and off the Fire 'till they are green; then give them a Boil
in the Water, drain them on a Sieve, and to every Pound of Grapes
make a thick Syrup of a Pound and a Half of clarify'd Sugar; and
when the Syrup is cold, put in the Grapes, and scald them every Day
'till the Syrup is thick, but never let them boil; then lay them out
on Earthen Plates, and sift them very well with Sugar; dry them in a
Stove, and turn and sift them every Day.


_To dry BARBERRIES._

Take Barberries, stone them, and tye them in Bunches, or loose in
Sprigs, which you please; weigh them, and to every Pound of
Barberries clarify two Pound of Sugar; make your Syrup with
something more than half a Pint of Water to a Pound of Sugar; put
the Barberries into the Syrup when it is scalding hot; set it on the
Fire, and let them just boil; then set them by, with a Paper close
to them; the next Day make them scalding hot, doing so for two Days;
but be sure they never boil after the first Time; when they are
cold, lay them out on Earthen Plates; sift them well with Sugar, and
the next Day turn them on a Sieve; sift them again, and turn them
every Day 'till they are dry: Your Stove must not be too hot.


_To preserve BARBERRIES._

Stone the Barberries in Sprigs; and to a Pound of Barberries make a
Syrup of a Pound and a Half of fine Sugar, with half a Pint of Water
to a Pound of Sugar: Put the Barberries in the Syrup, and let them
have a Boil; scald them every Day for four or five Days, but don't
let them boil: Put them in a Pot, and when you use any, heat the
rest, or they will not keep.


_To make BARBERRY-DROPS._

Take a good Quantity of Barberries, strip them off the Stalks; put
to them a little Water, to keep them from Burning; boil them, and
mash them as they boil, till they are very dry; then rub them
through an Hair Sieve, and afterwards strain them through a
Strainer, that there may be none of the black Noses in it; make it
scalding hot, and to half a Pint of the Pulp put a Pound of the
sifted Sugar; let it scald, and drop it on Boards or Glasses; then
put it in a Stove, and turn it when it is candy'd.


_To make WHITE QUINCE-MARMALET._

Pare Quinces, and quarter them, putting as much Water as will cover
them, and boil them all to Pieces to make Jelly; run it through a
Jelly-bag; then take a Pound of Quince, pare, quarter, and cut out
all the Hard of it; and to a Pound of Quinces put a Pound and a Half
of Sugar fine beaten, and half a Pint of Water, and let it boil
'till it is very clear; keep it stirring, and it will break as much
as shou'd be; when the Sugar is boil'd to be very thick, almost a
Candy, put in half a Pint of Jelly, and let it boil very fast 'till
it jellies: As soon as you take it off, put in the Juice of a Lemon;
skim it well, and put it in Pots or Glasses: It is the better for
having Lumps in it.


_To make RED QUINCE-MARMALET._

Pare the Quinces, quarter them, and cut out all that is hard; to a
Pound of Quinces put in a Pound and a Half of Sugar, and half a Pint
of Juice of Barberries, boil'd with Water, as you do Jelly, or other
Fruit; boil it very fast, and break it very small; when it is all to
Pieces, and jellies, it is enough: If you wou'd have the Marmalet of
a very fine Colour, put a few black Bullace to the Barberries when
you make the Jelly.


_To preserve WHOLE QUINCES._

Take a Pound of Quince par'd and quarter'd, cut out all the Hard,
put to it a Pound of fine Sugar and half a Pint of Water, and let it
boil very fast 'till it is all to Pieces; take it off the Fire, and
break it very well, that there be no Lumps in it; boil it 'till it
is very thick and well jelly'd; then take fine Muslin, and put your
Quinces into it, and tye it up round. This Quantity will make three
Quinces. Set them into three Pots, or _China_ Cups, that will just
hold one; cut off the Stalk-End of the Quince, and put it in the Pot
or Cup, to make a Dent in the Quince, that it may be like a whole
Quince; let them stand two or three Days, that they may be very
stiff; take them out of the Muslin, and make a strong Jelly with
Apples and Quinces: Take two Pints of Jelly and two Pound of Sugar,
boil it fast 'till it jellies very well; then put in the Quinces,
and let them have two or three Boils to make them hot; put them in
Pots or Glasses, with Paper close to them.


_To make QUINCE-CHIPS._

Pare the Quinces, and slice them into Water; put them into boiling
Water; let them boil fast 'till they are very tender, but not so
soft as to break them: Take them out with a Skimmer, lay them on a
Sieve 'till they are well drain'd, and have ready a very thick Syrup
of clarify'd Sugar; put them into as much as will cover them, then
boil them 'till they are very clear, and the next Day scald them;
and if you see they want Syrup, put in a Pint more, but let it be
very thick: Scald them twice more, then lay them out on Earthen
Plates in a Stove, sift them well with Sugar: Turn them and sift
them 'till they are dry.


_To make QUINCE-PASTE._

Pare the Quinces, and quarter them; to a Pound of Quince put half a
Pound of Sugar and half a Pint of Water; boil it fast 'till the
Quinces are all to Pieces; then rub it very fine, 'till there be no
Lumps in it, and put to it a Pint of Jelly of Quince, boil'd with as
much Water as will cover them, and run through a Jelly-bag; boil the
Quinces Jelly together, and to a Pint of it put a Pound and a
Quarter of fine Sugar; let it scald, but not boil, 'till the Sugar
is melted; skim it, and put it in the Stove; turn it when it is
candy'd; twice turning will do.


_To make QUINCE CLEAR-CAKES._

Pare, quarter, and boil the Quince with as much Water as will cover
it, putting in a little more as it boils, but not too much; let it
be a very strong Jelly, and run it through a Jelly-bag; put a Pound
and a Half of the finest sifted Sugar to a Pint of Jelly; let the
Jelly boil, then put in the Sugar, and let it scald 'till the Sugar
is melted; then put it through a Strainer, laid in a broad Earthen
Pan; fill it in little Pots, and when it is hard candy'd, turn it on
Glasses as other Clear-Cakes: Colour the Jelly, if you wou'd have
any Red Quince Clear-Cakes, with the Jelly of black Bullace, and let
it boil after the Red is in, before you put in the Sugar.


_To preserve GOLDEN or KENTISH-PIPPINS._

Boil the Rind of an Orange very tender, and let it lye in Water two
or three Days; then make a strong Jelly with Pippins, and run it
through a Jelly-bag. Take Golden-Pippins, pare them, and scoop out
all the Coar at the Stalk End: To twelve Pippins put two Pound of
Sugar and three Quarters of a Pint of Water, boil the Sugar and skim
it; put in the Pippins and the Orange-Rind cut into thin Slices; let
them boil as fast as they can 'till the Sugar is very thick, and
almost a Candy; then put in a Pint of the Pippin-Jelly, and boil
them very fast 'till they jelly very well; then put in the Juice of
a Lemmon, give it one Boil, and put them in Pots or Glasses, with
the Orange mix'd with them. The _Kentish_ Pippins are better in
Quarters than whole.


_To preserve WHOLE ORANGES or LEMMONS._

Rasp them very thin, just the Outside Rind off; lay them in Water
twenty four Hours; then set them on the Fire with a good Quantity of
Water; let them boil 'till they are very tender; then put them in
cold Water again, and let them lye two Days; the Lemmons need not
lye but one Day; then, to four Oranges or Lemmons put two Pound of
fine Sugar and a Pint of Water; boil and skim it, and when it is
cold, put in the Oranges or Lemmons, and let them lye four or five
Days in cold Syrup; then boil them 'till they are clear; set them by
in an Earthen Pan a Day or two more; then boil them again, and put
them in Jelly, thus: Take Pippin-Jelly, and to a Pint put a Pound of
fine Sugar; boil it 'till the Jelly is very strong; then heat your
Oranges, and put them to the Jelly, with half their Syrup; boil them
very fast a Quarter of an Hour; when you take them off the Fire, put
in the Juice of two or three Lemmons; put them in Pots that will
hold the Jelly: To four Oranges you may put one Pint and a Half of
Jelly, and one Pound and a Half of Sugar. Lemmons must be done by
themselves. _Sevil_ Oranges and _Malaga_ Lemmons are best.


_To dry ORANGES in KNOTS, or LEMMONS._

Rasp the Oranges or Lemmons with a sharp Knife, as thin and as small
as you can, and break the Rasping as little as you can, that the
Outside Rind may make but two or three Knots; then cut the Oranges,
and pick out all the Meat; and the white Rind makes another Sort of
Knots: Let both the Rinds lye two Days in a Sieve, or broad Pan,
before you boil them, or they will break; then put them in cold
Water, and boil them about an Hour; let them drain well from the
Water, and clarify as much single-refin'd Sugar as will cover them
very well; when the Syrup is cold put them in, and let them stand
four or five Days; dry them out as you use them; and when you take
any out to dry, boil them which you leave in the Syrup. They must be
candy'd out thus: Take as many as you desire to dry; the white
Halves must be cut in Rings, or Quarters, as you like them; then
take as much clarify'd Sugar as will cover them; boil them very fast
a great while, 'till the Sugar shall blow, which you may see, if you
put in a Ladle with Holes, and blow thro', you will see the Sugar
fly from the Ladle; then take it off, and rub the Candy against the
Pan Sides, and round the Bottom, 'till the Sugar looks Oily; then
put them out on a Sieve, to let the Sugar run from them; and as
quick as possible lay them in Knots on another Sieve; set them in a
Stove, they will be dry in an Hour or two: If you do but a few at a
Time, the Syrup you put to them at first will do them out. Whole
Oranges or Lemmons are done the fame Way, only boil the whole after
they are rasp'd, and cut a Hole at the Top, and pick out all the
Meat after they are boil'd, and before they are put in the Syrup;
and when they are laid on a Sieve to dry, put the Piece in again.


_To make CHINA CHIPS._

Cut the Rind of _China_ Oranges in long Chips, but very thin, and
with none of the White; boil them in Water 'till they are very
tender; then drain them, and put them into a very thick cold Syrup
of clarify'd Sugar; let them lye a Day or two; then scald them, and
when they are cold lay them to dry on Earthen Plates in a Stove.
_Sevil_ Oranges will do the same Way, if you like them with a little
Sugar, and very bitter.


_To make ORANGE-PASTE._

Rasp the Oranges, and you may make the Outside for Knots; then cut
the Oranges, and pick out all the Meat, and all the Stones from the
Meat; boil the white Rinds very tender, drain them well, and beat
them fine; to a Pint and half of the Meat put a Pound of the beaten
Rind; mix it well, make it scalding hot; then put in three Pound of
fine Sugar sifted thro' an Hair Sieve; stir it well in, and scald it
'till the Sugar is well melted; then put in the Juice of three large
Lemmons: Put the Paste in flat Earthen Pans, or deep Plates; set it
in the Stove 'till it is candy'd; then drop it on Glasses: Let what
is too thin to drop stand 'till 'tis candy'd again: Once turning
will dry it. _Sevil_ Oranges make the best.


_To make ORANGE-DROPS._

Take about a Dozen Oranges, squeeze out the Juice, boil the Rind
very tender, cut out most of the White, and beat the yellow Rind
very fine; rub it thro' an Hair Sieve, and to a Pound of the Pulp
put a Pound and a Half of fine Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair Sieve;
mix it well in, and put in the Juice 'till you make it thin enough
to drop from a Tea-Spoon: Drop it on Glasses, and set it by the
Fire; let it stand there about two Hours, and then put it in a
Stove; the next Day turn it: it will be dry in twenty four Hours.


_To make ORANGE-MARMALET._

Rasp the Oranges, cut out the Meat, boil the Rinds very tender, and
beat them very fine; then take three Pound of fine Sugar and a Pint
of Water, boil and skim it; then put in a Pound of Rind, boil it
fast 'till the Sugar is very thick; then put in a Pint of the Meat
of the Orange, (the Seeds being pick'd out) and a Pint of very
strong Pippin-Jelly; boil all together very fast, 'till it jellies
very well, which will be half an Hour; then put it in Pots or
Glasses, with Papers close to it.


_To make ORANGE or LEMMON CLEAR-CAKES._

Make a very strong Pippin-Jelly; when it is run thro' a Jelly-bag,
take a Quart of Jelly, and the Meat of three or four Oranges, boil
them together, and rub it thro' a Jelly-bag again; then take a
Quarter of a Pint of Orange-Juice, a Quarter of a Pound of fine
Sugar, and let it have a Boil; then put it into your Jelly, but
first measure your Jelly; put half the Syrup of the Oranges to a
Pint of Juice, and the Outside of an Orange, boil'd in two or three
Waters, and shred very fine; make them scalding hot together; then
to a Pint of Jelly take a Pound and a Half of Sugar, boiling the
Sugar to a Candy; then put in your Jelly, but not altogether;
because if it all boil in the hot Sugar, it will not dry: As soon as
it has done boiling, put in the rest; set it over the Fire 'till all
the Candy is well melted; but take Care it does not boil; then fill
it in little Pots, dry and turn it on Glasses, as other Clear-Cakes.
Lemmons are done the same Way.


_To make POMEGRANATE CLEAR-CAKES._

Make a strong Pippin-Jelly, and slice a Lemmon into it, Rind and
all; boil it well, and run it thro' the Jelly-bag again; then colour
it as you like it: To a Pint of the Jelly take half a Quarter of
Orange-Syrup, made as for Orange Clear-Cakes; let it have a Boil
together, and boil a Pound and a Half of Sugar to a Candy; put your
Jelly to the Candy, a little at a Time, 'till the Sugar has done
boiling, then put in all the rest; scald it 'till the Candy is well
melted, fill it in Pots, and dry it as other Clear-Cakes.

The Colour is made thus: Take as much Carmine as you can have for
Half-a-Crown, put to it two Ounces of Sugar, and as much Water as
will wet it; give it a Boil, and then colour your Jelly with it.


_To make ORANGE-HALVES, or QUARTERS, with the Meat in them._

Rasp the Oranges round and thin, cut them in Halves, pick out the
Meat, boil the Halves very tender, then take half of them, that are
clearest and best, and put them in a thick cold Syrup, as much as
will cover them; the Syrup must be made with fine Sugar, half a Pint
of Water to a Pound of Sugar; beat the other Half of the Rinds very
fine; pick the Seeds out of the Meat; and to a Pint of the Meat put
half a Pound of the beaten Rinds; scald it very well, and stir it
into a Pound and a Half of sifted Sugar; scald it 'till the Sugar is
well melted; put in the Juice of a Lemmon or two; set it in a broad
Earthen Pan in a Stove; when the Half Orange-Rinds have lain three
or four Days in the Syrup, boil them very fast 'till they are clear,
and the Syrup very thick; when they are cold, lay them out on
Earthen Plates in a Stove; the next Day, if you think they have not
Sugar enough on them, dip them in the Syrup that runs from them;
they must not have dry Sugar on them, but only a Gloss; before they
are quite dry, fill them with the Meat; set them on a Sieve, to dry
in a Stove, which will be in a Day or two.


_To preserve CITRONS._

Take the largest _Malaga_ Citrons, cut them in four Quarters, scrape
the Rind a little, but not all the Yellow off; cut out all the Meat;
lay them in Water all Night; then boil them very tender, and lay
them in Water another Night; then drain them very well, and to three
Pound of Citron take four Pound of fine Sugar and two Quarts of
Water; make the Sugar and Water just warm, put in the Citron, boil
it half an Hour, and set it by 'till the next Day; then boil it
'till it is very clear, and put in a Pound more of Sugar, just wet
with Water, boiling it fast 'till it is melted: Put in the Juice of
four Lemmons, and put it up in large Pots.


_To make CITRON MARMALET._

Boil the Citron very tender, cut off all the yellow Rind, beat the
White very well in a Tray, or wooden Bowl, shred the Rind, and to a
Pound of the Pulp and Rind take a Pound and a Half of Sugar and half
a Pint of Water; when it boils, put in the Citron, boil it very fast
'till it is clear; then put in half a Pint of Pippin-Jelly, and boil
it 'till it jellies very well; then put in the Juice of a Lemmon:
Put it in Pots or Glasses.


_To candy ORANGE-FLOWERS._

Take the Flowers full blown, pick the white Leaves, and put them in
Water an Hour or two; then put them into boiling Water, letting them
boil 'till they are tender; then drain them from that Water, and let
them lye in cold Water, 'till you make a Syrup of very fine Sugar,
as much as you think will cover them; to a Pound of Sugar put three
Quarters of a Pint of Water; and when the Syrup is cold, put in the
Leaves, and let them lye all Night; scald them the next Day, and let
them lye in the Syrup two or three Days; then make a Syrup, (if you
have a Pound of the Flowers) with a Pound and Half of fine Sugar and
half a Pint of Water; boil and skim it, and when it is cold, drain
the Flowers from the thin Syrup, and put them in the Thick; let them
lye two or three Days; then make them just hot, and in a Day or two
more lay them out on Glasses: Spread them very thin, sift them with
fine Sugar, and put them in a Stove: Four or five Hours will dry
them on one Side; then scrape them on Paper with the wet Side
uppermost, and set them in the Stove 'till they are almost dry; then
pick them asunder, and let them be in a Stove 'till they are quite
dry: You may put some of them in Jelly, if you like it.


_To make ROCK-SUGAR._

Take a red Earthen Pot, that will hold about four Quarts, (those
Pots that are something less at the Top and Bottom than in the
Middle) stick it pretty thick with the Sticks of a white Wisk,
a-cross, one over the other; set it before a good Fire, that it may
be very hot against your Sugar is boil'd; then take ten Pound of
double-refin'd Sugar finely beaten, the Whites of two Eggs beaten to
a Froth in half a Pint of Water, and mix it with the Sugar; then put
to it a Quart of Orange-flower-water and three half Pints of Water,
setting it on a quick Fire; when it boils thoroughly put in half a
Pint of Water more to raise the Scum, and let it boil up again; then
take it off and skim it; do so two or three Times, 'till it is very
clear; then let it boil, 'till you find it draw between your
Fingers, which you must often try, with taking a little in the
Ladle; and as it cools, it will draw like a Thread; then put it into
the hot Pot, covering it close, and setting it in a very hot Stove
for three Days: It must stand three Weeks; but after the three first
Days a moderate Fire will do; but never stir the Pots, nor let the
Stove be quite cold: Then take it out, and pour out all the Syrup,
the Rock will be on the Sticks and the Pot-sides: set the Pots in
cold Water, in a Pan, on the Fire, and when it is thorough hot all
the Rock will slip out, and fall most of it in small Pieces; the
Sticks you must just dip in hot Water, and that will make the Rock
slip off; then put in a good Handful of dry Orange-Flowers, and take
a Ladle with Holes, and put the Rock and Flowers in it, as much as
will make as big a Lump as you wou'd like; dip it in scalding Water,
and lay it on a Tin Plate; then make it up in handsome Lumps, and as
hollow as you can: When it is so far prepar'd, put it in a hot
Stove, and the next Day it will stick together; then take it off the
Plates, and let it lye two or three Hours in the Stove; if there be
any large Pieces, you may make Bottoms of them, and lay small Pieces
on them.


_To make FRUIT-BISCUIT._

Scald the Fruit, dry it well from the Water, and rub it through a
Hair Sieve; stir it in a Pan over a slow Fire, 'till it is pretty
dry; the stiffer it is, the better; then take two Pound of fine
Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair Sieve, and a Spoonful of Gum-Dragon
steep'd very well, and strain'd, and about a Quarter of a Pound of
Fruit; mix it well with Sugar, beat it with a Biscuit-Beater, and
take the Whites of twelve Eggs, beat up to a very stiff Froth; put
in but a little at a Time, beating it 'till it is all in, and looks
as white as Snow, and very thick; then drop it on Papers, and put it
in an Oven; the Oven must be very cool, and shut up, to make them
rise: The Lemmon-Biscuit is made the same Way, only instead of Fruit
put in the Juice of three Lemmons; less will make two Pound; it must
have Juice enough to make it to a Paste, and the Rinds of two
Lemmons grated; and when it is beaten enough, put in a little Musk,
or Amber, and drop and bake it as other.


_To make all Sorts of SUGAR-PASTE._

Sift your Sugar thro' a Lawn Sieve, then sift some Starch as fine;
to a Pound of Sugar put a Quarter of a Pound of Starch; make it of
what Colour you please, into a stiff Paste; putting thereto
Gum-Dragon well steep'd in Orange-Flower-Water; beat it well in a
Mortar, and make it in Knots or Shells in a Mould or Moss, with
rubbing it thro' an Hair Sieve: The Red must be colour'd with
Carmine; the Yellow with Gumboodge, steep'd in Water, and put to the
Gum; the Green is made with Yellow Gum, putting to it Stone-Blue
steep'd in Water; the Brown with Chocolate, and the Blue with Smalt.


_To make CHOCOLATE-ALMONDS._

Take two Pound of fine sifted Sugar, half a Pound of Chocolate
grated, and sifted thro' an Hair Sieve, a Grain of Musk, a Grain of
Amber, and two Spoonfuls of Ben; make this up to a stiff Paste with
Gum-Dragon steep'd well in Orange-Flower-Water; beat it well in a
Mortar; make it in a Mould like Almonds; lay them to dry on Papers,
but not in a Stove.


_To make WORMWOOD-CAKES._

Sift fine Sugar thro' an Hair Sieve, and cover it with Carmine; wet
it more than a Candy with Water; boil it pretty fast 'till it is
almost at a Candy Height; then put in about three Drops of Spirit of
Wormwood, and fill it into little Coffins made of Cards; when it
boils in the Coffins it is enough; you must not boil above half a
Pound at a Time, or less: The Spirit of Wormwood must be that which
looks black, and as thick as Oil, and must have two or three Boils
in the Cakes after you put it in.


_To make HONEYCOMB-CAKES of ORANGE-FLOWER-VIOLET of COWSLIPS._

Take about half a Pound of fine Sugar, sifted thro' an Hair Sieve,
wet it more than for a Candy, with Orange-Flower-Water, for the
Orange-Flower-Cakes, and fair Water for the other Cakes; boil it
almost to Candy Height, and then put in the Leaves of the Flowers;
boil them a little in the Candy, or it will be too thin; then put it
in Card-Coffins.


_To make ICE ALMOND-CAKES._

Beat a Pound of Almonds very fine, with Rose-Water, to keep them
from Oiling; mix them with half a Pound of sifted Sugar, make them
up into little long or round Cakes, which you like best; put them in
a Stove or before a Fire, 'till they are dry on one Side, and then
turn them; and when they are dry on both Sides, take very fine Sugar
sifted; to a Pound take as much White of Eggs as will just wet it;
beat it with a Spoon, and as it grows white put in a little more
Egg, 'till it is thin enough to ice the Cakes; then ice first one
Side, and when that is dry before the Fire, ice the other: Be sure
one Side is dry before you do the other.


_To make BEAN'D-BREAD._

Blanch half a Pound of Almonds, slice them thin the long Way, lay
them in Rose-Water all Night; then drain them from the Water, and
set them by the Fire, stirring them 'till they are a little dry and
very hot; then put to them fine Sugar sifted, enough to hang about
them. (They must not be so wet as to make the Sugar like Paste; nor
so dry, but that the Sugar may hang together.) Then lay them in
Lumps on Wafer-Paper, and set them on Papers in an Oven, after
Puffs, or any very cool Oven that Pies have been baked in.


_To make ORANGE or LEMMON-PUFFS._

Take a Pound of fine sifted Sugar, and grate the Outside Rind of two
large Oranges or Lemmons; put the Rind to the Sugar, and beat them
well together in a Mortar; grind it well with a Pestle, and make it
up to a stiff Paste with Gum-Dragon well steep'd; then beat the
Paste again, rowl or square it, and bake it in a cool Oven, on
Papers and Tin-Plates.


_To make ALMOND-PASTE, either BITTER or SWEET: The BITTER are
RATAFEA._

Blanch and beat a Pound of Almonds; put in just Rose-Water enough to
keep them from Oiling; then take a Pound of fine Sugar, and boil it
to a Candy; and when it is almost at a Candy Height, put in the
Almonds; stir them over a cool Fire 'till it is a very dry stiff
Paste, and almost cold, and set it by 'till it is quite cold; then
beat it well in a Mortar, and put to it a Pound and a Half of fine
sifted Sugar; rub it very well together, and make it up with a
Spoonful of well-steep'd Gum-Dragon and Whites of Eggs, whip'd to a
Froth; then squirt it, and bake it in a cool Oven; put into the
Sweet-Almonds the Rind of a Lemmon grated, but none in the Bitter:
If you don't make the first Paste stiff, they will run about the
Oven. Bake them on Papers and Tin-Plates.


_To make LITTLE ROUND RATAFEA-PUFFS._

Take half a Pound of Kernels, or Bitter-Almonds, beat very stiff,
and a Pound and a Half of sifted Sugar; make it up to a stiff Paste
with White of Eggs whip'd to a Froth; beat it well in a Mortar, and
make it up in little Loaves; then bake them in a very cool Oven, on
Paper and Tin-Plates.


_To make BROWN-WAFERS._

Take half a Pint of Milk and half a Pint of Cream, and put to it
half a Pound of brown Sugar; melt and strain it thro' a Sieve; take
as much fine Flower as will make one half of the Milk and Cream very
stiff, then put in the other Half; stir it all the while, that it
may not be in Lumps; then put in two Eggs well beaten, a little
Sack, some Mace shred fine, two or three Cloves beaten: Bake in
Irons.


_To make ALMOND-LOAVES._

Beat a Pound of Almonds very fine, mix them well with three Quarters
of a Pound of sifted Sugar, set them over the Fire, keep them
stirring 'till they are stiff, and put in the Rind of a Lemmon
grated; make them up in little Loaves, shake them very well in the
Whites of Eggs beat to a very stiff Froth, that the Egg may hang
about them; then put them in a Pan with about a Pound of fine sifted
Sugar, shake them 'till they are well cover'd with the Sugar; divide
them if they stick together, and add more Sugar, 'till they begin to
be smooth, and dry; and when you put them on Papers to bake, shake
them in a Pan that is just wet with White of Eggs, to make them have
a Gloss: Bake them after Biscuit, on Papers and Tin-Plates.


_To make CHOCOLATE-PUFFS._

Take a Pound of fine sifted Sugar, and three Ounces of Chocolate
grated, and sifted thro' an Hair Sieve; make it up to a Paste with
White of Eggs whip'd to a Froth; then beat it well in a Mortar, and
make it up in Loaves, or any Fashion you please. Bake it in a cool
Oven, on Papers and Tin-Plates.


_To make RATAFEA-DROPS, either of APRICOCK-KERNELS, or half BITTER,
and half SWEET-ALMONDS._

Take a Pound of Kernels or Almonds beat very fine with Rose-Water;
take a Pound of sifted Sugar and the Whites of five Eggs beat to a
Froth, mix them well together, and set them on a slow Fire; keep
them stirring, 'till they begin to be stiff; when they are quite
cold, make them in little round Drops: Bake them after the long
Biscuit, on Paper and Tin-Plates.


_To make all Sorts of SUGAR-PUFFS._

Take very fine beaten Sugar, sifted thro' a Lawn Sieve, make it up
into a Paste, with Gum-Dragon very well steep'd in Rose-Water, or
Orange-Flower-Water; beat it in a Mortar, squirt it, and bake it in
a cool Oven. Colour the Red with Carmine, Blue with Powder-Blue,
Yellow with steep'd Gamboodge put into Gum, and Yellow and Blue will
make Green: Bake them after all other Puffs. Sugar the Papers well
before you squirt the Puffs on Papers and Tin-Plates.


_To make ALMOND-PASTE._

Lay a Pound of Almonds all Night in Water, and warm some Water the
next Day to make them blanch, and then beat them very fine with
Rose-Water; and to a Pound of Almonds take a Pound and a Quarter of
fine Sugar; wet it with Water, boil it to a Candy Height, and then
put to your Almonds three Spoonfuls of Rose-Water, mix it, and put
it to the Candy; set it over the Fire 'till it is scalding hot, then
put in the Juice of a Lemmon and the Rind grated; stir it over the
Fire, and then drop it on Glass or clean Boards: Put it in a hot
Stove; twelve Hours will dry it; then turn it, and dry it the other
Side.


_To make LONG-BISCUIT._

Take thirty Eggs, (the Whites of fourteen (break twenty eight of
them; beat them very well with two Spoonfuls of Rose-Water; then put
in three Pound of sifted Sugar, and beat it all the while the Oven
is heating; then dry two Pound and a Quarter of fine Flower, let it
be cold before you put it in, and put in the two Eggs left out; stir
it well, and drop it. It must have a very quick Oven. Bake it almost
as fast as you can fill your Oven; the Papers must be laid on
Tin-Plates, or they will burn at the Bottom. This fame Biscuit was
the Queen's Seed-Biscuit. Put to half this Quantity half a Pound of
Caraway-Seeds, and bake it in large square Tin-Pans, buttering the
Pans: It bakes best in a cool Oven, after the Drop-Biscuit is baked.


_To make SPUNGE-BISCUIT._

Take the Yolks of eighteen Eggs, beat them well, the Whites of nine
whip'd to a Froth, and beat them well together; put to them two
Pound and two Ounces of sifted Sugar, and have ready half a Pint of
Water, with three Spoonfuls of Rose-Water, boiling hot; and as you
beat the Eggs and Sugar, put in the hot Water, a little at a Time;
then set the Biscuit over the Fire, (it must be beat in a Brass or
Silver Pan) keeping it beating, 'till it is so hot that you can't
hold your Finger in it; then take it off, and beat it 'till 'tis
almost cold; then put in a Pound and Half of Flower well dry'd, and
the Rind of two Lemmons grated. Bake it in little long Pans
butter'd, and in a quick Oven: Sift Sugar over them before you put
them in the Oven.


_To make round BISCUIT with CORIANDER SEEDS._

Take nine Eggs, and but four of the Whites, beat them very well, put
to them eight Spoonfuls of Rose-Water, and eight of
Orange-Flower-Water; beat the Eggs and Water a Quarter of an Hour;
then put in a Pound of sifted Sugar, three Quarter of a Pound of
fine Flower well dry'd, beat this altogether an Hour and Half; then
put in two Ounces of Coriander-Seeds a little bruis'd: When the Oven
is ready, put them in little round Tin-Pans butter'd, and sift Sugar
over them. A cool Oven will bake them.


_To make HARTSHORN-JELLY._

Take half a Pound of Hartshorn, boil it in a Pipkin, with six Quarts
of Spring-Water, 'till consum'd to three Pints; let it stand all
Night; then put to it half a Pound of fine Sugar, some Cinamon,
Mace, and a Clove or two, and let it boil again; then put in the
Whites of eight Eggs well beaten, letting it boil up again; then put
in the Juice of four or five Lemmons, and half a Pint of _Rhenish_
Wine; let it just boil up, and then run it thro' a Jelly-bag 'till
it is clear.


_To make LEMMON-JELLY._

Take four Lemmons, rasp the Rinds into a Pint and half of
Spring-Water, let it lye an Hour; and then put to it the Whites of
five Eggs well beaten, half a Pound of Sugar, and the Juice of four
Lemmons; when the Sugar is melted, strain it thro' a thin Sieve or
Strainer; then take a little Powder of Turmerick, ty'd up in a Piece
of Muslin, and lay it in a Spoonful of Water 'till it is wet; then
squeeze a little into the Jelly, to make it Lemmon-Colour, but not
too Yellow: Set it over the Fire, skim it, and when you see it
jelly, put it in Glasses; if it boil, it will not be amiss.


_To make BUTTER'D ORANGE._

Rasp the Peel of two Oranges into half a Pint of Water; put to it
half a Pint of Orange-Juice, and six Eggs, (but two of the Whites)
and as much Sugar as will sweeten it; strain it, set it on the Fire,
and when it is thick, put in a Piece of Butter as big as a Nut,
keeping it stirring 'till it is cold.


_To make ERINGO-CREAM._

Take a Quartern of Eringo's, cut them small, and boil them in half a
Pint of Milk, 'till they are tender; then put to them a Pint of
Cream and two Eggs, well beaten; set it on the Fire, and let it just
boil; if you don't think it sweet enough, put in a little Sugar.


_To make BARLEY-CREAM._

Take two Ounces of Pearl-Barley, boil it in four or five Waters
'till it is very tender; then rub it thro' an Hair Sieve, and put it
to a Pint of Cream, with an Egg well beaten; sweeten it, and let it
boil: If you please, you may leave some of the Barley whole in it.


_To make RATAFEA-CREAM._

Take Kernels of Apricocks, beat them very fine, and to two Ounces
put a Pint of Cream and two Eggs; sweeten it, set it on the Fire,
and let it boil 'till 'tis pretty thick: You may slice some of the
Kernels thin, and put them in, besides what is beaten.


_To make ALMOND-BUTTER._

Take half a Pound of Almonds finely beaten, mix them in a Quart of
Cream; strain the Cream, and get out as much of the Almonds as you
can thro' the Strainer; set it on the Fire, and when it is ready to
boil, put in twelve Eggs (but three of the Whites) well beaten; stir
it on the Fire 'till it turns to a Curd; then put in half a Pint of
cold Milk, stir it well, and whey it in a Strainer: When 'tis cold
sweeten it.


_To make a TRIFLE._

Take a Pint of Cream, and boil it, and when it is almost cold,
sweeten it, and put it in the Bason you use it in; and put to it a
Spoonful of Runnet; let it stand 'till it comes like Cheese: You may
perfume it, or put in Orange-Flower-Water.


_To make all Sorts of FRUIT-CREAM._

Take your Fruit, (scalded) or Sweet-meats, and rub it thro' an Hair
Sieve, and boil your Cream; and when 'tis cold, put in your Fruit,
'till 'tis pretty thick.


_To make SACK-POSSET, or SACK-CREAM._

Take twelve Eggs, (the Whites of but six) beat them, and put to them
a Pint of Sack and half a Pound of Sugar; set them on a Fire,
keeping them stirring 'till they turn white, and just begin to
thicken; at the same Time on another Fire have a Quart of Cream,
boil and pour it into the Eggs and Sack, give it a Stir round, and
cover it a Quarter of an Hour before you eat it: The Eggs and Sack
must be heated in the Bason you use it in, and the Cream must boil
before you set on the Eggs.


_To make BLAMANGE._

Take two Ounces of Ising-glass, steep it all Night in Rose-Water;
then take it out of the Water and put to it a Quart of Milk, and
about six Laurel Leaves, breaking the Leaves into two or three
Pieces; boil this 'till all the Ising-glass is dissolv'd, and the
Milk diminish'd to less than a Pint; then put to it a Quart of
Cream, letting it boil about half an Hour; then strain it thro' a
thin Strainer, leaving as little of the Ising-glass in the Strainer
as you can; sweeten it, and, if you like it, put in a little
Orange-Flower-Water; put it in a broad Earthen Pan, or _China_ Dish;
the next Day, when you use it, cut it with a Jagging-Iron in long
Slips, and lay it in Knots on the Dish or Plate you serve it up in.


LEMMON-CREAM made with CREAM.

Take a Pint of Cream, the Yolks of two Eggs, and about a Quarter of
a Pound of Sugar, boil'd with the Rind of a Lemmon cut very thin;
when it is almost cold, take out the Rind, and put in the Juice of a
large Lemmon, by Degrees, or it will turn, keeping it stirring 'till
it is quite cold.


_To make CITRON-CREAM._

Take half a Pound of Green Citron, cut it as thin as possible, and
in small long Pieces, but no longer than half an Inch: Put it in a
Pint of Cream, with a Piece of the Rind of a Lemmon, and boil it a
Quarter of an Hour; then sweeten it, put in an Egg well beaten, and
set it on the Fire again, 'till it grows thick; then put in the
Juice of half a Lemmon, and stir it 'till 'tis cold.


_To make PISTATO-CREAM._

Take half a Pound of Pistato-Nuts, break them, and blanch the
Kernels, and beat all (except a Dozen, that you must keep to slice,
to lay on the Top of the Cream) with a little Milk; then put them
into a Pint of Cream, with the Yolks of two Eggs, and sweeten it
with fine Sugar: To this Quantity put a Spoonful of the Juice of
Spinage, stamp'd and strain'd; set it all over the Fire, and let it
just boil; and when you send it up, put the slic'd Kernels on the
Top. If you like it thick, you may put in the White of one Egg.


_To make CLOUTED-CREAM._

Take four Gallons of Milk, let it just boil up; then put in two
Quarts of Cream, and when it begins to boil again, put it in two
large Pans or Trays, letting it stand three Days; then take it from
the Milk with a Skimmer Skimmer full of Holes, and lay it in the
Dish you send it up in: Lay it high in the Middle, and a large
handsome Piece on the Top, to cover all the rest.


_To make a very thick, raw CREAM._

Take two Trays, keep them boiling hot; and, when you bring your
Milk, put it in the scalding-hot Tray, and cover it with the other
hot Tray; and the next Day you will find a very thick Cream. This
must be done the Night before you use it.


_To make SPANISH-BUTTER._

Take two Gallons of Milk, boil it, and, whilst boiling, put in a
Quart of Cream; let it boil after the Cream is in; set it in two
broad Pans or Trays, and let it stand two or three Days; then take
the Cream from the Milk into a Silver Pan or wooden Bowl; put to it
a Spoonful of Orange-Flower-Water, with a perfum'd Pastel or two
melted in it; and sweeten it a little with sifted Sugar: Then beat
it with a Silver Ladle or a wooden Beater, 'till it is stiff enough
to lye as high as you wou'd have it: Be sure to beat it all one Way,
and not change your Hand.


_To make ORANGE-BUTTER._

Take the Rind of two or three Oranges, and boil them very tender;
then beat them very fine in a Mortar, and rub them thro' an Hair
Sieve; then take a Quart of Cream, boil it, and put in the Yolks of
ten Eggs, and the Whites of two; beat the Eggs very well before you
put them to the boiling Cream; stir it all one Way, 'till it is a
Curd; then whey it in a Strainer; when it is cold, mix in as much of
the Orange as you think will make it taste as you wou'd have it;
then sweeten it as you like it.


_To make ALMOND-BUTTER._

Take a Pint of Milk, and about twelve large Laurel Leaves, break the
Leaves in three or four Pieces; boil them in the Milk 'till it is
half wasted; then put in a Quart of Cream, boil it with the Leaves
and Milk; then strain it, and set it on the Fire again; when it
boils, put in the Yolks of twelve Eggs, and the Whites of three,
beating the Eggs very well; stir this 'till it is a Curd; put in
about Half a Pint of Milk, let it have a boil, then whey it in a
Strainer. When it is cold, sweeten it. This tastes as well as that
which has Almonds in it.


_To make TROUT-CREAM._

Have three or four long Baskets made like a Fish; then take a Quart
of new Milk and a Pint of Cream, sweeten it, and put in a little
Orange-Flower-Water; make it as warm as Milk from the Cow; put in a
Spoonful of Runnet, stir it, and cover it close; and when it comes
like a Cheese, wet the Baskets, and set them hollow; lay the Cheese
into them without breaking the Curd; as it wheys and sinks, fill
them up 'till all is in. When you send it up, turn the Baskets on
the Plates, and give it a Knock with your Hand, they will come out
like a Fish: Whip Cream and lay about them. They will look well in
any little Basket that is shallow, if you have no long ones.


_To make ALMOND-CREAM._

Take a Quarter of a Pound of Almonds, blanch and beat them very
fine, put them to a Pint of Cream, boil the Almonds and Cream, then
sweeten it, and put it in the Whites of two Eggs well-beaten; set it
on the Fire till it just boils and grow thick.


_To make RAW-ALMOND, or RATAFEA-CREAM._

Take a Quarter of a Pound of bitter or sweet Almonds, which you like
best, blanch and beat them very fine, mix them with a Quart of Cream
and the Juice of three or four Lemmons; sweeten it as you like it,
and whip it in a Tray with a Whisk; as the Froth rises, put it in a
Hair Sieve to grow stiff; then fill your Bason or Glasses.


_To make CHOCOLATE-CREAM._

Take a Quarter of a Pound of Chocolate, breaking it into a Quarter
of a Pint of boiling Water; mill it and boil it, 'till all the
Chocolate is dissolv'd; then put to it a Pint of Cream and two Eggs
well-beaten; let it boil, milling it all the while; when it is cold,
mill it again, that it may go up with a Froth.


_To make SEGO-CREAM._

Take two Spoonfuls of Sego, boil it in two Waters, straining the
Water from it; then put to it half a Pint of Milk, boil it 'till
'tis very tender, and the Milk wasted; then put to it a Pint of
Cream, a Blade of Mace, a little Piece of Lemmon-Peel, and two Eggs,
(the White of but one) sweeten and boil it 'till it is thick.


_To Ice CREAM._

Take Tin Ice-Pots, fill them with any Sort of Cream you like, either
plain or sweeten'd, or Fruit in it; shut your Pots very close; to
six Pots you must allow eighteen or twenty Pound of Ice, breaking
the Ice very small; there will be some great Pieces, which lay at
the Bottom and Top: You must have a Pail, and lay some Straw at the
Bottom; then lay in your Ice, and put in amongst it a Pound of
Bay-Salt; set in your Pots of Cream, and lay Ice and Salt between
every Pot, that they may not touch; but the Ice must lie round them
on every Side; lay a good deal of Ice on the Top, cover the Pail
with Straw, set it in a Cellar where no Sun or Light comes, it will
be froze in four Hours, but it may stand longer; than take it out
just as you use it; hold it in your Hand and it will slip out. When
you wou'd freeze any Sort of Fruit, either Cherries, Rasberries,
Currants, or Strawberries, fill your Tin-Pots with the Fruit, but as
hollow as you can; put to them Lemmonade, made with Spring-Water and
Lemmon-Juice sweeten'd; put enough in the Pots to make the Fruit
hang together, and put them in Ice as you do Cream.


_To make HARTSHORN-FLUMMERY._

Take half a Pound of Hartshorn, boil it in four Quarts of Water till
it comes to one, or less; let it stand all Night; then beat and
blanch a Quarter of a Pound of Almonds, melt the Jelly, mix the
Almonds with it, and strain it thro' a thin Strainer or Hair Sieve;
then put in a Quarter of a Pint of Cream, a little Cinamon, and a
Blade of Mace, boil these together, and sweeten it: Put it into
_China_ Cups; when you use it, turn it out of the Cups, and eat it
with Cream.


_To make perfum'd PASTELS._

Take a Pound of Sugar sifted thro' a Lawn Sieve, two Grains of
Amber-Grease, one Grain of Musk; grind the Amber and Musk very fine,
mix it with the Sugar, make it up to a Paste with Gum-Dragon well
steep'd in Orange-Flower-Water, and put in a Spoonful of Ben; beat
the Paste well in a Mortar, then roll it pretty thin, cut the
Pastels with a small Thimble, and print them with a Seal; let them
lye on Papers to dry; when they are dry, put them in a Glass that
has a Cover, or in some close Place, where they may not lose their
Scent.


_To burn ALMONDS._

Take a Pound of _Jordan_-Almonds, set them before a hot Fire, or in
an Oven, 'till they are very crisp; then take three Quarters of a
Pound of Sugar, one Ounce of Chocolate grated, and a Quarter of a
Pint of Water, and boil these almost to a Candy; then put in the
Almonds, and let them be just hot; take them off and stir them,
'till the Sugar grows dry, and hangs about the Almonds: Put them out
of the Pan on a Paper, and put them asunder.


_To make LEMMON-WAFERS._

Take fine sifted Sugar, and put it in Spoons, colouring it in every
Spoon of several Colours; wet it with Juice of Lemmon; this is to
paint the Wafers. Cut little square Papers, of very thick but very
fine Paper, (a Sheet will make two Dozen) then take a Spoonful of
Sugar, wet it with Juice of Lemmon, let it be pretty stiff, hold the
Spoon over the Fire 'till it grows thin, and is just scalding hot;
then put a Tea-Spoonful on the Paper, rubbing it equally all over
the Paper very thin; then paint it of what Colour you please, first
scalding the Colours: When you see it grows dry, pin it at two
Corners of the Paper; when they are cold, and you have made all you
design to make, put them into a Box, and set them a Day or two by
the Fire; then wet the Papers, with your Fingers dipt into Water, on
the Outside; let them lye a little, and the Papers will come off.
The Colours are made thus: The Red with Carmine, the Blue with
Smalt, the Green with Powder, call'd Green-Earth, and the Yellow
with Saffron steep'd in Lemmon-Juice.


_To candy little GREEN-ORANGES._

Lay the Oranges in Water three Days, shifting them every Day; then
put them into scalding Water, keeping them in a Scald, close
cover'd, 'till they are green; then boil them 'till they are tender,
and put them in Water for three Days more, shifting the Water every
Day: Make a Syrup with their Weight in Sugar, Half a Pint of Water
to a Pound of Sugar; when the Syrup is cold put the Oranges into it;
let them lye two or three Days, and then candy them out as other
Oranges.


_To candy COWSLIPS, or any FLOWERS or GREENS in BUNCHES._

Steep Gum-Arabick in Water, wet the Flowers with it, and shake them
in a Cloth, that they may be dry; then dip them in fine sifted
Sugar, and hang them on a String, ty'd cross a Chimney that has a
Fire in it: They must hang two or three Days 'till the Flowers are
quite dry.


_To make CARAMEL._

Take _China_ Oranges, peel and split them into Quarters, but don't
break the Skin; lay the Quarters before a Fire, turning them 'till
the Skin is very dry; then take Half a Pound of Sugar sifted thro'
an Hair Sieve, put it in a Brass or Silver Pan, and set it over a
very slow Fire, keeping it stirring 'till all is melted, and looks
pretty clear; then take it off the Fire, and put in your
Orange-Quarters, one at a Time; take them out again as fast as you
can with a little Spoon, and lay them on a Dish, that shou'd be
butter'd, or they will not come off: The Sugar will keep hot enough
to do any Plate full. You may do roasted Chessnuts, or any Fruit in
the Summer, first laying the Fruit before a Fire, or in a Stove, to
make the Skin tough; for if any Wet come out, the Sugar will not
stick to it: It must be done just when you use it, for it will not
keep.


_To make a good GREEN._

Lay an Ounce of Gumboodge in Water 'till it is all melted, Half a
Quarter of a Pint of Water is sufficient; then take an Ounce and
Half of Stone-Blue dissolv'd in a little Water, put it to the
Gumboodge when melted; put to it a Quarter of a Pound of fine Sugar,
and a Quarter of a Pint of Water more, and let it boil: Put a
Spoonful of this to a Pint of any white Clear-Cakes, it will make
them a very good Green.


_To sugar all Sorts of small FRUIT._

Beat the White of an Egg, and dip the Fruit in it; let it lye on a
Cloth that it may not wet; then take fine sifted Sugar, and rowl the
Fruit in it 'till 'tis quite cover'd with Sugar; lay it on a Sieve
in a Stove, or before a Fire, to dry it well; it will keep well a
Week.


_To scald all Sorts of FRUIT._

Put the Fruit into scalding Water, (as much as will almost cover the
Fruit) set it over a slow Fire, keep them in a Scald 'till they are
tender, turning the Fruit where the Water does not cover it; when
'tis very tender, lay a Paper close to it, and let it stand 'till it
is cold: Then to a Pound of Fruit put Half a Pound of Sugar, and let
it boil (but not too fast) 'till it looks clear: All Fruit must be
done whole but Pippins, and they are best halv'd or quarter'd, and a
little Orange-Peel boil'd and put in them, with the Juice of a
Lemmon.


_FINIS._

       *       *       *       *       *
           *       *       *       *
       *       *       *       *       *

Errata (Noted by Transcriber):

To make Honycomb-Cakes of Orange-Flower-Violet of Cowslips
  _The Table of Contents and the body text have identical wording and
  punctuation. Intended reading may be:_
    "Orange-Flower, Violet or Cowslips"
a Quarter of an Hour will do them after they begin to boil fast
  _text has period (full stop) after "them"_
To preserve APRICOCKS.
  _text reads "APRICOCRS"_
to a Pound of Quinces put in a Pound and a Half of Sugar
  _parts of this line almost unreadable, some "a"s invisible_
Whole Oranges or Lemmons are done the same Way
  _text reads "the fame Way"_
The Spirit of Wormwood
  _capital "S" (first letter on page) printed upside-down_
Take thirty Eggs, (the Whites of fourteen (break twenty eight of them;
  _punctuation unchanged: possibly error for:_
    Take thirty Eggs, the Whites of fourteen (break twenty eight
    of them);
  _The passage appears to mean "separate twenty-eight of the thirty
  eggs, using fourteen of the whites and all the yolks." The two whole
  eggs are used later in the recipe._
set it on the Fire till it just boils and grow thick
  _text reads "set in on"_
this is to paint the Wafers
  _text reads "Waters"_





