


Transcriber's note:

   "Domino" is the pseudonym of Augustus Bridle (1869-?)





THE MASQUES OF OTTAWA

by

"DOMINO"







  "_Wherefore are these things hid_?

      *      *      *      *      *

  _We will draw the curtain and show you the picture._"
        --SHAKESPEARE.



Toronto: The MacMillan Company
of Canada, Ltd., at St. Martin's House.
MCMXXI.
Copyright, Canada, 1921.
By the MacMillan Company of Canada, Limited.




THE PLAY-HOUSE CALLED OTTAWA.

Do not imagine that I spend much time at once in Ottawa.  I have never
liked the kind of play-house that politicians have made on that
glorious plateau in a valley of wonderland with a river of dreams
rolling past to the sea.  Where under heaven is any other Capital so
favoured by the great scenic artist?  On what promontory do
parliamentary towers and gables so colossally arise to enchant the
vision?  The Thames draws the ships of the world and crawls muddily and
lazily out to sea wondering what haphazard of history ever concentrated
so much commerce, politics and human splendour on the banks of one
large ditch.  Ottawa's house of political drama overlooks one of the
noblest rivers in the world, that takes its rise in everlasting hills
of granite and pines.

One, Laurier, used to dream that he would devote his declining days to
making Ottawa beautiful as a city as she is for the site of a capital.
To him as to others, Rome, London, Paris, Vienna, Washington, should
all in time be rivalled by Ottawa the magnificent.  But the saw-mill
surveyors of Ottawa spoiled that when they made no approach to
Parliament Hill to compare to the vista seen from the river.  Ottawa
was built for convenience: for opportunity: for expediency.

Parliament is its great show.  Politicians are the actors.  Time has
seen some interesting, almost baffling, dramas on that hill.  No other
Parliament stands midway of so vast a country.  But there are people
who prefer Hull, P.Q., to Ottawa, Ont.  We have had some mild Mephistos
of strategy up there: some prophets of eloquence: some dreamers of
imagination: giants of creative energy scheming how to draw a young,
vast country together into nationhood so that the show-men on
Parliament Hill might have an audience.

But the Ottawa of to-day is a strange spectacle for the prophets.  The
great new Opera House is all but finished, when no seer can tell
whether the plays to be put on there by the parties of the future will
be as epical and worthwhile as those staged by the actors of the past.
Imagination was not absent when Ottawa was created.  But it needs more
than common imagination to foresee whether these political playboys of
the northern world are going to be worthy of the great audience soon to
arise in the country that converges upon Ottawa.

Sometimes in Parliament you catch the vibration of big momentums in a
nation's progress.  Voices now and then arise in speech that reflect
some greatness of vision.  More often the actors are sitting
indolently, hearing the clack of worn-out principals whose struts and
grimaces and cadences are those of men whose cues should lead them to
the dressing rooms, or to the wings, or somewhere into the maze of the
back drop where nobody takes part in the show.  Or they listen to men
whose big informing idea constantly is that all we need to make
economic happiness for everybody is to turn out the company now in and
get another from the furrows.  These latter believe that a nation is a
condition of free trade--mainly on behalf of the farmer whose average
idea of industry is a blacksmith shop on a farm.

One's head inclines to ache by reason of listening to the
three-cornered claque on the Tariff as it was in the beginning, is now
and ever shall be.  Now and again we are inclined to study the men who
are elected to Parliament and some of those who gravitate towards
Ottawa without the bother of elections.  They stimulate interest and
challenge criticism, not less because the interest and the criticism
come from a seat in the audience rather than from "behind the
scenes"--which is not always a disadvantage.  While the
parliamentarians perform "Promises and Pie Crusts", the wives have
their own play--"Petticoats and Power".  The stage here is a
triangle--Rideau Hall, Chateau Laurier, the Parliamentary Restaurant.
At the cafe tables women from all the counties and electoral districts
of Canada--many of them French--chatter about the great masquerade up
at the Castle, the little-king show which at its best is worth more to
Canada than the Senate.  The homes of Ottawa are little shows whose
players imitate the manners and the accents of the fine people in the
Castle, the Restaurant and the Chateau.

"Nothing but a prinked-up panorama!" says the rugged Radical in a
coonskin coat, member of a deputation with a railway ticket as long as
his pocket.  "Poor show!  What we want down here is more plain farmers'
wives----"

He pauses.  This man's first cousin broke away from the farm a
generation ago because farmers' wives were too plain, and farmers did
so little reading, and the big thinkers and doers all seemed to live in
town.  As he talks, up dashes a sleigh, jangling its bells and dangling
its robes, and from behind the bearskinned driver alights a company
that makes his coonskin coat feel clumsy and uncomfortable.  He glances
up at the great pile of walls on the hill.  The hill is alive with fine
people.  In one of the sleighs a lady bows and smiles--at him!  He
touches his cap and takes his pipe from his mouth.

"That lady?" he replies to his sleeping-car mate.  "Oh, that is the
wife of a Senator, used to live in our town.  Clever little woman she
is, too.  They tell me she's writing a novel and that Lady Byng is
taking her up.  Lady Byng--oh, yes, she writes novels.  Good idea.
Likely her books won't be quite so rough as some of our Canadian novels
are.  I like style in a book, all that fine manners stuff; takes your
mind off the humdrum of everyday life.  Byng--say, that was a wise
appointment if ever there was one.  My way of thinking, Lord Byng has
'em all beaten since Dufferin.  Kings' and queens' uncles and cousins
and brothers don't suit this democratic nation like a man who got
acquainted with this country before ever he set eyes on it, through the
boys he commanded out yonder.  Great man!  Fit to be Governor-General
of a great country, and I won't deny it.  No snobbery.  Seventh son of
an earl, all his life a soldier and a worker.  A real man, such as any
of us could present to our constituents with pleasure and pride.  Tell
you what--listen!"

His sleeping-car mate feels a heavy clutch on his arm.

"Remember the old debate we used to have about 'The pen is mightier
than the sword'?  Well, say--when you get the pen and the sword united
in one outfit--what about it?  Oh, it's a great show, sure enough.  I
used to think government was a plain, plugshot business of trade
statistics, card indexes and ledgers.  But I've come to the conclusion
that this old town has to make it a good bit of a social compromise and
a show, or it can't be carried on, no matter who does it."




CONTENTS


THE UNELECTED PREMIER OF CANADA--
    RT. HON. ARTHUR MEIGHEN

THE PERFECT GENTLEMAN PREMIER--
    RT. HON. SIR ROBERT BORDEN

A POLITICAL SOLAR SYSTEM--
    RT. HON. SIR WILFRID LAURIER

THE GRANDSON OF A PATRIOT--
    HON. WILLIAM LYON MACKENZIE KING

NUMBER ONE HARD--
    HON. T. A. CRERAR

THE PREMIER WHO MOWED FENCE CORNERS--
    HON. E. C. DRURY

EZEKIEL AT A LEDGER--
    RT. HON. SIR GEORGE FOSTER

A HALO OF BILLIONS--
    RT. HON. SIR THOMAS WHITE

CALLED TO THE POLITICAL PULPIT--
    HON. NEWTON WESLEY ROWELL

AN AUTOCRAT FOR DIVIDENDS--
    BARON SHAUGHNESSY

THE PUBLIC SERVICE HOBBYIST--
    SIR HERBERT AMES

THE SHADOW AND THE MAN--
    HON. SIR SAM HUGHES

THE STEREOPTICON AND THE SLIDE--
    LIEUT.-GENERAL SIR ARTHUR CURRIE

A COAT OF MANY COLOURS--
    SIR JOHN WILLISON

WHATSOEVER THY HAND FINDETH--
    SIR JOSEPH FLAVELLE, BART.

NO FATTED CALVES FOR PRODIGAL SONS--
    HON. SIR HENRY DRAYTON

THE PERSONAL EQUATION IN RAILROADING--
    EDWARD WENTWORTH BEATTY

A BOURGEOIS MASTER OF QUEBEC--
    HON. SIR LOMER GOUIN

A POLITICAL MATTAWA OF THE WEST--
    JOHN WESLEY DAFOE

HEADMASTER OF THE MANCHESTER SCHOOL--
    MICHAEL CLARK, M.P.

THE SPHINX FROM SASKATCHEWAN--
    HON. J. A. CALDER

A TRUE VOICE OF LABOUR--
    TOM MOORE

THE MAN WITHOUT A PUBLIC--
    SIR WILLIAM MACKENZIE

THE IMPERIAL BRAINSTORM--
    BARON BEAVERBROOK

CONCLUSION




THE MASQUES OF OTTAWA


THE UNELECTED PREMIER OF CANADA

RT. HON. ARTHUR MEIGHEN

Once only have I encountered Rt. Hon. Arthur Meighen, Premier of Canada
by divine right, not as yet by election.  I was the 347th person with
whom he shook hands and whom he tried to recognize that afternoon.  His
weary but peculiarly winning smile had scarcely flickered to rest for a
moment in an hour.  For the eleven seconds that it was my privilege to
be individually sociable with him, he did his best to say what might
suit the case.  He seemed much like a worn-out precocious boy, of great
wisdom and much experience, suddenly prodded into an eminence which as
yet he scarcely understood.

I was introduced as--say, Mr. Smith.

"Oh?" he said, wearily.  "Yes, I've read your articles.  Er--Tom Smith,
isn't it?"

But Tom was not the name, I had scarcely time to say, and it made no
difference.  I should like to have shoo'd away the crowd and let him
call me Jake just for a few minutes to get the point of feeling of this
young man--though he is nearly 50--on how it feels to be Premier
without a general election.

There may not be as much finality, but there is sometimes as much
wisdom, in the choice of a leader by a small group as in his election
by the people.  Majorities frequently rule without wisdom.  In
accepting the gift of an almost worn-out Premiership and a year later
entering the most significant general election ever held in Canada, at
least since 1878, Arthur Meighen falls back upon his courage without
much comfort from ordinary ambition.  He faces a battle whose armies
are new, pledged to hold what he has against two enemy groups, and to
hold more than John A. Macdonald fought to get, without the sense of
one great party against another such as Macdonald had.  No Premier ever
went into a general election with so little intimate support from "the
old party", with such a certainty that whichever party wins as against
the others cannot win a working majority without coalition, and with
the sensation that the party he leads is already what remains of a
coalition.

Whenever I see Meighen I feel like hastening home to "cram" on
citizenship for an examination.  I behold in him picnics neglected and
even feminine society deferred for the sake of toiling up a political
Parnassus.  In his veneration for constituted authority I can
comprehend something of the Jap's banzais to the Mikado before he
commits harikari.

Whatever there is, or is not, in the character of Arthur Meighen, he
has a draw upon other men.  Any public task that he has in hand looks
like a load that challenges other men to help him lift.  A really
intelligent camera would show in his face a mixture of wholesome
pugnacity, concentration of thought and feminine tenderness.  He feels
like a big intellectual boy who unless mother looks after him will get
indigestion or neurasthenia.  Sometimes men pity their leaders.
Meighen, with his intensity and his thought before action looks such a
frail wisp of a man.  The last time I saw him in public he was
bare-headed on an open-air stage, a dusky, lean silhouette against a
vast flare of water and sky.  On the same spot less than two hundred
years ago, that singular, overbuilt top head and sharply tapering,
elongated oval of a face might have been that of some aristocratic red
man, deeply serious on the eve of a tribal war.

The little blank spots in Meighen's temperament are things that people
like to talk about; when the same idioms in an average man would be set
down as mild insanity.  Rumour says for instance that every now and
then he must be watched for fear he go to Parliament without a hat.
Why not?  It is only a British custom to wear a hat in the Commons
except when making a speech.  A bareheaded, even a bald-headed, Premier
may be a great man.  Meighen's negligence in the matter of a hat
perhaps comes of the bother of finding the clothes-brush at the same
time.  Since Mackenzie Bowell, Canada has never had a Premier so
naturally oblivious of sartorial style; though his later appearances
suggest that even he has fallen into the mode of well-dressed Premiers.
In his early law days at Portage it is said that one evening when Mrs.
Meighen was at a concert, he was given the first baby to mind, that
when the baby cried he marked a paragraph in a law book he was reading,
stole into the bedroom and took the baby over to a neighbour's house;
that when he was asked later where the infant was he gradually
remembered that he had put the child somewhere--now where was it?
There is some other half forgotten tale of the strange garb in which he
turned up at a friend's wedding, even before he was famous enough to be
able to do that sort of thing with any degree of contempt for the
conventional forms.

If Meighen remains Premier of Canada long enough, no doubt some really
apocryphal yarns will arise out of these little idiosyncracies, just as
legends wove themselves about John A. Macdonald, and Laurier.  I
remember that the clothes Meighen wore the day I shook hands with him
were dingy brown that made him look like a moulting bobolink; that he
had not taken the trouble to shave because a sleeping car is such an
awkward place for a razor, and it is much better for a Premier to wear
bristles than court-plaster.  Some one will be sure to remark that the
Premier travels in a private car.  Arthur Meighen never seems like that
sort of Premier.  One would almost expect him to choose an upper berth
because some less lean and agile person might need the lower.

No doubt much of Meighen's democratic _gaucherie_ about garments was
abandoned at the Imperial Conference.  He never could have worn a dingy
brown suit when he got the freedom of London.  Upon some State occasion
the Premier may have worn the Windsor uniform.  Not without scruples.
That uniform may not misbecome constricted Mr. Meighen more than it did
the spare Mr. Foster, or the lean Mr. Rowell.  But the Windsor uniform
spells conformity, colonialism, Empire--not commonwealth.  And Mr.
Meighen went to London to represent the Commonwealth of Canada.

We were told by cable that the Premier took part in most of the sports
on board ship, and of course lost most of the events.  Well, there is
no harm in a Premier beginning to be whimsically athletic near fifty.
But, unless now and then he could manage to win something it was
obviously only an attempt to make him interesting to the cables, on the
principle that a polar bear is prodded in a cage to make him perform
for the "lidy".

Weeks before he went the Premier foreshadowed the attitude he would
take at the Conference.  Again and again it was repeated as he slowly
left the country, even pausing at Quebec to say it again; and
thereafter the cables took it up, repeating it over and over, until the
people of Canada began to suspect that the correspondents were almost
as hard up for news as some of them were during the war.  Mr. Grattan
O'Leary knew he had a difficult character to popularize on the cable; a
man who until he became Premier, outside of Parliament was as diffident
as the hero in "She Stoops to Conquer"; at High School in the little
stone town of St. Mary's, Ont., so studious that he never could catch a
baseball that wanted to drop into his pocket; at college immersed in
mathematics, at Osgoode in law; as a young man opening a forlorn office
in Portage, still a sort of lariat town, when Meighen was shy of even a
family saddle-horse.

In Portage Meighen lived in a weather-boarded frame house, during the
time when in bigger Western towns other politicians were putting up
little palaces, causing their electoral enemies to wonder where they
got the money.  In Ottawa when he became Premier he lived in one of the
plainest houses, with no decorative fads, no celebrated pictures, not
much music, but plenty of room for the juveniles; described by a
political writer who was there the evening of the appointment as "just
comfortable."  He was at home that evening, discussing simply a number
of public matters, but not a word about the Premiership, till as the
visitor was rising to go and said, "Oh, by the way--permit me to
congratulate you," Meighen broke into his bewildered smile and said
bluntly, "Thanks!"  He was not outwardly impressed by the least
impressive Premiership that ever happened.  The nation had nothing to
do with it.  Meighen had not been elected.  He had drafted no platform
before he became Premier.  He did it afterwards.  All that happened was
a change of captains on a ship.

Meighen had been spiritual adviser to Borden in other remakings of his
Cabinet.  This time he was not consulted.  Sir Robert never had such a
predicament.  In the words of the old song, "There were three crows sat
on a tree."  The names of the crows were--White, Meighen, Rowell.
Their common name was Barkis.  Which should it be?  White
echoed--Which?  So did they all.  Great affairs are sometimes so
childlike.  Meighen was willing to accept White as Premier.  White had
been for years in the spotlight.  Did he hope, or expect, that Sir
Thomas would refuse?  We are not told.  But he must have surmised.  In
any case White was off the ship.

The choice came down to two.  Here again it was a spotlight man--or
Meighen.  Rowell had become famous when Meighen had not; but he was a
converted Liberal, and of only three years' experience.  The necessity
was obvious.  Sir Thomas, declining the leadership, must have
recommended Meighen, much to the Premier's joy.

Yes, it was time for a leader.  Mr. Rowell was out--and off the ship.
Happily there were no more crows on the tree, or Meighen would have
been forced to hold an election in order to get a Cabinet.

However, the three of them consented to remain in the crew, until
further notice.  Thus much was settled.  Meighen should lead,--but
what?  As yet little more than a hyphenated and quite stupid name,
which had never yet resolved itself into a platform.  But the name and
the platform were both as clear as the constitution of the party, in
which, under the political microscope, there was clearly discernible a
Unionist Centre, a Tory Right and a Liberal left.

"Lacks solidarity," mutters Meighen.  "Looks like tick-tack-toe.  But
wait."

The third disturbing feature was the condition of the country.  From
his wheel-house Meighen could see many clouds.  The Reds, whom he had
ruthlessly handled in the Winnipeg Strike; the rather pink-looking
Agrarians; the Drury Lane coalition of farmers and labourites in
Ontario; Quebec almost solid Liberal behind Lapointe; Liberals angling
for alliance with Agrarians; Lenin poisoning the Empire wells of India
with Bolshevism; League of Nations every now and then sending out an
S.O.S., interrupted in transit by Lord Cecil or Sir Herbert Ames;
and--not least threatening of storms but if properly negotiated
favourable to this country on the Pacific issue--Mr. Harding busy on a
"just-as-good" substitute for the League of Nations with Washington as
a new-world centre when Mr. Meighen had hitherto neglected to advocate
a Canadian envoy to that Capital.

Having scanned all these weather signals, Mr. Meighen decided that
diplomacy for the present was dangerous and that boldness was better.
In his programme speech at Stirling he divided the nation into two
groups--that of authority and order to which he belonged, and the
heterogeneous group of incipient anarchism to which belonged all those
who did not agree with him.

Having done this with such further definition of his programme as might
be necessary, the Premier took a trip to the West to prepare the way
for Sir Henry Drayton's tariff tour.  He went to that land of minor
revolutions as a representative of government by authority, high
tariff, conscription during the war, the Wartime Elections Act, and a
minimum of centrality in the Empire as opposed to a maximum of
autonomy.  It was a disquieting outlook.  But Westerners love to hear a
man hit hard when he talks.  Meighen has often been bold both in speech
and action.  In the Commons last session he paid his respects to Mr.
Crerar by calling the National Progressives "a dilapidated annex to the
Liberal party."  Which adroit play to the gallery with a paradox came
back in the shape of a boomerang from a Westerner who called the
Government party "an exploded blister."  On a previous occasion talking
to the boot manufacturers in convention at Quebec he took a leap into
the Agrarian trench with this pack of muddled metaphors.  "I see the
Agrarians a full-fledged army on the march to submarine our fiscal
system."

Epigrams like these do not make great Premiers.  But they are the kind
of schooling that Meighen had.  In his young parliament days he was an
outrageously tiresome speaker.  He heaped up metaphors and hyperboles,
paraded lumbering predicates and hurled out epithets, foaming and
floundering.  He had started so many things in a speech that he scarce
knew when or how to stop.  Commons, both sides, rather liked to hear
him struggle with his verbiage.  Later he developed the rapier thrust,
some snatches of humor, a trifle of contempt.  He learned the value of
playing with a rhetorical period that he might later leap upon a
climax.  Frank B. Carvell was periodically egged on to bait the member
of Portage.  He did it well.  I recall once when the member for
Carleton was spluttering vitriolic abuse at the member for Portage that
Meighen muttered, "Oh, you wait.  I'll get you."  Which he
did--immediately.  Young Cicero had his Catiline.

One of Meighen's best speeches now will rank with the best in any
country where dignity has not quite deserted the art of parliamentary
oration.  But he is rather too fond of picturesque language to make a
really great speech.  He has a strong intellectual grasp of what he
wants to say and a high moral measure of its significance to the
nation; but for a Premier he is too prone to lapse into the lingo of
partisan debate which in Canada--since the battering days of the giants
that followed Confederation--has not been on a very high level.
Meighen's best speeches are temperamentally big, but he has yet made no
great speech which will live, either in whole or in part, as a
glorification of his country.  It takes a Lincoln or a Roosevelt to be
in high office and say things that palpitate in the heart of a crowd.
Wilson did; but he was dangerous.  You judge a man in high office by
words and deeds.  Lincoln was great in both.  Lloyd George is great in
either, but not always in both at once.  Macdonald could thrill a crowd
with a homely epigram and turn his hand to a vastly national piece of
work.  We have yet to be sure that Meighen can be as big in action as
he has sometimes been in speech.

Unless one is too easily mistaken, the Imperial Conference imparted a
steady sense of responsibility to Arthur Meighen that he rather lacked
when he took office.  He found himself in a very uncomfortable
spotlight.  He had not been used to measuring his words to suit such
momentous occasions; nor accustomed to realizing how small the greatest
men and the most impressive human arrangements are when you get to the
centre and no longer have the perspective.  He represented the oldest
self-governing Dominion.  A word misplaced might make a vast
difference.  He realized the significance of the event--especially
before an election.  He was never able to keep out of his mind what
might be happening at home in such places as Medicine Hat.  The issues
which he discussed were big.  He handled them worthily, with a due
admixture of boldness and caution.

It was no time for mere sentiment, but for careful deliberation of
matters that lay beyond Canada, beyond the Empire, in the danger zones
of world politics, more especially of the Orient.  The status of Canada
as a nation north of the United States depended in that case vastly
more upon a definition of Japanese and Pacific policy than upon any
heroic allusion to the Great War.  No man could have traversed this
precarious business with more insight into the probable effect of what
he had to say upon the Empire, the United States, and his own electoral
prospect in Canada.  The day after his announcement of a general
election this year the Premier spoke to an open-air crowd at the
Canadian National Exhibition.  He chose the Imperial Conference, and
mainly the Pacific issue, as his theme.  In twenty minutes of
unrelieved, almost solemn seriousness, he made that weighty business
interesting to a crowd not too friendly in politics, with scarcely a
gesture, speaking direct to the people instead of using the amplifier
tube, making himself heard and understood with the clarity of studious
conviction and straight mastery of all the links in his logic.

And Meighen knows how to lead.  His bewildered smile is a prelude often
to a strong move in action.  Older and wiser men learn to love this
lean wildcat who knows the strategic spots in the anatomy of the foe;
who can spit scorn at the Agrarians and venomous contempt at the
Liberals; who dares to glorify a government of authority and of force
as though it were a democracy; who can hold the allegiance of some
Liberals and lose that of few old Tories.  He has earned that
allegiance.  He carried his load in the war.  Long enough he lay up as
the handy instrument of a clumsy Coalition, as before that he had been
dog-whip for the Tories.  When Premier Borden wanted a hard job well
done he gave it to Meighen, who seldom wanted to go to Europe when he
could be slaving at home.

Fortunately for Meighen he had been but a year in office when
Opportunity came to him with a large blank scroll upon which he might
write for the consideration of other people his views about, "What I
Think of Canada as a Part of the Empire."

No law examiner at Osgoode ever offered him such a chance to say the
right thing wrongly or the wrong thing first.  It was a fascinating
topic.  Other Premiers had done such things off-hand, almost impromptu
as it seemed, and inspired by merely patriotic sentiment.  This was a
notice that the Premier of Canada could speak his mind in advance, or
if he so preferred, wait till the Conference of Premiers opened and
spring a surprise.  Meighen lost no time in deciding to prepare for the
N.L.C. party a brief on Imperial relations.  Here was a thing out of
which he could make capital--for Canada and the party and the coming
elections.  And if ever Meighen had delved for material he did it now.
He was going to the Imperial Conference of Premiers with a mandate--to
help define Canada's position in the great Commonwealth about which Mr.
Lionel Curtis had written two large books and the Round Table had
published forty-four numbers since 1910; when nobody had as yet issued
the one clear call for Canada.  Foster, Borden, Rowell--since Laurier
and Macdonald--had all taken a hand in this.  But there was some new
way to state the case that would--or might--seem as large and strong
for Canada at the Imperial Conference as the voice of either Borden or
Rowell had been at the Peace Conference or the Geneva Assembly.

The Premier could picture Sir Robert scanning his manifesto to the
British press; Sir George, his old mentor of speechmaking in the House,
comparing it to what he used to say for Joe Chamberlain; more clearly
than all, Mr. Rowell himself, who for two years in the Cabinet had a
monopoly of that great subject to which he had devoted clear thinking,
concise language, and some diplomacy.

The author of "Polly Masson" might have drawn from the new Premier on
this subject some such confessions as are suggested in the following
imaginary, but not improbable interview.

Mr. Meighen, intensely revising his manifesto for the cables looks up
and says:

"Er--what did you remark?"

"That you were about to say----"

"Was I?  Oh, yes--about the Round Table.  On three legs.  Hasn't even
as much stability as the Canada First minority--most of whom are not in
Quebec.  These are the negligible but uncomfortable extremists."

"Ah!  Then you are of the moderate majority?"

"You mean I used not to be.  Well, events move fast.  Men change with
them.  I have been called a Tory."

"Yes, a tariff Tory."

"A moderately high tariff--sufficient unto the day."

"Quite so.  But not a tariffite in sentiment."

"Tariffs are not properly sentiment.  They are business."

"But Joe Chamberlain sentimentalized the tariff.  He was even willing
to have free trade in the Empire to get an Imperial zollverein against
the rest of the world."

"Why mention Chamberlain?  Are you--twitting me?"

"Because he afterwards wanted an Imperial Cabinet.  And if I'm not
mistaken you began to learn parliamentary speeches from one George
Eulas Foster only a few years after he stumped England for the
Chamberlain idea."

Meighen smiles; that wan but wholesome illumination of a
thought-harassed face.

"Hasn't the old flag been some sort of issue in every Federal election
since Confederation?" he is asked.

"Of course.  No Federal election can be held in this nation, except by
virtue of the B.N.A. Act, and every election carries with it an
inferential challenge to amend the Act.  Macdonald settled that--by a
grand compromise with Quebec."

"But--as a Canadian first."

"Granted.  But he also said in 1891--mm--now what did he say?"

"A British subject I was born----"

"And a British subject I will die.  In his day--well said."

"You will not say that in 1922?"

"Probably not.  Subjects do not vote in true democracies.  Events
change men----"

"And parties.  Even Premiers?"

He turns his spindling anatomy about in the chair, suddenly rises and
darts to a bookshelf, seizes a book and flicks over the pages.

"After all," with a yawn, "we have now and then to go back to Laurier,
the biggest if not the greatest autonomist of all Premiers--though Sir
Robert Borden years ago spoke at Peterborough quite as broadly, if less
eloquently.  Here it is--spoken during the war by Laurier.  'We are a
free people, absolutely free.  The charter under which we live has put
it into our power to say whether we should take part in such a war or
not.  It is for the Canadian people, the Canadian Parliament and the
Canadian Government alone to decide.  This freedom is at once the glory
and the honour of Britain which granted it and of Canada which used it
to assist Britain.  Freedom is the keynote of all British
institutions?'"

The clock ticks louder.  It is time to go.

"Tell me, Mr. Meighen, is it not after all the mandate of Canada's part
in the war that stands behind the attitude you are bound to take at
this Conference?"

"You mean that if Canada had not gone to war magnificently as she did,
the war--might have been lost?"

"Essentially that.  Hence the new nationhood of Canada born of the war.
You, or any other leader, even as Tory or as clear Grit, would not
foist upon this free nation any issue which does not do justice to the
sense of nationhood begotten by the war.  Would you?"

"I will say--no."

"Then as to the Anglo-Japanese Alliance?"

"Canada must be free, because she has a vital interest in the American
aspect of such an Alliance that even Britain has not.  This nation is
the electric transmission transformer between Britain and the United
States.  There is a Pacific zone of policy in which Canada has a big
stake."

"I see.  Now as to the next election?"

The Premier rises: now thinner and more intense than ever.

"My friend--just this.  The solidarity of the British Commonwealth
League of Nations is at the root of the welfare of the civilized world.
In every nation of this League, no matter by what party label the
Unionist cause is identified in the baggage room, it is a matter of
vital importance to the solidarity of the League that such party should
remain or go into power.  So--I hope to get from the Conference such a
reasonable endorsation of Canada's stand on the main issues that our
party here----"

He pauses and gazes fixedly at a large map of Western Canada.  The
visitor imagines that he is looking at Portage, his home town.

"Er--you were saying, Mr. Meighen?"

"Medicine Hat," he answered vacantly.  "Somehow, you know--I wish
Kipling had never made that remark about Medicine Hat,--'all hell for a
basement.'"

"You don't worry about the Hat just because there's going to be a
bye-election while you're away?"

"No,--for I know pretty well that I won't hold that seat.  What worries
me is the fool use that some people will make of a freak election as a
forerunner of doom.  However, as I was saying about the Conference--I
hope to get such a reasonable endorsation of Canada's stand on the main
issues that our party here can work to victory advantage in the next
election.  I may as well be honest.  Arthur Meighen, Premier, has not
yet been elected.  But he intends to be, because he ought to be,
because the party he leads can do this country more good for the next
few years than anything else in sight; because the party which carried
the war and the re-establishment has been given a new lease of life, at
least some vision, and a vast deal of experience which Canada is going
to need from now on more than she can ever need the wholesale patent
nostrums of millennial doctors who think the plough-handles are a sign
manual of a new efficiency in government.  We all know what is
happening to Russia.  I'll be perfectly frank, and say that I fear this
young nation may be induced to scrap experience for experiment--which
above all times would at present be the inauguration of an economic
system for which the nation is not prepared, for which it has not been
educated, and because of which it cannot afford to take for its
education the bitter experience which too often succeeds glittering
experiment.  What the world needs to-day is economic justice, not
economic revolution.  No nation in the world has a better chance than
Canada for sound economic justice to all that makes her the world's
young leading democracy.  But economics isn't everything.  Good-night."




THE PERFECT GENTLEMAN PREMIER

RT. HON. SIR ROBERT BORDEN

Here is a modest, honourable man who saw his duty to the nation and the
emergency never more clearly than he knew his own defects.  Canada
never before had a mediocrity of such eminence; a man who without a
spark of genius devoted a high talent to a nation's work so well that
he just about wins a niche in our Valhalla--if we have one.  It was the
war that almost finished Borden; and it was the war that made him.

Canada has been governed by strategy, imagination, and common sense.
We have had Macdonald, Laurier, and Borden.  The first finished his
work, the second wanted to, and the third had finished his work two
years before he resigned office.

Sir Robert Borden was the only man in the world Premier both when the
war began and when it ended.  Of all Premiers of Canada he was the
least like a Canadian, and he achieved European fame with less title to
personal greatness than either Laurier or Macdonald.  For the crowd
there never was an inspired moment in Sir Robert's life, nor ever one
when he did not try to do his whole duty.  He never interested the
people and did not always hold the profound allegiance of his party.
Yet there never was a public man in Canada to whom the average
politician would as soon take off his hat in absolute respect for his
moral purpose, integrity, fair-mindedness and sense of honour.  There
was enough morality wasted in the equipment of R. L. Borden to have
supplied the lack of it in some of his heterogeneous followers.  But it
was morality that he could not transmit except by silent influence.

Other celebrated Premiers had governed by the personal method.  The
moral law was written all over Borden.  He was a walking decalogue.  He
worked for the good of the country without detriment to the
Conservative party.  But there never was any Borden Mount of
Transfiguration.  He never could lead except when he was considered by
the Majority to be right.  In the war he took refuge in the nation, and
its patriotism.  But for the war one doubts that Sir Robert would ever
have won any title to fame.

The man's whole makeup is a sort of righteousness.  He had no use for
the mirror more than to adjust his necktie and his hair, of which a
woman writer said:

"That wonderful hair of his must have brought the unctuous fingers of
many masters, spiritual and otherwise, down upon it in commendatory
pats. . . .  I daresay that it was his mother's pleasure in it and the
way she enjoyed running her fingers through it that made him
realize--subconsciously at least--that his hair was a very magnificent
asset."  The writer also described the garden of the Premier--his
wonderful roses; how he talked about the personalities of the wild
flowers so dear to his soul, and the perversities of the wild
cucumber--but amiably declined to say a word about the destinies of
nations.

Laurier had his flute.  Borden should not be denied his wild garden.  I
used to think, watching the Premier in the House, that he would make a
splendid bronze bust of an Egyptian god.

But the man never could dress for the part of leader.  He needed too
much grooming.  He must always be immaculate.  A trifle of neglige
would have ruined his career.

We never heard of his "iron hand within the velvet glove."  He had
neither the hand nor the glove.  He was an influence; never a power.
Even when the stage was all set for a show Sir Robert could not take
the spot-light.  He did not abhor the calcium; he merely did not know
what to do when it was on.  During the tour which preceded the
triumphal election of 1911 he was strong enough to win the country and
weak enough to pose for oratorical photographs of Sir Robert swaying a
crowd--on the roof of a Toronto hotel.  Those photographs were
published as authentic pictures of the Premier in action.

But real action seldom happened to Premier Borden.  He never could
invent occasions.  He had no craft to play the game, no intuition to
penetrate into the conscience of a lukewarm supporter or of a man whose
policies and programmes might bedevil the union of the party.  On his
tour in 1915 when, after seeing and hearing more of the realism of war
than any other man in the country, he undertook to translate his
emotions to crowds of people here, he was compelled to use the
tomtom-on-the-Midway performances of R. B. Bennett, at a time when
dominating men of both parties put their political makeups into their
pockets in order to do honour to the tragic cause of which on behalf of
the nation he was the spokesman.

Political history is very largely a chronicle of stupendous noises, of
pageants and tumults and shoutings, of strategies and manoeuvres,
secret conclaves and cabals, of sinister intrigues and specious
platitudes in parliament to cover them up, and of occasional great
episodes when the leader feels called to vindicate himself and his
followers.  Most of these emotional experiences seem to have been
denied to Sir Robert.

I daresay it was mainly his lack of imagination.  Borden must, "work
for the night is coming."  The day's work was often bigger than the man.

His advent to the leadership was a moral makeshift.  His defeat of
Laurier in 1911 was not a triumph for anything that might be called
Bordenism.  His conduct of the political side of the war was
creditable, at times splendid, never consummately wise, never heroic.
His exit was as uneventful as his advent.  Sir Robert had more than
finished his work.

The Conservative party as such carries no indelible imprint from the
man who for nearly a quarter of a century led it.  He led it by going
alongside.  He was not a great partisan.  He had no overwhelming and
audacious bigotries.

Borden was the first Conservative leader of note who never could play
the ace of Quebec.  The Laurier Cabinet knew how to play politics by
imagination.  Borden had nothing but a demoralized remnant, which the
Liberals pillaged when they discarded Free Trade, helped themselves to
a high, virtually protective, tariff for revenue only, took a reef out
of the Tory "old flag" monopoly by establishing the British Preference
and sent a contingent to the South African War in the name of Empire.
Laurier was master in Quebec, in the new West whose two new Provinces
he created, in immigration, in great railways, in a deeper St.
Lawrence, in flamboyant adventures with great harbours, in the Quebec
Bridge.  Borden as yet was master of nothing.  Such brilliance and
success had never been confronted by such a demoralized party and so
much drab common sense in a leader.

Sir Robert's Premiership was a desperate inheritance.  The direct
plunge into the Naval Aid Bill was a badly staged attempt to capitalize
the reaction against restricted reciprocity.  That first session of the
Borden Parliament goes on record as the most complete one-act farce
ever inflicted upon a patient country.  The Imperial issue was a play
to the gallery, and it is the one clear issue that seems to remain of
all the Borden idea.

Sir Robert in his whole life never constructed an epigram.  His two
great predecessors had made several.  Epigrams sometimes outlive
policies.  He never delivered a great passionate speech.  He had
opportunities but could not meet them.  Fine speeches enough, to be
sure; many of them instinct with a sort of ethical nobility; but a
great palpitating speech, never.

It is not likely that if left to the logic of ordinary evolution Sir
Robert ever would have recreated his party even on Imperial issues; or
convinced the West that Conservatism was not merely anti-agrarian; or
shewn Quebec that Conservatives in the second decade of the twentieth
century are better Laurentians than the Liberals by preserving better
the anti-continental idea.  Such things call for leadership by
imagination and a Cabinet of strong men.  Sir Robert had neither.  Even
in the House he was not the party leader.  Conservatism established by
Macdonald as a great system of damnation to the Grits, was on the low
road to extinction.  It was not in the power of Robert Borden to save
it.  The country was swept by a new Liberalism that by astute
manipulation had kept sympathetic both manufacturers and radicals.

Long before the war came, Canada recognized in Mr. Borden a Premier who
knew the meaning of moral caution so well that he knew not boldness at
all except that his cause was right.  Borden had the ethical stolidity
of Asquith without the latter's personal weaknesses or his powers of
oratory.  He needed somebody with him as stage manager and makeup
artist.  Even his virtues might have been advertised with
effect--though as a rule, except in characters like Lincoln, it takes
the perspective of time to put those into a poster.  So eminently
respectable; so high in honour; so fair in judgment; so irresolute in
action; so defective in imagination; so content to be overshadowed by
lesser men in his own party even though he never was intimidated by
bigger men in the Opposition: such, so far as we could see him before
the war, was Sir Robert Borden.

Platitudes lay in wait for the Premier to utter them.  Only by an
effort of will could he lift them to a plane of high interest.  He
could sketch great issues with the solemn hand of a great preacher
pronouncing a benediction; but he never could utter an aside, or crack
a joke, or tell a story, or forget that once upon a time Fate had
picked him to be a leader and so help him he would go through the
motions of shepherding while the other men were the real collie dogs of
the flock.  If only Borden could have broken some bucking broncho, or
worn some new kind of bouquet, or invented some imitation of a brazen
serpent to hold up, the people and the party might have got hold of him
and followed him.

Such was Premier Borden before the war, and so he remained, but under a
magnifying glass, afterwards.  The war was a godsend to the Government.
It drove out alleged dissension in the Cabinet and gave the party which
had met defeat in the Naval Aid Bill a chance to perpetrate something
which no Parliament would dare try to defeat.  Sometimes I almost think
Borden was for short periods in the war a truly great man--in the eyes
of the angels.  He had known the war was coming; he had said so.  There
was a secret plan of action on file in the Archives months before it
came.  Not his to exult in I-told-you-sos to the leader opposite who
had mitigated the menace.  He rose to his programme of duty.  He did
not even wait till Britain declared war, but cabled assurances of aid
on August 2nd, 1914.  Special Parliament was assembled.  The hour had
struck.  A Halifax writer present at the Khaki Parliament says:

"Sir Wilfrid easily bore off the honours in oratory.  It was a great
occasion and he rose to it. . . .  Sir Robert is no orator, but he
spoke in straight man-fashion of the great crisis.  The climax of his
speech was a solemn warning of the dark days to come 'when our
endurance will be tried.'"

Had the Premier issued a referendum in that first month of Canada's
going to war he would have wept at the amazing number of Noes from the
Province in which Laurier was born, and the provinces in the Far West
which he had created; in the one, obvious indifference whatever the
cause; in the other enmity from the Nationals whom Laurier had imported
to make Liberal voters.  Even in the rural areas, traditionally the
stronghold of Liberalism, indifferentism was the rule; and in the city
of Kitchener where Laurier had politically baptized Mackenzie King, his
successor, there was almost a state of civil war.

But the fervour of the Hughes programme prevented the Premier from
taking stock of the nation.  He permitted Hughes to treat Quebec as an
automatic part of Canada at war--which it was not; and he failed to use
even the Machiavellian energies of Bob Rogers in getting a line on the
psychology of the West, supposed to be useful only in elections.  Sir
Robert had long known of the menace of Germany, and his Naval Aid Bill
was one proof that he knew.  But he did not understand the menace of
disunited Canada.  There never was in Ottawa any informing vision of
Canada at war.  Canada, in fact, was not at war.  Political feuds were
indeed forgotten; thanks to a noble-minded Premier that was natural
enough.  But had there been a national poet then big enough to
translate into great verse the true spiritual state of Canada, he would
have written with poignant sadness about Quebec; perhaps a few verses
on the overwhelming British-born majority in the First Contingent.  He
would have explained that being a native son of Canada, whether you
were English or French by extraction, did not of itself lead to
enlistment in the ranks.  The Premier should have known whether Sam
Hughes was awarding patronage by making officers from the Conservative
party or whether according to his own statement he was doing just the
opposite.  In fact it was the Premier's business to see that the
Minister of War pursued neither policy.

But with the Hughes flares all about him it was hard for the Premier to
see the nation; most of all Quebec.  In this matter of the two Canadas,
Sam Hughes saw his opportune duty and he did it.  Sir Robert saw his
and shrank from it, not weakly but blindly.  Quebec should have been
the instant objective of all the wisdom in Canada's Cabinet.  Except
for one or two grand battalions and a minority of broad-minded
French-Canadians, Quebec was not at war, as part of united Canada.
Banging the drum and blowing the bugle in Quebec was as wrong in
strategy as to send Bob Rogers down to exorcise, as he did in 1915, the
phantom of conscription.  Sir Robert knew that even in civil times his
Government was electorally ignored on the St. Lawrence.  How much more
in a time of unpopular war?  Was it not clear that every hurrah for the
Empire in Ontario, every fresh battalion mustered and drilled in
Toronto, every troopship down the St. Lawrence, was a nail in the
coffin of Quebec's potentiality in the war?

Yes, Sir Robert Borden knew that.  He knew that Laurier was sulking
like Cassius in his tent; that he was gnawing himself over the failure
of his own predictions about the peace welfare of the world as well as
for his own defeat in the election of 1911; that the man of the "sunny
ways" was becoming a reactionary and a cynic, an old leader of great
power, which he was willing to use to the utmost for the prosecution of
the war had he been in office, but in opposition was manacled by a
sense of futility against forces in Quebec which he understood and
feared far more than did the Premier.

No doubt the Premier traversed all this, many a time and in great
concern.  And it may be that he saw so sharply into the sad
hopelessness of it all that he decided not to ask Laurier for advice,
or even suggestion.  Such is lack of imagination.

Laurier had his day in the grand expansion of the country.  Borden
would have his, in the sacrifices and moral energies of the dark days
to come.  It was a greater thing to be Premier in war than ever it had
been in peace.  Canada was a greater land in action on the West front
than ever she had been stringing railways, settling farms and building
towns on the frontiers.  The more Canada went to the front of her own
free will, the greater she seemed abroad.  The credit of this nation at
war went up in London and Paris much faster than its investment credit
had ever gone on the exchanges.  The further one got from Ottawa the
greater the country seemed.  A Canadian Cabinet Minister meeting a
British Minister in London could talk for an hour on the wonderful war
character of this country.  London was the centre of gravity of the
west front, and of Canadian Ministers.  The Premier spent almost half
his time in or near London, whenever summoned, or whenever politic to
go--to a place where the rancours of Ottawa were all buried in the
grand cause.  The Premier of Canada sometimes went to London when he
would rather have stayed at home; more often when he felt that it was
emotionally bigger to be Premier in London than in Ottawa.  He was more
honoured in war than Laurier had been in peace.  He would have been a
better Canadian had he stayed in Ottawa more.  But there were many
Canadians who were more concerned about how to help Foch and Lloyd
George win the war in Europe than about how to knuckle down to common
business at home.  The trek to England and to Europe became a fad.  The
nations went world crazy.  Premiers neglected to "saw wood."  It was a
matter for gratitude that they did not parade in khaki.

Premier Borden's lingering objection to Coalition here, even after it
was established in London, did him no credit.  He was displeased when
the Chairman of the Imperial Munitions Board, back from a business
conference in London, asked if the Premier had any objection to his
stating the case for the need of Coalition at a public dinner.  Of
course the Chairman was out of order.  But he was talking business, not
politics.

The war was not going well.  The British part of it was badly enough
bedevilled by distance and differences of opinion between various
Dominions without the distraction of party politics.

But for the great services of win-the-war Liberals the Military Service
Act might have disrupted the Coalition even when it came.  It was an
extreme measure; much more hazardous here than in Britain--except for
Ireland, of which we wanted no imitation in Quebec.  There were times
when Sir Robert longed for the wings of a dove.  His offer of Coalition
came at a time when he knew Laurier would refuse it.  Conscription he
carried out as a necessity.  He never wanted it.  No Premier of a
free-will nation would.  There were bigoted anti-Quebeckers who would
have had compulsion from the first to show the French that Canada was
greater than Quebec.  But if Canada had sent conscripts in 1915 what
would have become of the glory of the Canadian army?  The argument that
it was the best men who were killed, thereby robbing the nation of its
flower, is thoroughly ignoble.  Canada has never regretted that her
best men died first, or that the Premier delayed conscription until it
was inevitable.  Canada does regret that the Government did not until
too late, attempt to make any national register of the strength of this
nation as had been done in England before conscription came as the
final result.  To have applied conscription before the United States
went to war would have driven thousands of slackers across the border.
Enough went as it was in the fear that conscription was coming.

The bilingual bungle in the Commons was even worse than the bad feeling
over conscription.  In this debate the angry French element in the
House were a bad commentary on the still hopeful minority of
broadminded French-Canadians who wanted to carry on the honour of
Courcellette.  The controversy over titles was no feather in the cap of
the Premier, who made a bad fist of defending a practice the most
glaring instance of which was the creation of hereditary titles in a
democratic country.

Canada's "dark days" were fast coming.  The resignation of Hughes was
due before it came.  The Premier's patience was scarcely any longer a
virtue in this case, when four months after the declaration of war he
had been compelled to make a diplomatic visit to Toronto's war camp in
order to smooth out the troubles created by his "Chief of Staff."

From that time on to the end of his career we had the spectacle of a
Premier overburdened and weary in his office, bewildered by the
insistent advices of other men and sad over the failure of even
conscription, in the face of such wastage, to get Canada's 5th Division
into the field without weakening the four divisions we had.  The Union
Government was too heavy a load for so weary a man to carry.  It had
done its work, most of it well, some of it too late.  The head of it
was worn out.  He was away much for his health, more for service in
Europe, coming back to reconstruct his Cabinet, with the aid of
Meighen, then away again.  He had lost Hughes, Rogers, Crerar, Cochrane.

The strong men he had left, except Meighen, White and Foster, were
Union Liberals.

Why did the Premier not himself resign?  His work was done.  His Union
Government had finished the work which the nation gave it a mandate to
do.

The answer must be in Sir Robert's own conviction that as a Premier of
Canada he still had a great work to do in Europe in the settlement of
peace.  That work he did, some of it much more ably than much he had
done at home.  We had to read the headlines diligently to see where
next Canada's mobile Premier would be needed in the adjustments of
peace.  More of the answer might be found in the doubt as to whether
any man in Canada clearly knew what the Government's work, and
therefore its mandate, would be.  It was a time of upheavals when any
nation with a Government carrying on its work constructively according
to programme might have been glad to escape the further upheaval of a
general election.  But political parties have usually been profiteers
in the emergency of a nation.  Did the Premier fear that his
resignation would force an election before the new party was ready?  We
are not told.  Under pressure he called a caucus in 1919 to determine
the programme of whatever party he had in the Union.  The caucus
determined nothing.  Did he hope to carry on until the legal expiry of
his term in 1922, thereby evening up with the Liberals who wanted to
bring on an election in 1916?

This also we do not know.  Sir Robert was a weary and baffled Premier.
He did not know how to let go.  Once even his faltering hand was off,
who was to succeed him?  There were three men to consider.

The man's work was done.  He knew it.  Much of it had been nobly done.
He knew that the nation was sure of this.  And he now understands that
even with the failures and the weaknesses of his administration, both
as Conservative and Unionist Premier, we cordially concede to this high
mediocrity a place in our critical affairs only second to the credit
that he gained in England and in Europe as the head of a nation that
had gloriously fought and magnificently won--in the war.

Canada never had as great and noble a servant, who failed so
conspicuously on personal grounds to be the nation's master.  But there
were elements in the patriotic servant-hood of R. L. Borden, higher
than the political masteries of more brilliant men.




A POLITICAL SOLAR SYSTEM

RT. HON. SIR WILFRID LAURIER

Fifty years from now some Canadian Drinkwater, charmed by the eloquent
perspectives of time, may write an "Abraham Lincoln" string of personal
scenes from the lives of Wilfrid Laurier and John A. Macdonald.  The
narrative will thus begin in the very year that the story of Lincoln
ends, and it will carry on down just fifty years in our national
history to the time when Wilfrid Laurier, passionate student of the
Civil War, reached the end of his climax in the affairs of Canada and
the Empire.  But the poet who does this must be inspired; because no
young country at that period of time in the world had had two such
remarkable men as contemporaries, and political foes, and lucky is the
nation which at any period has such a man as Laurier.

Outwardly Laurier's political career was complex where Macdonald's was
simple.  John A. was as great a Canadian as Laurier; but in the simpler
times in which he lived he had less cause to be puzzled by the web of
fate and of political cross-currents at home and abroad, even though he
was immensely more baffled by politicians and party emergencies.

Laurier swung in a great romantic orbit of political sentiment, vaster
than that of any other statesman we ever had.  For the fifteen years up
till about 1906, he seemed like the greatest man ever born a citizen of
Canada.  Before that period he was a romance.  After it he was a
national hallucination.  The last three years of his life he was a
tragedy.

Yet the tragedy kept on smiling.  Half a century of smiles.  We never
had a statesman who could smile so potently.  Never one with such
mellifluous music in his voice, such easy grace in his style, such a
cardinal's hauteur when he wanted to be alone, and such a fascinating
urbanity when he wanted to impress a company, a caucus or a crowd.  The
Romist whom Orangemen admired, the Frenchman who made an intellectual
hobby of British democracy, the poetic statesman who read Dickens and
re-read in two languages Uncle Tom's Cabin and sometimes played the
flute, and the Premier of a bilingual country who had a passion for the
study of the war which emancipated the negro, was the kaleidoscopic
enigma of Canadian public life.

Laurier was nearly all things to all men.  He was sometimes many things
to himself.  He idolized himself and laughed at himself.  He venerated
British institutions and passionately loved Quebec.  He came to his
flowering period in a party of Free Trade and went to seed in a party
committed to a species of protection.  He spoke English as fluently as
Bach wrote fugues, and with more passion and beauty of utterance than
any of our English-Canadian orators.  One moment he could be as
debonair as Beau Brummel, the next as forbidding and repellent as a
modern Caesar.  He was consistently the best-dressed public man in
Canada.  A misfitting coat to him was as grievous as a misplaced verb
in a peroration.  He superficially loved many things.  Life was to him,
even apart from politics, a gracious delight.  He knew how to pose, to
feign affability and to be sincere.  With more culture Laurier would
have been the most exquisite dilettante of his age.  But he cared
little for poetry in verse, not much for fine music, had small taste
for _objets d'art_ or the precious in anything.  His greatest affection
was in his home, his greatest charm in fine manners, his master passion
in speech, and in managing Cabinets to win elections for the party
which to him meant a greater and more inspiring Canada.  We have had
better debaters; but never a man except himself who in the House could
make a sort of grand music out of an apologetic oration on National
Transcontinental grades.

A writer who at various periods of time was very intimate with Laurier
thinks he was a man of deep emotions.  This may be doubted.  A man who
talked so easily and was so exquisitely conscious of himself could
scarcely be considered spiritually profound.  Other men and events
played upon him like the wind on an Aeolian harp.  He was tremendously
impressionable; and by turns grandly impressive.  A personal friend
relates how a man with some experience as a critic of drama--probably
himself--went to see Laurier by request for a talk on the political
situation; how Laurier invited him to a chair and immediately took one
beside him an inch or two lower so that his own face was on a level
with the visitor's; how for some minutes he sat feeling the power of
this actor who tried to persuade him to run as a Liberal candidate, and
when he rose again seemed taller and more aloof than ever.

That is acting.  Some other man might have done the same thing and made
no impression.  Laurier could perform obvious tricks with a consummate
grace.  And he performed many.  There never was a moment of his waking
life when he could not have been lifted into a play.  His movements,
his words, his accent, his clothes, his facial lineaments were never
commonplace, even when his motives often may have been.  He was
Debussy's Afternoon of a Faun; poetry and charm all the days of his
life.

During the ridiculous deadlock on the Naval Aid Bill, when his
supporters went so grotesquely far as to read the Bible to talk out the
Bill, he was away from the House for a week, reported as quite ill, in
reality having a very delicious time at home reading light literature.
The day he came back the news of his coming was heralded to the
Commons.  The benches were packed.  Not till they were all full, every
Minister in his place, every page at attention and the House like a
pent-up Sabbath congregation, did the then leader of the Opposition
make his grand, swift entry, bowing with courtly dignity to the Speaker
and taking his seat amid a claque from his supporters, in which even
the Tories felt like joining.

Sir Wilfrid Laurier had the infallible knack of adjusting his makeup,
not always himself--to any occasion from which he could extract
profitable publicity, or upon which he could do some charming thing for
somebody else.  He is reputed once to have worn overalls among a gang
of timber-jammers, but he felt rather ridiculous and soon took them
off.  Interviewed abed in his private car at a railway station by a
political friend, he suddenly became conscious of his pyjamas and
rolled back into the bedclothes with a smile.  He was not happy in
_deshabille_.  Entertained at an arts luncheon in 1913, he made the
most of a very Spartan meal, consented with much dignity to exchange
his plate of cold beef for another man's cold mutton, listened with
great gravity to a short programme of music, asked the names of the
composers and the players and spent most of his brief speech denying
that he was anything but a philistine in art, and pledging himself if
ever he was Premier again to do more for Canadian art than had ever
been done before.  In conversation at a friend's house with a stranger
he claimed that at college he was always a "lazy dog."  Visited once by
an agent who tried to sell him a phonograph, he consented to play the
flute for a record; after listening to the record and being assured
that it was a faithful replica of his own performance and asked if now
he would not buy the machine, he answered gravely, "No, I think I will
sell the flute."  This story may be apocryphal, but it is delightfully
true to character.

On one of the thousands of "occasions" in a career that was almost
perpetual drama he was buttonholed in his office by an American
reporter who, having been warned that the Premier of Canada never gave
interviews, boasted that he would break the rule.  After half an hour
the American reporter came out to his confreres of the press gallery,
sat down at a typewriter, lighted three or four cigarettes, nervously
aware that he was being watched for the forthcoming article, and after
spoiling a number of sheets and tearing them all up he confessed,
"Well, boys, I thought I was pumping Laurier, but it's a cinch he spent
most of my time pumping me."

To the Liberal press gallery men he was as much a captain as he was to
his followers in the House.  He gave them daily audience during the
Session, very often in a group, and at such times he usually asked,
"Well, boys, what's the news?"  He wanted good news; and many a
reporter tricked up the truth now and then to give it to him.  Informed
once that "Bob" Rogers had vehemently in his office denied any cabal in
the Cabinet against the Premier he swiftly replied, with that splendid,
satirical smile, "Well, the fact that Bob Rogers says there is none
would convince me that there probably is."

Laurier was the kind of man to whom other people naturally happened.
He was a human solar system in which many kinds of people wanted to
gravitate, even to the ragged little girl on the prairie who picked him
the wild flowers that he wore in his coat as far as she could see him
on the train platform.  He discovered early in life that he could
interest other people much as some men find out they can juggle or
sing.  It was a fatal gift.  Laurier was far too long in this country,
much too interesting.  Women in Ottawa could make delirious
conversation out of how this man at 72 got into a taxi.  He was more
phenomenal to English than to French.  He never cultivated Paris and
would not have been at home there.  At Imperial Conferences and
Coronations he was an Imperial matinee idol in London.  In Ontario he
was regarded with much the same awe as the small boy views the
long-haired medicine man.  To the Quebecker he was the grand magic;
until Bourassa came, irresistible, incomparable on stage.  But Laurier
had no great intensity; no Savonarola gift to sway a crowd; he just
charmed them; when they came to remember his song--what was it?
Earlier in life he was a sort of Ulysses, led by magic.  He loved the
_petit ville_ of Lin where he was born.  But it was too small for him.
He was lured into studies, to college, to the bilingual university
McGill, to law, to discourse with learned Anglo-Saxons, to the study of
British Government by democracy, to the translation of himself into
English.  The translation, which was almost a masterpiece, made him the
first and perhaps the last French Premier of Canada, and in many
respects the greatest Premier we ever had.

This alone was something.  Speaking their own tongue, Laurier could
impress the English.  He could tour Ontario and feel grandly at home in
the Liberal shires, among the men of the Maple Leaf.  He could follow
one of his two transcontinentals up the Saskatchewan, and to multitudes
of many nations led from Europe by his own immigration policy conduct a
Pentecost for the two new Provinces.  He could fling magic over
Manitoba, and on the Pacific he had power.  But in Nova Scotia he could
never equal the memory of Joseph Howe, a greater orator than Laurier.

What this man's sensations were as he studied himself in the art of
politics may be compared to what an English Canadian of similar
temperament would feel like if he could fling a spell over Quebec.
Laurier made a second conquest of Canada.  He took a great Cobden party
from Edward Blake and made it almost protectionist, Imperial and his
own.  He grafted a sort of Liberalism on to polyglot nationalities.  In
about the same tenure of power he created a personal ascendancy the
equal of Macdonald's, in a nation almost twice as big and much more
complex.  In ten years he changed the face of Canada as no Premier had
ever done before or ever can do again.  He was looked at in Imperial
London as though he were the joint picturesque descendant of Wolfe and
Montcalm, with a mandate to make Canadian Liberalism an instrument of
Empire, a bi-racial Government a final proof of the eternal wisdom of
the British North America Act, and a measure of reciprocity a safeguard
of Anglo-American entente.

So the son of the village surveyor from the tin-spired parish of St.
Lin had made himself very nearly monarch of all he surveyed, with the
notion that his right there was none to dispute.  Sprung from the most
backward province in Confederation, he pushed Canada forward with
hectic speed, not counting the cost, nor caring what the end might be,
so long as he died Premier of a prosperous nation and therefore happy.

At about the age of sixty a reaction came over Laurier; first
noticeable in less enthusiasm and more reticence at the Imperial
Conferences.  The French-Canadian who had lost a segment of his
idolatrous following in Quebec because of clashes with the clergy and
the sending of a contingent to the South African War, began to resist
the cold machinations of the Chamberlain group.  He began to see
Empire, not as a commonwealth of democracies, but as domination from
Downing Street.  At home he was shrewd to observe that the Canada of
his own domination was a complex of many "nationals," only a few of
which were historically rooted in the Anglo-Saxon idea.  He saw that
the bigger half of this Canada was arising in the West, which he
believed he had truly because politically created; and the West had but
a slender minority of people to whom the Maple Leaf meant anything.

If the party which he also had recreated into a Laurier Liberal party
was to continue dominating Canada until white-plumed Laurier had
finished his work, it must be by a stronger leverage than Imperialism.
He had managed to hold Quebec, which now thanks to himself and Lomer
Gouin, was almost solidly Liberal.  The prairie farmers he must not
lose.  And the grain growers were not keen about an England which
bought their wheat at open world prices in competition with cheap wheat
countries like Russia, and their cattle at prices dictated by the
Argentine; when both cattle and wheat were cheapened to the producer by
the long-haul railways which Laurier and the Tories had built.

And although the "Old Man" had scant knowledge of business, he had the
wisdom of the serpent to translate the signs of the times; yet lacking
somehow the vision to foresee that a play for the western vote by a
measure of reciprocity would resolve itself into a boomerang at the
polls.  Laurier had a wonderful Canadian vision.  In 1904 he refused a
Liberal M.P. from the Pacific Federal interference in the Oriental
problem, saying, "The day will come when we shall be glad of Japanese
warships on our Pacific coast."  Yet in 1912, in a letter to a friend,
he gravely minimized the German menace.  He understood America and Asia
better than Europe.  His vision was keener in power than in defeat.

And then the war, which in a few strokes finished the almost complete
picture of Laurier.  His support of the Government in going to the aid
of Britain was at first a flash of the old generously impulsive Laurier
who loved England.  That love he never lost.  He expressed it in the
House down near to the end of the war.  He loved England a thousand
times better than some Englishmen do.  For the Empire it is doubtful if
he was ever profoundly enthusiastic except as he saw in it the glorious
evolution of self-governing democracies such as Canada, his first love.
He understood this country.  It is not remarkable that he did.  Any
public man of Canada should.  But Laurier's love for his own country
was of an especially intense character, because it was for a long while
so deeply romantic.

As he grew older the original veneration he had for England as the
mother of democracy was more and more transferred to Canada as an
experiment in that form of government.  The more he won elections, the
greater grew his passion for democracy and for interpreting his native
land.  The pity is that a man cannot go on winning and losing elections
without suffering some damage to his clear love of country.  The
highest patriot is he who knows best how to lose himself and his
election, all but his conscience and his cause, for the sake of the
land he loves.  Laurier did not remain till the end of his life the
highest patriot.  Weary as he is said to have been of public life as
far back as 1905, he was lured into winning more elections by the
adulation of his followers and his own love of swaying men as a master,
until elections with him became a habit and the loss of one a tragedy.

And even the war which shook so many men's love of country to the
depths--some of them over the precipice of profits, others to the
passionate heights of sacrifice--did not obliterate in Laurier the
fatal desire to win elections.  One has almost to cease thinking to
remember that Wilfrid Laurier did hope that an election would yet be
held during the war that would return him to power.  The failure of the
Government in the war would be largely the fault of Quebec which he
still in large measure controlled.  He held that ace.  And when the
time came he would play it.  The Premier wanted no advice from him.
Laurier offered him none.

When the bilingual dispute was transferred to the Commons, Laurier took
the only side consistent with his character and his career.  He avowed
his belief, as always, in Provincial rights, but he asked Ontario to
use its strength with clemency.  Even with an element of bitterness he
did not lose his dignity.  But the fine sparkle of the Laurier we all
knew was gone.  He was beset with complexities and contradictions.  The
one simple thing about him was his hope to finish his work by winning
another election.  In the debate on the Nickle motion for the abolition
of any further king-made aristocracy in Canada, he was an acidulous old
cynic, offering to go and burn his title in the market place if certain
others would do likewise.  Those photographs of Laurier in the Windsor
Uniform, making him look like a refulgent relique of the court of Louis
XIV. were no longer prized in the family album.  Away with them!

Poor, splendid old man!  Even in his crotchets and quavers he was
charming.  To the very last he could rise in the Commons and with a
voice as thick as wool make members opposite fancy they were hearing
great music.

In 1916 an artist painted a portrait of Laurier to hang in the
Legislative halls of Quebec, where the sound of his magic voice had
first been heard in parliamentary speech.  The artist began to paint
the Laurier of "the sunny ways."  The old man corrected him.  "No, if
you please," he said gravely, "paint me as a ruler of men."

It was the Cardinal speaking; the man who had disciplined more Cabinet
politicians than even Macdonald, the master of Cabinets; the old man
who remembered the power of an earlier day.

Early in 1917 he was offered coalition by the Premier.  He refused.
Laurier knew that coalition meant conscription, and conscription meant
dragooning Quebec.

It came home vividly to the old leader in Opposition, whatever it may
have done had he been in power, that to advocate conscription would
drive Quebec into the camp of Bourassa from which he and Lomer Gouin
had between them managed to save a large majority of French-Canadians.
The struggle of Bourassa to oust Laurier began with the Boer War.  It
was fated not to end until either leader or the other should quit.
Before the war Bourassa was flamboyant and defiant.  After it began he
was openly and brazenly disloyal, when the doctrines he preached were
inflammably acceptable to people uneducated to citizenship in so
conglomerate a thing as Empire.  The easiest thing in the world is for
a high wind to sweep a prairie fire.  The war and Bourassa together had
the power to sweep Quebec, had Laurier and Gouin shown signs of
yielding to the demand for conscription.  I am told that Laurier
personally believed in conscription but saw this terrible danger of
disrupting the nation over Quebec.  The war only had staved off the
Irish question, a conference on which was in session when war was
declared.  Laurier dreaded the spectre of a second Ireland in Quebec.
He knew all the forces and how they would operate.  By his own methods,
mistaken or otherwise, he had spent most of his life to achieve unity.
He dreaded to see that unity imperilled.  I think he would have been
glad to see Quebec enlist as Ontario and other Provinces had done.
That was impossible.  Conscription was a menace in Quebec to the man
who had failed to estimate the jack-boot menace in Germany, but who had
not failed to oppose the idea that navalism in England was as bad as
militarism anywhere.

No judgment of Laurier, when it comes to be adequately made by the
historian, can fail to take account of this sentiment in an old leader
to whom the unity of Canada had become an obsession far transcending
his original passion for the solidarity of Empire.

The Winnipeg convention of 1917 was a piece of almost calculated
cruelty on the part of men who should have known that the old chief's
day was politically done.  His party which for years he had penetrated
with his personality was slipping into disunion.  Vaguely he knew that
the western wing of it was almost gone over to Radicalism such as he
could not control.  But in Ottawa there was an even more direct split.
There, conscriptionist Liberals called the Convention for the purpose
of proclaiming win-the-war independence of Laurier and considering
Coalition on its merits.  But the western Liberal machine captured it
by a fluke.  For a few days the old chief dreamed that the West had
rallied to his standards.  Then he awoke to the reality that even in
the east he was head of a divided house.

The man who in 1916 had been painted as a ruler of men found in that
summer of 1917 the Win-the-War Liberals deserting him, some of them
with sobs.  They loved him well.  He was the old king.  Conscription
was now the issue.  The Government had decided upon it late in 1916.
In 1917 the Military Service Act was brought down in the House.
Laurier knew at what it was most directly aimed--Quebec.  He fell back
on the ruse of invoking the Militia Act which called for defence only.
There was no defence.  He knew it.  He moved for a Referendum, knowing
that in the West, sore over the Wartime Elections Act, and in Quebec,
and in the absence of the soldier vote it might carry by a majority
sufficient to defeat the Government, to force an election and send him
back to power.  He was beaten.  Conscription became the law.  To
enforce it came the Coalition.  The election was held.  The Liberals
were again beaten--partly by men from their own ranks.

Still the old king hung on.  He was now too old to let go.  Even the
Coalition might fail.  Or the war might be ended And then----?  The
last fighting act of his life was to call the Ottawa Liberal
Convention, of the men who had not abandoned his colours; the men for
whom he was not still holding the open door.  But a few months before
he died here he was "up on his toes," as George Graham said of him,
sending out battle calls for some election that must come now.  The war
was over; the army coming home.  The Coalition's day was "done."  Those
stalwarts must return to the fold.

But most of them came not.  There was still work for them to do, and
surely no haste for an election.

What?  No more elections for Laurier?  Not one more chance, after all
the waiting, for him to finish his work?  Poor old infatuate! splendid
even in his illusions.  There was no work for Laurier to do now.  There
was no room for him to do it if there had been.  There were few to
follow him except in Quebec--for in his dotage he would not believe
that the West had so forsaken him.

In a few months he was dead.  And when dead, once again men forgot
their political opinions and for a brief while somehow worshipped the
memory of the man whose life was almost the coming true of a dream,
whose work was never done, whose evening of life was a tragedy.  And
case-hardened politicians who had borne the burden and the heat of the
day with Laurier, wept.

But the power of Laurier is not dead.  In the long perspective of
history the figure of this great Canadian, with his "sunny ways" and
his bewildering Atlas load, will stand out vividly when many of his
successors will be scarcely visible in the haze.




THE GRANDSON OF A PATRIOT

HON. WILLIAM LYON MACKENZIE KING

In December, 1913, there was a Literary Society dinner in the
University of Toronto at which Sir Wilfrid Laurier was the guest of
honour and speaker on "Democracy."  My own seat at a table was next to
a restless, thick-bodied, sparse-haired man who seemed younger than his
years and to whom I had not been introduced.  During the hour that
Laurier spoke this man continued to lean over the table so as to catch
a view of his fascinating face.  He interested me almost as much as did
the speaker.  I had never sat beside such an irrepressible vitality.
Like a bird to a succession of swinging boughs, he hung upon the golden
utterances of his old chieftain and political mentor concerning a
subject so poignantly dear to the experiences of one and the
imagination of the other.

First impressions are sometimes reversed on closer acquaintance.  I was
uncomfortable beside Mackenzie King, but interested.  On a latter
occasion I was still more interested, and rather more uncomfortable.
The early impression remained, that he had very little faculty of
restraint--what scientists call inhibition.

That occasion will not soon fade from memory.  Often I can hear in
imagination a thousand students singing "Vive le roi! vive le
compagnie!" before the fine old leader spoke, and that earnest, hectic
disciple joining in.  When I discovered who he was I ran back in fancy
to the time when Mackenzie King was a student at that same university.
At that time William Mulock was Vice-Chancellor and became keenly
interested in the brilliant young student of economics with whose
father he had attended law school.  King entered the University the
year that the chief author of the National Policy died.  He graduated
one year before Laurier became Premier, in the golden age of Liberalism
triumphant, when "freer" trade was emerging as a symbol of that brand
of democracy in opposition to free trade in a minority.  How we have
fallen upon evil days!  Farmers' sons at college no longer regard free
trade as the forerunner of political absorption by the United States,
but as the vindication of the farmer as a group in government.

Mackenzie King is a man about whom nobody ever could have a lukewarm
conviction.  He is either cordially liked or disliked.  More than most
other men in public life he has become the victim of violent opinions.
For this he is temperamentally responsible.  People consistently
decline to reason about him.  They speak of him vehemently.  His
dominant note of character is rampant enthusiasm.  King is always
intensely in love with whatever interests him.  His enthusiasms are not
so much on the surface for many people, as underneath for causes--and
for a few men.  Gifted with an uncommon capacity for absorbing
impressions and collecting data for research, he has made himself a
sort of pathological study to other people.  In mastering economics he
has himself been enthralled by his own enthusiasm.

At the time of Laurier's speech on democracy King was peculiarly
enthusiastic about John D. Rockefeller, Jr., head of the Rockefeller
Foundation.  But he had lost no jot of his fervent admiration for
Laurier in Ottawa and was still passionately devoted--as he remains--to
Sir William Mulock, his political godfather.  Nobody has ever
criticized him for his ardent discipleship to the two older Canadians.
There is an old-fashioned spontaneity about this mutual regard much
above the common commercial admiration of one man for another in
business.  Many have blamed King for his attachment to Rockefeller, and
have used that connection to his detriment as Liberal leader.

In April, 1920, he was flatly accused of having been an absentee from
Canada during the war, employed by the Rockefeller interests and so
"entangled in the octopus" that as leader of the Liberal party he would
become a menace to Canada.  It was the old bogey of continentalism in a
new setting, and it took Mackenzie King twelve pages of Hansard to make
his defence in the House.  The incident forms a hinge to a career which
is worth a brief survey.

King was born in Berlin, Ontario, son of a subsequent lecturer in law
at Osgoode Hall and of a daughter of William Lyon Mackenzie.  At the
University of Toronto he was one of the '95 group that included also
Hamar Greenwood, Arthur Stringer, and the late Norman Duncan and James
Tucker.  There was a rebellion during that period in which there is no
record of the grandson of a glorious rebel having taken part.  At
college he displayed a passion for pardonable egotism in which there
were elements of a desire for public service.  The Family Compact at
Ottawa must have interested him.  Liberalism, as understood by the
Laurier group, was emerging from the disreputable mess known as
continentalism, fathered by Goldwin Smith, who was beginning to be
estimated for what he really was, a brilliant philosophical pamphleteer
bent upon the obliteration of Canadian nationality.

After graduation King went for a brief term on the staff of the
_Toronto Globe_.  In that year the Liberals came into power.  King was
engaged by Sir William Mulock, Postmaster-General, to inquire into
sweatshop methods in contracts for postoffice uniforms.  No man could
have done it better.  He had a native appetite for that sort of
investigation, and he was helping to establish the new Liberalism.

For the next four years King was out of the country.  Had he followed
the academic fashion of that period he would have been in training to
become a citizen of the United States.  Chicago University, built by
John D. Rockefeller, attracted him first; Harvard next.  He was still
studying economics.  No other Canadian had ever spent so much time and
talent on this subject.  At Harvard he became a Lecturer, and was sent
to Europe to investigate economic conditions.  While there he got a
cable from the Postmaster-General of Canada, who had created the
Department of Labour as an adjunct to the postal department, and
established the _Labour Gazette_, and wanted a deputy who should edit
the _Gazette_ and look after the details of the office.  King
courteously declined, saying that he could not accept until the expiry
of his contract with Harvard.  The salary of the Deputy-Minister of
Labour was $2,500 under a man whom he tremendously admired, and as yet
with no clear ambition to become a member of the House led by the man
whom he was afterwards to worship, and to succeed.

There is no proof that Laurier took any uncommon interest at this time,
as he afterwards did, in the Deputy-Minister of Labour, though he
noticed that the young man was making a great success of his work.
Much if not most of King's tuition in politics at this stage came from
William Mulock, who as a member of the Commons in Opposition, had
fathered the fair trade resolution in Convention and did much to
convert the Liberal party from free to "freer" trade.

In the eight years up till 1908, by experience with conditions, King
made himself master of the subject which was later to appear in his
book, "Industry and Humanity."  He was repeatedly made chairman of this
or that mission, board, and commission at home or abroad, to get the
true facts about labour, immigration and employment.  By a sort of
genius for conciliating groups, even when he antagonized individuals,
he became for a time the world's most successful mediator in labour
disputes.  Industrial warfare had not as yet adopted the trench system.
Direct action, the One Big Union, the sympathetic strike and collective
bargaining were scarcely dreamed of, though anticipated in the
philosophy of Karl Marx, as yet not transplanted to America.
Socialism, as expressed by Henry George, whose "Progress and Poverty"
was a classic in King's college days, was the most radical element with
which the young Deputy had to deal.  But the Government's policy of
foreign labour nationals being gradually absorbed into labour unions
made Canada, in proportion to population, a very difficult country in
which to act as conciliator.

During his eight years as Deputy, King was made two offers, each of
which illuminates the criticism that in the war he was only a nominal
citizen of Canada.  A group of Canadian employers, recognizing his
success as a mediator, offered him $8,000 a year to act on their behalf
with the heads of labour.  Without consulting his chief, King declined
the offer.  He said that he preferred the $2,500 from the Labour
Department, where he could be independent of either one side or the
other.  Later President Eliot, of Harvard, on the death of the man who
occupied the chair of political economy, offered King the post,
pointing out that his duties would keep him but six months a year in
Boston.  The salary was at least twice what he was getting in Ottawa.
Again without consulting his chief, King declined, on the pretext that
he had no desire to leave the useful work he was doing for the Ottawa
Government to become a citizen, even of eminence, in the United States.
During the same period he was asked to act as conciliator in a great
mining strike in Colorado, when violence and murder were the law, and
when the result of his action led to the enactment of a successful
arbitration measure by the Government of Colorado.

All this was prior to King's election as member of the House of
Commons.  Eight years as Deputy in the Department of Labour, he stepped
into the Commons and the Ministry of Labour with exceptional qualities
to succeed.  His record as Minister was the natural but uncommon sequel
to his experience as Deputy.  King was so long the one man whose whole
time was spent in the effort to reconcile industry and humanity in
Canada that it seems hard to recollect that he spent but three years as
Minister.  During that time, as well as before it, he became the ardent
disciple of Laurier.  While there was great advantage in having spent
so many years as Deputy, it is a pity for the sake of the young
leader's subsequent elevation that he did not come under the spell of
the old chieftain as a candidate before Laurier had begun to grow
cynical in office.  In 1908 Laurier had been at least three years tired
of public life when there was no man to succeed him, and when, as often
as he expressed his weariness of trying to govern a nation so
temperamentally difficult as Canada, he was tempted by the adulation of
his supporters to try again, until winning elections for the sake of
remaining in power became a habit.

Admiration such as King felt for Laurier made criticism impossible.  He
worshipped Laurier.  In this he was not alone.  Older men than King,
among his colleagues, shared the same spell-binding sentiment.  And
there was no member of the Cabinet who grieved more than King at the
defeat of Laurier in 1911.

Here begins the Standard Oil story.  The _Montreal Gazette_, in a
report of two speeches made at a certain club, published an accusation
that King had "deserted Canada in her hour of crisis in search of
Standard Oil millions."

As similar statements may be made during the election campaign, it is
fair to know the facts.  King was employed by the Rockefeller
Foundation, not by Standard Oil.  The connection is merely one of cause
and effect.  The Foundation spends on the wholesale betterment of
humanity the multi-millions which Standard Oil accumulated from the
people.  The theory of justification here is that the people would have
spent these millions foolishly, whereas the Foundation spends them
well.  There is some truth in the theory.  King was engaged solely upon
the industrial relations programme of the Foundation, with special
reference later to industries of war, and with permission according to
his own stipulation to conduct his researches in Ottawa from which in
the ten years between 1911 and 1921 he has been absent only upon
special occasions.  He was in the unusual position of working in Canada
and being paid in the United States, for researches of benefit to the
cause of American industrial relations during the war.  His book,
Industry and Humanity, which is the literary form of those researches,
was all written in Ottawa.

These are respectable facts; the only objection to which is that the
full statement of the apologia occupies twelve pages of Hansard and
must have taken at least two hours of Parliamentary time.  The original
accusation was a malicious stupidity.  The vindication was a
confessional in which the Liberal leader told the House every item that
he knew.  Half the number of words would have been twice as effective.

This introduces my second impression of the Liberal leader, two years
after the outbreak of war, at midnight in a baronial farmhouse in North
York, Ont.  He had been addressing a political meeting in a
school-house some miles away.  There was a golden harvest moon and the
scene from the spacious piazza overlooking the hills of York was a
dream of pastoral poetry.  Suddenly motor headlights flared out of the
avenue and from the car alighted the same restless man whom I had met
three years before at the dinner to democracy.  In a very little while
we both became so interested in what he had to say that neither of us
cared to go to bed.

Next day I found him still more interesting.  He spoke with bubbling
frankness and uncontrolled fervour about many things and certain
people, chief among whom was John D. Rockefeller, Jr.  He described the
young magnate's trip into Colorado during a recent great strike, an
itinerary planned on purpose that the son of John D. Rockefeller might
get a first-hand knowledge of what conditions actually were, what the
labour leaders thought, and what sort of people they might be.  With
graphic interest he described the young financier's reception by the
miners, the speech he made, the big dance in which he took part, the
camps and mines he visited; a picture of capital conciliating labour
such as seldom comes to notice outside the pages of a novel.  He made
no effort to eulogize himself.  He was absorbed in generous admiration
for the other man and with enthusiasm for the glorious chance that
Rockefeller seemed to have to make a new Magna Charta of brotherhood
between Capital and Labour.  In this he was a tremendous idealist.  In
many respects one was forced to regret that the world somehow did not
seem quite so full of brotherly intention as Mr. King said that it was.

"The common ground of both capital and labour is humanity," he said
over and over in various form.  "The antagonism of each will be
forgotten when both unite in an effort to forward the interests of the
whole community without which neither can prosper."

"Right!" I felt like screaming, had there been a moment to do so.
"Bravo!"

The idea found expression in his book which he was then engaged in
writing.  And it is doubtful if any book on the subject of political
economy was ever the source of greater happiness to its author than
"Industry and Humanity" was to Mackenzie King.  On the merits of
democratic statesmanship as revealed in that book, Mackenzie King
should be Premier of Canada in 1922.  Alas! men are often greater in
what they say than in much they are able to do.  Mackenzie King is a
species of rather emotional idealist.  He has studied economic humanity
somewhat at the expense of his perception of human nature.

During the evening King talked with equal gusto upon his intimate
knowledge of a certain popular song writer in Chicago, the story of
whose life he told with vivid strokes of descriptive pathos; and upon
his still more intimate acquaintance with the late William Wilfred
Campbell, poet, whom he had seen in the same moment feed his pigs in a
near suburb of Ottawa, and create a line of poetry--which King
quoted--"The wild witchery of the winter woods."  He was seized with
the idea that a Foundation such as the Rockefeller should subsidize
poets and song-writers.  The pity of it always is that the world is far
too desperately cynical in high places to accommodate such generous
impulses.  Mackenzie King's fervent advocacy of a reform sometimes
creates more antagonism than the cold attacks of an adversary.  His
passion for the betterment of humanity often outruns his judgment.  His
statements smack of exaggeration even when they are absolutely true.
He lacks a sense of proportion and a capacity for restraint.  "Better
is he that ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city."  But a
political leader must do both.

Had he expected the Liberal leadership, the close of the war and almost
the end of Laurier should have found the member for Prince ready for
action or advice.  But there is no record that, at this time, his
counsels were sought by the Liberal party, or that he thrust himself
into the limelight.  Three months after the Armistice, Laurier was
dead.  Even then King was not mentioned as his successor.  Four months
later he was chosen, when not even he quite understood how it was done.
King did nothing to reform his party along new lines, or publicly to
state what he considered its reasonable position to be as between the
Union party and the Agrarians.  A broad manifesto from the new leader
at such a time would have been useful.  Never had a political leader in
Canada such a duty of broad revision within his party.  King neglected
the opportunity.  The _Toronto Globe_ realizes what a squeezed lemon
the Liberal party has become between the other two groups and calls for
a working alliance between the Liberals and Agrarians to upset the
Government.  The _Mail and Empire_ paternally points out that it is the
duty of Liberals to enlist, Quebec included, under the hegemony of the
party which has already incorporated Liberals and is ready to save that
party from obliteration by the free-trade group.

Beneath the conventional assurance displayed in each of these organs of
public opinion one detects an under-current of uneasiness, by no means
mitigated by the farmer victory for the Commons in Medicine Hat, which
the _Globe_ construed as a triumph on parade, and the Agrarian turnover
in Alberta which the _Mail and Empire_ with all its sturdy
protestations cannot honestly interpret as other than a calamity.  Each
of the historic parties feels itself confronted by a new sort of menace
comparable to nothing in the history of Canadian politics.  Two parties
which ten years ago were in opposition are now flung together by the
fear of a common danger and refuse to admit it.  _The Globe's_ hope is
that Farmerism will become the new Liberalism.  _The Globe_ is right.
But the captains may not be of _The Globe's_ choosing and the planks in
its platform are not those which _The Globe_ in its days of sanity
would have accepted for the good of the people.  It is the intention of
Farmerism to absorb all there is of Liberalism.  Mackenzie King knows
it.  He knows that the Liberals will suffer more than the Government
from the plough movement.  Yet he is invited by _The Globe_ to try the
trick of the bird swallowing the snake!

The essence of Liberalism has always been liberation; emancipation.
But the farmers are out to smite all the shackles from all of us.  They
intend to stop short only of Bolshevism.  An ex-Cabinet Minister of
Alberta predicts that the farmers will sweep the country at the next
election and steer it down the rapids of economic ruin.  He cites Drury
and Co. as examples of a certain sort of cunning whereby they did not
at first show their real hand, in order to get people to feel that
Agrarianism is not half so bad as painted and then--the broadening out
into the People's party.  The farmers are not notorious for sheer
cunning; neither for stupidity.  They are naturally hesitant about
being as radical in office as they were on the stump.  As an economic
group they are no different from the old Free Trade Liberals, except
that they seek to govern as a class on behalf of that particular group.
Meanwhile the nation more or less opposed to farmerism is
disintegrating itself into more groups.  Labour is out for a species of
self-determination; a Labour Party.  A veteran Liberal statesman
recently asked me this question:

"Suppose that in industrial centres like Montreal, Toronto, Hamilton
and Winnipeg, Labour puts a candidate into every constituency; that
in smaller factory centres which dominate essentially rural ridings
they do the same.  In each of these more or less labour-dominated
fields suppose we have the possible four candidates.  Is the
Labour-Unionist in doubt over his own candidate going to vote Liberal,
Liberal-Conservative, or Farmer?"

"As a man of long experience in elections--suppose you answer that?" I
suggested.

He did not, but went on:

"I know what I should say to a labour elector under such circumstances.
I should say to him: 'You had better not touch the farmer candidate
with a ten-foot pole because--the farmer wants dear food and you want
cheap food; he wants long hours and you want short hours; he wants
imported manufactures and you want employment in your home town; he
wants free trade and you depend upon a measure of protection.'"

Nobody has ever more pithily stated the case.  There is no basic
mutuality between the farm and the labour union.  The farmer is as much
a capitalist as he is a labourer.

I asked the Liberal statesman bluntly:

"Don't you think that in order to avoid political devastation by
splitting the vote into three opposition groups each fighting the
other, it is the immediate business of the two historic parties to
unite against all parties of experiment, especially against the
emancipating fanner?"

He gave this evasive but shrewd reply:

"I am a lifelong Liberal.  I have been in the habit of reading
newspapers on both sides of politics.  I am now driven to take the
Conservative organ for my daily political food."

I commend that answer to Hon. Mackenzie King.  If the Liberal leader is
now as anxious to serve the nation of his birth as he was when he twice
refused large salaries and comparative ease for the sake of continuing
to do Canada's work, would it be high treason either to himself or to
his party to call a Liberal convention out of which he would father a
resolution of federation of historic parties based upon such a
compromise as Macdonald created in the federation of provinces?

The answer is obvious: "Fantastic!  Absurd!  Impossible!"

Mackenzie King will put up a smoke screen to hide the defection of the
West from historic Liberalism.  He will insist that the Liberals want
only a reasonable tariff for revenue while the Government want
protection--when Heaven knows each of them wants substantially the same
thing in opposition to the farmer who wants everything.  He will point
with confident pride to the solid Liberal _bloc_ Quebec, when he knows
Quebec is dominated by Lapointe who can demand from him just what he
wants as the price of Quebec's solidarity; and he knows equally well
that Quebec is as much opposed to continentalism as the
Liberal-Conservative Government can ever be.  The man who wears the
mantle of Laurier without his Orphean magic cannot lead Quebec.

However, Mackenzie King was put where he is to lead, and he intends to
keep on doing it.  If he can regulate a few of his enthusiasms and so
adjust his personality as to make Liberalism as led by him powerful
enough to be the dog that wags the Agrarian tail, he should be set down
as one of the most remarkable men in the history of Canadian politics.
He legitimately chuckles over Quebec.  One can fancy him matching that
race-group against the Agrarian _bloc_ and the Government industrial
centres group, and saying to himself:

"Labour may lop a few from the Government; Michael Clark a few from the
farmers--enough to make my friend Mr. Crerar a most excellent colleague
in my Coalition.  Excellent fellow, Crerar!"

A low-tariff group, of whom 75 per cent. are Quebeckers, amalgamated
with a no-tariff group who are near-Continentalists, is at least
entitled to serious regard as a fantastic experiment in administration.
But we may trust Hon. Mackenzie King to simulate a vast moving-picture
smile of high benevolence and great sagacity as he contemplates such a
fantasia--with himself as the chief tight-rope performer and Niagara
roaring below.




NUMBER ONE HARD

HON. T. A. CRERAR

Some Frank Norris such as wrote "The Pit" and "The Octopus" should arise
in Canada and write a Wheat-Politics novel about T. A. Crerar.  This
man's photograph was once published squatting Big-Chief-wise in the front
row of 300 farmers on a raid to Ottawa--I think early in the war about
prices.  It was a second to the last delegation which the farmers intend
to send to Ottawa.  The next one was in 1918, when the farmers went to
protest against conscription.  If you ask T. A. Crerar to-day, he will
predict that in days not far to come manufacturers will petition a farmer
government in Ottawa.  Because the farmers in the West regard Crerar as
almost a geological process, which sometimes results in a volcano.

Crerar was projected into public affairs by 50-cent wheat, monopolistic
elevator companies, discriminating railways and protected manufacturers;
all of which, while he was still a young man who should have been going
to dances and arguing about the genesis of sin, he concluded were into a
dark conspiracy to make a downtrodden helot of the prairie farmer.
To-day Crerar is at the apex of a movement.  He embodies the politically
and commercially organized campaign of the biggest interest in Canada
against all other merely "big" interests.  He is willing to let himself
be talked about as the next Premier of industrial and agricultural Canada
on behalf of all the farmers whom he can persuade to elect him a majority
minority in the next Parliament.  And the prospect does not even dazzle
him, or awe his colleagues of the coonskin coats and the truculent
whiskers.

Crerar began responsible life as a farm boy in Manitoba, taught school,
and managed a small elevator company; he became President of the United
Grain Growers and of the Canadian Council of Agriculture--and the next
obvious thing to say is that he entered politics as Minister of
Agriculture in the Union Government.  But T. A. Crerar had been in
politics a long while before that, though he had never even run for
Parliament or legislature.  Unusual, unprofessional politics.  Hear what
the present Secretary of the Canadian Council of Agriculture has to say
about the parliaments of the Grain-Growers in 1916:


"Their annual conventions are parliaments of the Middle Western
Provinces.  Resolutions and recommendations of all sorts and description
are debated and decided upon.  Questions of far-reaching influence,
socially and morally, have their beginning, so far as Western Canada is
concerned, in the Grain Growers' Conventions.  Records of these
Associations show that besides recommending the establishment of
co-operative elevators, co-operative banks, co-operative dairies, free
trade, single tax and a dozen other economics reform, the Grain Growers
in convention fathered Prohibition long before it was adopted, advised
and urged woman suffrage many years before that measure was generally
favoured, and were the first sponsors of the idea of direct legislation.
The Grain Growers' Association and their annual conventions are the
source and inspiration of all the commercial activities, and social and
political reforms with which one finds the name of Grain Grower connected
so often in Western Canada!"


This is the reforming political school that has trained the man now
openly discussed as the next Premier of Canada.  And for the benefit of
any Canadian Norris who dreams of writing a problem novel about Crerar,
it may be said that he is the most drab and unpicturesque personality
that ever stood in line for any such office in this country.  In the
triangle of leaders at Ottawa he is the angle of lowest personal, though
by no means lowest human, interest.  Meighen is impressive; King
brilliant.  Crerar--is business.  He would be a hard nut for a novelist
to crack.  A man like Smillie impresses the imagination.  Crerar, who is
to the Canadian farmer what Smillie was to the British miner, invites
only judgment.

The first time I met Crerar--at lunch in a small eastern club--he
impressed me as a man enormously capable in business, tersely direct in
his judgments, somewhat satirical and inordinately sensitive.  He seemed
wary, almost cryptic in his remarks.  Recently sworn in as Unionist
Minister of Agriculture, he had turned his back on Winnipeg, where he was
a sort of agrarian king, and taken his first dip into the cynical waters
of Ottawa, where he was but one of a Ministerial group some of whom were
abler and more interesting than himself.  He had not yet appeared in
Parliament.  He dreaded the ordeal.  He had no knowledge of just to what
programme he would be expected to adhere, except the general one of
winning the war.  He had little enthusiasm for the Premier, probably less
for most of his colleagues.  So far as he had been able to survey Ottawa,
he considered it an administrative mess.  His direct ways of doing
business were menaced by a sense of muddle and officialdom.  He missed
the breezy, open ways of "the Peg" and the sensation of being general
manager of the biggest commercial concern west of the lakes, the Grain
Growers' Grain Co.  Crerar could not business-manage Ottawa.  When he
opened his Agriculture door he saw no box cars trailing in from the
elevator pyramids on the skyline; he smelled no wheat; he saw no
"horny-handed" farmers writing checks to cover their speculative
investments in grain which they had not yet sown.  No wheat-mining
comrade motoring in from the plains came to thrust his boots up on the
general manager's desk and say, "Believe me, Tom, I paid thirteen-ninety
for those protected articles.  What a shame!"

Crerar complained of indigestion.  I think his nerves were on edge.  I
asked him if he expected to co-relate Agriculture with Food Control and
Trade and Commerce.  "Oh, I suppose so," he said wearily.  "Nobody in
Union Government knows what he will do yet.  I don't like Ottawa.  Its
whole atmosphere is foreign to me."

He seemed almost contemptuous.  He had made the patriotic plunge in order
to put his particular brand of radical Liberalism at the service of a
Tory-Unionist Government.  He did not like it.  Of all the Liberals who
entered the Union Cabinet he was the sworn Radical.  Both Calder and
Sifton were machine men from governments that still had Liberal labels on
their luggage.  Crerar represented the great inter-prairie group of no
compromise and of economic enmity to the Tories.  He was rather looking
for trouble; thinking rather hard of how he could get through with such
an uncomfortable job, do it well and get back uncontaminated to his own
dear land of the wheat and his fine office in the most handsome suite of
offices in the Grain Exchange at Winnipeg.  The Ottawa that he hated was
the Capital that old line politicians had created.  He was looking
forward to some Ottawa of the future which like Canberra, the new dream
Capital of Australia, might be vacuum-cleaned and disinfected of all the
old partisan microbes.

Crerar made his success in a country where the visible signs of getting
on in the world are a bigger factor than anywhere else in Canada.  The
prairies are mysterious and sublime.  The West is plain big business.
Crerar represents the West rather than the prairies.  He is
temperamentally a man of Ontario, where he was born; solidly businesslike
and persistent.  He glorifies hard work.  And he went West at a time when
the law of hard work was just coming to replace the old-timer's creed of
hanging on and waiting for something--usually a railway--to turn up.  He
came up with the farmer of 60-cent wheat in a part of the country where
everything that the farmer had to buy in order to produce that kind of
wheat was high in cost.  Cheap wheat and dear wherewithals have been to
T. A. Crerar and his kind Number One Hard experience.  His axioms began
with the plough made under a high tariff.  His code of ethics was evolved
from the self-binder, railroaded the long haul by systems that thrive on
the tariff.  His community religion--not his personal, which one believes
has been pretty devoutly established--is embodied in the emotions of the
skyline elevator following the trail of the steel and the twist of the
box car.

One cannot mention these rudimentary western things without a species of
enthusiasm for the Westerner, and a consequent precarious sympathy with
the views of Mr. Crerar.  Transplant yourself even for a year, as the
writer did twenty years ago, to the far northwest, and you begin in spite
of all your previously inrooted sentiments, to share the beliefs and talk
the language that lie at the basis of even so arrogant an organization as
the Grain Growers' Association and so inordinate an oligarchy as the
Canadian Council of Agriculture.  A man cannot fight the paralyzing
combination of drouth, wet, early frost, rust, weevil, grasshoppers,
eastern manufacturers, high tariffs, centralized banks and bankrupt
octopean railways in the production of under-dollar wheat, without losing
much of his faith in the smug laws of economy laid down by men who buy
and sell close to the centres of production.

Now begins the work of the novelist, making _precis_ notes for his Crerar
masterpiece; investigating the prairie farm of 1900, anywhere between the
main line and the skyline.  For the sake of space we copy his notes,
hastily sketched:

Low hill--General aspect, poplar bluffs, billowy landscape--Log and
mudchink shack; pole and sod roof--stable and shed ditto--Three or four
cattle and lashions of grass--Broncho team and new high-painted wagon--No
family--Dash churn--Lucky to have a wife--Some hens--Sod-breaking plough,
long snout, breaks odd fields twixt bluffs--Coal-black loam,
strong--Wheat and oats, wonderful early growth--Drouth first year--Second
year, pole fences, more fields, and wet season--More crops but half
spoiled by wet--Sacks on trail to cars, toiling across prairie to
elevator--Smudge of train, bit of a town and a tank--No cars to load
grain--Must sell to elevator--Monopoly--Low price--Grading wheat to No. 2
Northern--55 cents, used to be 40--Lien note to pay on wagon and
binder--Goes to indignation meeting--Lots of that--Farmer
revolutionaries--Want Gov't. to pass acts compelling Rys. to supply
farmers cars to break low-price monopoly of elevators--Act passed, but
roads in league with elevators--Same old trouble--Rise of radical
leaders--Organization of farmers into group to fight interests--Helots on
prairies--Helpless unless organized--Only partial relief from Gov't.--Two
new provinces in 1905--Grits make great splash, promising Utopia along
with newer trunk lines and big towns, etc.--Farmer grins, goes on
organizing, in each province association of grain growers (G.G.)--Every
few towns some fiery evangel--Great on conventions, regular convenanters,
old style--Schools of debate and Utopian legislation--Gov'ts. wear
goggles and organize elections--Farmer organizes group ideas, to oppose
old line politics--Say Eastern old parties effete in West--Townsmen
league with farmers, common interest; low price wheat means lean
purchases and laggard towns--By this time young man Crerar in Wpg., taken
from managing small elevator company to be general manager G.G. Grain
Co.--Co-op. movement develops in all associations, for buying and
selling--G.G.G. Co. give farmer equal rights with city man in speculation
on what farmer grows--Horn into Grain Exchange, little office--Under
Crerar Co. grows to much the biggest corporation in Exchange; whole
ground floor offices of G.G.G. Co. which as commercial organization
focuses the buying and selling end of whole agrarian movement--Head of
this, naturally chief of movement--All remedial and legislative
programmes merged in economics of G.G.G. Co.--Crerar wiry, quiet
executive, now fuse plug to a real agrarian party with a programme which
through Canadian Council of Agriculture, members from all over Canada,
constitutes itself a parliament of farmers telling old parties to go to
the devil--Liberal gov'ts in prairie province mere annexes of new radical
group which is now bigger nationalist force than Quebec ever was, ready
to march upon Ottawa----


On this basis the novelist builds his political fabric of Crerar, who
began life as a Laurier Liberal, became a Free Trader of the Michael
Clark school, and ten years ago gave symptoms of pushing the economic
side of the agrarian movement to a point where it aimed to become the new
Liberalism of the prairies.  He was the business head of a revolutionary
movement of which other men became the ardent, flaming crusaders, both in
and out of Ottawa.  Crerar calmly evolved his practical evangelism out of
the ledger of exports and imports.  Nothing excited him so deeply as
comparative statistics.  He never trusted to the moral or emotional side
of the case.  His crusade was in the national ledger.  His church was the
elevator; his economic Bible the Grain Growers' Guide.

Since 1914 or thereabouts this man has kept his balance at the head of a
movement that split again and again into local factions only to come
together again in the head offices of the Grain Growers' Grain Co.  and
the Canadian Council of Agriculture.  He represented multi-millions of
investment in land, agriculture, co-operative commercial enterprises and
speculation.  On the ground floor of the Grain Exchange he was at the
head of the greatest organization in the world speculating in visible
supply wheat.  The grain that Crerar's cohorts bought and sold was either
just sown, or heading out, or being threshed, or it was crawling to
Winnipeg in miles of box cars on its way to Fort William.  In wheat he
put his trust; in railways and steamships never; in centralized banks and
eastern manufacturers not at all; in old parties at Ottawa still less--if
possible.

Crerarism was becoming power to act.  Behind Crerar was a sullen but
optimistic reformation of such varied emotional character that none but a
quiet, steady man could have controlled it in Winnipeg.  The novelist's
prairie farm was now a power in the land.  It was Agrarianism; that had
bolted like an ostrich both old parties in the West, and now offered a
new one supposed to contain as a new National Policy a general and
itemized contradiction of the old N.P. of 1878--The National Progressive
Party.

No economic crusade had ever been so rapid, gigantic and revolutionary.
Trades unionism had taken decades to make head where the Agrarian
movement took years.  The One Big Union of the Reds, anarching against
all Government as it is, merely applied the principle of direct action
which the farmers had taught them by suggestion in the unofficial
parliaments of the prairie.  The Agrarian is himself a One-Big-Unionist.
His concern is not with wages and hours, but with exports, imports and
elections.  The Agrarian will not strike.  Crerar knows that.  He must
not tie up communities and stop trade.  He must work through Parliament.
His aim is to establish farmerism as the basis of the nation.  His creed
is, that no matter what use we make of raw material, cheap power,
manufacturing experience and capital, Canada's greatest revenue and
export production must be in the farm; and that therefore national
legislation must gravitate about the farmer's garage.

This thing came to a head in a part of the country which contains less
than one-sixth of Canada's total population, and more than half of them
Canadians only by immigration.  The one biggest man in the whole
movement, besides Mr. Crerar, the man who practically elected the new
farmer Premier of Alberta by appointment, is an American born.  H. W.
Wood, the Czar of Alberta, came as a farmer in search of cheaper land
from the Western States.  He is a good citizen, and as much entitled to
play strong-arm in our politics as any native Canadian is to enter the
Cabinet of the United States.  But as a rule a free people resent men
from other countries agitating for revolution on behalf of an original
small minority in a part of the country where industrialism can never
become more than a sideshow in the business of production.  A people of
national consciousness do not relish the idea of a minority group
organized to the last man and the last acre, trying to organize a
nation-wide group in provinces where the factory and the mine and the
fishery are at least as important as the farm.

The whole plan smacks too much of engineering.  It is a case of complete,
almost Teutonic, organization masquerading as a sort of democracy, but in
reality a controlled tyranny whose aim so far as at present defined, is
to establish group government under a camouflage of the National
Progressive Party, and by means of the power so obtained or by alliances
with some other group, to upset the whole economic structure which it has
taken fifty years to build up.  No true citizen will object to farmers in
Parliament and many of them.  None but a slave will consent to a
Parliament dominated by any group, whether farmers, manufacturers,
lawyers or labourites.  Democracy means free government on behalf of the
people; not on behalf of a great group which arrogates by organized
majorities the right to represent the people.  Agrarianism is not a
nation-wide interest.  Quebec has more to hope from the Government now in
power than from the farmers.  Ontario cannot elect a clear working
majority of farmers.  It is the West and the West only, which has become
Agrarianism rampant.  And according to the new officialdom of the West
the farmer must save us all.  Elect him to Administration and he will
open the golden gates of real prosperity by establishing a maximum of
free trade, on the assumption that our present protective investment in
great railways (two of them bankrupt), in banks, industries and
speculative land is all wrong.

The prospect glitters.  Mr. Crerar is not dazzled.  He sees with a calm
and collective gaze into the future.  He contemplates with profound
elation the scrapping of our present system built by experience, and the
setting up of another which makes theories a substitute.  Nothing is
difficult to a revolutionist.  Crerar's success in building Agrarian
grand opera is a mere augury in his mind to still greater success in
rebuilding a nation, which he thinks is the same thing because the farmer
is the nation; and a nation is the easiest thing in the world to
revolutionize so long as you do not obliterate its institutions.  We are
not expected to abolish Commons, or Cabinets, or even the poor old
Senate--until further notice.  Mr. Crerar may need them all in his
business.  "For this relief much thanks!"  Mr. Crerar is not to be
nicknamed Cromwell.

The repeal of the Underwood Tariff and the Agrarian majority in Medicine
Hat gave him great joy.  The prospect for a farmer victory in the general
election is to him almost certain by some form of coalition--perhaps with
the Liberals; possibly with Labourites.  In 1920 a man very close to
Crerar estimated a return of 75 National Progressives in a total of 235
had the election been held at that time.  Since then farmer prospects
have bulled on the market.  Alberta has gone Agrarian, following Medicine
Hat.  Organization has been extended.  The old Liberalism on the prairies
has been absorbed.  Dafoe, of the _Free Press_, has swung into line with
Crerar.  There is prospect of the Government winning some seats in the
West, as there is of the Liberals fielding candidates who will not be
elected.  Ontario is already a loose-jointed but effective part of the
movement.  Business is not good.  A time of trade depression has always
been a good time for a change of government, even along orthodox lines.
The present economic aftermath of destructive war and a large element of
I-Won't-Work labour along with high wages no matter what else falls, must
look to Crerar like a good time to make us all believe that we shall all
get through to Canaan if we follow his Ark of the Covenant.  He is able
to assure us of cheap clothes and furniture and machinery, because the
farmer needs these things in the production of food, which must not
become too cheap or the advantage will be lost.  What is to become of our
industries is not clearly stated; but if living is to be so cheap we
shall probably not need employment except on the farms; though under free
trade we are told that industry, free to flow, is sure to locate itself
at the point of advantage in material, power, transportation, and getting
to market.  In fact some free traders blithely tell us that once you get
rid of tariffs, living becomes so cheap that people naturally flock to
the free trade country, and industry is bound to follow the people;
therefore free trade will give us factories as we need them.

There is no end of the mirage for your head and morass for your feet once
you begin to consider the possibilities of a revolution.  We had somewhat
the same experience forty odd years ago in the forests of smokestacks
supposed to spring up in the wake of the National Policy.  It took a long
while and much hard patient work to get those smokestacks.  Now we have
got them as part of our national equipment, along with great water powers
and long-haul railways and centralized banks and a number of trusts and
an undeniable number of dear manufactures under a tariff--and Mr. Crerar
purposes to abolish the whole thing, to begin all over again as it was in
the beginning, except that even then if the farmer had lost his market
town on Saturday he would have been in a very bad way for his Sunday
clothes.

In short, Crerar proposes one more revolution, whether by one fell swoop
or by a slow process of getting us used to here a little and there a
little more--we do not know yet.  What we do know is that he proposes to
govern this country by a huge economic group that used to go to Ottawa as
delegations; that in his opinion the real Capital of Canada is not
economically Ottawa, but the ground floor of the Grain Exchange Building
in Winnipeg.

We may not all have been reared on the farm, but be it known to all of
us, our natural gravitation is back to the land.

Not many years ago also it was said that one large nation would Boss the
world; later that Soviets would do it.  Both the Boss nation and the
Soviets seem to be reconsidering the contract.  The world is a perversely
complicated technicality.

Meanwhile Crerar smiles when the Premier (by appointment) calls the
Agrarians "a dilapidated annex" to the Liberals.  He thinks he knows
better.  He smiles even more sarcastically when he sees Mackenzie King
chortle over that amusing fiction.  He may have some use for King.  If
the Liberal leader will be reasonable he may permit him to merge his
party with the Agrarians.  If not he may threaten to rob him of Mr.
Lapointe and Quebec, and let him see how he will like that.

Last winter I met Crerar in a Toronto hotel.  He had just been down east
proclaiming for United Farmers in the Maritimes.  An ardent Crerarite who
spends his life watching Ottawa closely said as the leader came up:

"Tom, your one best bet is to make an alliance with Lapointe.  That
combination could upset any other confederacy in Parliament."

Crerar smiled--warmly.  He said nothing.  At lunch no doubt he discussed
this with his supporter.  The old ace of Quebec!  When will that home of
race Nationalism ever get into the hand of cards held by Crerar who would
inundate Quebec with reciprocity?  Perhaps one E. C. Drury can tell.  He
is talked about as the man whom Crerar may call to the Premiership in a
Cabinet of fourteen Ministers of Agriculture and one Minister of Justice.




THE PREMIER WHO MOWED FENCE-CORNERS

HON. E. C. DRURY

  MOWING FENCE-CORNERS.

  A zig-zag old rack with its ivies and moss,
    Just fifty-odd panels or so;
  A wheat-field, a scythe and a boy his own boss;
    He had the fence-corners to mow.

  He slivered the whetstone clear out to the tip
    Of his snake-handled, snubnosed old blade;
  And he swung his straw hat with a sweep and a rip
    With the sun ninety-four in the shade.

  He thought of the water-jug cool as a stone
    Right under a burdock's green palm,
  By the leg of a fence-corner hickory half-grown,
    Where the breeze always blew in a calm.

  But the boss saw him loafing clear over the corn,
    The next the boy heard was a shout;
  And he wished for a moment he never was born
    To mow all those fence-corners out.

  Past the elder-bush blow it's five corners to mow,
    To get to that burdock's green lug--
  So he put on a spurt till the sweat blacked his shirt,
    And he mowed his way in to the jug.

  What cared the boy then for the boss in the corn
    With a beaded brown jug at his feet,
  While he pulled out the corn-cob as glad he was born
    As the bobolink there in the wheat?

  He unbuttoned his shirt and got on the top rail,
    He hung his straw hat on the stake,
  And he smiled to the hickory leaves' rustling tale,
    As he gazed at that berry-bush brake.

  Till chuck! went the scythe on a piece of old rail
    That lifted clear out of its bunk;
  And he said what he never had read in a tale,
    To that innocent, rotten old chunk.

  And then he heard something that never was sung,
    That no bobolink could have said,
  That never was rendered by pen or by tongue;
    But it made his heart thump in his head,

  As he let the scythe drop and he picked up the chunk,
    And sneaked up as soft as a breeze,
  And poked at the noise in that rotten rail's bunk
    Till out came a bumble of bees.

  Oh! the jug it was cool and the berries were red,
    And sweet was the bobolink's strain;
  But bumble-bee cups in a rotten rail's bed
    Make a jug and a bobolink vain.

  By noon at the nest there was only one bee,
    And only one berry to pick,
  And only one drink in the jug at the tree:
    But that boy was as full as a tick.

  They have torn the old zig-zag clear out of its snake,
    And the bushes have gone up in fire;
  The hickory stands but it's only a stake
    To hold up a fiddle of wire.

  The wires are strung tight for the fiddle is new,
    And straight as a beam of the sun:
  The plough slides along it, the wind whistles through,
    And the fence-corner blue-grass is done.

  The old mossy rails and green ivies are gone
    With fifty grass crooks in a row--
  But the bobolink sits on the wire and sings on--
    The music he sang long ago.

  And now 'mid the jostle and rush of the street,
    That boy has his dreams in the day,
  When he sits on the rail 'twixt the clover and wheat,
    And mows out the fence-corner hay.


Whenever E. C. Drury whetted a scythe mowing fence corners he was, so
far as can be reasonably surmised, thinking about the tariff and the
waters of the Red Sea that swallowed up Pharaoh.  It may be a
coincidence, but it seems like fate, that he was born in the same year
as the National Policy; the indignity of which was so great that he
vowed to spend his life living it down.  He went to sleep with blue
books and the Bible under his pillow.  He gave way to both.  He has
never gone back on either.  The iniquity of a tariff to him was part of
the moral law.  The more he exhorted at revival meetings and
local-preached and led class-meetings, the more deeply he was convinced
that tariff-Tories are in constant need of economic salvation.  At
threshing bees I can fancy this broad-faced, dreamy-eyed, large-mouthed
young "Reformer" who never was born to take life mentally easy, saying
to himself as he shoved the stack straw past his boots, that the old
boys talking so hard about elections knew nothing about economics; and
he wished to heaven that barn was all threshed out, so that he could
get back home to read some more tariff statistics.

The Drury farm, hewn from the bush by his grandfather, cost the young
man nothing but taxes and upkeep.  It gave him leisure in which to
study the ills of farming.  What a blessing all farmers have not
leisure!  Travelling up and down that peninsula between Huron and Erie,
constantly at some sort of "Meeting," Drury could see "Hard Times" on
almost every telegraph pole.  The average farmer had a small lot, a
heavy mortgage and a large family; scrub cattle, thin horses and poor
hogs.  No doubt Drury read, when it came out, that amazing pamphlet of
Goldwin Smith--Canada and the Canadian Question, in which the writer
alleged that the Canadian farmer sold the best he produced and ate the
culls.  Well, with hogs at $3 per cwt., oats 20 cents a bushel, hay $7
a ton, and wheat under a dollar, from stumpy little fields--the farmer
in Drury's youth did well to escape cannibalism.

To know Drury, one must understand the oddly interesting epoch and
region in which he came up.  The men with whose sons he went to the
village school were manufacturers first, farmers second.  Their raw
material was the hardwood bush; their factory the saw mill; their
common carrier the Yankee schooner.  In my own bush days a few counties
further down in that same peninsula, I recall heaps of white oak slabs
in the forest which I was told were the remains of the timber-men who
had gone through buying and cutting out the oaks for square timber that
floated away in rafts, probably to build tramp steamers in England.
The bush farmer hired to wield the broad-axe on that oak was as much an
industrialist as any moulder in a foundry.  He would have fought with
his naked fists any agitator who proposed to interfere with that wages
revenue.

After the oak was gone came the elm buyers, shrewd Americans who paid
as much for a thousand feet of prime swamp elm as the pork buyer twenty
miles away paid for a cwt. of dead hog.  Mr. Drury must have known
something about those friendly but niggardly Yankee dollars that saved
many a bush farmer from being sold for taxes.  He may have seen bolt
mills go up and young men betwixt haying and harvest swagger down to
the docks to get 25 cents an hour loading elm bolts into the three-mast
schooners.  He probably saw stave mills arise in which hundreds of
youths got employment while their fathers at home fought stumps, wire
worms, drought and the devil to get puny crops at small prices.  He saw
the wagon-works and the fanning mill factory and the reaper industry
come up out of these timber products.  While he was a youth the farmers
were the first promoters of bigger towns, because the big town meant
more jobs for the young men whose father's acres were too few for the
families, and bigger markets close at hand for perishable products.
The farmers of that day would have tarred and feathered any
revolutionist who came preaching that a good market town was a wicked
conspiracy of _bourgeoisie_ and should become a deserted village.

Yankee money and Canadian industries were the economics of Drury's
boyhood.  If he was as good a Canadian then as he is now he must have
had more faith in the Canadian factory than he had in the American
paymaster, or sometimes even in the Ontario farm.  There never was a
bush farmer who would not have voted for a tariff that increased the
price of timber for the saw-mill.

By the time Drury was old enough to consider being a candidate for
Parliament, heaps of sawdust marked the grave of many a vanished saw
mill.  Young men who could not get work in the near-by town drifted to
High School, to college, to law and medicine and the pulpit; they went
to the big cities across the border and got high wages; to the Canadian
West and got cheap land.  The counties of Western Ontario began to
decrease in man wealth as they increased in the wealth of agricultural
industry.  The schools that used to have boys sitting on the woodpile
by the box stove shrank to about four scholars in a class.
Congregations dwindled.  Little towns lost their mills and began to
feel like Goldsmith's Deserted Village.  Then came the age of farm
machinery, when the big towns had more overalls than the farms, and
every good farm began to be a sort of factory.

All this was meat and drink to E. C. Drury, who came to voting age with
the solemn conviction that though the fathers had worked hard, the sons
were not prosperous.  They paid too much for what they had to buy and
got too little for what they had to sell; a fate which seems to
overtake most of us in varying degree.  With stagnant local towns the
markets for perishable products declined.  In the open markets of the
world, reached by long railway and steamship hauls, the Canadian
farmer's staple products were in competition with nations of cheap
labour.  Across the lake a nation of twelve times our population was
retaliating against our protective tariffs by duties on Canadian grain,
cattle and hogs.  The Tory party and the Canadian Pacific and the Bank
of Montreal and the Canadian Manufacturers' Association were becoming
British at the expense of the Canadian farmer.  At the back of all the
gods of things as they are and ought not to be, stood the damnable,
desolating tariff that fattened the town and starved the farmer in
order to bloat the banks and the manufacturer and the railways--under
the cloak of patriotism!  Heaven deliver us!  Was it not a Tory
manufacturer of stoves who said in Toronto that he would build a tariff
"as high as Hainan's gallows?"  Was it not a Tory President of the
C.P.R. who said he would have a tariff as high as a Chinese wall to
keep out the Yankees?  Was it not the President of a great Canadian
bank who deserted the Liberal party when it sought to enact a measure
of reciprocity?

On all hands Mr. Drury could see the evidence of a master conspiracy
against the farmer, who was to become the helot of civilization.  He
could see it in his own barn as he reckoned the cost of his machinery,
and over against that the price of what he had in the bins of his
granary and on the hoof outside.  That thousands of farmers voted and
talked Conservative proved the astonishing power of heredity.  That all
farmers did not become Liberals and make the Liberal party a solid
rural party proved that even a man's depleted pocket cannot compete
with the traditions of his family.  Drury looked to Laurier to
emancipate the farmer.  In vain.  Laurier created more farmers,
thousands of them in the West; but he only enslaved them with the
voters' lists; the very party over which Drury had almost wept with joy
when at the age of eighteen he had felt them like the armies of Israel
sweeping out the scoundrels of the National Policy.

Thus his hope was no longer in Laurier, who knew nothing about the
farmer, nor dreamed that in the very West which he had put on the
political map with his prosperity of imported people and borrowed
money, there was arising a race that would repudiate him and his.
Drury had a weather eye on the West.  There were farms in Simcoe county
now worked by old men whose sons had gone to that Promised Land.  In
the constant drift of the hired man and the farmer's son to the town
and the city for shorter hours, higher wages and more amusement, he saw
the fluidity of labour, the first evidence that there was some common
ground between the farmer and the labour class.  Working in his own
fields, driving his own teams, operating his own machinery, this
capitalistic labour-unionist of the soil said to himself that the
farmers of Canada were entitled not merely to representation in
Parliament, but to the organization of a class interest that should
take hold of the country's economic horns and turn it on to the right
road.

In the lonely furrow of the farm a man often thinks out conclusions
that are gloriously right in themselves, but in the chequered and
cynical experiences of men in office tragically impossible.  Mr. Drury
was no stranger to Ottawa.  He had been there on deputations; and on
tariff commissions; and each time he came back he had a stronger
determination to go there some day as the voice of the more or less
united farmer against the tariff that had sterilized the Liberals.

Drury was a rural Liberal.  He saw in the reciprocity campaign of 1911
some glimmer of hope that Liberalism might succeed without a
revolution.  The election settled that.  From then on to the war the
philosopher of Crown Hill bent himself to the deeper study of the one
force that now seemed to him to be left capable of breaking the
nation's bondage.  He no longer had the fervent desire to see a new
town grow among the farms that he had when he was a youth.  Every
bigger town, unless it had industries that could widen the farmer's
low-cost market, was a mitigated menace.  Every foundry and implement
works and furniture factory and boot industry making goods more or less
from imported material, considerably with imported labour, and selling
to the consumer at a normal price plus the duty, roused in Mr. Drury as
much hostility as a natively kind and Christian character would permit.

And at last he saw the predicted slump begin to come in the year 1913,
when the boomster dodged the boomerang of inflated and speculative
values; when east and west the farmers, crimped by high railway rates
and cost of materials, machinery and labour, ceased to be the backbone
of Canadian buying.

And then the War.

Whatever may be traced to the normal development of this Ontario
Cincinnatus, it was the War which made Drury.  But for the war he would
have bided his time to be elected to Ottawa on a straight tariff issue.
The war, backed by the man's religion and his tariff theology, drove
him to the Premiership of Ontario.

There were times during the war when, if Mr. Drury was as honest with
himself as he is about government, he must have reflected that the
Canadian farmer was getting pretty well paid back in part of one
generation for the wrongs and adversities suffered by generations ago.
Pork at $20 per cwt., oats at $1.50 a bushel, wheat fixed by the
Government at $2.40 to keep it from bulling to more than $3--none of
these could have been economically justified by Mr. Drury except as an
act of compensating Providence.  The farmer of all people as a class
benefited most, when he was driven to the worst labour hardship he ever
had by the terrific prices paid for war work, which robbed him of hired
help almost at any price.  The higher the price and the scarcer the
help, the more the Government clamoured for production.  The Ontario
farmer responded to the call.  He was no more a patriot to do it than a
man was to buy Victory Bonds.  He was simply a profitee (we leave off
the r).

And this was the first call of the war to which the farmers as a class
made a hearty response.  No doubt most farmers were better servants of
the nation in the furrow than in the trench.  But the time came when
they had to leave the furrows.  On top of the Government's most frantic
call for more production by the farmer came the Military Service Act,
which refused to exempt him.  The call to the plough-handle came before
the election of 1917.  The call to the bayonet came afterwards in a
crisis unforeseen at the time of the election.  Drury himself had been
defeated as a conscriptionist Liberal candidate in 1917.  No farmer
could be in khaki and overalls at the same time.  There was no reason
given for the drastic change of face except the message from the front
that more men were urgently needed or the West front was doomed.  It
was not even reckoned that a farmer conscripted after seed-time in 1918
could not possibly be of use in the trenches till long after the time
when the fate of the West front would have been settled anyway.

Hence the ire of the agriculturist, driven now to become an agrarian.
The Ontario farmer made no distinction between the Unionist Government
that had conscripted the farmer, and the Ontario Conservative
Government which supported Ottawa.  The farmer made up his mind
wherever possible to defeat both the old line candidates.

Premier Drury was the chief result.  He never would have been offered
the post but for the cleavage caused by the war.  The U.F.O. were not
unanimous, and Drury was not anxious.  He had his eye on Ottawa.  But
there was nobody else who could unite the group with labour.  Drury had
himself been the first president of the U.F.O. and secretary of the
Canadian Council of Agriculture; he was a thinker, something of a
scholar, a futurist, and a good deal of a radical; and he could speak
well.

He picked a Cabinet mainly of farmers.  He occupied more time drafting
his Cabinet than most farmers take to harvest a crop.  He was in a
hurry, but he wanted nobody to suspect it.  He said little; wisely.
There was no occasion.  He had no mandate from the people.  He wanted
sure-enough colleagues.  The men he chose were all novices.  The old
line critics watched him with affected contempt.  They said Agriculture
and Labour never could mix.  Drury went along.  No Cabinet had ever
been so prayerfully hand-picked.  Labour must not get the idea that it
was merely being sopped for the support of twelve men in a House
majority of one.  There must be concession; common aims understood,
even ahead of experience, when there was as yet no common policy.

Mr. Drury had been only a few hours sworn Premier of Ontario when he
was summarily turned out--not, however, from Office.  In company with a
farmer author friend who had been given the freedom of a certain small
but desirable Club and who wanted to show Mr. Drury one place where he
could have a quiet time of an evening, he went to have dinner.  As
neither of the gentlemen was known to the housekeeping department a
member of the Club--a well-known newspaperman--was asked to inquire
their identity.  The result was that the Premier of Ontario and his
friend left the Club, without dinner.

The next day the newspaperman looked over the shoulder of his
editor-chief in office and said,

"Who is the important-looking man in the photograph?"

The answer came, "Hon. E. C. Drury, Premier of Ontario."

"Great Scott!" he said huskily, "that's the man I turned out of the
Club last night."

Drury had the sense of humour to regard the matter as a joke on both
the newspaperman and himself.

The opening of the new Legislature was a spectacle.  Dignitaries and
judges, professors and generals stood about the farmers--led by the
farmer-in-chief, morning-coated, carefully groomed, plainly nervous but
sustained by the dignity of it all.  His voice was firm; his manner
that of a very circumspect bridegroom.  The old smug strut and
case-hardened pomp of legislature inaugurals was lacking.  An
undercurrent of deep sincerity stayed many a tremorous hand.  Drury was
the least nervous of all.  I imagine that in the morning he had sung to
himself some good old fortifying hymn, like "Rock of Ages."

Since that day the Premier has learned that practical politics is a
game that taxes all a man's technique in Christianity.  Autocratic
Hydro and Mackenzie the loosening octopus; New Ontario preaching up the
old plaint of secession; better roads and prodigal Mr. Biggs; what to
do with Education that Cody had not started to do; how to stave off
commissions on reform of the school system; the constant queues of
moral reformers; the new menace of the movies and the censorship farce;
the timber stealers; disconcerting Dewart and redundant Ferguson;
returned soldiers and khaki members; the Reds and the plain clothes
men; blustering Morrison, and the tyrannical U.F.O.----

Until the Premier, plain, homespun gentleman that he is, longed for
Friday evening and the Crown Hill farm and the quiet little church in
the village, because one week at his desk took more out of him than a
month in overalls.  And then to relieve his surcharged soul he made
that speech at Milverton in which he boldly proclaimed that he was
going to head, not a mere group called the U.F.O., but a People's
Party.  For this "broadening out" speech he got clods thrown at him by
Morrison, and Burnaby put rails on the road to upset the Premier's
buggy, and the _Farmers' Sun_ tried to change the wheels on his rig so
that he would not be able to get home.  Worse than any the _Onlooker_,
that virile organ of no advertising and of the Meighen Government, said:

"The U.F.O. chose this man and dragged him out of his rural obscurity.
In common gratitude he should have stuck to their colours.  He should
have given fair warning of a change of heart, and indeed we think he
ought to have resigned.  When a man joins a political party he agrees
to subordinate his ambitions and activities to the common good of that
party, and failing to do so honour demands that he should leave it."


In spite of the fact that the Premier of Ontario twice made an
appointment by request from the writer of this for the purpose of
getting a statement for the press as to what he meant to do about this
whole business of "broadening out," twice failed to keep the
appointment and later came out with the Milverton pronunciamento, we
have no hesitation in pointing out that:

Mr. Drury was not in rural obscurity.  The U.F.O. had no colours which
Mr. Drury had not helped to paint, for he was the first President the
U.F.O. ever had.  He had no change of heart, because when he made an
unstable coalition of the U.F.O. and the Labour party he entered into a
pact and covenant which the U.F.O. had never considered; he had already
"broadened out" to drive Labour and Agriculture as a team and had
pretty well succeeded in doing it.  Mr. Drury did not join a political
party.  The U.F.O. was not a real party because it went into the
election of 1919 without a leader, and in order to get its platform
translated into party it had to have Mr. Drury or somebody like him.
And if Mr. Drury should resign from the head of the two groups which he
alone has made into the semblance of a party, he would be recommended
by Mr. Crerar to let his guardian take him to a lunatic asylum.

Drury has done much better than his critics expected he would do.  He
has been bold enough to keep Adam Beck from being the unelected Premier
of Ontario, which is more than Sir William Hearst ever could do.  He
has made Government cost more than it ever did, though it is only
reasonable bookkeeping to believe that part of the cost was incurred by
a Government over which he had no control.  He has begun to build
public highways which being originally a farmer's job should have been
done well, but up to the present has been on a smaller scale as bad a
case of wasting the public money as the railways of Canada ever
perpetrated.  The cost of administration being a matter of either
experience or graft, it is probable that the Coalition will cut down
the cost when they get more experience.  The Chippewa Canal is one
glaring instance of high labour cost which a Farmer Premier with Labour
colleagues did not presume to regulate.  If anybody knows what a day's
work is it should be the farmer; but the farmer in this case was not
absolutely free to express his opinions, because he depends upon Labour
for his voting majority in the House.

In the matter of referendum Mr. Drury has been an advocate instead of a
judge.  He and his--notably the church-ridden Mr. Raney, who does not
even smoke--are a dry lot.  They wanted Ontario to be bone dry and
therefore preferred to have the people vote either foolishly for the
iniquitous O.T.A. or fanatically for absolute prohibition.  Mr. Drury
should have taken the spark plug out of his Methodist car long enough
to reflect that what keeps a man contented is going to keep him from
stirring up trouble.  If the Government of enlightened and moral
Ontario had brought in a measure to create a referendum on the
alternative of prohibition _vs._ effective government control of
reasonable liquors, it might have less cause to be panicky over
Bolshevism.

The legislation to exempt from taxation houses costing less than a
certain amount looks like a pretty straight play for the Labour vote,
and the propagation of a semi-Bolshevistic principle that unless
checked somewhere will exempt the many at the expense of the few.

But before Mr. Drury has the chance to be truly elected by the people
of Ontario to carry on his People's Party, he hopes perhaps that he may
have a chance to be called to Ottawa.  It is freely rumoured that Mr.
Crerar has no intention of taking the Premiership which the liberated
people of Canada are going to bestow upon him by virtue of one more
group-coalition.  In which case he may invite Mr. Drury, who has given
a sparring exhibition of being a Premier, to succeed him.  Then we
shall have the undemocratic farce of an appointive Premier all over
again--for the third time in three years.  And then--well, we shudder
to think what is going to become of Mr. Drury's hitherto unimpeachable
Christianity and of the economic welfare of a country which has as much
right to modern factories as the bush farmer ever had to saw-mills.




EZEKIEL AT A LEDGER

RT. HON. SIR GEORGE FOSTER

Sir George Foster is a genius.  The world forgives much to geniuses,
because it lives by them.  Canada has tolerated a great deal in Foster
for the very good reason that no man except Laurier has for so long a
period without interruption seemed so picturesquely necessary to our
public affairs.

In his own temperamental way Sir George somewhat compensates Canada for
never having produced a Milton or a Bach.  One of his best speeches
might be made into blank verse or set to a fugue.  He illuminates life.
Decade by decade he comes prancing down the vistas of our politics with
a vitality that is perfectly amazing.  And when some obituarist writes
his epitaph, "Foster Mortuus Est," he promptly rubs it out and writes,
"Resurgam!"

The first allusion I ever heard made to Sir George Foster was in 1889,
on a Sunday School excursion when a Grit lawyer superintendent spoke
with admiring deprecation of the then famous divorce case; adding, as
might be expected of a righteous Grit, that it was a pity so eminent an
advocate of prohibition should have so compromised, perhaps ruined, his
political career.

Well, the compromise has lasted a long time and the ruin seems to be
long overdue.  Public sentiment over both temperance and divorce has
somewhat shifted.  In 1889, when virtue shuddered over marrying
divorced women, drunkards were being made by hundreds in any town under
the very nose of the church.  In 1921 when Parliament moves to
popularize divorce, public sentiment not only abolishes the bar, but
votes bone dry on the eve of an artificial millennium.

A man who for some years has wanted the Ministry of Trade made the
remark in a magazine article that if he had Sir George Foster in his
employ as a salesman he would have him discharged for incompetence.
That man forgets that a genius is not born to sell goods.  There were
times in the war when less genius and more business in Trade and
Commerce would have been better for Canada.  Foster was almost seventy
when the war began; a pretty old man to act as the chief business
manager for a nation at war.  His department was the economic backbone
of the Administration.  The nearer Canada got to total conscription of
resources, the more Foster's work should have towered into the blue.
Trade and troops were the life of the nation.  Hughes, White, Borden,
Rowell, Meighen, were all shoved into greater eminence by the work they
did in the war; Foster was no bigger or more potent a figure in war
work or any other kind of work when peace was signed than he was in
1914.

He never was a great executive even at his portfolio under Macdonald in
the early '80's.  He has always been a prophet.  Public speech is his
besetting passion.  He could rise anywhere and translate logic and
economics into ethical emotion.  No man in Canada felt the war more
intensely.  But Trade was not a matter of emotion; or of oratorical
periods; or the right hand descending upon the left.  It was a matter
of urgent and colossal business.

In 1916, talking to the war budget, he declaimed against patronage.  He
had done the same thing in 1910 just as ably when he was the pot
calling the kettle black.

"I hope," he said, "that in the white light of the present struggle the
two parties will agree to do away with the evil."

But the "white light" was more intent on doing away with the parties
themselves.

In the same speech:

"When the trenches call for munitions and supplies, when the blood of
the country is oozing from its veins in the struggle to preserve its
ideals and its liberties, when those who are at home are contributing
with generous self-sacrifice and without murmur or repining, I say that
to me as a member of the Government, to you as supporters of the
Government, and to you, gentlemen opposite, as a part of the great body
which represents the people of this Dominion, the call comes to cut off
every unnecessary expenditure, to refuse every improper demand.  It is
our business to administer the funds of the people with perfect
economy, and to devote ourselves to the one sole purpose of prosecuting
this war to a successful and final conclusion."


Again, he spoke like a prophet when he riddled the blind optimism of
the prosperity pack.  At that time Canada had a favouring balance of
$200,000,000 just two years after a heavy ledger against us.

"The Optimist speaks of the unexampled prosperity that is to follow the
war.  I would like to think so, but I can't.  The prediction of a
Montreal newspaper that Canada will have from twelve to fifteen million
inhabitants within three years after the war is a mischievous
exaggeration.  The first trying period of readjustment will come
immediately after the actual fighting ceases and an armistice is
declared."


Ezekiel was profoundly right up till the last prophecy.  The Minister
of Trade, with all his great ability to analyze trade, had not mastered
economics.  Neither had the President of a great Canadian bank when he
said before the armistice, that merchants with empty shelves and able
to buy cheap goods would be in luck.  It was a bad time for prophets.

However, for a man who aimed at so many nails, Sir George had a good
average of hitting.  But while he was talking so much, and in Europe so
long, the biggest-business administration of which he was the chief
went along on its own more or less mechanical momentum.  By 1917 Canada
had a total export trade of more than half a billion; with a possible
yearly munition order of 500 millions--no thanks to the Minister of
Trade.  No nation in the world exported so much from so few people.  No
Ministry of Trade had such a record.  Sir George knew exactly what it
all meant.  He was used to analytical surveys.  But one fails to
remember that at any period he issued from his office, the trade centre
of the Dominion, any statements that shewed him to be more than a
puzzled commentator on the riddle of trade, usually between speeches
and journeys.  Sir George never did have executive patience for the
mastery of detail.  In this case he did not even convince the people
that he had sized up the great general outlines, so fascinating because
so profoundly unusual.

In June, 1916, Sir George issued in his weekly Trade Bulletin a
resounding Call To Action for a business conference at Ottawa of all
parties interested for the purpose of pulling the country's industries
and organizations into one big _ensemble_ for getting back to peace.
That "Call" was published in one paper illustrated by a picture of Sir
George--in the climax of a speech.  A few months later a political
writer was in Ottawa, and when he came back he wrote an article about
the Foster Conference.  The following extract shows what he thought of
it:

In Ottawa, last week, I met a big bear of a Canadian westerner.  He had
just arrived from Toronto.  He was all smiles, all energy and
enthusiasm, and he was looking for the Minister of Trade and Commerce,
Sir George E. Foster.

"Tell you what I want him for," he said.  "I want to go up and shake
hands with a real live man.  That's what I want.  I read his message
'bout getting together, and it sure set me thinking.  I'm strong for
this Conference scheme.  I'm going to back it for all I'm worth and do
my darndest to help a real, live statesman to pull off a big deal.
Damn if I care whether he is a Tory.  My middle name is--Boost!  I want
to help."

We walked up to the Department of Trade and Commerce together.

"Just what line of industry are you interested in?" I asked.

"Boilers--steam boilers.  Vancouver.  Little Van-cou-ver.  That's my
town."

"And if I may ask, what is your idea about this Business Man's
Conference?  What do you think ought to be done?"

"Eh?  Why, I don't know yet.  That's what I'm coming to see Foster
about."

An hour later I met the boiler-maker coming away from the Department of
Trade and Commerce.

"Well," I said, "everything clear?"

"Clear?" he roared.  "Clear?  Why, man alive! that fellow Foster's away
in the West with some Dominion Royal Commission, making speeches or
something, and back there"--nodding toward the Department of Trade and
Commerce--"nobody home!"

"Couldn't they explain it?"

"Sure.  They explain that Sir George is away and nothing definite can
be done.  I asked 'em when the conference would be called and they said
that was indefinite.  Then I said where?  And they thought somewhere in
Ottawa.  Why, all that fellow Foster made was a speech.  That's all.  A
speech!  Now what the h---- good will a speech do to help me and help
the rest of us manufacturers to keep from getting swamped after this
war?"


Trade in Canada during the war was of vastly more practical
significance than the old fiscal idea of Empire of which Sir George had
been such a protagonist when he stumped England for Chamberlain in
1903.  But he never seemed able to grasp it as clearly even in a
speech.  I don't know which seems to me now the greater speech; that on
the Chamberlain mirage to the Toronto Empire Club when he elevated
fiscal statistics into a pageant of economic emotion; or his speech on
the war, I think in 1916, when he lifted his thin spectral figure into
a sublime paroxysm of ethical appeal, corralled all opposing arguments
into a corner and flogged the life out of them in a great message to
awakened humanity.  The comparison scarcely matters except to show that
in fifteen years of great Foster speeches alas for the prophets!--it
was not the fiscal Empire of Chamberlain that had leaped to the war.

Still more startling to Sir George, the economics of war riddled to
bits the old economics of Empire.  In 1917 he was compelled to forget
that a tariff was implied in the Ten Commandments and to consent for
all necessary purposes to remove trade restrictions across the border.
That was after the United States had declared war.  The high priest of
protection himself invented a phrase "economic unit" to express North
America.  He wanted markets to find their own levels by their own
routes.  He no longer had any fear of Canada being Americanized.
Canada's nationhood was already defined in the trenches more than ever
it had been in tariffs.  In Sir George's phrase the food producers of
North America were to become one vast international group.  When Foster
was "Yea" to Macdonald in 1887 and 1891, before he became "Amen" to
Chamberlain in 1903, this economic unity was called continentalism,
which to Foster was the mother of annexation, and Free Trade Liberals
were traitors to the Empire.

Economic unity, however, meant far more than Sir George intended it to
mean.  He admitted the principle of free-trade only in production.  In
spite of tariffs North America became, not only a vast group of
producers, but a huge family of consumers.  Every Victory Loan raised
money that was spent in once more paying wages and buying materials for
war production in Canada.  Every time that money went round the circle,
prices for many of the staple commodities went higher.  The Department
of Trade registered a tremendous increase in the cash value of exports
even when the bulk value changed very little.  The more loans "put over
the top," the more money there seemed to be.  The more hazardous
shipping became through submarines, the greater the scarcity, and the
demand--and the price paid.  Sir George witnessed this phenomenon: the
fewer producers left by conscription on the land, in the mines, in the
factories, the more Canada was able to export--in cash values.

This must have given a good Tory economist loss of sleep.  No man could
have analyzed the paradox more ably than Sir George.  But so far as we
can recollect, he published no illuminating bulletins from his
Department to tell us about it.  How we should have enjoyed his master
mind elucidating the phenomenon of a continent being gradually denuded
of goods and flushed with money; of prices inexorably mounting; of
money hungering for goods; of fabulous wages for munition-making and
anything else that could be scaled up to meet the competition unloading
themselves into Victory Bonds at a sure profit, and the surplus into
commodities most of which were not made in Canada and must therefore
come from the United States.  What a prophetic commentary it would have
made on the "buyers' market" which followed the armistice.  What
wonderful reading it would have made if Sir George had issued replies
to those commercial newspaper editors over the border who rushed
jubilating into print to say with fabulous statistics that Canada was
now the heaviest customer that nation had.  How we should have liked to
hear officially from the Minister of Trade how Broadway was infecting
the country, luxuries reeling in argosies over the dry land to Canada,
and Canada buying herself bankrupt on the exchanges; and that though
there were powerful economic reasons for it all, we had better enlist
in an army of economy instead of being conscripted later by the
super-tariff on luxuries and the luxury tax.

But the Minister of Trade confined himself to growling that we should
all wear patches and old clothes.  Which was one good reason why many
people did not.  It was easy for Sir George to wear patched trousers if
he felt like so doing.  He would have been merely picturesque, like
those ragged prophets of old.  Most of us still had to invest in some
sort of decoration.  Anyhow a large number of people had the money to
spend; and the more they spent the more they approved of self-denial in
other people.

This problem of American penetration is big enough at any time here.
The Department of Trade is the place where it is most clearly
understood.  We are constantly warned about the danger, not only to our
Canadian dollar, but to our national independence if we persist in
importing motor cars, fashionable footwear, party gowns and lingerie
and hats, art furniture, home decorations, phonographs, moving
pictures, and magazines.  But we go on doing it; because Canada,
whether in war or peace, fails to produce a great many things that
people like to have and to wear and to go about in; and for those that
she does we are charged the foreign price plus the duty and more; so
that in many and many a case it has been found more economical to buy
the article from catalogue, paying the duty and the express charges.

Has Sir George ever enlightened us about this?  Has he ever tried to
inform the Canadian manufacturer that if he expects to hold our
allegiance even under a more or less protective tariff, he must refrain
from charging the consumer all the traffic and more than the consumer
will stand?  We fail to remember; even when we recollect that on thus
and such an occasion somewhere in the Empire he made some glorious
patriotic speech.  On a subject which causes many Canadians to explode,
often with ill-considered accusation of "the Yankees," our greatest
maker of pure and applied speeches seldom has a word to say.  But he
knows.  Sir George Foster knows our economic subjugation by the 12 to 1
method, even under a tariff.  Alas! he hails from the Maritimes, a land
of great people, of constructive Canadians who have too often been in
absolute economic need of more of that sort of subjugation.

Then there was the never-dead dragon of high prices for everything,
which our St. George made no real attempt to spear.  That is a long
story.  It was his department which furnished the Food Controller, the
duties which the Trade Department could not discharge.  Well remembered
are the evangelical injunctions of the Controller to consume perishable
and export other products; to live on garden truck grown in back yards
and corner lots so that grain and butter and bacon and eggs and oatmeal
might run the submarine blockade on the high seas.  There was no fault
to find with this, so long as it was economy.  But heaven knew what
armies of housewives, already desperate from lack of help, were
dragooned into making their kitchens amateur canning factories where
they wasted good fruit along with tragically expensive sugar in jars
that approximated the cost of cut glass.  And after all the slavery and
the self denial, butter and eggs that were not shipped abroad because
there was no room in munition ships to carry them, vanished
mysteriously in the lower price season into some limbo known as
cold-storage, only to emerge when it suited the storage barons at
prices as high as were paid in Europe.  No doubt there is an economic
philosophy in cold-storage just as there is in hydro-power.  But we
have always supposed its virtue was in taking care of a perishable
surplus, so that when there is a scarcity the surplus can be released
at a reasonable profit.

Did the able Minister of Trade ever stoop to enlighten us with the
economics of this?  If so, the recollection has faded.

There is at any time, whether in peace or war, a great function for the
Department of Trade to perform in the matter of what is the reasonable
cost of any commodity in general demand.  But no Trade Department in
this country has ever done it.  There is always plenty of time for the
consideration of new markets, the plotting of new trade routes and the
planning of mercantile marine for export; all very well, and if we are
to pay our bills by exports, very necessary.  But the common consumer
has many a time, long before the war and often since, found himself in
the jaws of a nutcracker in the shape of some combine or trust or
confederacy of middlemen; and if there was any sphere of government to
deal with these things it was the great Department of Trade.

This has nothing to do with party politics.  Any party up to date has
been capable of neglecting the people in these matters.  But it is
quite as important as the abolition of patronage.

We have ceased to expect any such function from a Minister so old, so
eloquent, so Imperially-inspired as Sir George Foster.  There is always
something else to do.  The party must be led in the House.  Sir George
was the House leader.  Magnificent!  No man ever rose at a desk in
Parliament who could more superbly play upon the bigotries and the high
patriotic emotions of even a remnant party.  The man is a genius.
There must be the valley of dry bones for Ezekiel.  And the bones must
come together and walk.  Sir Robert Borden on such occasions was a mere
interested gargoyle.  Patriotism demanded that the party's desks be
thumped.  Sir George saw that they were thumped without stint.

Twice during the Opposition period Sir George was dead and buried by
the Grits; once over the Union Trust land investigation; again in a
libel suit which he lost to the _Globe_ when Rowell was against him.
None of these things defeated the able author of Resurgam! who was made
Minister of Trade, went for a six-months' journey in the Orient trying
to convert the yellow races from rice to Canadian flour, and afterwards
got his title.  So when the people, in 1917, asked Ezekiel for a
prophecy, the Minister of Trade stoically advised them to eat less,
save more, waste nothing, wear what their grandmothers wore if
possible, and hope for the best.  In the matter of fixing prices Sir
George had as much wisdom as most, though he made a very awkward
attempt to adjust the price of wheat and only then at the instigation
of the British Government.

The world by this time was full of upsetting anomalies to Sir George.
Even government was perverted.  He had no desire for Unionism; to sit
at Council with even win-the-war Liberals--once plain Grits.  It needed
political philosophy to make colleagues of such men as Calder, the Grit
enemy of Toryism in the West, Crerar, the avowed apostle of free-trade,
Sifton, the Alberta mystery man, and Rowell, who had won the libel suit
against him for the Globe.  It was not to be expected that so complete
and historic a Tory as Sir George could at first easily regard such men
as anything but interlopers, even though he admitted their strength in
the Coalition.  One can imagine Meighen making up to his old trade
enemy Carvell, but not Foster making overtures to Rowell.

But the vital element was gone out of the Administration, and Sir
George had to admit it.  Cold and repellent as he has always seemed in
politics, without a crony or even a man who cared to make him a
confederate, he has never been a man of implacable resentment.  He was
yet to regard Rowell as a real man, worthy his confidence.

A newspaperman sent to Osgoode Hall to report the Globe libel suit for
an Ottawa Liberal paper relates how the night of the conclusion of the
trial he met Mr. Foster at the Toronto Station.  The reporter had
already wired the decision of the Court adverse to Mr. Foster, who had
not even taken the trouble to inquire what it was.  The two chatted
amiably on the train and met the next morning in Ottawa.  On his way
home Mr. Foster saw the Liberal bulletin at the newspaper office.  A
few days later he met the scribe.

"Tom," he said, genially, shaking hands, "why didn't you tell me about
that decision?"

"Well, sir, I really thought you knew, and I didn't care to hurt your
feelings."

The member for North York laughed.

"Feelings!" he repeated.  "You are the first Grit that ever said I had
any."

A prominent Liberal described to the writer the exit of Mr. Foster from
the House after the Royal Commission investigation into the Union Trust.

"Mr. and Mrs. Foster," he said eloquently, "went together down the
terrace in a fog of rain, into the shadow of the night, under one
umbrella.  And I said to myself as they went, dejected and pitiful,
'Well, that's the final exit of Foster from political life.'"

The author of Resurgam knew better.  He could always somehow come back
on the stepping stones of a dead self.  Something made him feel that
without him the Conservative party would have been like the Liberals
without Laurier, or in an earlier day his own party minus the old chief
Macdonald.  He was almost right.

One other episode illustrates how spontaneously the emotional aspect of
things sometimes sways this cold politician who never could lead a
party.  When the Premier by request called a caucus of his Union
supporters for the purpose of discovering what could be done with the
Coalition to make it a party, it was not the Premier who held the
floor, but Sir George, who made a long passionate speech upon the
vicissitudes of men who--like the Premier and himself--had carried the
burden and the heat of the political day.  When Foster had finished,
there were tears on case-hardened faces and the caucus adjourned.
Asked later for a copy of his great speech, Sir George said he had not
even prepared any notes; when he went to the caucus he had not intended
making any such speech; he did not now remember what he had said.

Can we call such a man anything but a genius?  As Minister of Trade he
may be a poor salesman.  He is not less a poor salesman of his party,
his country, or his big original belief in the Empire, whatever form of
government it might become, or of his birthright to spend his
tremendous talent in public service rather than in private gain.  And
he has been for almost a generation the most interesting personality in
the ranks of the Conservative party.

There is but one other politician in America with the political
vitality of Sir George Foster.  "Uncle Joe" Cannon is the man.  In
Washington Cannon is regarded as a miracle because he was once the
autocrat of Congress and is still a member of the House and a very old
man.  Sir George Foster is almost as old a man and has been in public
service much longer.  He has held portfolios under all the Conservative
Premiers that Canada ever had--Macdonald, Thompson, Abbott, Bowell,
Borden, Meighen.  There have been times in the shuffles of these men
when for ability he, rather than Abbott or Bowell or Borden, should
have been Premier.  But there was always a fatal obstacle in the
personality of the man whose leadership always depended upon making a
great speech.  When he was first Minister under Macdonald, a lad named
Arthur Meighen was getting ready to attend a High School.  Could that
Minister and that lad have been introduced, would Ezekiel have
prophesied that in 1920 he would be holding office under the lad,
Premier of Canada?

Anomalies like these are the rule in a life of a man so unusual as Sir
George, who is now a Senator.  Even in the Senate he is not dead; for
in Ezekiel, 37th chapter, it is written, "Son of man, can these bones
live?   And I answered, O Lord God, thou knowest."




A HALO OF BILLIONS

HON. SIR THOMAS WHITE

Sir Thomas White was the world's only continuous Finance Minister for
the whole period of the war--and after; when nobody else cared to have
his job, and Sir Thomas did.  He seduced billions of patriotic dollars
out of the pockets of this country and smiled as he did it.  No man in
Canada was so exquisitely fitted to the task of making an average
dollar burn a hole in a man's pocket in order to do its bit.  It gave
him "the pleasure that's almost pain" to feel that no man except Henri
Bourassa or an Eskimo could escape the snare of a Victory Loan
advertisement prepared by Sir Thomas and his committees of ad-men and
brokers.  Never before on this continent had a nation been so
advertised into patriotism.  In England some expert had done it for
Kitchener's Army.  But it was easier to recruit England, with 30
millions of people within the area of our maritime provinces, than to
mobilize billions from a vast emptiness like Canada.

It must be admitted that the divinity which keeps governments from
wrecking nations had somehow picked the right man for this stupendous
task.  Sir Thomas had a quality of mind and a political experience
which made it possible for him to pull the last dollar for victory.  In
the war annals of Canada he will have a halo of billions, while Sam
Hughes has one of bayonets.  He mobilized our financial resources by a
system that stopped only short of conscription.

I seldom see Sir Thomas standing at a street corner when I do not feel
like urging him to run along and attend to his office and not to be
losing time.  He seems to belong to that cold group of men whose time
is naturally money.

In 1912 I asked Mr. White in Ottawa for an interview.  He appointed an
hour when I might see him.  As soon as I entered the office he began to
talk.  The ease and fluency of his conversation amazed me.  No other
Minister of that Cabinet could have been so suave and entertaining.

"Er--with regard to the question of railway fin----?"

He saw the question coming in a sort of parabolic curve and he dodged
it.  By a neat evasion he got the topic switched to sociology, from
that to philosophy, to heredity, literature, journalism, art, and
finally prenatalism.  Every effort I made to probe him on public
finance was met by some calm and smiling barrage of eclectic interest.
For an hour we played conversational pingpong in the most amiable
style.  And when Mr. White urbanely confessed that he liked everybody
in the House of Commons, even "Bob" Rogers and Dr. Pugsley, it was time
for the interviewer to go, before so charmed a Utopia should vanish
like a film on a screen, and to conclude that the Finance Minister of
Canada was no novice in a certain species of diplomacy.

Time made some heavy changes in him.  A press gallery observer, asked
by a certain Canadian periodical to name a possible successor to Sir
Robert Borden four years before the Premier's resignation, picked Sir
Thomas whom he said he had watched turn grey and careworn in office,
sedulous at his desk, always busy, never at ease.  Yet in 1912 he could
lecture hon. gentlemen opposite seasoned in political intrigues as
though he, himself, had discovered some new coefficient in politics.

Sir Thomas White has always been a political emergency, a sort of
administrative occasion.  For real politics he was never meant.  For
government by business he had great aptitude.  To him government is big
business, and the human side of democracy a sealed book.  He has an
almost exquisite sense of prerogative.  His equilibrium is adjusted to
the niceties of a seismographic instrument.  Yet he has never held
himself aloof, and is not commonly proud.

There is an idle story that near the end of his term in office he went
to a bank teller's wicket--being in urgent temporary need of a little
common money--and presented a cheque.  On being courteously reminded by
the teller that he had not brought the customary identification, he
blandly announced, "I am the Finance Minister of Canada."  The manner
in which the Minister spoke is said to have left no doubt in the
teller's mind that he was indeed the very man whose photograph had
appeared in the newspapers.

There is also a little story that during one of the Victory Loan
conferences in Ottawa, one of his older associates in newspaper work
politely called him Sir Thomas, and that the Minister replied, "Oh,
forget it!  Call me Tom."

The first may be fiction.  The second is a fact.  But the number of men
who without invitation would call him Tom, is not very extensive.

From his youth up Tom White had a powerful capacity for ordered work.
There was "a time to work and a time to play, a time to laugh and a
time to weep."  Nor did he acquire this from Sir Joseph Flavelle, with
whom he was so long and intimately associated.  He had it from the
cradle, which he must have left at the appointed time with some
impatience at too much rocking.  As a student at the University, as a
law student at Osgoode, as a barrister, as reporter on the _Telegram_,
as an employee in the Toronto Assessment Department, he had always a
sort of mathematical regard for the diligence that makes a man fit to
stand before kings, and the sensation of a superbly pigeon-holed mind.

By heredity Sir Thomas was labelled a Liberal, and at the time of the
Taft-Fielding reciprocity junta he sat on the edge of his political bed
pulling the court-plaster off.  Next morning, without a single new grey
hair in his head, he found himself a Conservative.  The Liberal regime
of shipping in people and booming up speculative towns on the prairies
was a good thing for any Trust.  But when the Government began to
barter its preserve for another lease of life, Mr. White decided that
it was time for a change.  When he quit the National Trust to take on a
trust for a nation he was a new-born Conservative, and in the eyes of
the new Premier a lovely child.  And as Finance Minister in a Tory
Government he became the real author of Coalition.

Mr. White took into the Finance Department the atmosphere and the
technique of the fiduciary corporation.  Hence he was never able to
read himself into the life of the country, never became more than a
superficial master of its political forces, never rallied men about him
in a great effort to save anything but a financial situation, and never
lost a superb sense of himself.  The fact that without ever having been
elected to Parliament or Legislature, or even a County Council, he
could walk into what is usually regarded as the most important
department of administration in any country, is a proof that government
as big business was more important to him than politics as experience.

The average portfolio is handed to a politician, not because he knows
anything about the matter in hand, but because he is a good politician,
a big enough man to represent some electoral area, and may be left to
learn his public job after he gets it.  Such is democracy.  White was a
tyro in politics and public administration.  But he did know finance.
When Laurier picked editor Fielding from Nova Scotia to look after the
Budget he chose a good deal of a genius.  Mr. Fielding was a master of
tariffs and of inspiring fiscal speeches outside the House.  He had
almost a Gladstonian faculty for making statistics scintillate with
human interest.  He had made a survey of the country on tariff for
revenue; and he usually had a bookkeeping surplus at a time when he
practically boasted on the platform of what it cost to run the country.
Much thanks to him the Liberals had given Free Trade a profoundly
respectable burial, with Michael Clark, headmaster of the Manchester
School in Canada, as chief mourner.

But the ledgers of Canada looked to be in a bad way to Mr. White.  "The
cost of high living" had been demonstrated by the Liberal Government
some time before James J. Hill coined the phrase.  Laurier monuments to
high living were dotted all over the country in the shape of armouries,
post offices, customs houses, docks, courthouses, the Quebec Bridge,
and vast systems of unpopulated railways.

When Mr. White's sensitive finger came to that prodigal item in the
public ledger he had almost excuse, in spite of his pre-knowledge of
the business, for curling up like a cutworm.  His knowledge of banks
and their customers was very extensive.  He had dealt with those banks.
The ex-manager of the National Trust had long known that Canada was
overbuilt with railways and going-to-be-bankrupt towns.  The orgy of
expansion whose familiar figure was the prodigal with the scoop shovel
in the gold bin by the open window with a huge hole in the ground
beneath, was just about at the crest of its master carousal
[Transcriber's note: carousel?]; and the transcontinental railways with
their entails of cash and land grants and guaranteed bonds was the
thing that gave the new Minister the greatest concern of the lot,
though he never said so.  An ex-Cabinetarian who used to agree with Sir
Thomas in politics still stoutly alleges that the 1911 "bolt" of the
famous 18 Liberals, of whom Sir Thomas was one of the leaders, was a
tactical manoeuvre to save the Canadian Northern from bankruptcy by
reciprocity.

Sir Thomas should have made the railways his first drastic item of
reorganization.  Here was a Verdun for the Finance Minister to take.
But for two years while the railway cataclysm was coming he went along
with business as usual.  It would have been less of a burden to unload
that railway bankruptcy in 1913 than it was during the stress of after
the war.

But of course the Finance Minister was only the chief subordinate in
the Administration.  Time would force the railways to terms.  The war
and war business came faster than the time.  Sir Thomas probably
dreaded the public ownership in which he has never profoundly believed.
In conversation with the President of the Canadian Pacific he
practically admitted that a Government cannot compete with a great
corporation in operating a railway.  But in 1912, on the principle that
an egg hatches into a chicken, he must have foreseen that national
ownership of half Canada's railways would be thrust upon him.

It is not explicitly known what are Sir Thomas White's opinions about
the Government ownership of railways; but one can easily imagine what
he would have said prior to 1911 to any proposal of any Government to
begin owning and operating banks and trust companies.  And as
Government is the owner of the Royal Mint in Canada and does its own
coining of the metals used in our currency, it would seem to be vastly
easier for a Government to own banks and loan companies than to own and
operate transportation systems.  Sir Thomas would scarcely deny that.
He is too shrewd in experience.  It is one thing for a municipality to
own street railways, because all the streets are automatically part of
a city's property.  It is quite another matter for Government to own
and operate railways, because the routes of these highways and the
machinery necessary to conduct traffic are not naturally the property
of a Government, which exercises its power chiefly through the
regulation of rates and the functions of the Railway Commission.

One imagines that Sir Thomas sincerely hoped that the railways built
from cash borrowed on Government guaranteed bonds, and by direct loans
from the national exchequer would some time develop business enough to
pay their own way.  But it is not remembered that he held any
conferences with the Minister of Railways to prepare a public statement
on this question.  Both these Ministers had troubles enough without
creating more.  The country was on the crest of a wave whose trough was
not far ahead.

Sir Thomas had made but one really constructive budget speech when the
inevitable slump began to come.  But as yet he seemed to be rather
charmed with the novelties of Parliament and the ironies of preparing
to win elections.  The war plunged him into a system that cared no more
for his budget than a cyclone for a baby carriage.  Tariffs, bankrupt
railways, the banking system, exchanges, and the common cost of living
were all but obliterated in the campaign of war loans, not the least
marvellous feature of which was that selling Victory Bonds almost made
the Finance Minister a friend of the common people.  The "vicious
circle" of higher wages and higher cost of living was offset by Sir
Thomas White's virtuous circle of money raised in Canada, spent in
Canada, for goods needed by Canada and the Allies at the front.  The
formula was 5 1/2 per cent with no taxes, and the best security in the
world--if the war was won, which of course it would be if people bought
Victory Bonds.

In this era of the patriotism of the pocket, common reason almost
tottered from her throne.  Ordinary financial logic was forgotten.
Economic delirium took hold of the nation.  A broker in those days
could talk in language more mysterious than the polite attentions of a
juggler who pulls an egg from your pocket.  Newspapers were full of
jargon that sometimes seemed more fantastic than the theories of the
Holy Rollers.  The citizen who could not cash a Victory Bond to pay a
debt was considered behind the times, and the banker who told you that
it was better to sell bonds than to borrow on them at the bank was
regarded as an oracle, even though you could not begin to comprehend
his logic.

But the Finance Minister was as calm as Gibraltar.  He was the man
behind the curtain and the show.  He was seldom absent from the
Orders-in-Council convention, commonly known as Parliament.  He was
again and again acting Premier.  He cared little for Imperial
Conferences.  His war was at home.  His firing line was all over
Canada.  He was the most stay-at-home and sedulous of our ministers.
He worked while others slept or sailed the seas.  No Victory Loan
advertisement proof escaped the eagle eye of this ex-newspaperman
before it went to press.  He scanned and corrected every syllable.
Every advertisement was a sermonette from the Finance Minister.

An independent writer visiting Ottawa in the fall of 1916, wrote
concerning the Finance Minister:

"One of the best evidences of Ottawa's frame of mind is the way it
talks about Sir Thomas White--and the way Sir Thomas talks about
himself.  Sir Thomas White has probably rendered more real brain
service to this country in his few years of office than any one man who
has held office as a Minister--I am not now speaking of Prime
Ministers, whose functions are particular and peculiar--since
Confederation.  To Ottawa, Sir Thomas is little short of a miracle.
The frame of mind on both sides of politics regarding Sir Thomas is not
unlike that of the farmer who saw a two-humped camel for the first
time.  "Hell," said Ottawa, "they ain't no such animal!"  Now it calls
Sir Thomas White 'great'--and even Sir Thomas admits it!"


Vol. I., No. 1 of The Onlooker, had this to say on the other side of
the ledger:

"One would gather from the way some of his admirers talk that he, and
he alone, was responsible for the success of the various loans issued
during the war.  He had it easy.  The country was literally bursting
with money seeking investment.  One could almost have raised it with
his eyes shut.  The whole community was humming with activity like a
top asleep; and still the orders from abroad came pouring in.  Every
fresh loan stimulated activity anew.  All that was required was to
issue the prospectus, pass the solicitation of funds to interested
canvassers, newspapers, publications, loan companies, banks, brokers,
and hurrah at the end."


Some things do look easy to the man who is not doing them.  Common
sense admits that the man who patriotically juggled the billions from
pocket to exchequer and back to pocket again would have had a much
harder task to undertake what somebody called "the Gethsemane" of
paying the nation's bills when the "hurrah" was over.  The method of
financing Canada in the war may be vastly different from the method
necessary in peace.  But when money must be had quickly in vast
quantities there is no time to debate on just how you are going to get
it.  Sir Thomas White's raid upon the pockets of Canada was a financial
spectacle not to be judged by standards of thrift, for the very good
reason that the people were nauseated with thrift talk, were looking
for something easy, and White had the instinct to know that the easier
and the more spectacular he could make a Victory Loan the better for
the war.  He rowed with the current and knew he was doing it.  In his
own financial brain, which is not unthrifty, he knew that the "hurrah"
was not healthy in the long run and that it could not last forever.
But once it was started there was no other way but to keep it up.

Thanks to Sir Thomas, every citizen had an opportunity to get himself
rubber-stamped on behalf of the nation; which on general principles was
a good thing, because a large number of people at that time indulged
the fiction that as the Government was paying its debts, a good way to
do it would be to print more paper money.  It was the Finance
Minister's opportunity to instruct us, that the Government was not
paying debts--but making it possible to pay wages.  Unless the surplus
of every man's earnings was invested in Victory Bonds there would
shortly be no big industries left to pay the earnings at all, Canada
would cease to export munitions--which might be the one thing to lose
the war, in which case nothing would be left for any of us but to pay
war indemnities to the enemy.  Critics declared that non-taxable bonds
were an iniquity in favour of the big investor who could heap up
bonanza investments without taxes; another way of accusing the Finance
Minister of being in league with the "big interests."  But we must do
Sir Thomas the credit of taking a sure way to encourage the small
investor by refusing to tax his patriotism.  A 100th per cent tax on
some people's patriotism might have squelched it altogether.  It would
have been a public service if Sir Thomas White had plainly told the
people, not less about why they should buy Victory Bonds during a
period of inflation, but more about what would happen to them when
deflation began to set in; when, ceasing to buy Victory Bonds at a low
price, we should have to buy bread and butter and clothes at higher
prices than ever at a time when money began to sneak away, we knew not
whither.

Perhaps it was too much to expect one man to organize the "hurrah" and
afterwards to conduct the "Gethsemane."  At any rate, before we had an
opportunity to test the real size of Sir Thomas as a public servant he
resigned office.

Whether the Finance Minister at the climax of his big _opus_ was shrewd
enough to imagine that the kudos of the loans might get him the
Premiership, we do not profess to know.  He is not considered famous as
a political strategist.  He has far too much serenity.

In 1917 Sir Thomas was chairman of a monster meeting in Toronto when
ten thousand people who tried to hear Theodore Roosevelt speak on
behalf of that year's Victory Loan of Canada were turned away.  For
some hours he had been in company with a man whose mastery of the
unusual was almost the equal of Mark Twain's.  If ever he had a chance
to be startled out of his headmaster poise, here it was.  But he made a
long, tedious preamble of a speech the only sentence of which that
sticks in my memory is that sincerely girlish utterance of Portia to
Antonio after the trial, "Sir, you are very welcome to our house."  It
was like pinning a pink bow knot on the head of a lion.

Sir Thomas showed strategic ability when he refused the Premiership.
After declining the Premiership he was not likely to need a portfolio.

Public life is considerably like war.  Every time you move there must
be a motive.

A former political crony of Sir Thomas said to the writer that the
excess profits tax imposed by the Minister was one of the cleverest
political manoeuvres ever perpetrated in Ottawa, because it drove
manufacturers and merchants to advertise in the newspapers in order to
reduce their profits, thus paying part of the excess to the newspapers
rather than to the Government; which was supposed to have made the
Government popular with newspapers on both sides of the political
fence.  This is a genially cynical way of saying that every publisher
has his price, and that the Finance Minister had made some startling
progress in his mentality since the day when he was charmed with
everybody in Parliament.  But it is a Machiavellian touch quite
uncharacteristic of a man whose friends had designated him for the
Premiership.

The friends of Sir Thomas may have had good reason for considering him
as the next Premier.  On the evidence of the mere handling of executive
big business demanding cool judgment, practical vision and powerful
action he was the equal of any other candidate for the office.  His
defects were less obvious, but perhaps more vital in the case.  Sir
Thomas was not designed to lead, which in these days means to be
constantly recreating a party, not to operate a well-built governmental
machine.  In his nine years of public life he did a big national work
and justly earned all the real distinction he ever got.  He did so much
in a big, unusual way for the nation that his passing out becomes
another example of how easy it is to cripple administration by
sacrificing public service brains to private business.




CALLED TO THE POLITICAL PULPIT

HON. NEWTON WESLEY ROWELL

N. W. Rowell has the bearing of a man who long ago felt that he was
called to do something for a cause or a country and has never got over
it.  Meanwhile he has done much for both a cause and a country, and
seems to have quit before the country had begun to enjoy more than the
least agreeable elements in his character.  To have suffered the
insistent righteousness of Mr. Rowell so long, and at the close of the
first period of his life when he seemed to be getting his own measure
as a public man on a big stage, to see him withdraw like a chambered
nautilus into his shell, not only from the Cabinet but from his seat in
Durham, is a little hard on public patience.  But of course the
chambered nautilus may emerge again.

Years ago Mr. Rowell had moral energy enough to reconstruct a large
part of the world in Liberalism and in the Methodist Church.  Today he
finds evangelic Liberalism rampant out on the skyline under such men as
Crerar and Drury, and the church discussing social reformation in
phraseology associated with dynamic ideas to which he never could be
assimilated.

Mr. Rowell's career reminds us that there are four brands of Liberals
in Canada: Evolutionary; Manchester School; Laurierite; Agrarian.
Tories never evolve.  There are only good Tories and bad ones.

He belongs to the first group, and there is nothing in his temperament
to make him anything else.  Free Trade never did convince him; he broke
away from the enchanting tyranny of Laurier; and, though born on a
farm, he never could revert to the plough-handles for a vision of the
world.

Judging from some fairly recent preachments by able reverends such as
Wm. Woodsworth and Salem Bland, there may be as many brands of
Methodism.  If so we unhesitatingly place Mr. Rowell in the
evolutionary group.  Therefore by personal development he is next thing
to a Conservative; and the latest phase of his career proves that in
working it out he has practised the fine old platitude of Polonius to
Laertes:

  "To thine own self be true,
  And it must follow, as the night the day,
  Thou canst not then be false to any man."


Mr. Rowell is one of our most encouraging types of what is called the
self-made man.  Any Oxford professor hearing him make a typically good
speech in London on "The Commonwealth of Nations under the Union Jack,"
would infer that he had taken a post-graduate course in political
history after graduating as a B.A.  But Mr. Rowell never even attended
a High School.  He went from the farm as a lad to be a parcel boy in a
London, Ont., dry-good store.  The class-meeting and the sermon and the
Mechanics' Institute gave him a taste for serious literature.  He came
up in the oratorical county that produced G. W. Ross and J. A.
Macdonald.  He must have regularly read Tannage's sermons.  He was a
youth when the Y.M.C.A. movement invaded Canada along with baseball.
He made the choice.  He passed into the Law School, somehow dodging all
the good brethren who advised him to go into the ministry.  And through
the opportunity afforded him by the successful practice of law and
Liberalism on a large scale he has been able to preach his sermons to
much bigger audiences than he ever could have found in the Methodist
Church.

If some of the advanced radicals of these days would con over the
outlines of a career like this, they might get rid of some of their
fantastic notions about State-devised equality and emancipation.  Mr.
Rowell instinctively reached out by industry and enthusiasm for the
forces that would better his condition.  In so doing he spent a large
part of himself upon the betterment of society.  The result is an
intellectual, moral and financially successful character of which any
community might be proud--so long as the community contained but one of
the kind.

Rowellism is a good salt.  It is not good porridge.  The average
unprofessional Christian man cannot live on the levels where Mr. Rowell
breathes so easily.

Time and again have we heard the equivocal remark about this man; if
such, and however so.  Why not take the man as he is and make the best
of him?  Surely by now he has proved that he has a definite and
uplifting leverage on public life.  It is of no use to complain that he
never was cut out to be a leader in anything but ethical ideas of
statesmanship.  It was political makeshiftery to make such a man the
leader of Ontario Liberalism, which did not ask to be led but to be
cajoled and tricked up for the carnival.  It was fatuous to imagine
that he could ever become a chief of the National Liberal and
Conservative party to which he now inextricably belongs.  If secret
ambition ever spurred him to indulge that dream--which seems
incredible--sober reflection at the looking glass should have corrected
the strabismus.  Mr. Rowell is not a leader of men, in action; never
was and never could be--without some drastic transformation in his
outward character such as he has never shown.

The last time I observed Mr. Rowell he was in the lounge of a club
where he had just finished lunch.  All about him were scores of men in
groups, each group animatedly intent upon some topic from baseball to
high finance.  A few weeks earlier that same club had given a public
dinner to Mr. Rowell and Sir George Foster, when each seemed to overdo
the other in gripping those present by the presentation of a world
theme backed by a striking personality.  In the lounge Mr. Rowell, our
best authority on the ethics of the Empire and the League of Nations,
went about alone, unobtrusive, drab-coloured, almost insignificant.  He
spoke to nobody and few men as much as noticed him.  He nodded gravely
now and again, but never smiled.  Both hands in his trouser pockets, he
seemed to be gazing at some vagabond blind spot in the room.  He almost
seemed to be whistling to himself like a lad in a forest.  Presently he
wandered out.

By no exercise of imagination could one conceive such a man as a
Canadian political leader.  If there is anything in an aura he has it
not.  A halo would have suited him better.

Three elements conspire to make Rowell:

Conscience; oratory; opportunity.

Most men have trouble enough with any two of the three.  Mr. Rowell
continues to hold our respect in spite of the whole trinity.  Too much
conscience always on duty at a peak load is no way to attract a vast
variety of people who relish a degree of sinfulness now and again.  We
do not repudiate the value of conscience in public affairs.  The public
man without it provides almost the only sane argument for the
preservation of the gallows.  But when one man carries so much of it, a
number of others may be excused for carrying less.  This is an age of
specialties.

It is required of a truly efficient conscience, however, that it be
instant in season and out of season, and that it do not wait upon
opportunity.  When the Ross Government was so old in sin that even the
new _Globe_ editor accused the ship of having barnacles, we fail to
remember that Mr. Rowell lifted his voice against it.  He was a
candidate for the Commons five years before James Whitney began his
regime of government by indignation; at a time when if Ontario went on
a political spree Ottawa got a headache.  Big-party government was
pretty strong in those days to keep a man like Rowell from talking out
in meeting.  The value of a conscience to a community, whatever it may
be to an individual or a party, is in giving it a chance to speak out
when something is wrong with your own group, not when it is politically
convenient to take off the muffler.  Mr. Rowell's method of opening
Durham as a safe seat for himself by making a Senator of the
Conservative member for Durham, was one way of reforming the Civil
Service, which was one of his Government hobbies.  But in practical
politics it is sometimes necessary to do evil that good may come.  Mr.
Rowell needed a safe seat--in order to do his work for the country.  It
seems a pity that a constituency so shrewdly obtained could not have
been steadfastly held.

As an orator Mr. Rowell is remarkable in spite of two defects; no
classical or humanities education except what he diligently dug out of
books, and a very thin voice.  Few public speakers of our time use such
admirable diction, and it is a rare one who can make so lean a voice
thrill so completely with passion in the presentation of powerfully
synthetic ideas.  This is a great gift; but like personal beauty it has
its fatal fascination.  Mr. Rowell has not ceased to suffer from a sort
of bondage to his oratory as he has from the tyranny of his conscience.
In conversation he seldom just talks.  He seems to deliver dicta.  He
rarely glows with the fire of the moment; he seems to be preparing for
the grand occasion.  The stage must be set.  When did he ever make a
poor speech that he had time to prepare?  Or a good one impromptu?  One
cannot soon forget his remarkable speech in the Toronto Arena at the
citizens' reception to Premier Borden in 1915.  Here this lifelong
Liberal made what up to that moment was the greatest speech of his
career; and he was speaking as a British citizen, not as a Canadian
Liberal.

With equal power, to a small group, but with even more passion as a
broad-minded Canadian, he spoke to the Bonne Entente in Toronto in 1917
on a subject which may have had something to do with his future as a
Dominion instead of a Provincial statesman.  In this connection I quote
from a report of that meeting made by the writer:

"He took his preconsidered skeleton of argument with all its careful
alignment of crescendos and climaxes and clothed it with the passion of
a rousing, emotionalizing speech.  The points somewhat roughly made by
other men he remade by a new grouping of the ideas.  With eminent
juridical clarity he worked himself up the ropes of oratory, and when
he got to the tiptop of the trapeze he flung out his big compliment to
the French-Canadians now at the front.  Of course he said other things.
He made fine use of the historic as he always manages to do.  But when
he got away from that into the great little story of Courcellette and
the gallant 22nd with its sole surviving eighty men and two officers
besides the C.O. "fighting the Germans like devils," he had voltage
enough for an audience of ten thousand."


It is doubtful if Canada ever had a public speaker who with so little
personal makeup for the part could so wonderfully deliver himself in
orational speeches on any topic of nations, commonwealths and empires.
If Rowell were less of an orator he would be more of a power as a
public man.  Carrying around loaded blank pistols is not nearly so
congenial to most men as a cigar in the left hand vest pocket.  There
is in most of us a strain of buncombe which we exhibit often when
others are not looking.  I think Rowell exhibits most of his in solemn
form in public.  If one has not what is called _savoir faire_ he must
make his abstractions and silences confoundedly interesting.  Rowell
packs all his power into a speech.  Therefore even his greatest
speeches are sometimes to some people a bore.

I think he must have risen to about his height of unceremonious
informality at a Peace dinner in London when he sat next to the
plenipotentiary from Serbia, to whom he remarked:

"I should think so many dinners and public functions would be hard on
your constitution."

"Yes," rejoined the Serbian with a gravely astute look at his
companion; "but we have an upper and a lower chamber."

Rowell told this on himself.  Even that he could not have done five
years ago.  Mingling with men more solemn than himself he observed the
inconvenience of solemnity.  He really wants to be a conductor of the
little currents of energy that make men think and act in small groups.
Some good parson years ago should have encouraged him to smoke between
speeches.

Opportunity.  This focuses the other two.  Rowell has seldom neglected
this mistress.  It is comparatively easy for many men to make
themselves at the Sign of the Dollar; as a rule more difficult at the
Sign of Culture.  Mr. Rowell is a man of fine intellectual attainments,
which he has seldom failed to use in furthering his public success.
Yet he was a good while becoming incorporated into the body politic of
Liberalism.  The world was his parish.  Wesley was his idol; then
Laurier.  Between these two it is a marvel that even at the rather late
age of forty-four he came to the leadership of Liberalism in Ontario.
Here he became the prophet who would abolish the bar even before its
time, not without provocation.  There had been stories of wild drinking
escapades among some of the Liberal leaders in Queen's Park.  Mr.
Rowell can therefore be amply forgiven for having been the instigator
of that poster, "Is That You, Daddy?"

This can be remembered from his five years of misfit rule in Queen's
Park when many of his good offices there are mainly forgotten.  It was
rather pitiful to observe how incapable Mr. Rowell was of giving vent
to his great talents in that Legislature.  He did not understand the
lingo.  Most of it was too piffling and small.  He knew Ontario better
from the angle of corporation law.  He made a poor showing as leader,
for there were no great issues in which he could lead; though he did
initiate a great deal of useful welfare legislation.  He made one
heroic effort to understand New Ontario in the rough when he donned
overalls and went down in some of the mines.  But it was all too much
in the rough.  One imagines there must have been many a moment when he
wished he had never taken that leadership with so precious little to
lead, and yearned for some larger way.  But it was a long, long trail.
And Laurier was now a strange old man.  Whichever way he looked he was
in a blind alley.

The Coalition gave him a way out.  The old chief's attitude towards the
war made Laurier Liberalism still more unpalatable.  Rowell was deeply
stirred by the war.  He could see in the upheaval of old and new world
ideas the sort of grand realignment which he could understand; the
assertion of true Liberalism in true democracy.  Any average speech of
his during the war demonstrates that he was among those few leaders of
thought whom the struggle lifted into a larger conception of manhood in
the State.

Again, honesty to himself suggests that Mr. Rowell did not suffer such
pangs at his severance from Laurier as did men like Carvell, Guthrie
and Clark, who had fought under the old man in Commons.  At the Liberal
Win-the-War meeting in 1917, he threw off all disguises and fervently
proclaimed that he had chosen to take office under "the greatest
Premier in the world."  The statement smacked not so much of
insincerity as of a sense of emancipation.  Mr. Rowell was no longer
labelled a Laurier Liberal.  He was a free agent in a new great
conflict of force.  He was stirred as never he had been.  Of all the
Liberals who took oath under the new administration he was the
strongest, and the most difficult to assign a competent task.  He was
made President of the Council and Minister of Information.  The
peculiar advantage of the latter was that as real information was the
last thing that seemed to be wanted by anything resembling a
Government, there was very little for Mr. Rowell to do at his desk and
very much time for him to be absent where he felt much more at home, in
Europe.  As President of the Council he had great ability.

This one year of Ministry before the end of the war gave Mr. Rowell an
opportunity to survey forces of whose operation he had no knowledge
while he remained a mere Liberal.  He became officially familiar to
London and as the constant companion of the Premier came very near to
the elbows of the great, when he did not suffer by comparison.

But it was the Peace Conference that gave him his real work.  During
the war any nation got the prestige that it could win, either by its
own efforts or in league with others.  All nations on each side were
more or less animated by the one great purpose.  Suddenly the golden
grip of union was off.  The second war began around the Peace table.
In this new and more precarious conflict of pour-parlers and old secret
diplomacies under the dangerous flare of the self-determination torch,
national selfishness rushed to the front of the stage.  Every pocket of
people in Europe hemmed between a river, a mountain and a dialect
claimed the rights of a nation, when more than half of them should have
been conveniently merged into workable groups having some form of
government with which nations of experience could deal.

In this clamour of the _voces populi_ the voice of Canada was not to be
disregarded.  We had reason that it should be heard.  We were in sudden
danger of being overshadowed at the Conference by the vast figure of
the other half of North America.  Mr. Rowell has never been an
anti-Yankee.  He has too much fine sense ever to pull feathers out of
the eagle in retaliation for twisting the lion's tail.  He knows as
well as any man the strategic and moral necessity of Canada being the
real House of Interpreter to the two leading Anglo-nations.  He knew it
at the Conference.  But he knew also that in proportion to service and
sacrifice in the war, Canada in the Council of Peace had a right to be
heard and considered as the voice of a nation occupying the northern
half of North America.

There was great sense in the estimate of a leading London correspondent
that among the four most impressive and masterful personalities at the
Geneva Assembly of the League, Rowell the Canadian was at least the
fourth.  This was not merely a personal or natural compliment.  It was
the sincere recognition of a fact.

Mr. Rowell had the gift and the energy of will to translate the Peace
into Canadian language.  He gave Canada a voice in Europe.  He did try
so far as one man might to play up to the voice given to Canada by the
dead in Flanders.  In the big occasion when great tumult of forces were
rushing to a climax Rowell rose to the opportunity--as he always has
done--and he earned the lasting gratitude of his country.  We needed
just that intellectual power and that moral audacity, not only in
Europe but in Washington.

Yes, N. W. Rowell has made a big use of opportunity.  He has even
created it.  But it was seldom the little simple thing at his door that
roused his great qualities.  It was the bigger issue that lay out among
the mountain tops.  He was overwhelmingly eloquent for the universal
eight-hour day when he attended the International Labour Conference in
Washington.  The League of Nations had recommended it.  But what of the
cheap-labour competition in the Orient?  And what did Mr. Rowell know
about Industry and Democracy at all?

Mr. Rowell made a bold bid for recognition as a statesman of
international repute.  And he got it.  His speeches on the Empire were
consistently a greater voice than Borden ever could have had.  The
colleague of the Premier became his Imperial master because he had the
power which Borden lacked, of making the British world-Commonwealth
live in great public utterances.

What a journey had this man travelled now from "Is That You Daddy?" in
Queen's Park!

And it may be sensibly asked--What was his great intention?  Canada is
interested to know what is "the big idea" in this man's mind.
Corporation law cannot contain him now.  He has tried his strength and
knows it.  He knows that other men know it.

Once during the derelict days of the Coalition it was rumoured that
Rowell on a Western trip would sketch out a new leadership--for
himself.  But he was not a man to throw Borden overboard.  He had a
profound respect for the Premier, who had made great use of him.

Perhaps, if only Rowell had been born Conservative instead of a
Win-the-War Liberal converted into a Coalitionist, the Premier might
have called him to succeed.  We know not.  There was a predicament.
White, Meighen, Rowell--all must be considered.  There was the
Washington post, if ever it should come to be.  Did Mr. Rowell ever
intimate that he wanted either of these?  Nobody has said.  But Sir
Robert was wise at least not to have offered him the Premiership.  Too
long had that been the office of a man who could not lead.  It was time
for a leader.  It is not surprising that Mr. Rowell should have stepped
out of the Administration when Meighen went to the head of it.  He
could not comfortably serve under Meighen.  Ambition is a tyrant.
Self-sacrifice is usually easiest when great moral issues are
uppermost.  For more than one session he would not even retain his seat
in the House.  His retirement opens Durham, a safe constituency under
Rowell, and may weaken the Government.

But what if it does?  Mr. Rowell took office as a Coalitionist to win
the war.  The war is won.  But his work--is only nicely beginning.  How
is he going to finish his work for this nation?  He has not said.  Not
by making sundry speeches about the League of Nations.

If this country is to go ahead on its own native steam, it must be wise
enough to find a big public place for the great talents of N. W.
Rowell.  And if Mr. Rowell, or any other disciple of opportunity in
public affairs, wants to give Canada what she has a right to expect
from him, he will do well to make his needed money now at corporation
law, and when he comes back to public life have a constant eye single
to the glory of his country.

To evolve men of that stamp is not easy.  Rowell, like Meighen, is a
product of the older studious days when youths buried themselves in
books for the sake of getting on in the world without reference to mere
money.  He is now at an age when the best he has made of himself might
be of incalculable good to the country if he could help the Government
to go back to power and go with the National Liberal-Conservative Party
as conscientiously as he entered the Unionist Government.

Conscience; Oratory; Opportunity.  The greatest of these is Conscience;
the least, Opportunity.




AN AUTOCRAT FOR DIVIDENDS

BARON SHAUGHNESSY

Canada has a national habit of veneration for the C.P.R. just as England
used to have for Kitchener in Egypt.  The travels of H. M. Stanley in
Africa were not more wonderful than the everyday lives of Sandford
Fleming's engineers routeing that great new line through the Rockies; and
the legend of Monte Cristo scarcely more fabulous than the exploits of
Van Horne in getting the money or the work done without it.  The man who
bought supplies for Van Horne (when there was money) and wrote letters or
sent telegrams when there was none, got a finer preparation for being a
great railwayman than most Premiers ever got for the duties of public
life.

The sensations of the cured scriptural blind man who saw "men as trees
walking" were repeated to Canadians of thirty-five years ago who read
about those legendary Scots, Yankees and Canadians who flung that _chemin
de fer_ over Canada to start a Confederacy into a nation.  And there was
no _Boys' Own Annual_ in Canada to tell the tale, as it should have been
done, along with the tales of the Northwest Mounted Police and the
adventures of the Hudson's Bay Company.  George Stephen, Donald A. Smith,
Robert Angus, Sandford Fleming, John A. Macdonald, Van Horne, the young
Shaughnessy--all seemed then to be not merely doers of the undoable, but
men of mighty imagination and a sort of Old Testament morality.  Even the
Pacific Scandal seemed as necessary a part of the narrative as the story
of Joseph's coat and of Jacob and Esau were of the epic of Israel.

Well, admittedly, most of that has faded from the Canadian Pacific.  We
read the annual address of the C.P.R. President with yawns.  It all seems
considerably like what is said and done at any directors' meeting of a
rubber factory or a street railway.  You read the names of the directors
and few of them strike you with any sense of novelty or of awe.  The room
in which these magnates meet is--just a room; it used to be thought of as
a sort of Doges' Palace of finance.  You may even note that one of the
directors is baggy at the knees, and any two of them may be talking along
the corridor about that very ordinary thing--the cost of living.

Of all the men at any C.P.R. directors' meeting, Lord Shaughnessy knows
most about the steep side of finance.  He was the spender when there was
nothing to spend.  The romantic adversities of those days never left him.
He came down to the presidency with the fear of no-funds in his soul.
From the beginning until then he had felt all the ragged edges of C.P.R.
life.  He had grimly chuckled to Van Horne, the occasionally helpless
wizard, over the hard times.  And hard times never really left the road
until Van Horne handed the C.P. over to Shaughnessy just at the edge of
the era when the system was getting ready to handle phenomenal traffic
arising out of stupendous immigration.

From then on till the day that he also went out was the epoch when
traffic and travel became vaster than the road, and greater than the men.
It was his to operate, and to build as well.  But the operations were all
of a system which had creaked into through traffic from Yokohama to
Montreal as far aback as 1889; and the new lines built under Shaughnessy
were just branches of the old trunk.  Shaughnessy took over bulging
receipts after he had spent years at painful expenditures.  He took over
a despotism and made it an autocracy.

It was not in his practical, unromantic temperament to play the
Gargantuan role.  He had not the mentality.  Van Horne left the road when
the road threatened to become bigger than its creator.  Shaughnessy began
to work on it when he knew that the bigger he made the system the greater
would be his own executive authority, and the bigger the dividends to the
holders of stock.

There was a radical contrast between these two men; and as much between
the road built by Van Horne and the system operated and magnified by
Shaughnessy.  The former would not have his shadow dwarfed by the
dimensions of his own creation.  The latter had created nothing: he would
have the shadow of the thing fling itself so vastly over the nation--and
the nations--that whenever men spoke of C.P. they thought of Shaughnessy,
and when they said his name they mentally took off their hats to the
headship of the greatest system of its kind in the world.

This may or may not have been Shaughnessy's intention.  It was certainly
the effect.  We have all gone through the era of profound respect for the
cold autocrat of the twentieth century, as some of us did that of awesome
veneration of the railway giants of the nineteenth.  We have read
newspaper stories--some of them buncombe--about this man's all-seeing eye
as he travelled over the system, as we did of the peripatetic omniscience
of James J. Hill and the Gargantuan humours of Van Horne.  We have
consented that the system perfected by Shaughnessy was the most
marvellous known of its kind, and therefore the man at its head must be a
phenomenal administrator.

Very likely we have been warped by our enthusiasm.  Shaughnessy was no
miracle man.  He was a wonderful _maestro_ of details, a clear-headed
organizer of systems and a man to provoke high respect in those who had
to deal with him at close range.  But he had perhaps less sheer ability
for detail than Van Horne, who as a rule despised the botheration of it.
I have heard Van Horne dictating to his secretary a mass of intimate
instructions to a contractor about how to build a rotunda in a hotel in
Cuba, at the same time with his left hand on a drawer full of complicated
notes on his philosophy of life, which with the other lobe of his brain
he was traversing in order to engulf the interviewer as soon as the
letter was finished.  Shaughnessy never could have carried on such an
interview, lasting four hours of a busy life.  His talks to the press
must be curt and comprehensive--or else elliptical.  He had no exuding
vivacity.  When I talked to him--or listened to him--he was cold and
exact.  He left his chair only to walk erectly to the window.  He
deviated not a syllable from the subject in hand--the system.  He
worshipped that: as much as any Mikado ever did his ancestry.  He paid
passing veneration to Van Horne--when from the slant of his remark I
surmised that he was critical even in his admiration for that epical
character.

Shaughnessy is essentially a system-man.  When he travelled he had his
practical jokes and his Irish stories and his fondness for the social
side; but he was conventionally as correct as a time-table.  Had there
been a spark of genius in him he would have extinguished it for the sake
of betterments to the most conventional Colossus in Canada.  The C.P.R.
was supposed to lead.  It was built for dividends, and born in politics.
It had craft at its cradle.  The new policy under Shaughnessy was bigger.
It had to do less with Asia, with spectacle, with carved gods; more with
Europe, with immigration posters, with land settlement.  Shaughnessy had
taken over a system which could be used ostensibly as the agent of the
Immigration Department and of the Interior; effectively as the base of
population-supply on its own account.

As Shaughnessy worked it out the C.P. had a scheme of national expansion
that acted independent of government; its own ships, trains, roads,
docks, land offices, immigration agents, poster-advertising--until the
average European looking for a way out of economic slavery believed that
the C.P.R. was the owner and operator of Canada.  A belief which was not
contradicted, except officially, at home.

William Mackenzie set the pace for building; Shaughnessy for operation.
But Shaughnessy built fast.  He did it under a handicap of two systems
against one.  The difference was that an average new line under
Shaughnessy paid dividends, or at least did not appreciably lower
dividends already declared.

Under Lord Shaughnessy it was unofficially believed that the head of the
C.P.R. was somehow overlord to governments.  Shaughnessy the impenetrable
was not the agent of a democracy, but an emperor.  He had his counterpart
in Japan.  The Orientalism which Van Horne infused into the system even
while he laughed it out of court, was solemnly accepted by the man who
came after.  But it was the Orientalism of efficiency.  Shaughnessy was
its symbol.  Away from it he was of little consequence except as a
benevolent citizen with statesmanlike views upon how governments should
govern.  Within it he was mighty.  He felt himself the apex of a thing
that knew no provincial boundaries.  He consciously made it the
instrument of Empire.  He was inordinately proud of its morale.  To him
it was a complicated army.  He felt it assimilating men who lived, moved
and had their being in C.P.R.--as he had.  He was the great human rubber
stamp.  He had extra power.  He lived on fiats and papal bulls.  Men
learned to tremble at his nod--not at Shaughnessy, but at the man who
personalized the infallible system.  And as governments came up and
capsized in the storms of public sentiment, the great system went on in
its sullen but splendid way, a sort of solar system in which parties and
governments gravitated.

It would have needed a greater soul than Shaughnessy to be cynical about
C.P.R.  It often needed his latent Irish humour to appreciate the larger
cynicism which it expressed concerning the country.  The pap-fed infants
of Mackenzie and Hays served but to illustrate by contrast the perfection
and the well-oiled technique of the dynamo operated by Shaughnessy.  It
became an obsession with him, as it did with Flavelle over a commercial
company, that "the king can do no wrong."  His annual report bristled
with pride over the Company's achievements.  He insisted upon the
inherent morality of the thing and of the men who were its officials.
And the older he grew the more Shaughnessy became absorbed in it.  In his
career the office of President reached its climax.  It was shorn of much
of its aspect of awe as soon as he left it.

His knighthood was a slight decoration on so august a personage; as
though the king had decorated the Mikado.  The baronage more nearly
fitted the case.  Shaughnessy was not too passionately a Home Ruler to
take it.  But he was never so good a president of the C.P.R. after he got
it.  He became particular over forms and etiquette.  One almost looked
for a change of guard at the gate when entering the President's office.

No pomp, however, could undo such efficiency, and in the main such
national sanity.  Shaughnessy always liked to have a voice in national
affairs.  That was partly tradition.  It also kept the public from
remembering that the railway after all was a creature of government and
of politics.  It sometimes deflected public attention from the "melon"
patch which was the _Toronto World's_ sobriquet for the C.P.R. "pork
barrel," and from the ever potential lobby maintained by the company at
Ottawa.  Of course lobbies are always repudiated.  No self-respecting
railway ever knows it by that name.  There is no department of lobbyage
in the head offices.  The art is never taught.  But it is childish to
dodge the public necessity of a great corporation being represented at
the centre of national legislation.  In fact, C.P. has loomed so large in
public affairs that a member of Parliament for the Company would
sometimes have been scarcely ridiculous.  Whenever Lord Shaughnessy went
to Ottawa, it was public news.  He never went for his health, seldom
without some issue too big for a subordinate to handle.  Had the Minister
of Railways gone to Montreal to see Mr. President, it would have seemed
quite as natural.

The war gave Lord Shaughnessy for a time almost equal prominence with Sir
Sam Hughes.  His quite sensible speech criticizing the haphazard and
costly methods of recruiting made Hughes retort that to raise the First
Contingent was as great a task as building the C.P.R.  Lord Shaughnessy
earned that absurd retort because of his announcement to the Government
that he meant to make the speech; as though the nation would be waiting
to hear it.  There was room for one super-governmentarian at Ottawa;
never for two.  It was Hughes _vs._  Shaughnessy.

Lord Shaughnessy's retirement from the presidency was not sudden.  He had
reached his zenith.  His eyesight was bad.  But he had not lost his grip.
The war threw such an unusual load on the system and so changed its
complexion that it became necessary to have a younger man.  There is
reason to believe that the war rudely upset much of the Imperial dignity
of the great system.  The C.P. was no longer a law unto itself.  It was
part of the national pool.  The President was no longer a sublime
autocrat; he was a public agent.  The life blood of a globe-girdling
system was drained by the war, even while it retained its supremacy as
the greatest railway and more than held up its end compared with the
railway muddle in the United States.  Never again could the C.P. recover
its splendid isolation of greatness.  Public ownership was being thrust
upon the nation by the bankruptcy of the other roads.  Shaughnessy had no
real fear that it would ever absorb the C.P.R.  But he had reason to
suspect that a huge Government system would be more or less of a menace
to the system which he had spent his life to build up.  There was no
better way than to retire, leaving the chief administration to a man of
his own choice and retaining the post of Chairman along with the room
occupied by the old President.  Even here the old autocrat survives.  The
proposal made by Baron Shaughnessy to pool all the railways, except the
Grand Trunk, and to put them all under C.P. administration with a
guarantee of dividends to C.P. shareholders--was a magnificent play to
the gallery.  The other roads were undeniably bankrupt, when even the
splendid showing made by the management could not make their records
palatable to the public.  It was a strategic time to advertise once,
finally and for all, the unequalled efficiency of the old
Transcontinental.

But Canadian railwaydom is dominated by C.P.R. as naturally as tides by
the moon.  The Railway Association, once the Railway War Board, are now a
junta of dividendists and of paid chiefs of the Government system, to
oppose--whenever necessary--the adverse judgments of the Government's
Railway Commission.  The road which was the tangible nexus of
Confederation was built by two Americans, one of whom became a
high-tariff Tory and a knight, the other an Imperialistic baron who
believed in Dominion Home Rule for Ireland when the average Canadian
considered Home Rule as treasonable as annexation.  It is the prerogative
of any robust Canadian to oppose either infection from Broadway or
domination from Downing Street.  But, regarding the strategic position of
Canada in the misnamed "British Empire," we might all take a cue from
Lord Shaughnessy, who has had all the internationalizing emotions of
which any man is normally capable, and can challenge any man to shew
where he has ever compromised conscience or country.




THE PUBLIC SERVICE HOBBYIST

SIR HERBERT AMES

Whatever may be done by the Washington Conference to the League of
Nations, there still live two men to whom it is and shall be the hub of
the world.  Lord Robert Cecil and Sir Herbert Ames at least will never
admit that the League was a mere Wilson-Democrat device for making the
world safe for humanity, and that the alternative is a Harding-Republican
expedient for making Washington the new hub of the world.

Sir Herbert is much too cordial a cosmopolitan to begrudge Washington any
eminence she can get from imitating the League.  He is too charitable
even to admit that if Dr. Wilson had stood for peace first and covenant
second, no Washington Conference would have been needed.  He is also
Canadian enough to realize that transferring the centre of the Peace
propaganda to the leading Capital of the New World is a good way to
remind the Old World that Ottawa has more to do with Washington than even
London has.  Out of the Washington Conference may arise the Canadian
envoy.  Whatever happens in the Pacific zone of the world-open diplomacy
can never hurt Ottawa---nor disturb the complacent optimism of Sir
Herbert Ames, Financial Director of the Secretariat to the League of
Nations.  The time may come when even Ottawa is considered a better place
than London or Geneva for the conduct of world-peace agenda.

When Sir Herbert Ames was chosen Financial Director of the League
Secretariat he was chosen less to please Canada than to vindicate his own
ability.  When he spoke in Canada on how the League works he showed his
remarkable optimism by extolling its operations at a time when Europe was
more anarchic than at any time since the war.

Every forward nation should have its Ames.  This one justified his
existence in Canada long before he became a knight or even an M.P. for
St. Antoine, Montreal.  At one time in his citizenship he was the
incarnation of what a large number of people would be anxious to avoid;
in the days when he used to pack his grip from Montreal and go forth on
lectural pilgrimages over Ontario and other parts.  On a platform he
always seemed like a long, lean schoolmaster.  Sometimes he used a
blackboard.  One of his pet subjects was prohibition.  He looked entirely
like it.  One could scarcely recollect having heard quite so dry a man on
any subject.  He looked like the genius of self-denial--like a man who
long ago should have gone into a monastery, doing penance for the uplift
of the world as mirrored in his own conscience, instead of remaining at
large a common Presbyterian and a very uncommon sort of Tory.

I was agreeably startled to find Sir Herbert in 1920 one of the most
cordial and amiable men on the roster of Who's Who.  He was no longer
dry, bigoted, or pedagogical.  In fact he was almost benignly human, even
humourous.  And I concluded that if intimacy with the League of Nations
could work such a change in the average man connected with it, there is
surely some function for the League as a cheerful solvent for the world.

Sir Herbert Ames' previous work as Hon. Chairman of the National
Patriotic Fund of course did a good deal to reclaim him.  Of all war work
this was among the most destructive of personal bigotry and political
prejudice.  If Sir Herbert imbibed the real philosophy of the Patriotic
Fund he must be, speaking humanly, one of the wisest men in Canada.  It
was a scientific fact that at a time when men in the army were displaying
incredible heroism, certain people at home were exhibiting unbelievable
meanness.  The people who used to attempt graft on the Patriotic Fund
were the kindergarten of the college of national profiteers who came
later.  They were happily out-numbered by the people who were thankful
for all they got and who in the greatest losses that life can inflict
showed almost sublime fortitude and patience.

Preparation for some form of public service by doing it as he went along
has always been Ames' strongest characteristic.  He had eyes for the
homely, sometimes mean, job under his nose.  There was an evangelism
about him.  Why?  Because he was a citizen.  Where did he live?  In
Montreal.  No man can be a reforming citizen in Montreal unless he has
plenty of time, and some money.  Mr. Ames has always had both.  He also
has endless patience.

Perhaps the most remarkable proof that he intended to be a practical
philanthropist is the fact that for eight years he was one of the feeble
Anglo-Saxon minority in the Montreal City Council.  An artist in search
of contrast could never have found a finer example than a comparative
study of the leader of the English section Ames, and the French boss, the
late L. A. Lapointe.  In the bilingual Legislature of an incorrigible
city Mr. Ames spoke two languages.  If he had mastered twenty he never
could have equalled Lapointe, who in my recollection of a long
conversation some years ago could genially and grandly boast that the fad
for reforming the City of Montreal would never make much headway so long
as he remained boss of the French section in Council.  Lapointe was
Montreal's Tammany.  He held Montreal under his patronage and executive
thumb before Mederic Martin had begun to achieve any fame beyond that of
a maker of cigars.  He knew every cranny of Montreal as intimately as the
late John Ross Robertson used to know Toronto.  Mr. Ames' knowledge of
the big town was fairly complete.  But if Mr. Ames and Mr. Lighthall, the
genie of civic information in Montreal, could have been one two-headed
man, they never could have matched Lapointe in the expert business of
knowing where to plant a man to give him a civic job or how to create a
job to suit a man in need of it.

Yet for eight consecutive years Mr. Ames with no other desire than to do
his duty, to study Montreal, and perhaps qualify for larger service
later, remained a member of the City Council.  And he did his work there
before the English-speaking element undertook to clean up the city--the
most genial, sarcastic failure of modern times.  He wrote little books
about Montreal.  He mastered French by studying it first-hand in France.
Those who used to listen to his evangelical speeches in his own tongue
sometimes wished he had learned a few nuances and inflexions in English.
He was for some time Chairman of the Municipal Board of Health, in a city
where infant mortality is such a constant epidemic that babies' coffins
are displayed in shop windows.  In 1907 he wrote a tractate on the
housing of the working classes, just on the eve of the period when
Montreal began to be the worst city in America for high rents,
extortionate charges for moving and intolerable congestion.  The
publication of his views on the subject, however, showed that he had the
courage to point out what was wrong, even though he had no concrete
constructive proposal which any municipal government in Montreal or any
Legislature in Quebec would ever accept as a working basis for putting
the thing right.  As far back as 1901 he indited a treatise on The City
Problem, What Is It?  Twenty years later, after all Mr. Ames' burnings on
the subject, Montreal has slumped back into sheer mediaevalism in civic
government under the wheedling despotism of Mederic Martin, who presided
at the public funeral of the only effort the city ever made to establish
a real business administration.  In that Quixotic eruption of public
virtue in 1912, Mr. Ames, after all his publicity on the subject of
redeeming Montreal, was not even considered as a candidate for the Board
of Control.

On the whole scarcely a public man, or even a reforming editor, in Canada
has talked so consistently and so cheerfully for so long a period and to
so little apparent purpose, on the need for cleaning up civic government.
The difference between Mr. Ames and the average public-service expert in
Montreal on this question is that Mr. Ames has never been worldly-wise
enough to become an avowed cynic on the question.  He probably knows as
well as anybody that to clean up Montreal is in the same category as
making Europe safe for the League of Nations; a much harder city to
regenerate than even Philadelphia.  Muck-raking has no effect, when
two-thirds of the population read French papers which never use the rake,
and when the boss of three-fourths of the rest is himself often a target
for the yellows.  Mr. Ames should long ago in this connection have
propounded a thesis, Hugh Graham, What Is It?  He would then be free to
dissect the ethics of Mederic Martin and the late L. A. Lapointe.

Martin rules Montreal in spite of Lord Atholstan, the Archbishop and the
International Union, because in his own person he interprets the
distinction between Anglo and Franco.  In Montreal a dominant minority
controls three-fourths of the commercial wealth.  A couple of dozen men
control big industries, railways, electric and water powers, finance and
newspapers.  When these men want the City Hall they consult the
directory.  To them Montreal is a convenient sea-wharfing spot to conduct
big business; otherwise a French Canadian city and so, hopeless.  The
chief common bond between this group and the city at large is the labour
market.  The elections are a mere superficial disturbance.  The old
courteous alternative of a French mayor, an English mayor, and an Irish
mayor has been discarded.  The mayors are all French now.  The population
is overwhelmingly French.  The City Hall is as French as the courts.  The
civic jobs are given to Frenchmen.  As a rule there are plenty of jobs.
It is a fair compromise--that if the Anglos will monopolize most of the
big productive business, the civic administration must go to the Francos
who are the elective majority.

Sir Herbert Ames, who was born in Montreal and is the only man who has
ever undertaken to theorize openly as to its redemption, knows exactly
why the place is so absorbing to the cynical mind.  He understands that a
man cannot have the same geometrical and diligent enthusiasm for Montreal
as he has for Toronto.  To be a thoughtful citizen of Montreal stimulates
the imagination and disgusts the economic sense.  For the past ten years
Sir Herbert has been too much absorbed in Ottawa and the League of
Nations to care much about the city where he spent so much of his earlier
zeal for reclamation.  The member for St. Antoine has a larger orbit--to
negotiate which he has resigned his seat in the House.

One is tempted to consider whether there are not enough secretarial minds
in Europe from which to take a man as Financial Secretary for the League
of Nations, and let Sir Herbert come back to Canada to finish his work.
He has had world experiences enough to come back and be of some real use
to the country.  He is not yet sixty.  He has ahead of him twenty years
in which he could do a great deal more for the Empire about which he is
so earnest by working in Canada than by occupying a conspicuous post
somewhere in Europe.  It is not the fashion for ex-Canadians who have had
political or other experiences abroad to come back here for anything but
speeches and banquets.  Sir Herbert may be permitted to change the
fashion.  With his versatility in French, his knowledge of Europe, his
acquaintance with large public questions of finance and his general
_savoir faire_, he seems to be just the kind of man who could head a
movement to nationalize Montreal.

But of course he never will do it.




THE SHADOW AND THE MAN

HON. SIR SAM HUGHES, K.C.B.

The career of the late Sam Hughes is a tragic reminder that no man in
public life can afford to regard himself as bigger than his suitable
job.  When a nation has to retire a genius for the sake of enthroning
what remains of common democracy the nation's loss is nobody's gain.
In the jungle book of our aristocracy Sam Hughes should have been Lord
Valcartier.  Not that a democratic country cares at all to be given any
more lords, even if Parliament had not asked the King to abolish the
custom.  But while peerages and baronetcies were being handed about for
honour, Hughes was the kind of man that should have got his--except
that he made it impossible.

However, it is more interesting to record the shortcomings of Hughes
than to report the success of mediocrities.  Canada had in Hughes a
name with which for a year or so to poster almost any part of the
Empire, especially England.  We are in danger of forgetting at this
distance--five years now since he resigned office--just what were the
conditions that made him such a tremendous figure.

Sam Hughes, M.P., born in County Durham, Orangeman from the town of
Lindsay, editor, soldier, adventurer, school teacher who once taught
English and who never could make a speech, though he talked in
public--what was there about him up till 1914 to make any nation
wonder?  The first time I saw Hughes, in 1910, a man whose office he
had just left said, as though imparting a State secret:

"There goes the next Minister of Militia."

Up till that moment if anybody had asked me, "Do you know Hughes?" I
should have said, "Oh, yes, everybody knows Jim Hughes, the School
Inspector."

The story of Canada's Army is immortal.  It is yet to be truly told.
When it is told by the right man--whether historian or poet--the name
Hughes, as we know it at its best and biggest, will shine out like a
great fixed star that tried to play being a comet.  On April 22nd, from
the sick bed that even he probably knew he never would leave of his own
will, in memory of St. Julien, he sent the army boys a brief message,
that he still believed in them as he always had.

Simple little message, it meant much.  It would have meant a million
times more if the "boys" could have flashed back a helio to the wan old
General who used to be such a noise in the world--"Same to you,
General."  The boys somehow liked him.  The defects of Sam Hughes were
of the sort that soldiers love.  He was a man's man.

"Tipperary" was just becoming popular to whistle when a camera man
authorized by the Government of Canada took one of the most striking
pictures in our part of the war outside the zone of the shell areas.
Gen. Sam Hughes, jack boots and oilskin cape flung back by the gale to
show his belt and the flap of his khaki, wide-legged on a rope ladder,
coming down forward from a troopship in the Gulf, almost baring his
teeth to the October wind; bidding farewell to the First Contingent
33,000 strong, that steamed out of the Gulf into the convoy.

You recognize in such a picture a man who perhaps understood the
sensations of Alexander.  Sam Hughes had finished his first job for the
war.  Among all the war achievements that thrilled nations when big men
suddenly took hold of them in after years, this one holds its own.
Hughes never could match it again.  Here was the greatest army that had
ever put out to sea at one time; an army forty per cent bigger in three
months than the total force that Gen. Ian Hamilton estimated Canada
could send as her whole contribution to a great war.  This was Hughes'
answer to Hamilton.  Not only were the men Canadian--if not many of
them Canadians--but their uniforms, boots, kits, rifles, horses, tents,
artillery, machine gun batteries, army waggons, cook waggons,
engineering outfits and munitions, were as far as possible produced in
Canada.  Troop trains and transport steamers were Canadian.  The money
that paid for the army was Canadian.  The pay of officers and men was
Canadian.  And we know what Hughes was.

But the moment Hughes let go the rope ladder that should have made him
Lord Valcartier, he began to undo his own career.

In a misguided speech afterwards Sam reminded Lord Shaughnessy that to
raise, equip and dispatch the First Contingent from Canada was a
heavier contract than building the C.P.R.  The comparison was foolish,
but very human.  Shaughnessy had provoked it by announcing to the
Government that he intended to make a speech in condemnation of Hughes'
methods of recruiting.

The author of Canada in Flanders describes exactly what the work of
organizing that Contingent was.  A few extracts will do:

"In less than a month the Government, which had asked for 20,000 men,
found almost 40,000 at its disposal. . .  General Hughes devised and
ordered the establishment of the largest camp that had ever been seen
on Canadian soil.  The site at Valcartier was well chosen. . . ."

"The transformation effected within a fortnight by an army of engineers
and workers was a remarkable triumph of applied science.  Roads were
made, drains laid down, a water supply with miles of pipes installed,
electric lighting furnished from Quebec and incinerators built for the
destruction of dry refuse.  A sanitary system second to none that any
camp has seen was instituted.  Every company had its own bathing place
and shower baths: every cook-house its own supply of water.  Troughs of
water for horses filled automatically so that there was neither
shortage nor waste.  The standing crops were garnered; trees cut down
and the roots torn up.  A line of targets 3 1/2 miles long--the largest
rifle range in the world--was constructed. . . . .  Camp and army
leaped to life in the same hour.  Within four days of the opening of
the camp nearly 6,000 men had arrived in it.  The cloth mills of
Montreal began to hum with the manufacture of khaki, which the needles
of a great army of tailors converted into uniforms, greatcoats and
cloaks.  The Ordnance Department equipped the host with the Ross Rifle.
Regiments were shuffled and reshuffled into battalions; battalions into
brigades.  The whole force was inoculated against typhoid.  There were
stores to accumulate; a fleet of transports to assemble; a thousand
small cogs in the machine to be nicely adjusted."


Sir Max Aitken did not mention the message to "My Soldiers" in every
man's knapsack, an imitation of Kitchener's knapsack message to the
"Old Contemptibles"; or that he himself had applied to Sam Hughes for a
"job" in Canada's army.

Hughes was Minister of War, not a Minister of Defence.  In the tramp of
battalions down the street he felt Canada to be a young nation, not an
overseas Dominion only.  Yet the First Contingent was the work of one
of the most scientifically unprepared-for-war peoples in the world.
Valcartier was the glorification of Hughes, who was always personally
prepared for war; what or where he was not always sure, except that it
would involve the Empire, that when it came, the sand-bags of Canada's
front line would not be in Canada, and the Canada Militia Act would be
as useful in the case as a page from Pickwick Papers.

Allow for the British-born majority in the First Contingent, the
patriotic enthusiasm of Militia officers, the commandeering of national
resources and the great work of subordinates; the fact remains that had
he not been as much his own enemy as he was a soldier born and bred,
Sam Hughes should have been Lord Valcartier.

The sad fact about Hughes is that he did not estimate what Canada did
and did not in her first impact upon the war.  He could not see Canada
except as the shadow of Sam Hughes.  In the light of the war as he
stood in front of it, that shadow of Hughes seemed to him to cover the
country.  For two years, it seemed to grow.  Then it flickered.  In
1916 it went out.  And there never was in Canada a going out like it.

Hughes was the embodiment of force without power.  He began to mobilize
a nation, not merely as battalions on parade, but as an army equipped
by Canadian science, industry, transportation, intelligence, and
citizenship.  So far as he carried that out, the editor of the _Lindsay
Warder_ and M.P. for Haliburton and Victoria had no superior in
organizing force in this country.  Up till 1916 he was a patriotic
cannon-cracker exploding without any particular objective, except that
he wanted a Canadian Army in Canada, not an overseas Contingent, or an
Imperial Army.  between 1914 and 1916 he was a great organizing
soldier, at his best comparable to any men who were doing wonders at
the front.  As Nationalist as Quebec, he thought of Canada as a unit in
the Empire, most of which he had seen for military reasons.  Canada
could not declare war; but in the mind of Hughes the force that held
Canada and other overseas dominions within the Empire was not in trade
and tariffs, but in ships, armies and victories.

Sam Hughes failed to translate his force into power because he failed
to estimate the elements which carried him to success, and therefore
could not measure the energies that would defeat him.  He never
understood what Bismarck called the "imponderables".  Nature gave him
the energy; Fate the ambition: Destiny denied him the vision.

The electric energy of this nation in response to the call of war made
a flash that blinded Hughes.  He seemed to think that he was the man
who was running the cataract.  He had a wholesome contempt for
Kaiserism in Germany.  He tried to express it by an imitation of
Kaiserism in Canada.  He had a sense of relative omnipotence.  He put
editors in jail, went over the heads of District commanders,
inexcusably humiliated General Lessard in command of the most important
military district in Canada, openly browbeat officers in front of their
men, played Napoleon on a white charger at the crest of a mound in
Valcartier, and trod on the official corns of his colleagues.

Such things are now somewhat blurred by perspective.  At the time they
were glaringly in the spotlight as the pranks of a Jack the Giant
Killer.  In December, 1914, Premier Borden made a tactical visit to the
headquarters of Military District No. 2, nominally commanded by General
Lessard.

A military writer had this to say about the Premier's speech:

". . . .  He thought the accomplishment of this task (Valcartier) was a
tribute to the spirit of the people.  He claimed no special credit for
his Government; inferentially it was a high compliment to the
organizing ability of the Minister of Militia, but Sir Robert deftly
left that to the imagination of his audience. . . .  A curious feature
was his avoidance of any mention of the 'Minister of Militia.'  When he
desired to speak of the military programme, he stated that he had
decided, after consultation with the 'Chief of Staff'.  This was done
repeatedly and apparently with definite purpose.  Once he mentioned the
name of Major Lessard, and a shout went up from the audience."


Further quotation is not needed.  In less than two months after the
glorification of Valcartier, the Premier found himself challenged by
the man who had already begun to act as though national headquarters
were in the Militia Department.  Sam Hughes was never unpopular in
Toronto.  The incident referred to might almost have taken place in
Montreal.

Canada was beginning to understand, to heroize and to censure Sam
Hughes.  His measure was being taken here.  But the censure was
unheeded.  Hughes worked while critics talked.  He was mobilizing, if
not organizing, a nation.  He still believed that he (ipse) could do
it.  The mobilization included everything needed by the army as well as
the army itself.  He wanted to get the nation behind the army: and
himself behind the nation.  He started everything--even to shells, high
explosives and aeroplanes.  Hughes knew what the army needed.  He
refused to admit that other men also knew how to get some of these
things better than he did.

Cabinet colleagues were adjuncts.  The motto punctuated by the smashing
fist was, "I want to tell you!"  No major on parade ever felt so
overwhelming.  Hughes was more than a martinet.  He was a dilemma.  The
phenomenal was always about him.  War was not even hell to Sam Hughes.
It was more often a chance to show a civilian minister that he was a
mere conventional ornament.  Hughes may have hated the necessity, but
he loved the spirit and the fire, of war.

Sam Hughes was probably wiser on what modern war demanded than many of
the British command.  Even Kitchener argued for shrapnel when Lloyd
George wanted high explosives.  There was no civilian in Canada to
argue against Hughes, who aimed to do in Canada what the Minister of
Munitions, Director-General, Headquarters Staff, and the Minister of
Transports did in England.  He was able from the first to get a
realizing measure of the kind of mechanical hell known as modern war.

Start a force like that and you may expect abnormalities in the wake of
it.  We had "Sham Shoes".  Hughes had nothing to do with those.  He
stated in Winnipeg that Wellington had once said that a contractor who
made bad boots for an army should be shot.  We had shell contracts--and
the "friend" Joseph Wesley Allison; the Kyte charges, which brought the
Minister home from England to answer them in the House.  Neither the
answer nor the friend was characteristic of the kind of man we had
supposed Sam Hughes to be.  We had the Ross Rifle.  Hughes knew that in
actual warfare the Ross was the finest sniper's rifle in the world, but
that in quick action it jammed so badly that often the Canadians
furtively swapped them for Lee-Enfields whenever the chance came.
There was no excuse for the Ross rifle, and Hughes ought to have
admitted it.  There never should have been a chance for any detractor
of his to insinuate that the Minister had stock in the Ross Rifle
Company.  We had cellulose nitrate and Grant Morden, who has never had
an equal over here for making sudden wealth out of next to nothing and
getting popular credit for doing it.  What the ex-Minister of Militia
made out of that promotion was never stated.  It never should have been
necessary for him to have made a copper in any such way.  On his
retirement from the Cabinet Hughes should have had a big honourable
endowment from the nation sufficient as an income for the rest of his
life.  The whole idea of such a character being even good-humouredly
mixed up with any deal not absolutely foursquare is a paradox.  The Sam
Hughes that we knew best was as straight as a chalk line.


The exploits of Canada's army never surprised Hughes.  He had always
said they could do it.  He boasted about the generals he had taken from
desks and offices.  But the generals were fighting.  There was a cubist
picture in the War Memorials at Ottawa thus described by a Canadian
editor who went over the battlefields which it depicted:

"The canvas shrieking with its high hues was filled with Turcos in
panic flight crowding one another in their terror, while over them
billowed the yellow poison pall of death; but in the midst of the
maelstrom the roaring Canadian guns stood immovable and unyielding,
served by gunners who rose superior alike to the physical terrors of
battle and the moral contagion of fear."


That picture of St. Julien must have thrilled Hughes, whose son was
soon to be Brigadier-General.  It was on the crest of the St. Julien
wave that Hughes got his title and was given the freedom of London;
when some delirious writer in a London daily predicted that some day
Sir Sam would ride through London at the head of his victorious troops.
One writer called him the Commander-in-Chief of Canada's Army.  None of
these things moved Sam Hughes to humility.  As well as any man he knew
how small the greatest man was in the fury of that war.

Other Cabinet Ministers had to wait till the Peace Conference before
getting such press notices.  Even the Premier took nearly two years to
convince London that he was much more than the civilian colleague of
Gen. Hughes.  Sir Sam was idolized from the beginning; at times when
generals at the front were baffled, discouraged and beaten, and when
patient old Kitchener was enduring red tape and making perfunctory
reports to the Lords, knowing that the war was bigger than his
knowledge of it.

Hughes may not have been wise enough to estimate the real value of this
idolatry; but he was probably shrewd enough to know that it would soon
be over.  He knew that much as had been done to make Canada a war
nation, the first two years had done less than half the work.  87,000
troops went overseas in 1915.  That was natural.  The majority of the
men were in camp.  In 1916 the number was almost doubled, from the
enlistments of 1915.  In 1917 the number sent overseas dropped to
63,536, proving that the enlistments of 1916 had been about half those
of 1915.

Hughes knew this better than anybody.  He knew that the voluntary
system, in which he believed, was going to break down.  We had no
national register.  A country as big as twenty Englands, with a
population about one-fourth as big, had also Quebec--and the farmer.
The Canadian census was five years old and useless for anything like a
national register of resources of war.  Camp Borden in 1916 helped to
stimulate recruiting and to give Hughes something resembling in a
feeble way the sensations of 1914.  But Camp Borden was not Valcartier.
General Lessard, whom he had ignored in 1914, was sent down to Quebec
to encourage enlistments.  He went too late.  Wrong men had gone
earlier.  Hughes had never tried to placate Quebec.  But in 1916 he
himself went down to see Cardinal Begin.  For an Orangeman like Hughes
that was a desperate measure.  He got what he expected--cynicism.
Begin afterwards issued a letter to the press in which he tried to set
the clergy above the law of conscription.  No doubt the Cardinal came
at Hughes with the twaddle invented by the Nationalists and later
adopted by Laurier, about enforcing the Militia Act which provided for
nothing but defence.

Canada had now four divisions in the field.  The problem was how to
keep them up, and how to send a fifth.  The fifth never went.  But it
stands to the immortal credit of Sam Hughes that the four did, and that
he had sent them.

The affair about the Chairman of Munitions was to Hughes a sore blow.
He had started munitions as an arm of war.  He did not want a civilian
to take it over as a mere industry.  Even that was a sign that the
volunteer system was about done.  Ottawa was full of experts now, each
man taking over as a big business something started by Hughes.  The
one-man epoch was over.  But Hughes refused to admit it.  The man who
had started everything was in no humour to admit anything.  Yet in the
darkest days Hughes never lost faith in the men who had gone.  No man
continued to say more heartening things about ultimate victory.  And he
played blind optimist against the cold, comfortless fact that the
Canadian Army was wasting and the reserves were not marching up to mend
it.

Hughes knew that conscription had to come.  But he was the very last
man in authority to admit it.  Only a few days before Ottawa announced
that compulsory service must be applied, and when Sir Sam knew it was
coming, he said publicly to soldiers in Toronto that Canada, the
freeman's country, would never need conscription.  It was most pitiful
to hear him.  Sir Sam never seemed to pity himself.  His egoism was
game enough for anything.  Bigger men than he had gone down.  A big man
here or there was nothing now.  But what of little men that stayed up?
Hughes probably asked that in silent contempt as he saw the coming of
Coalition.  But he knew he would not be there when it came.

By this time the egotism that was so splendid in 1914 had begun to
breed in Gen. Hughes rancours and envies and enmities.  Some of the men
he had sent overseas were now more potent figures than himself.

There was still a person at the head of the Militia Department known as
Lieut.-General Sam Hughes, K.C.B.  But there was no longer in Canada
any such man as old Sam Hughes.  The Fate chickens hatched in 1914 were
coming home to roost.  For two years the Government had carried on two
wars, one with the Kaiser Wilhelm, the other with Kaiser Sam.  It had
to be determined that whatever defects government may have because it
is a democracy--even such democracy as was left in 1916--it is bigger
than any one man.  It had to be conceded that the nation was bigger
than any one political party, and war bigger than all the world's
volunteer armies.

Sam Hughes belonged to the eternal Volunteers.  The days of his glory
were the days when Canada of her own accord went to war or stayed at
home.  The Force called Hughes dreamed that it was bigger than a
machine called War.  But the machine won.  Hughes went down.  He went
down as he had come up--alone.  His going down seemed more swift than
his rising.  And yet he began to go down when he stood on the rope
ladder down the Gulf and watched the troopships drift out.  If in that
moment he had not dreamed that General Sam Hughes was above government,
he might have continued his great work long enough to become Lord
Valcartier.  He might have helped in a second Capture of Quebec, made
conscription less difficult when it came, and put the Fifth Division
into the field.  And in that case Canada's part in the war would have
been even more magnificent than it now is.

The latter days of the General were characteristic of a man who never
knew he was beaten.  Musical geniuses have written tremendous scores to
depict a man's struggle with death.  None of them could have
transcended the long battle which Sam Hughes put up to stay here.  For
months we had intermittent bulletins from his bedside when any morning
we expected to read that he was gone.  He was a hard man to conquer.
And only his intimate friends are likely ever to know whether or not it
was his own ultimate biting failure, after his almost super-human
success, that turned this man of the shadow into a phantom before he
let go.

And before he went the hard, bluff soldier, who has as much iron in his
composition as any man of his time sprang one of those human surprises
that even war fails to emulate--when he listened time after time to the
record that he loved better than most music, "I know that my Redeemer
liveth", from Handel's "Messiah".




THE STEREOPTICON AND THE SLIDE

LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SIR ARTHUR CURRIE

The war was a great cosmic artist of infinite satire, making of
humanity little stereopticon slides which he slipped in front of his
calcium and flashed upon the clouds for a screen.  When the war was
done the stereopticon was smashed.  The slides remain.  What shall we
do with them?

One of the most world-interesting characters in the magic lantern of
war was Lieut.-General Sir Arthur Currie, who in 1914 locked his real
estate desk in Victoria, B.C., and in 1919 came back to Canada
admittedly one of the ablest commanders in a war which made the
exploits of Wellington seem like comic opera in simplicity.

Whatever partial, prejudiced or private opinions some Canadians may
have about Sir Arthur Currie, it must be generally admitted that he was
perhaps the most remarkable of all the slides slipped into the
stereopticon of the war artist.  To quote from "Canada's Hundred Days",
by J. F. B. Livesay, concerning the secret strategy of Sir Arthur
Currie for the great Amiens show in August, 1918:

"That afternoon the Corps Commander had a talk with the two Canadian
correspondents.  Before him was a large scale map and the barrage map.
It was all very clear and lucid.  We take up our line here; and our
first objective is there; 'zero' hour was named; our final objective
for the day over there--constituting a world record for a first day's
advance. . . .

"So at last all is ready.  The story goes that the Corps Commander was
asked how soon he could deliver the Corps in fighting trim at the
appointed place.  'By the tenth,' he had said.  'Too long; do it by the
eighth.'  And he did it. . . .

"And it was all done secretly and by night.  For an entire week the men
of Canada were passing south from their old front, taking circuitous
and puzzling routes.  None knew where they went.  They sang as they
marched--a thing they had not done for two years.

"Foremost that night of nights was one's sense of wonder at how it had
been done; how of many tangled threads of railway and lorry and march,
all that great and intricate machine--more complex far than Wellington
had gathered on the field of Waterloo--had been assembled in perfect
order to the minute. . . .

"Up the winding hill go all the impedimenta of war--marching
battalions, traction-engines towing great guns, ammunition trains, long
lines of Red Cross lorries; everywhere the pungent odour of petrol.
From every little wood belch forth men.  They march silently.  They
might be phantoms, dim hordes of Valhalla, were it not for the spark of
a cigarette, a smothered laugh.  There is no talking.  All is tense
excitement.  For miles and miles in a wide concentric sweep every road
and lane and bypath is crowded with these slow-moving masses.  Over the
bare hillsides lumber the heavy tanks, just keeping pace with the
marching men.

". . . .  Berlin thinks we are in Flanders; London that we are in the
south.  All is well. . . .

". . . .  The watch hand is creeping round--half-past three--four--ten
past four--an interminable laggard.  It is to be the greatest barrage
of the war.

". . . .  'Zero' is set for four-twenty, and the pointer has barely
reached that figure when behind us there goes up a mighty flare, and
simultaneously all along the line ten miles to north and south of us,
other flares light up the countryside.  At the same instant there
breaks out the boom of our heavy guns, the sharp staccato of
sixty-pounders, the dull roar of howitzers, and the ear-splitting
clamour of whizz-bangs--a bedlam of noise.  Shells whistle and whine
overhead; they cannot be distinguished one from another, but merge into
a cataract of sound.

". . . .  The heavens are lighted up across their broad expanse by a
continuous sheet of lightning, playing relentlessly over the doomed
lines.  Now a faint light of dawn shimmers in the east and soon blots
out the fireworks.  A lark rises high, carolling. . . .

"The fog lifts.  It is eight o'clock.  The cavalry, a wonderful sight,
appear on the scene.  They have come up from Hangest-sur-Somme and have
lain overnight in the great park of Amiens.  Like a jack-in-the-box
they have sprung from nowhere--miles on miles of gay and serried ranks,
led by the Canadian Cavalry Brigade."

      *      *      *      *      *      *


On the 1913 side of this Wagnerian stage setting take a look at a real
estate office in Victoria, B.C.  The junior member of the firm is a
pink-faced giant who had taught school and made no money, and having no
other qualification for getting ahead in the world, went into buying
and selling houses and corner lots.  Victoria was booming then or he
never would have done it.  He had maps of the city on his walls and
could solemnly point out to some timid newcomer in 1913 what little
house there or nice wooded lot yonder might suit her; and the
price--oh, yes, the price; seems high, but the location is excellent,
the neighbourhood fine, the scenery superb, and the city--well, it had
been going ahead until the slump and then----

"Oh, yes, Victoria's all right," he insists heavily.  "Got sleeping
sickness, that's all."

Then he yawns, which is a relief to the lady client, who thinks that
his face is less ugly that way.  Such a huge, long, solemn face!  She
glances at the office, wondering--if the agent is hard up?  If so, no
wonder; for he seems a sad salesman.

He closes his desk and locks up.  Off to the rifle ranges, where he
stays as late as the eye can see because--well, it's a joy to help the
men get bull's eyes.

Sunday--marches in full Highland regalia at the head of the 50th Gordon
Highlanders on garrison parade.  On the curb a twinkling little Jap
watches him.

"Nothin' like him in Japan, John," says a boy scout.  "Wow!"

"Big--so big!" admires the Jap.

"Yah.  Makes them big Macs. in the ranks look shrunk.  Knows artillery,
too.  Rifle--kick! got a great eye.  Look at 'im right wheel!"

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Then on the 1920 side of the Wagnerian stage picture observe this same
giant, less baby pink, thinner in the face, clad in evening dress;
Inverness cape, crush hat, in the rotunda of the Ritz in Montreal,
beside an average athletic citizen similarly dressed; the superb
civilian--and his marionette.

"Er--I think the car's waiting, General."

"Oh, no.  We'll walk.  Only a block or two," booms the giant.

He crosses the rotunda in seven swift, great strides, while the
marionette trots to keep up.  They are off to a function at McGill
University.  The new President--to whom professors bow with frigid
politeness and ladies ogle in admiring awe, and university governors
stand about like a bodyguard as though to intimate,--

"Ridiculous?  Not a bit of it.  There's no other university President
like him.  And what else could we do with him?  The Government had
nothing to suit him; for politics he's never meant; for business never.
Geddes left us.  We picked a greater man.  Yes, it seems awkward, but
never mind.  A year from now you will say--here was the man that made
McGill as famous in 1921 as Sir William Dawson, the world geologist,
made it in 1890."

Montreal that made a citizen of prodigious Van Horne had here a
character in a setting far more unusual.  The eminent soldier as head
of a university.  One of the last surprises of the war; almost as it
seemed then a joker in the pack; when men had to remember how this man
leaped from an almost bankrupt real estate office in Victoria to what
he was in Canada's Hundred Days.

Of all men who seemed to have been absolutely created by the war Currie
was the first.  He enlisted for active service in 1914, and Hughes made
him brigade-commander at Valcartier.  He was in the First Contingent
that swung out of the Gulf the day that Hughes stood on the rope
ladder, almost forgetting that he had shaken hands with Currie.  He
went to France as Commander of the 2nd Infantry Brigade.  Within two
months came St. Julien and the green gas when Currie held his part of
the stricken line from Thursday till Sunday.

"And on Sunday," said Max Aitken, eye-witness, "he had not abandoned
his trenches.  There were none left.  They had been obliterated by the
artillery.  He withdrew his undefeated troops from the fragments of the
field fortifications, and the hearts of his men were as completely
unbroken as the parapets of his trenches were completely broken."  Much
more was said in official despatches about the fine spectacular heroism
of other officers of lower rank.  Currie, the most picturesque physique
on the West front, was no man for mere gallantry.  Poor dashing Mercer,
beloved of the ranks, later paid the penalty for the sort of bravery
that inspires troops but does not win battles.  Currie was no coward.
But he was cautious.  The Scot in him preordained that he might be a
necessity higher up.  He just flung his left flank around south and
hung on.  We read on in the official record:

"Monday morning broke bright and clear and found the Canadians behind
the firing line.  But this day too was to bring its anxieties.  The
attack was still pressed, and it became necessary to ask Brigadier
General Currie whether he could not once more call on his shrunken
Brigade.  'The men are tired,' this indomitable soldier replied, 'but
they are ready and glad to go again to the trenches.'  And so, once
more a hero leading heroes, the general marched back the men of the 2nd
Brigade, reduced to a quarter of its strength, to the very apex of the
line as it existed at that moment."


Five months later a party of Canadian newspapermen visited the Canadian
front when one of them wrote concerning Major-General Currie:

"English officers spoke of him with a curious mixture of enthusiasm and
reserve as though he were some new sort of being.  It was everybody's
secret that this big, husky Canadian with the baby pink face and the
blue eyes and the slow, smooth, bellowing voice was to be in command of
the Second Canadian Division just then being organized. . . .  No place
except Canada produces such voices as Currie's, or such tremendous
easy-moving bodies.  He met the newspapermen with a smile and a great
outstretched hand.  The gesture was something like that of a popular
preacher shaking hands with the children on their way out of church.
But the voice was the great thing.  It seemed to come from illimitable
depths.  It suggested at once poise and unlimited balance.  Cool
judgment that could never be upset.  Officers who saw Brigade
Headquarters being strafed and who saw the roof blown in over Currie's
head whispered among themselves that would be the last of Currie.  But
he emerged as calm and smooth and pink as ever. . . .  The day the
newspapermen saw him a very junior officer who has since distinguished
himself came to report breathlessly, 'That last one, sir, got my tent!'
He was excited and just a trifle hysterical; but two words from the
General seemed to calm him at once.  'That so?' he said, with the same
quiet interest that a farmer might have received news that a certain
hen had at last laid an egg.  'I thought that last one sounded a bit
close.'"


Then there came to the head of the Canadian Corps a man named Byng, who
could stroll casually into a billet or a training field to inspect "the
muddy trench hounds" in canvas leggings and with three buttons loose.
Until Byng came the Canadian Corps was a semi-disciplined and
marvellous mob of men who could swear as hard as they could fight and
fight like wildcats.  Byng gave then the massive and complex mechanism
of an army competent to conduct operations as a unit of modern war,
dominated by the man of whom the boys sang to the tune of Three Blind
Mice, "Byng Bangs Boche, See how they run!"  Currie, commander of the
2nd Division, had seen this Corps Commander stroll into a billet and
hurl machine gun questions at the men who jumped like eager school-boys
to answer.  He must have silently envied this genius, who cared far
less than he knew about what was wrong in a kit inspection, but had a
shrewd eye for manoeuvres.  Not often in actual war does a man so
personally popular organize a cross-section of a vast international
country into a war machine called an army, and not seldom do men when
they hear of such a commander being transferred look at one another in
a sort of blank dismay and say, "Well, I'll be damned.  Now who's it?"

Out of the army came slowly and ponderously the huge Highlander, with
the "baby pink face" and the rumbling gong of a voice.

Sir Arthur Currie was much too honest to imagine that he or any other
man could make the Canadian army.  It was a heavy ordeal to follow
Byng, just as it had been easy for Byng to succeed Alderson.  But
Currie knew the Canadians down at the root better than Byng knew them.
He knew how that army had been made: that he was taking over a
humanized machine that was to war in 1917 what the sword of Wallace had
been in man-to-man combat seven hundred years earlier.  He knew the
weakness of men for idolizing a popular commander.  They never would
parody any nursery rhyme in his honour.  Except the Anzacs, they were
the most audacious army in Europe.  They had become great in defiance
of red tape, insisting on whatever is called Canadianism.  They
embodied all there was of Western independence on that Front.  The
Anzacs, great in fight and in ideas of personal liberty, had not been
welded into such a machine as the Canadians, whose advertised national
qualities Currie was expected to conserve.

"As soon as one lets the cheeky beggars, Canadians from America, have a
bit of quiet, they get uppish," was the illuminating sentence in a
letter found in a German trench near St. Eloi.  Currie knew those
"cheeky beggars".  In his own elephantine way he loved them, when few
of them could figure it out.  He knew how hard those "beggars" could
hit: how grimly they could stick: how madly they could raid and rush:
how infernally they could scheme to "put one over on Heine"; how
desperately they could abuse earth and heaven when they had time in the
rest billets to smoke fags and write letters home.  They were no army
to go whacking on the shoulder.

It had been all right for Byng the Briton to go among those men with
three buttons loose.  Men like a touch of insurgency in a commander who
has come up among the martinets.  Byng was a professional soldier.
Currie was not yet even a mild insurgent, or was not known as such to
the ranks.  He was almost a man of prayer.  He moved in a large arc
somewhat like his great resolute body; an engine of might that never
seemed weary; who at "Molly-be-Damned" studied battle reports at two
a.m., and was in the field at six.  As he had almost come up from the
ranks, the men knew him.  Here and there in a British Columbia
battalion may have been a man who had bought a corner lot from Currie
in Victoria.  If so, he liked to talk about the hard-up days of the
Corps Commander when he was in real estate.

Currie knew that above all things he must keep the confidence of those
men and that he could never do it by familiarity.  Success was the only
way.  Not, anyhow, speeches.  The C.C. was rather fond of talking aloud
at first; sometimes too religiously.  It was a habit that he never
quite abandoned, though he changed his style as he grew in experience.

There was work to do.  No army had more; few armies as much.  Currie's
was a mobile army; needed as shock troops in rough places--a very good
reputation if not too much of it.  There was danger of the army losing
its Canadianism by being shunted about.  One of Currie's first
objectives that he wanted above all things to achieve as a Canadian
commander of initiative, was the capture of Lens.  He had a plan for
this.  He was never allowed to carry it out.  Says the author of
"Canada's Hundred Days":

"Thus when he is ordered to abandon his planned offensive at Lens and
take the corps up the Salient, he refuses point blank to serve under
the Commander of the Fifth Army.  He is placed under his old Chief of
the First Army, looks over the ground before Passchendaele and then
protests against the whole operation as being useless in itself and
likely to cost the Corps 15,000 men."


It was said by some who believed they knew, that the Lens preparation
was nothing but a huge feint put up to mislead Heine for an attack in
force elsewhere.  This was one of the bewildering events of that
baffling year when the French army was in a state of mutiny, the nation
behind the army in a state of nerves, and the politicians, clamouring
for victories--or at least a cessation of defeat.  Something had to be
done, not only by France but by Britain, whose Premier insisted that
unless the Germans could be broken in the north he could not hold his
country united at home.  There was a Council of War--so, a few weeks
before the writing of this, said a Canadian General in New York--at
which Currie was present.  Sir Douglas Haig unexpectedly arrived and
was soon into an argument with the Canadian Corps Commander demanding
that he abandon Lens and strike at Passchendaele.  The two commanders
were in violent disagreement.  Currie refused to yield.  The British
Premier went to France and met Currie, who gave way to the Premier--as
people usually did--and, against his own convictions, abandoned Lens.

The precise military significance is of less value here than the remark
credited to Lloyd George, who is reported to have said in England after
a subsequent War Cabinet meeting--that in the Canadian Corps Commander
he had met "the biggest thing physically and mentally on that front."

What Currie was at the head of the Corps no civilian then in Canada has
any means of knowing, except by what men say who were under him or
about him.  A brawny veteran infantryman, whom I met with his chum,
said:

"Currie--oh, yes, he was a good general.  But few of the men where I
was in the trenches or the billets ever liked him."

"But did you see much of him?"

"Too much, begad."  His chum nodded agreement.  "Too awful much,
sometimes.  Why, he used to come into a rest billet almost every day
after we'd come there all shot to bits with only a corporal's guard o'
the whole battalion, muddy and tired and sleepy; yes, and what's the
first thing we hear, but begad, we've all to shine up and get spic and
span for parade because the O.C. says the C.C. orders it.  Out we go,
like a ragbag remnant and he looks us over, says he knows we're tired
and makes a speech----"

"Oh, boy, them speeches!" sighs the chum.

"Tells us how well we've done and all like o' that, and at the end says
there's such a devil of a job yonder that he's compelled against his
will----"

"Oh, yes, dead aginst his will," pipes the chum.

"To intimate that he'd like us to trail back to the show and do it some
more for the sake of the victory and the good long billet we'll get
presently.  Yes, Currie was a good General.  He did the work, he got
results.  But never tell me he was easy on his men--becuz four years I
was wan o' them."

One allows in this man's opinion for the tendency to "grouch" that
always appears in veterans who know best how to fight.  Men like this
were "fed up" on the war, of which they never saw anything but the
glimpse of their own sector.  The war was over now, and between the
armistice and getting home many such men had a chance to talk, as they
wearily waited for a ship.

"Yes, and that capture of Mons," says the chum, as he sips a little
drink.  "Altogether useless and against orders.  The war was over."

"No," says the veteran; "that was a mere trifle, as I see it.  Not one,
two, three with the march into Germany.  Begad! if ever I was a rebel
it was then on that 150 miles, says you.  But--'twas so ordered by the
C.C. and we went."

It was not likely that Gen. Currie believed his army to be rebellious
against that march.  He was too much of an insurgent to fear
insubordination.  He had packed many a pipe-clay parade officer home
for inefficiency.

A machine gun officer, who had got a Blighty at Passchendaele and was
asked by the writer what he thought about Currie, admitted that he knew
very little about him because all he saw at the time was his own little
corner of the show.  He casually referred the question to two others,
one of whom was a H.Q. staff officer, and saw Currie at first hand for
months at a time.  The answer was:

"I'll say that Currie always inspired me with absolute confidence in
his genius for modern war.  It was a pleasure just to see him revise a
Divisional plan of action.  He had a hawk eye for any weak spots and he
pointed them out.  No doubt some of the stuff that got through to the
boys in some of the shows shortly after Currie took command was Byng
stuff, and Byng sure handed over a fine army to Currie.  But believe
me, Currie had his own programme and picked his own men and developed
his own machine shortly after.  And I don't believe there was a
commander in any of the Corps on that Front that had anything on him
for what makes an army win."

The General's return to Canada was preheralded by a barrage of
criticism that seeped through from men coming home.  Some day we shall
know how much or how little of this was politics inspired by Currie's
enemies in Canada and by men who, jealous of his success and his
eminence, had no scruples about fomenting the criticism.  But Currie
must be judged by what he did with his army.  In that last hundred days
all the armies but the American army were remnants of what they were in
1915.  The wonderful thing about the Canadian army is that in the three
months before victory it was an even more terrible arm of war than it
had been at Vimy Ridge.  After a year and a half of Commander Currie it
was still the superb fighting machine described in the extracts already
quoted from the battle of Amiens.  For a few of the reasons why it was
so we quote again that same book the writer's estimate of Currie:

"But according to the letter of the law he is not a good subordinate.
He cannot be popular with the powers that be: he is always complaining
about something; getting his own way or making it unpleasant for people
if he doesn't.

"In the panic of the following March (1918 after Passchendaele) he
finds the Corps is being torn to pieces, its divisions hurried here,
there and everywhere; orders given and countermanded and then issued
again.  He protests strongly; the Canadian corps whose value is tested,
must be kept together; and he wins out." . . .

"Is all this insubordination?  If so, it is a quality that makes for
victory.  The average Canadian is always willing to "take a chance"
because he has confidence in himself.  And the Corps Commander is very
much of a Canadian."


The author does not criticize Currie, though he had so good an
opportunity.  In telling so well the wonderful story of that last
hundred days and so explicitly glorifying the Commander whose best work
of the war was done during that period, he gives us no perspective.  Is
it not just to admit that though the four reduced Canadian
divisions--with certain attachments--had defeated forty-seven German
divisions, they had conquered divisions terribly more reduced than
their own and absolutely without reserves in either men or materials
and devoid of the last vestige of morale?  The great bluff was about to
break.  It was due to have broken sooner.

When the armistice came all the armies but the Canadians laid down
their arms.  Currie had not finished his work.  He had planned the
whole hundred days, beginning with Cambrai, and the apex of that
achievement after the breaking of the infallible Hindenburg line, was
the recapture of Mons.  He was once more "insubordinate".  He did not
seem to pay respect to the armistice.  His men had often said that they
wanted to fight Heine on German soil.  Denied that, at least they
wanted a chance to be part of the army of occupation, as far east as
Cologne.  Currie could never have ordered an unwilling army--not that
army unwilling--to march 150 miles into Germany.  He had an army of
conquest, not of armistice.  But the stereopticon and the slides:

What was to be done with this soldier at home?  How could he be
re-established in civil life?  Thanks to the Administration's
predicament in trying to please both the General and his enemies, here
was the worst D.S.C.R. problem of the lot.  Thanks to McGill
University, the predicament was removed.

A sagacious professor in McGill who knows by experience what it is to
get the ear of the public, said when Currie was appointed President
that almost the entire faculty were opposed to him because the idea was
so ridiculous.  That professor now alleges proudly that faculty,
students and management are all convinced that Currie is a wonderful
President; that he has revolutionized all existing ideas about the
headship of a university, that he understands even the academic mind;
that the _esprit de corps_ of McGill is such as it never was.

In short, nobody is left to remark--

"I say, what a pity Geddes left us in the lurch!"

They are making a new stereopticon for that slide.




A COAT OF MANY COLOURS

SIR JOHN WILSON

After a life of wearing Joseph's coat, Sir John Willison, ex-editor of
the _Toronto Globe_ and of the _News_, finds himself President of the
National Reconstruction Association.  Programme--to reconstruct Canada,
beginning in 1918, after fifty years of Confederation.

A supercilious editor once asked why on such an Association no farmer had
been appointed.  The answer was simple enough.  Sir John was born a
farmer.  He used to wield a handspike at logging bees in Huron County,
Ont.  Why no Liberals?  But Sir John used to be the leading Liberal of
unelected Canada.  Why no professor of political economy to represent the
great universities who are always supposed to be reconstructing a nation?
Simple again.  Sir John himself once conducted a university of culture,
economics and general information known as the _Toronto News_.  In fact
there was no need of an Association at all.  Sir John Willison was
sufficient unto the day.

One finds it tolerably easy to be sarcastic about Sir John Willison,
because for many years he was to some of us the sort of man that
compelled a sincere, almost idolatrous admiration.  In this also he is
more adept than the average man.  He himself once idolized Sir Wilfrid
Laurier in two volumes; but a few years before he turned all his
political guns on the French-Canadian Premier to get him out of power for
good.

In all Canada there has never been a more versatile character; never one
who after a _volte face_ in politics could turn with such poise and
dignity upon any critic cradled in the foundations of belief and ask,
"Well, what's new?"

From his crisp manner of speaking and a certain austerity of manner, I
used to think that Sir John was in a measure inscrutable.  He had such a
curt way of summoning a reporter, as once,--

"Never," he began when the culprit had got into the corridor facing the
editor-in-chief, "never, when interviewing a man in his own home, say
anything about the furniture."

Born a Conservative and a farmer, Willison became on the _Globe_ Canada's
greatest unelected Liberal.  He conserved Liberalism.  On the _Globe_ he
held the balance between the Free Traders who believed only in
reciprocity and Brastus Wiman, who with Goldwin Smith made Taft a mere
plagiarist when he said that Canada was an "adjunct" of the United
States.  It was Willison's attempt to consider commercial union on its
merits that made the _Globe_ seem like a mark for the annexationists, at
a time when the high priest of the movement in Canada had the effrontery
to remain a citizen of the nation which he was openly trying to sell at a
bargain counter.  The man who kept the _Globe_ from becoming an annex to
Goldwin Smith in 1891 had an experience that would fit any man to become
a protection-tariff Chairman of Reconstruction, and to remember the
sirens that tempted Ulysses.

Nobody could have predicted in those days that the great editor of the
_Globe_ would live to become first an Independent, next a Tory, and at
the last a Liberal-Unionist.  And perhaps none of these transformations
would have been necessary if Sir George Ross had not tried the trick of
"32 years in the saddle" from the days of Mowat; to do which and to
remain politically virtuous was an impossible feat, even though the
Premier of Ontario was a director of the _Globe_.  Ross remained
director, and also Premier.  But it seems that Mr. Willison saw in such a
dual role a greater inconsistency than even he deemed to be worthy of so
brilliant a man.  As he could not remove the director, he took what
seemed to be a providential opportunity to remove the Premier.

The reconstructed _Toronto News_ was the opportunity.  The elimination of
Ross was the first result.  The removal of Laurier was the necessary
sequel.  The first was a pleasure.  The second must have been a pang.
Because of the first, in place of Sir George Ross, Willison had as
frequent visitor to his sanctum James Pliny Whitney, the new Premier of
Ontario, "honest enough to be bold and bold enough to be honest."  From
that to Toryism was merely opening a door.  It took the new Tory editor
eight years to remove his old idol Laurier, the result of which was a
sort of intense and bigoted animosity to the Province of Quebec which Sir
John is now learning to overcome.  When the Tory _News_ became a
Northcliffe Imperialist organ it was inevitable that Sir John should
convert his common hostility to the western Laurier-Liberals into a
polite suspicion of the Radicals who were becoming Agrarians.

When finally, weary of mere politics in which he was our greatest
journalistic expert by instinct and experience Sir John left the _News_,
he was free to engage in work of a more practical character than writing,
and to become Chairman of the Government's most important branch of
active agenda outside of professional politics.

In all these Protean changes of makeup, if not of character, Sir John
Willison has never abandoned two early habits; lawn bowling and reading
the _Globe_.  He is an expert in both.  Bowling vexes him least, because
its rules never change.  The _Globe_ gives him pangs because alas! it is
now engaged in the unpardonable effort to merge the Liberals with the
National Progressives as a greater Liberal Party.

Inconsistency may be the evolution of greatness.  Inconstancy never.  The
_Globe_ of a certain date in June, 1921, contained a front page display
of the Agrarian bye-election victory in Medicine Hat.  On another date
there was an editorial once again advising the Agrarians to make common
cause with Liberals against the common enemy, Meighenism, or as it might
be said, Willisonism.

Perusing the _Globe_ in his Reconstruction office, Sir John glances
up--leisurely at a spot on the wall, next to the portrait of Sir John A.
Macdonald.  Like Macbeth's dagger, he sees a cold, organizing face
smiling like Mona Lisa, fair at Sir John; the face of T. A. Crerar.

The Levite of Reconstruction shakes his fist.

"Down with you," he mutters.  "Avaunt!  I'll have none of you.  There's
nothing under Medicine Hat--except what Kipling said, 'all hell for a
basement,' Natural gas, Crerar, not a test case at all.  Oh, no.  Too
near the border."

Sir John yawns and peruses a proof of the 745th pamphlet issued from
Reconstruction, total of nearly seven million copies paid for not by
taxation of the people, but inferentially by tariffs.  Probably a very
patriotic minority read these Willison bulletins aiming to reconstruct
the country by putting a crimp in the exportation of the Canadian dollar,
looking after welfare work in factories, women and children, grappling
with unemployment, helping to change over industry from war to peace,
aiming to "stabilize" the nation, to curb that team of wild horses,
Bolshevism and Agrarianism, and generally to keep Canada from going to
perdition.

In spite of Sir John, in 1919 and 1920, people bought Canada almost
bankrupt on the exchanges.  Hence among the items in the cheapening list
may be placed the Canadian dollar which is now worth about 89 cents in
New York.  That is what happens to the dollar when it goes away from home
and plays prodigal son.  What Sir John works to see is Canadian
commodities crossing the border and the Yankee dollars coming back in
exchange.

Here is one of the greatest moral issues of the age for this nation.
Even the preachers, if they could see us put up the barriers against
luxury imports from the United States--said to be such a wicked
nation--would breathe more easily.  People so often buy sin done up in
dutiable packages.  For the fiscal year ending March 31, 1921, Canadians
went into debt to the United States over a million a day--adverse
exchange.  Nearly $400,000,000 in one year spent for Yankee goods more
than Yankeedom spent buying goods from us.

And now comes the need for the rationalizing philosophy of Sir John
Willison, truly our most versatile expert on tariffs from the _Globe_
reciprocity down to the Reconstruction.  Beginning in 1917 with Foster's
"economic unity" in North America, a friendly Democratic tariff had let
Canada send certain natural products into the United States free of duty.
Private interests found it profitable to handle Canadian trade, much of
it in transit to Europe in a state of high demand.  The democratic
element in Sir John must have approved that.  Grit as he used to be, Sir
John must believe in letting the great United States practise free-trade
if it be so disposed.  Those good Democrats!  Had they not enacted the
Underwood tariff, what a mountainous load must have been imposed upon the
Atlantean shoulders of Reconstruction!

Which brings us to the eve of Dominion Day, 1921.  Sir John was not
bowling; he was reading the _Round Table_ for June--at least if not he
should have been--an article on the meeting of the "Imperial Cabinet".

"Mischievous title!" he mutters.  "It's an Imperial Conference of
Premiers.  John S. Ewart will be sure to make a kingdom article out of
that.  Very ill-advised.  Er--Come!"

"Evening paper, Sir John," says the boy.

Sir John takes up the paper and is at once confronted by an item which
convinces him that if ever Canada needed protection from the United
States, now is the time.  The item is the repeal of the Underwood tariff.
Accustomed for life to unpleasant sensations from printed pages, his face
gives no sign of emotion.  Swiftly he reads through, flings the paper
down and looks up.  At once he rises, glaring coldly at the Crerar
palimpsest on the wall.  Again that Mona Lisa exporting smile, as the
lips seem to say:

"Well, Sir John--what will be the Republican Reconstruction price of the
Canadian dollar now?"

"Bah!" Sir John snorts into a handkerchief, like a Tory squire.  "That
tariff, Sir, is not a menace, nor a prophecy of agrarian victory at the
polls.  It is a challenge to this nation.  Canada will not let down the
bars.  We shall put them higher!  Keep the Canadian dollar in Canada.
Sell our natural products to Britain.  Build up our towns and our
industries.  Utilize our great water powers, the cheapest power in the
world.  Use our raw material; our manufacturing experience gained in the
war.  Develop the home market.  Sell more to ourselves and spend our
incomes in countries that do not put up economic barriers against our
products.  Without some adequate protection, sir, we are economically as
extinct as the Dodo.  There's but one alternative--commercial autonomy
from the United States or commercial annexation.  Nobody but a lunatic or
an Agrarian would ever doubt which of these we shall choose--eh, what's
that you say?"

The portrait chuckles.  An uplifted hand appears in the unframed picture.

"I said, Sir John--put the repeal of the Underwood tariff under your
Medicine Hat."

In sudden fury Sir John flings the _Round Table_ at the place where the
picture vanished.

This may be a whimsical conclusion to the study of a personality so
perplexing and vagarious as Sir John Willison.  But he himself, having a
high sense of humour, will appreciate its psychological justice as much
as he regrets its historical inaccuracy.  Sir John has always aimed at
being a big Canadian, and he has usually succeeded.  He did his share of
contribution to right thinking about the war, as he did in vicarious
action when he lost one of his two sons in that struggle.  He could not
do otherwise, because in spite of his bewildering superficial changes of
coat, when even his detractors almost admired the dignity with which he
changed it, Sir John, the Tory at heart, has always been a loyal servant
of his country.  Without him the story of political journalism in Canada
would be a thing of shreds and patches.

He has at various times wielded an immense power usually in the direction
of shrewd, sane thinking about national affairs.  No Canadian editor of
his time so thoroughly mastered its intricate problems.  He has a faculty
of clear, constructive thinking and a fine style of writing.  With no
college education he became a cultured journalist--which is sometimes an
anomaly--though he never showed any zeal for the "humanities" and never
knew much about that peculiar sociological phenomenon called the
proletariat.

Since he drew away from the farm Sir John has never had a desire to
return, even in sympathy.  With a fine sense of humour he has never
relished reminiscences of the backwoods and the smoke of the log heaps.
His published "Reminiscences" are a fine contribution to our political
history, but they show no real sympathy with the rude pioneer life from
which the writer came and to which he owes a debt that he could very well
discharge, if he would write a book about the social and craft life of
the Canadian farm as it was in the Victorian Era.  There is more national
vitality in the story of that than there is in the programme of the
National Reconstruction Association.  Sir John has a true sympathy with
that life, because he knows it has been at the root of all his own big
Canadianism in all its forms.  He is one of the kindliest men alive and
he writes with great discernment and dignity.  Let him stop writing
Reconstruction bulletins and do something of more value to the country,
so that the older enthusiasm of men who used to think he was Canada's
greatest editor may not althogether die.




WHATSOEVER THY HAND FINDETH

SIR JOSEPH FLAVELLE, BART.

"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might."  I have
forgotten whether it was Paul or Solomon who said that.  But Sir Joseph
Flavelle, Bart., will be sure to remember.  From the time he was big
enough to carry in wood for his devout Christian mother near
Peterborough, Ont., he was living out that text.

The Flavelle family afterwards moved to Lindsay, where the future
baronet went into business.  Queer little town--to be the home of three
such men as Flavelle, Hughes, and Mackenzie.

A man who has had years of business intimacy with Sir Joseph said to me
once--under suggestion--"Yes, you never miss a word he says to you,
because he puts everything so clearly, and you admire the big things he
does, because he has such a genius for action after he thinks--but
somehow you are so exasperated when you leave him that you feel like
giving him a big swift kick."

Another man who was under him in an organizing position for years
during the war said: "Well, the higher critics can say all they like
against his methods and his personal peculiarities, but I tell you--I
like the old boy."

One of Britain's foremost financial experts in the war said to an
interviewer: "Ah, you know Flavelle?  Clev-er man!  Clev-er!"  That was
nearly twenty years ago.

In 1918 Sir Joseph Flavelle had in his Munitions Office at Ottawa a
staff of 360 accounting clerks working upon thirteen ledgers, each
representing a separate department of the Board, which up till that
time had placed orders in this country for war material aggregating
$1,60,000,000 [Transcriber's note: $160,000,000?  $1,600,000,000?] in
value.

At that time an editor wrote Sir Joseph asking for a statement of what
his Board had done.  Within a few hours of receiving the letter Sir
Joseph forwarded an itemized statement a column long, of which one
paragraph read:

"Upwards of 56,000,000 shells have been produced; 60,000,000 copper
bands; 45,000,000 cartridge cases; 28,000,000 fuses; 70,000,000 lbs. of
powder; 50,000,000 lbs. of high explosives; 90 ships built, or under
construction aggregating 375,000 tons; 2,700 aeroplanes have been
produced."


He stated also that 900 manufacturers had taken contracts in all the
Provinces except Prince Edward Island.  The great ex-Minister of
Munitions himself, reading that report, might have said: "Flavelle?
Yes--he is mighty clever."  And Flavelle had been for one year then a
baronet.  That also was clever; and just in time.  The man who happened
to be in England when war was declared and sold war bacon in August,
1914, was not to be caught napping in 1917; neither after he had got
his title was he to be found slacking in his marvellous work in 1918.
Flavelle earned a title--even after he had taken it.

"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do!"  Yea, verily.  I have been fairly
well acquainted with Sir Joseph for a good many years.  I do not know
him.  Yet his altogether uncommon personality has almost frozen itself
into my memory.  Whenever I see that thick-shouldered,
whitening-whiskered man of sixty-three hastening afoot up the street,
or driving his little runabout, or wiping his glasses every minute in
some office, or coming becaped and crush-hatted to a concert, I can
hear that high-keyed, slow voice, the calm dispassionate utterance with
never a syllable misplaced, and feel the energy of a nature that of all
men I ever met is the oddest compend of clear thinking, cool judgment,
strength of grip and juvenility of impulse.

The story of his struggle to affluence is not much different in basic
outlines from that of any average, self-made man; differing vastly in
the character of the man.  A year after he was forced out of Lindsay by
boycott because of his Scott Act campaign, the freezing of a car of
potatoes on a Toronto siding almost wiped out his business.  Frankly
and modestly, yet with a sort of fatalistic assurance, he discusses the
kind of man he thinks himself to have become since he lost those
potatoes.  He denies that he has ever been interesting; rather
bewildered that at one time or another people have taken such a
peculiar interest in him.  He talks of his early struggles, the economy
of bacon, and the bigotries of Old Testamentarians in the same concise
language set to the same unvaried monotony of voice.  If you should
fail to follow him, he would almost chide you for not paying attention.

Nearly twenty years ago I met a preacher keenly interested in Flavelle.
He told me a story repeated to him in a sort of admiring deprecation
that very day by a Methodist preacher from Toronto who had a gift for
elevated gossip.  This story was probably out of the Apocrypha, as it
concerned a very worldly episode in the joint experiences of Mr.
Flavelle and another Canadian financier on a visit to Chicago, when the
latter got a wire stating that a certain conditional donation of his to
a small church in Ontario had been unexpectedly covered by the
congregation with the stipulated equal amount, and that it was time to
send the money.  It was said that he showed the wire to Flavelle; that
the two financiers took joint action on the Stock Exchange; and that
the money was wired immediately.  The little details about the
transaction I omit, partly out of deference to the preacher who bandied
the yarn--wherever he got it.  He probably only half believed it
himself.  Even ministers will gossip.

Much has been said about Sir Joseph's religious affairs.  He has had
many.  He has been in publicity over a few, such as the controversy
between the late Dr. Carman, his old adversary, and Rev. George
Jackson, his then pastor, whom he defended.  Flavelle has never
concealed his enthusiasm for the church.  He has entertained many a
celebrated minister.  He has been prominently identified with Missions,
with the Methodist Book Room--that sadly unecclesiastical
corporation--with debates in Conference on amusements and other things,
with Methodist education.  In all these he has practised the text,
"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do."  The church needed Flavelle's
organizing hand.  He generously lent it.  He could not do otherwise
without being untrue to his own prodigious and inherited passion for a
certain kind of organized religion.

The personal faith of a public man is no business for the critic,
except where that faith becomes public works.  Sir Joseph has been
conspicuously aligned with the militant work of the Church.  It has
been the belief of those who know him, casually or intimately, that his
philanthropic works were inspired by his faith.  But many men have had
as much faith with less works, because of too much dissipating emotion.
Sir Joseph with all his juvenility of impulse had a way of hitching his
emotions up to a job.  The church needed organization.  Other
wealth-getting Methodists were prominent in pews, public donations and
conferences.  Flavelle believed in the seven days' work.  He had a
programme of action for the Sabbath.  Church, social work, business,
were to him very much one thing; all in need of organization to get
results.  He had no use for the idle church and less for what he called
"the dead hand"--referring to the influence of his old adversary, Dr.
Carman, who thought it presumption in a wealthy pork-packer to regard
himself as a critic of clerical authority.

It is tolerably certain that had Flavelle made less of a business of
religion, the public would have had less business condemning him on the
bacon inquiry evidence.  Here was a man who all his life had been a
tremendous organizer of the church and a professor of a peculiarly
active faith, president of a company which in one year had made an
alleged profit of $5,000,000 on a capital investment of less than
$14,000,000.  Bacon at that time--1917--cost the consumer 50 cents a
pound.  The price was considered outrageous.  Bacon afterwards went to
80 cents at a time when nobody blamed Sir Joseph; and when he had
disposed of his interest in bacon altogether.  But the alleged
extortion of this powerful and baroneted Christian stuck in the public
mind.  Bacon was the pioneer in exposed "profiteering."  O'Connor's
report was made public at a time when it was yet the private property
of the Cabinet.  There was politics here.  And the Premier was away.
Other men afterwards made much more amazing profits that never were
mentioned in the press; men who never went to church; who had never in
public said such words as "let war profits go to the hell where they
belong."

It was not the actual profit, but the alleged hypocrisy of Flavelle
that roused the detestation of a large section of the public.  And to
the end of his life this man will never erase from the minds of many
people the notion that he was of all profiteers the worst, because the
most hypocritical.

Then there was the baronetcy.  For a man who had preached Christ so
much this seemed a thin business.  A man's Christianity, if he works
hard at it, becomes advertised without posters.  The world that
mistrusts the church on principle, that only waits the chance itself to
profiteer and to get social preferment, is quick to anathematize the
man who in a big way seems to corelate church, profits and society.

The public are no longer concerned, neither did they understand at the
time, whether the Davies Co. made 5.05 cents a pound on bacon or 5.05
minus overhead charges, 4.1.  Here was the first "sinner" caught;
sentimentally lynch him.  It made no difference then what had been the
man's serious work in philanthropic organization and in public service;
or that for war production he had offered the Wm. Davies plant to the
Government to operate at so much percentage to the company; or that
Flavelle himself had no connection with the management and at the time
concerned knew very little about it.  The public appetite did not want
extenuating facts.  It wanted a victim.  Certain other interests,
curbed by Sir Joseph in the matter of prices for munition contracts,
wanted revenge.  Under the old system of contracts these men had made a
fairly good start at plundering the nation in its extremity.  Between
the long-suffering public, who thought they had a reason for hating
Flavelle, and the profiteers who really had such a reason, Sir Joseph
had an experience that would have tested any man's Christianity.

However, he made no protest; did not resign his post or leave the
country, but worked on.  The time came when he could have said, "Et tu,
Brute!" to men who with no record for helping the church or organizing
to help humanity had profited far more prodigally than the Wm. Davies
Co.  But he kept silence.  He believed in his conscience that the
company buying hogs at competitive prices, and selling in a protected
market was ethically A1 at Lloyds.  He still believes so.  His
enthusiasm for the company has not waned.  He admires it even to a
point of emotion.  The company was not his, but he had made it.  From
the day that William Davies drove to Flavelle's house in an old open
buggy and asked him to sell out his provision business to manage the
company, till the day it produced about 100 million pounds of bacon
alone, in a year, he had been its energizing head.  The Wm. Davies Co.
was but the main thing from which he made his money.  Its stock was not
sold on the markets.  There was never any need of capital except what
came from the business conducted by Flavelle.  There was no wit and
philosophy in "The Letters of a Pork Packer to His Son" that could have
instructed him in the shrewd business of making a great commercial
concern out of a little business.  His success in Canada was relatively
equal to that of any Swift in Chicago.  Multiply it by the ratio of
population and see.  In one year during the war the Wm. Davies Co. had
a bacon output of forty million dollars.

But Flavelle never can be judged by bacon.  He could have done as well
at railways or banking or law.  He did even better at munitions when
there were no profits, not even a salary.  He did as well at any other
form of public service.  No man can justly judge him by commercial
success.  He invested--himself--in everything to which he set his hand,
with the one exception of the now defunct _Toronto News_, which he left
to the management of other people.  He invested the same self capital
in the commercial concern and in public service.

Any patient who has been in the Toronto General Hospital will tell you
what a wonderful institution it is.  He may not know who made it
possible, or whose genius for order and perfection of mechanism it
expresses.  Without Flavelle, Toronto, instead of one of the greatest
hospitals in the world, would have had just a good hospital.  Almost a
village was pulled down to make room for it, on a site that would suit
the medical needs of the University.  It needed a strong will to put it
there, against the opinions of other people; a great hospital on the
end of a slum!  The same will put the great "Methodist Book Room" where
it is--against the wish of a majority.

Flavelle was Chairman of the Commission that reorganized the University
of Toronto.  He had no desire for the work.  The late Goldwin Smith was
already chairman, much disliking Flavelle for some editorial about him
in the _Toronto News_.  The old professor was feeble.  The Commission
asked Flavelle to replace him.  He consented.  If they thought he was
the man, he was willing to do the work.  And it was thoroughly done, so
far as a business brain could direct the reconstruction of a concern in
which business system is the anatomy, not the life.

No man could sit at a conference with Flavelle and not think hard; or
accept a duty from his committee and not discharge it.  He demanded on
behalf of the public--service.  No man ever sat on a committee with him
who had time for badinage.  That man with the slow, high voice and the
steady look was judging other men by results.  Men came to believe that
when there was a public task to perform, Flavelle was the man to take
it.  He was almost forced into service, often by the public indolence
of other men.  Canada has always played the professional grandstand
method of getting things done for the public.  Before the advent of
Rotary and Kiwanis Clubs our two chief cities systematically advised
the humble philanthropist without pull to go to such men as Flavelle,
Edmund Walker, one of the Masseys, E. R. Wood, J. C. Eaton, Thomas
Shaughnessy, Herbert Ames and P. S. Meighen--because these men were in
the habit of doing or giving or organizing for the public interest,
which is supposed to be a game for experts, not amateurs.

Flavelle's investment in things that made him no money was one of great
ability, hard work and conscience.  His returns on such capital were in
the efficiency and usefulness of things which he had helped to create;
the need for which he had observed as clearly and calmly as ever he had
foreseen the scope of a great business.

Yet for much of his life he has been a creature of impulse, powerfully
attracted by things not in business.  He left his seat once in a great
Buffalo hall to stand at the door that he might judge the effect of a
certain decrescendo from a choir.  To a group of musical enthusiasts in
Chicago he suddenly suggested a trip to the Cincinnati May Festival.
Speaking to the boys of Upper Canada College, he drew from his pocket a
piece of putty to illustrate the plasticity of character.  Standing
amid heaps of luggage at the docks in St. John, he looked at the
immigrant sheds and said, "What a very human picture!"  Pocketing the
proof of an hospital article, which as proprietor of the _Toronto News_
and Chairman of the Hospital Board he had withdrawn from publication,
he said to the reporter, "Old man, a place of suffering should not be
described in the language of the racetrack."  When Pastor Wagner,
author of "The Simple Life", was in Toronto, he was the guest of Mr.
Flavelle, who for a time was as much absorbed in the peasant
philosopher as he often was in the "Meditations" of Thomas à Kempis.

Considering these impulses to express himself, it is not hard to
understand how Sir Joseph came to say to the Toronto Board of Trade
that war profits should go to the hell to which they belonged.  He was
speaking under a sense of emotion.  All through his enormously
successful career he had been energized by a sudden enthusiasm to take
hold of something, and afterwards to make it go.  "Whatsoever thy hand
findeth."

Flavelle's hand found many things.  Among them was the _Toronto News_,
his one recorded failure.  This also was an impulse; precisely the same
as had led him years before to subscribe $5,000 to a fund for the
better education of the Tory party.  The _News_ cost him one hundred
times as much, for much the same reason on a larger scale; and he lost
it.  But he has never regretted the loss, because he gained the
experience.  The _News_ did a valuable work.  But its rather Utopian
resurrection had a sad sequel in Toryism such as Flavelle never could
have endorsed, and its ultimate extinction seemed to prove that
newspapers cannot be operated by ideals.

Again, reconstructing enthusiasm followed him to Ottawa.  He went there
at the instigation of the Imperial Government.  Whether he himself made
the original suggestion of the need, I do not know.  But he obeyed the
need when he saw it.  Impulse drove him to meet it in the greatest work
of public organization ever done in so short a time in this country,
except the sending of the First Contingent.

Flavelle had never liked Ottawa.  Ordinarily he had a sort of contempt
for its waste of time and its dissipation of morality.  It is not
conceivable that he would have taken Munitions under any Canadian
department.  Nor was it necessary.  Canada was to produce munitions for
much more than the Canadian Army.

The work was vast and varied; the man at the head of it capable,
exacting and impartial.  His sole aim was to produce and to export
munitions at a price high enough to attract industry and low enough to
prevent profiteering.  For three years he was the superman of Canada's
industrial fabric.  The C.M.A. and the Department of Trade became mere
annexes to munitions, at a time when Davies' bacon clamoured for
ship-room needed by Flavelle munitions.

Official Ottawa had never known a man like this.  He was not popular.
The Government had no control of him.  Ottawa had never cared for
super-men.  Flavelle was there without politics.  He had a department
greater than any in the Administration.  He was never responsible to
Parliament.  Ministers to him were not necessary.  He had no favours to
ask of members.  He never even looked in at the Commons which he would
like to have reformed.  People sometimes ask why such a man does not go
into Parliament.  Impossible.  He regards government as sheer business,
when it is often a passing show.  Foster's Business Conference that
never met would have caused him to discharge the department for
incompetency.  Sir Thomas White had no desire to lift his eyes unto the
hill Flavelle, the super-Minister who for years had been a critic of
his own party, and now believed it more inept than ever in spite of the
great work of the Finance Minister.  Sir Sam Hughes had never wanted
Flavelle.  There was a good reason.  Sir Sam had started the munition
industry in Canada as a branch of war, not as a department of mere
business.  Flavelle was all business.  War was business.  There was the
rub.  The nearer the war came to a climax, the more men like Flavelle
at home became part of the machinery.  Foster never could have salaamed
to this super-man of trade and commerce.  Did even Sir Robert Borden
ever feel comfortable with him?  Back from Europe in a fit of impulse
more powerful than he had ever known, impressed by the success of
Coalition in England, Sir Joseph wanted to see it established in
Canada.  The nation was united for munitions; why not for national
business?  The Premier was away in the West.  Sir Joseph wired him
asking permission to urge coalition at a certain public dinner.  There
was no response.  Evidently the Government wanted no advice from a man
who had nothing whatever to do with it and represented merely big
business.

Something must have caused the Premier to treat Sir Joseph coolly.
Afterwards at the bacon investigation there was cause for a change in
temperature.  The Premier had been negligent about some documentary
evidence extenuating to the Flavelle presentation of the case.  The two
had warm words.  Sir Joseph told the Premier one thing which, as it was
repeated to me without reference to use in publication, had better be
omitted here.  But it was scathing.  Sir Joseph is no mean master of
the kind of language that hurts.  But he has the Christian
spirit--which in this case he laid aside.  I should like to know what
the Premier said to Sir Joseph; and precisely what were the Premier's
opinions, before and after, concerning the baronetcy.

In his quiet moments Sir Joseph does not rebuke himself more than he
regrets the moral myopia of other people.  I think he is somewhat
disillusioned as to what it is worth to gain a good deal of the world
at the risk of a lot of people thinking he has lost his soul.  He does
not believe that his soul was ever in danger of being lost.  Often he
goes to rugby games.  In this he sees again the virtue of struggle,
probably wishing he himself had played rugby in youth.

"When a man gets old," he said lately, "he loves to sit at home."

But Sir Joseph, for all his whitening whiskers and his impatience with
the shortcomings and animosities of the world, is not yet old.  He has
the strength of two men, and a power of administration possessed by few
men in public office in any country.  He has lost some of his bubbling
enthusiasm for the humanities.  The last thing he will lose must be his
faith in himself: and that is very far off.

"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do . . . ."

Sir Joseph Flavelle has yet a strong hand.  What remains that he will
do with all his might?  If he so desires, more of service on behalf of
the public good in the ten years he has left than many men accomplish
in a strenuous lifetime.

It is time we learned the difference between a public pirate and an
organizing servant of the public.  Take away from this man his public
church business, his power to make money, his human vanity over an
hereditary title, and we still have left the story of a big life, much
of it spent in doing good for the sake of other people.  You cannot
efface that strange personality; that desire after all the admiration
of his wonderful ability to administer him mentally "one good swift
kick."  But you will never mentally kick a man of such powerful good to
his country.




NO FATTED CALVES FOR PRODIGAL SONS

HON. SIR HENRY DRAYTON

Were I a novelist sketching a character for Henry Herbert Drayton I
would have him, except in one item, just about all that he is not.  He
should be unmarried, live with his maiden aunt, most of his time make
very little money and depend for his income upon winning about three
good criminal prosecutions a year; the rest of his time to be spent
reading up criminal psychology and taking his aunt to see pictures.
The commonplace scene-shifter who places behind people the scenery of
real life has bungled Sir Henry, thereby robbing him of much interest.
What a net a man with his classic patience and enormous ferret instinct
for minutiae could have woven about some cunning but once too often
embezzler!  Instead we have Drayton, K.C., pushing himself methodically
through a series of legal metamorphoses, at each change getting one
convolution higher, by public corporation solicitorships and county
attorneyships, burrowing into hydro-electric affairs for Toronto until
he becomes Dominion Railway Commission chairman--seven years at
that--and at last steps out into the full glare of undramatic notoriety
by taking office as Minister of Finance in 1919.

Well, in that capacity he has rubber-stamped millions of people in the
region of their pockets whom he would have missed altogether had he
been taking his maiden aunt to the picture galleries between detective
cases.  Besides, he has three or four children, and I'm sure that when
some lady writes the cinema of his life she will portray him as a
hugely devoted papa with perfect young geniuses of children who yearn
to spend papa's money upon the very luxuries against which he is
warning the parents of other young people.

Once,--it was something to do with Niagara power--I heard Mr. Drayton
weaving a dull dry web of apparently trivial evidence about some very
important people.  It seems to me that one William Mackenzie was a
particular object; if not he should have been.  Once you admit that
Drayton belongs to corporation instead of criminal law--though
sometimes there's precious little difference--Mackenzie and Adam Beck
are just the sort of audacious public-interest performers that a man
like him should be after.  He seemed to have an insatiable capacity for
picking out little filaments of dry-as-dust technique from which on
behalf of an impersonal client like the city of Toronto he could manage
to inveigle a web of silk about any anti-civic despot who regards a
city as a thing to be worked for dividends, and people merely as common
economic dots and carry ones.

He impressed me then as a born Englishman.  He had the neat, chiseled
accents and the imperturbable air of a perfect gentleman, with a touch
of nonchalance and the suggestion that if at the time of adjournment he
had just got to the up stroke of a small "i", he could leave it there
and come back to-morrow, beginning precisely where he had left off.
But he was not born in England; only educated there--which is
something.  A few more of our public men would be the better for a
little Harrowing.

Once into public finance, Sir Henry does not propose to be a mere
reverberation of Sir Thomas White.  Never have we had two such drastic
highwayman budgets as those which Drayton flung at the people in 1920
and 1921.  From the tone of any supplementary remarks which he feels
like making in order to amuse us while he lightens our pockets, it may
be worse next year and thereafter unless we have a care.  This man has
never uttered a soothing phrase since he took office.  He has made no
attempt to furbelow our finances.  He is not even concerned about the
precise political effect of his taxes and tariffs.  We never had a
Finance Minister who so disregarded the Gladstonian principle, that if
figures cannot lie they may at least make interesting romances of the
truth.  In the two years that he has been budgeteering, this dapper,
tailored man with the sailor hat and the truculent jaw and the heavy
outskirts to his eyes has treated a budget as though it were a Santa
Claus stocking to be talked about a long while in advance, so that when
it comes it may be all the more significant.

Such budgets as he gives us are not the work of a true Conservative.
They bear no interesting bigotries of the party.  They deal only
secondarily with tariffs.  I believe Sir Henry knows that most people
regard a tariff as a very oblique way of reaching the pocket.  People
compute tariffs and argue about them.  Only the farmers can make them
into frightful realities.  Nobody understands a tariff anyway when it
comes to the schedule.  Its chief use is for winning and losing
elections.

But Sir Henry's admonishing finger goes up, and we are hushed to see
what is the really cruel thing he intends to show us next, that will
hurt just like a thumbscrew.  He smiles and flips down a long scroll
of--direct and drastic taxes quite shocking to contemplate.

"This is going to hurt you all, good people," he says.  "But I may as
well be honest about it.  I am not a financial Christian Scientist.
You will all feel better after you are properly hurt."

Thus far we remember chiefly how it hurt.  We are still hoping to feel
better.

Drayton had some grounding in practical finance long before he took any
of the detail jobs that have had so much to do with computations and
costs.  We are reminded of a little episode of his early youth in
Toronto.

Harry Drayton and Frank Baillie were schoolboys together.  They lived
on the same street.  A neighbour was about to have an auction sale of
his goods, but looking over the lot he made a present of a punching bag
to Harry and Frank, no doubt because he foresaw that they would both
have strenuous lives.  The boys thanked him and took away the bag.  On
the way home Harry said to Frank:

"Do you really want a share in that punching bag?"

"Not so keen as I might be," said Frank.  "Why?"

"Because he had something else I'd rather have.  Remember that little
printing press?"

"Oh, what he uses to print calling cards on?"

"How would you like to go snooks with me and get that, Frank?"

"Well, it certainly would be swell to print our own calling cards,
Harry."

"He wants $6.50 for it, though."

"Oh!  That's different.  Here, let me sell the bag, anyhow.  That'll be
a start."

Frank, already budding into finance, sold the bag for one dollar and
twenty-five cents.

"Well, we're still shy $5.25, Frank," said the coming Finance Minister
of Canada.

"Yes, and it's your move, Harry."

"All right, I've got an idea.  You wait."

Next day the sprouting financiers met, when Harry had a fine steel
trout rod.

"See that, Frank?  Got that from dad.  Made me a present of it--at my
own suggestion.  What is she worth?"

"Don't you want to fish, Harry?"

"Not if you can sell the rod."

Frank took it and looked it over.

"Sure!" he said.  "I'll sell that for the company."

There being no guile in either of these young men, the sequel is that
Frank sold the trout rod for $5.25 and Harry proudly took the entire
$6.50 to the neighbour, paid for the press and had it taken home to his
attic, where it must be presumed the two of them spent rainy days
printing calling cards for Draytons and Baillies.

Canada took very little interest in Drayton till he came to be Chairman
of the Railway Commission.  But by that time the said Commission was no
longer the grand court it had been in the days of J. Pitt Mabee.  It
settled more disputes than ever and settled them as well as ever.
Drayton had almost twice the mileage to cover that Mabee had in 1903.
He did it with tireless exactitude.  He was less concerned with the
ethical issues at stake in decisions between railways and communities
than with the unethical fact of such a prodigal lot of lines having
been built at all to give trouble to the nation.  We were just getting
to the end of the race of the railroads, when thousands of foreigners
had been dumped into the country with shovel and pick, and thousands of
miles of new railway built that would shortly be a charge on the
country.

An able writer a few years ago wrote a series of articles in a Canadian
publication headed, "Is there a Railway Muddle?"  Being himself a
railwayman he seemed to think that the muddle, if any, was chargeable
to conditions over which the railways had little or no control.

Mr. Drayton, shrewdly traversing the network of those prodigally built
railways, felt no need of asking any such question.  He carried on into
the slump in business, and on into the war when the Railway War Board,
practising a sort of church union by cutting out competition and
re-routeing traffic for the sake of getting war haulage done as quickly
as possible, left very little for the Drayton court to settle.  But
there was a bigger settlement to come later, and Drayton was to have a
hand in it.

As Chairman of the Commission he never made a statement that was good
for a headline, or coined an epigram, or lost his temper, or spluttered
into print.  But on a certain occasion, before retiring from the
Commission, Sir Henry put on record a number of things that the people
of this country read with acute and sustained interest.  This was the
report of the Smith-Drayton-Acworth Commission for the purpose of
finding out whether the Canadian Northern and the Grand Trunk Pacific
could ever manage to pay their own debts, including interest on
multi-millions borrowed from abroad, or whether, debts and all, they
should be handed over to the people of Canada?

During the war this nation had many commissions.  Their very names are
mostly forgotten.  Most of them committed themselves to nothing.  This
commission to investigate railroad bankruptcy was fated to be very
different.  Much of the difference was in Sir Henry Drayton who, had he
been asked the question, might have saved the country the cost of the
Commission.

But of course he was prejudiced, and against the roads.  He knew those
roads.  The minority report of the chief of the New York Central made
no difference to the grim bulldog judgment of the Chief Railway
Commissioner--that the two secondary systems of Canadian railways were
alike and for much the same causes constitutionally bankrupt, and
should therefore be given the nationalizing cure.

What more disagreeable qualification could a man have for being made
Minister of Finance?  The air holes that White had skated around,
Drayton proposed to go right over and to take the people with him.
What the common stock of these roads might be worth was for Sir Thomas
to find out.  By the time Sir Henry went to the national ledger that
matter was all adjusted and the thing left was to raise the money.

There's a divinity that shapes our ends even when they do not meet.
The little Houdini of calculations was at last into a predicament where
it seemed that he never could figure himself out.  One fancies him
gazing intently over the Finance Department of whose precise technique
he knew nothing as yet, and saying to himself:

"Well, White did a wonderful turn.  I don't believe the audience will
like mine half as well--at first.  No audiences ever do.  I'm bound to
be more or less unpopular because I don't know how to act a bit like
Tetrazzini."

The great organized orgy was over, when the dollars followed the drum
and the drum thumped at every crossroad; when a Victory Bond in every
top commode drawer was more necessary than a bottle in every cellar.
The whole nation, four times tagged for Victory, was once more tagged
for reconstruction.  Done with credits to England for purchase of war
material in Canada, we were invited to extend credits to war-swept
nations in Europe who would be sure to want things made in Canada to
help put them on President Wilson's new map of self-determination.
Even profiteers now admitted everything to be abnormal.  The whole
country was like a milkfed pumpkin at the fair.  War wages inclined
every man to become a profiteer.  The land was teeming with war money
and denuded of necessary goods.  People who used to be content with
good wages, a plain rented home and a bottle of beer, went out after
short hours, high wages, French heels, $300 coats and motor-cars.  It
was part of the emancipation of people for which soldiers had not died.

"Er--if you need me, telephone, old chap," one fancies Sir Thomas
saying as he carried Sir Henry's luggage to his room.  "But I'm sure
you are the man for the job.  I really have to go back to private
finance.  However, the super-tariff on imports of luxuries is one thing
with which you will feel at home, I am sure.  Quite suited to your
temperament, Sir Henry."

In one of Scott's novels a gentleman named Front de Boeuf pulls out a
Jew's tooth every time he wants more money.  Both our national dentists
knew that a super-tariff on anything is the very thing that makes a
large number of well-to-do people want it.  People bought luxuries in
this country and growled at the high cost of necessities.  Most folk
feel rather proud of a big price for a coat or a gown or a
Chesterfield, if they can get even by skimping on the price of butter
and potatoes.  Low-value money and visions of Utopia had played far
worse havoc with the people than legalized liquor had ever done.  And
one of the worst features of the situation was that the bulk of our
luxury buying was done in the country which had the only remaining
standard of value on the exchanges.  Canada had convenient access to
the country which alone had a surplus of factory goods.  Our tremendous
buying average in the American market was even used as propaganda in
the interest of keeping the peace with Britain.

Hence the devil of exchange and Drayton's dilemma.  The things Drayton
said to this country even before he presented his first budget were as
comfortable as what the doctor prescribes when you are overfed.  On
went the unpopular luxury tax and sales tax.  The general principle was
that the more people bought, the more they got out of living, and the
more they should pay for the privilege.  It was not merely a tax on
improvements, but an impost on being alive.  Accustomed as we had been
to war taxes which never came off, this was a sanctioned way of
"passing the buck" such as we had never known.  The advantage is that
when we pay 14 cents for a box of matches that used to cost five cents,
we can read "5 cents War Excise Tax Paid" on the wrapper.

Sir Henry Drayton had no superb suavity with which to beguile those who
made complaints.  He heard the howlings of all the babies in the
national dormitory and went ahead.  He did not impress us as a
financier, but as a plain doctor of homely common sense.  He said in
public many things which threw much instructive light upon our buying
and selling.  He spoke some blunt but kindly truths even in the United
States at whose supremacy in our markets his policy was aimed.

"The men who save the world," says _The Onlooker_, "are those who work
by rule of thumb; who do the day's work by the day's light and advance
on chaos and the painful dark by inches; in other words, the practical
men."

Such a motto might be Drayton's crest.  He is very practical; too much
so to be an interesting personality to the average man.  But by his
dull and diligent practicality he has done rather more than his bit in
helping to re-establish Canada.  He would, if he could, cut our imports
from the United States in half in order to rectify exchange.  Whenever
he dies the Canadian $ par on exchange will be found graven upon his
heart.

Drayton's tariff tour was one of the most characteristic things he ever
did.  In this, however, there may have been an element of politics.  A
travelling tariff commission taking evidence in almost every village
with a smokestack from coast to coast must have had some real object.
But Sir Henry had cleaned up most of the possibilities in direct
taxation; it was time he tackled the tariff, even though he knew it was
largely a show to satisfy the people that the most patient investigator
in the world at the head of a small court had taken evidence on what
every Tom and Dick had to say for and against in any part of the
country outside of the Yukon.  Had it been practicable to hold a
session on Great Bear Lake, to determine the trade relations between
the copper-kniving Eskimos and the meat-swapping Yellow Knife Indians,
Sir Henry would have done it.

Such vast patience is phenomenal even in Drayton.  One almost fears
that he is becoming interested in a Federal election.  If so, the end
is in sight.  The day we partyize Sir Henry we shall lose one of the
oddest and rarest personal identities we ever had.  But we can better
afford to lose his personal identity in his party service than to lose
both in putting into the Finance Department in 1922 some idealistic
experimenter in the efficacy of Free Trade.




THE PERSONAL EQUATION IN RAILROADING

EDWARD WENTWORTH BEATTY, K.C.

The main thing that E. W. Beatty, K.C., did to help win the war was to
become President of the C.P.R.  And he did it well.  A glance at this
polished pony engine of a chief executive suggests that he has never
done anything but well, and that he is the kind of man likely without
preachments to stimulate well-doing in other people.

I first met this self-controlled master of executives not long after he
became President.  He was most cordial; as Shaughnessy had been
austere.  Under such a direct impression it seemed that I had at last
found a man who would make the inexorable old C.P.R. become a golden
door to humanity.  Of course I was mistaken.  That kind of man is born
often enough, but he seldom stays with his birthright.  I knew that the
railway of railways was no school for the humanities; but this
university graduate, Chancellor of Queen's, distinguished counsel and
potential eminent judge, bachelor, Canadian born, every inch an athlete
and as rugged as Carpentier, seemed to my aroused imagination one who
would be as much bigger than the stodgy C.P.R. as that system was
greater than others of its kind.

Beatty has not been at his new job long enough yet to prove what I
suspect--that I was wrong.  But he has been long enough with it to know
that the surging ideals and aspirations of a young, healthy man in his
own office are pretty rudely shaken down by the practical operation of
a great system in a time of financial difficulty.

We talked for nearly an hour.  He seemed to have the time and the
interest.  His big office was as quiet as a library.  His desk was
almost devoid of signs of labour.  Not a paper to be seen that required
immediate attention; every item neatly disposed; himself smoking--a
fairly strong pipe; scarcely a telephone call to interrupt.  He seemed
the sculptor's embodiment of strength in reserve; a man who never could
be tuckered or peevish or unable to detect either the weakness of an
opponent, the penetration of a critic or the need of a man who came to
ask him for advice.  There was a big instant kindliness about him that
would have won the cordiality of the stolidest of interviewers, as we
talked about railways, government ownership, the needs of journalism
and the value in business of the personal equation--his own phrase
which he repeated so often that it seemed to contain something of
prophetic intention.  He paid his venerating respects to the founders
of the C.P.R., but he seemed to have more enthusiasm for Lord
Mountstephen than for Van Horne.

I heard him say some strong, sincere things about the uselessness of
rich men who would sooner use their money on the gratification of
vanity than upon public service.  He meant that.  He repeated such
things at various interviews.  In doing so he proved that he himself
had always made a god of very hard work, discipline and self-denial,
for the sake of giving his own personality a square deal, without
regard to the money he could make.  He had the strength and he used it.
As solicitor and chief counsel he became almost a machine to win cases
for the railway.  He must win, and know how to lose.  Fighting a
corporation's battles is a good way to believe that the system can do
no wrong.  But I don't think Beatty was ever blind to the native
defects of the C.P.R.

Railroading is a great university of character.  Nothing else in our
practical affairs attracts such a variety of men.  None of our
railwaymen have climbed to the peak of the railway operation business
quite so successfully and so Canadianly as E. W. Beatty.  Most other
transportation magnates we have imported from either Scotland or the
United States.  This one is Canadian from his cradle up.  He embodies
the best characteristics of the average Canadian in a very high degree.
He is an amateur athlete whom hard work has never been known to make
weary.  At the end of any perfect day of hard work he has as much
strength in reserve as he had in the morning when he came to it.  Even
in his talk he wastes never a word, states everything clearly and in
forcible language, but is seldom curt at the expense of courtesy.  He
does not talk like any big American executive whose equal or superior
he may be in administration.  He copies nobody.  The day's work has
always been his exemplar.  He has no desire for mere personal success.
Years ago he could have made more money by exporting his brains to the
United States.  But he preferred Canada where he has made less money,
justly earned more fame, and where he can continue to do more work that
counts for efficiency in himself and in other people.  He is the kind
of man--like Arthur Meighen--who inspires other men to go in with him
on a heavy task to get it done in a big way.

Beatty's type of mind, though somewhat dry and legal and at times
judicial, is also capable of an immensely quiet enthusiasm that
transmits itself to other people.  He invites discussion, but not
familiarity.  Not personally careful just to maintain traditions, he
profoundly respects the men who created them--and goes ahead to
transact business now, and to hand out decisions immediately, that get
to-day ahead of yesterday and as near as possible to the day after.  He
believes in the square deal in action and in the high common sense of a
decision.  There is no public question upon which his opinion might not
be sanely valuable, though one would never expect him to succeed as a
leader in politics.  As a business reorganizer of McGill University he
is bound to consider a college as a "going concern".  As Chancellor of
Queen's, he upsets all traditions as to the dignity of pure scholarship.

It seemed like a long stride from being Chief Railway Counsel to
becoming Chief Executive.  But to his practical personality the stride
was only a step.  On an average this is no lawyer's job.  Judges in the
United States can preside over big corporations.  The chief executive
of the C.P.R. works.  He must know the system, its men, its technique.
Railroading is a complex of specialities.  A good president must enter
into the spirit of the man who builds a locomotive and of one who
constructs a timetable.

It fell to this first Canadian President that the road ever had to
shoulder a load which would have made the wizard Van Horne read up
Hercules.  Beatty holds the record for getting through with a programme
that would have puzzled either of his two eminent predecessors in that
office.  Shaughnessy at the same age might have done it.  Van Horne
never.  Yet Beatty never could have built the C.P.R.  His brain has no
wizardry in it.  He is a co-ordination of facts that knows not the
meaning of magic.  He is the most matter-of-fact man in any high
executive position in Canada.  The task he undertook was all cut out
for him.  Fate decreed that he should take it.  He never dreamed of
refusing.  And what a task!

The greatest trouble Beatty had to face when he became President was
too much traffic, too little rolling stock, an almost tragic scarcity
of labour and the McAdoo award in wages.  Railroading costs were at an
apex before even munitions costs began to be.  The collapse of railways
in the United States drove a vast amount of traffic over Canadian
roads.  The two younger transcontinental systems were on the verge of
receiverships.  The brunt of the burden fell upon the old C.P.R., which
at that time, in spite of the McAdoo awards was making a heavy profit.
The cash value of traffic handled was colossal.  War work was wearing
the railways down.  New locomotives and cars were hard to get.  Orders
could not be placed outside.  Canada's railways had to depend on
Canada.  Ships could not wait, though submarines could.  Freight must
move.  Two hard winters nearly paralyzed all the systems.  No new lines
were being built.  The old lines were wearing out.  Canada had the
longest hauls of any nation in the world.  Our systems were built for
the long haul.  The railway systems of other countries were demoralized
with wastage, low repairs and enormous traffic.  Even in short-haul
England of the easy climate, there was railway paralysis.  But England
had great gasoline highways and coastal routes when Canada had neither.
It is said in a report of that period, "General Superintendents in
charge of some of the "key" divisions of the big roads have had to work
from 12 to 20 hours a day to keep roadbed, rolling stock and crews up
to top mark."  22,000 Canadian cars were "lost" in the United States in
one winter.  What war left of the railways winter did its best to
debilitate.  Industry stole transportation labour at high wages and
rolled out vast quantities of material that had to be moved, when even
C.P.R. efficiency seemed to be just about obliterated from the chart of
the world's work.

This was no time for any man to pray that he might be made chief
executive of the greatest transportation system in the world; nor a
time for Lord Shaughnessy to continue in that office.  The work was now
too heavy for the autocrat and for a man whose eyesight was bad.  A
successor had to be found.  The directors did it almost automatically.
There was but one man to consider; and he had no experience in any of
the mechanical departments.

Beatty was the man.  The old autocrat himself had said so; and he knew.
Shaughnessy had taken the road from its wizard creator, and made it the
size and efficiency that it was.  There was almost apostolic
succession.  Stories that the Montreal directors favoured one man, the
Toronto directors another, and that Shaughnessy gave the casting vote,
were mere fabrications.  Yet Beatty stated that never in his long years
of experience with the system had he a clear ambition to climb up its
ladder.  He never wanted anything but a large day's work--and he got
many.  But, when he was made Vice-President, he must have known that he
was the man.  Vice-Presidents on the C.P.R. are not necessarily
presidents to be.  One of Beatty's friends travelling with him up from
Three Rivers once bought him a picture postcard with the legend, "No
mother ever picks her son to be a Vice-President."  Beatty smiled it
off.  He probably knew.  This was one of the rare bits of humour that
illustrated the Shaughnessy regime.  His lordship, fond enough of Irish
jokes outside, was never humourous inside the system.  All the humour
in Canadian Pacific was supposed to have died when Van Horne left it.

But now and again a gleam of human insight came from the grim
efficiency of the great system, and at least upon one occasion it
flashed from the legal department.  When the Railway Commission was
almost a new thing under that remarkable square-deal chairman, Joseph
Pitt Mabee, the town of Trois Rivieres, Que., had a suit, through its
Board of Trade, against the C.P.R., involving discrimination in rates.
The counsel for the plaintiff was a French-Canadian who could read, but
not comfortably speak, English.  The further he went the more
bewildered the chairman became, until he ventured to interrupt:

"I have a suggestion to make to my hon. friend who is having difficulty
in getting me to understand the case."

The suggestion was that the solicitor for the railway who had made a
special study of the Board of Trade's argument for the sake of
demolishing it, should himself present that side of the argument in the
clear, concise English of which he is a master; that wherever necessary
the French counsel should correct the statement; and that afterwards
Mr. Beatty should proceed to demolish the argument which he himself had
put up.  The counsel was agreeable.  Mr. Beatty rose to the occasion.
His statement of the case was so satisfactory to the counsel for Trois
Rivieres that he afterwards wondered how Beatty was ever able to
demolish it and win the case.

Beatty has no hobbies.  He cares for no art, collects no curios, has no
great house, drives no big cars; cares not at all for society; thinks
more of the Amateur Athletic Association and the Navy League and the
boys of the Y.M.C.A., the athletic equipment of Queen's University and
the success of Sir Arthur Currie as President of McGill.  He never
travels for pleasure.  When he goes over the C.P.R., expect results.
The average Montrealer does not even know where he lives.  He is said
to spend forty minutes a day, indoor weather, at basketball.  In summer
he camps.  Snapshotted in a sweater he looks like a compromise between
Babe Ruth batting a home run and Hofmann playing the piano.

When Beatty was first a young lawyer in Montreal he was so lonesome for
the city he came from that he used to go down to the station to see the
Toronto train pull in.  He did not dream then that some day he would be
the man that pulls all the trains in; that from his desk he should have
a periscope on the world--every day--the greatest intelligence
department in America.  When he was a school lad in Thorold, afterwards
at the Upper Canada "Prep." (where he got so bad a report that his
father was advised to take him out of school), he had no idea that he
would be Chancellor of Queen's University.

The system and the man.  Determining which most affects the other is
like the old problem of the hen and the egg.  But here, anyhow, is a
great system.  No man venerates it more than Beatty.  He does not even
consent to call it a corporation; prefers to think of it as an
association, imbued with enthusiasm and loyalty.  Now and then he
publicly discusses national ownership; none can do it better.  He did
it at Thorold soon after he was appointed.  He argued it in Ottawa with
Cabinet Ministers.  He did it in Winnipeg.  One suspects that Beatty's
ability to do this was one of his qualifications for the presidency.

A year before Beatty became president a man high up in the system
predicted that the C.P.R. would spend a million dollars to campaign
against Bolshevism.  He failed to foresee that the stolid old bulwark
of things as they are would never need to do any such thing.  All it
needed to spend was Beatty who, within six months of the time he
changed the sign on his door, had convinced the system that a sort of
new optimistic vitality had got hold of it.  There was once a cynical
proverb around those offices: "It's cheaper to buy editors than
newspapers."  One hears very little of it now.  The annual meeting of
the Directors may be fine copy for the _Montreal Gazette_, but the
yearly banquet of the officials is a matter of real public interest,
especially to the young President.  There is a psychology in
this--"association"--that is not a corporation.  How does he gauge it?
From the officials.  He does not visit the Angus shops; though if he
did he would be welcome.  It was an old axiom of Van Horne that what
the head is, so also will the system be.  Beatty extends the axiom--to
include the officials.  He would have them radiate optimism, not
particularly caring that they get it from him.

For the past two years optimism has been needed.  C.P. reports are not
what they used to be.  Even the stock exchanges tell the tale.  But in
comparison with American lines, with other Canadian systems--ah! here
is always some comfort.  Trust Beatty to miss no chance of intimating
that he would much prefer to have real competition from Government
roads.  He fervently hopes for Government ownership to succeed.  C.P.
cannot thrive on weak competition.  He has no fear that any sane
Government will try absorbing the C.P.R.  Even farmers, he thinks,
would soon settle down to a sense of responsibility.  The old pioneer
is a hard organization to make into a tail that does not wag the dog.
Steadily he has advertised to the public that the system is still the
handbook of efficiency; let Government roads imitate.  National
ownership, being impersonal, somewhat Bolshevistic, and very vague,
cannot develop the intensive "super-loyalty" of the big private system
vested in a board of directors, and the chief.

Since ever he became chief Beatty has made this clear; for a purpose.
Did I omit to say that he is the first C.P.R. president without
whiskers; the first with a college degree; the first Canadian born, the
first lawyer, the first bachelor and the first man from Toronto who had
occupied that position; the youngest of all the presidents; that he
used to be an expert at college Rugby; that at Upper Canada "Prep." he
was much addicted to pugilism; not to mention the discarded tilt of his
Fedora?  If so it is because the man himself sets no value on these
things.  His faith is in the collective personality, called the
Canadian Pacific, built up on the Personal Equation.

But Ottawa--what of that?  Almost ever since Ottawa was, the C.P.R. has
been said to own it.  Governments of either party have never been
inhospitable to the benign octopus--centipede it became--that had its
origin in the Parliament of Canada and wrecked one Tory Government.
The penalty of transcontinental railways is that they require to have
mortgages on governments.  Presently the worm turns.  But that usually
costs more money than the mortgage.  We are now paying off the
mortgages of two great systems.  The C.P.R. mortgage was paid long ago.
The President of the C.P.R. is usually regarded as second only to the
Premier in point of national management.  But Premiers and governments
come and go; the President stays on.  Suppose that in the year 19--
there should be a Cabinet mainly of farmers.  Alberta has a farmer
government.  Saskatchewan with a "Liberal" government has a Cabinet
mainly of farmers.  Manitoba sometimes has to remind herself that
Premier Norris is a kind of farmer.  Ontario has a farmer Premier and
more than half a Cabinet of farmers.

This is the age of the farmers' innings.  Suppose that a Cabinet of
super-Agriculturists at the Capital some day should not agree with Mr.
Beatty that farmers when they get responsibilities measure up and
settle down to conservatism.  Such a Cabinet might not remember that
the C.P.R. had really done so very much for the prairies in comparison
with what it has got from the West.  It might decree that a lawyer
President should be called upon to elucidate why he judges that so
efficient a Personal Equation as the C.P.R. should not be
"nationalized", if not government-owned, for the good of the whole
people, and especially of the people whose traffic creates most of the
revenues?

This is merely supposing.  In any case Mr. Beatty would be master of
the occasion.  The lawyer who argued against himself and won at Three
Rivers might be able to put up a more convincing argument to Ottawa
Farmers than Lord Shaughnessy did to the Union Government when he
offered to amalgamate the C.P.R. with the Government roads providing
the management should be C.P.R. and the dividends guaranteed.

But of course this is a merely hypothetical argument.  There may never
be a Farmer Administration in Ottawa.  And if there ever should be, we
may trust to conservative and progressive old C.P.R. to do its share of
injecting a "sense of responsibility" into a Farmer Cabinet to help it
measure up and settle down, even if some farmer should buy C.P. shares
enough to get himself elected as a director.  As it stands to-day in
the estimation of the travelling public, who may or may not care a
copper about the personality of its rugged and efficient lawyer
president, the Canadian Pacific is the one greatest proof that Canada
needs no revolution which will interfere with the morale of that
system.  In fact so long as the C.P.R. holds its own an economic
revolution in Canada is impossible.




A BOURGEOIS MASTER OF QUEBEC

SIR LOMER GOUIN

Early in January, 1917, a remarkable dinner was held in Toronto, the
first of its kind ever held in that city of Orange Walks.  Protestants
and Catholics sat side by side.  They applauded the same sentiments.
Orator after orator dug into the mines of national idioms.  They
cracked jokes and told stories and worked up climaxes.  The three
hundred rose again and again with glasses of orangeade, and
Apollinaris, toasting--Quebec, Ontario, and United Canada.  They waved
napkins and cheered and sang again and again "For he's a jolly good
fellow".  A Methodist minister sat at the back of the room next a
Congregationalist preacher and pretended to unwrap a _de luxe_ cigar.
Orangemen sat at the same table with Catholics.  Macs hobnobbed with
'eaus.  They autographed one another's menus.  The books of songs were
bilingual--French and English.  "God Save the King" was sung in both
languages.  "O Canada" was done in French.  Methodist orators vied with
French speakers.  Col. George Denison sat next Gen. Lessard.  They
fraternized as soldiers.  The Methodist local-preacher Premier of
Ontario sat with the Roman Catholic Premier of Quebec.  Sentiment ran
high.  But no French-Canadian was so emotional as N. W. Rowell, who
glorified the heroes of Courcellette; and no Anglo-Canadian was quite
so stolid, serious and impressive with homely common sense as Sir Lomer
Gouin, the Premier of Quebec.  This man spoke slowly, massively, almost
gutturally like a Saxon, in fluent but accented English.  He was far
less excitable than the Premier of Ontario on the same subject:

  THE RACE UNITY OF CANADA
      PREFIGURED IN
    THE BONNE ENTENTE

Three hundred public-spirited men of whom eighty came from Quebec were
as one family on this.

At one in the morning the concomity broke up.  Not a drop of vin or
liqueur in any form had been served.  The enthusiasm was, therefore, as
natural as the tide of the St. Lawrence, which in the form of the great
lakes and Niagara does its best to put its arms round the neck of
Ontario before it cuts through the heart of Quebec.  To the pure
imagination it was somewhat as though a procession of St. Jean Baptiste
had suddenly dreamed it was an Orange Walk.

This unusual Entente was held between the rancours of the bilingual
dispute of 1916 and the Quebec revolt against conscription in 1917.
Those present who doubted the sincerity of passionate speakers anchored
a timidly steadfast hope to the practical, broad-angled Premier of
Quebec, who, had he sat between Mr. Bourassa and the Premier of
Ontario, would have inclined his ear to Ontario.

Nothing is more certain than that four French-Canadian leaders, had
they been given or had they asked for the opportunity and had acted
together, could have put a different face on Quebec's relation to the
war.  Four men namable in that capacity are, Sir Lomer Gouin, Sir
Wilfrid Laurier, Ernest Lapointe, and Cardinal Begin.  Of these, Gouin
was at that time the most able.  For ten years he had been
uninterruptedly Premier of Quebec with a moral guarantee that he could
occupy the Premiership by an overwhelming majority until he should be
gathered to his fathers.

Again and again rumour slated Sir Lomer for Ottawa.  He wisely
declined.  He had a peasant's attachment to "le pays" and its white
villages.  In Quebec he was the Chief of Ministers, the little elected
father of his country.  In Ottawa he would have been perhaps a grand
Minister of Public Works building docks in Halifax, customs houses in
British Columbia, post-offices on the prairies, armouries in Ontario
and court-houses in Quebec.  Yes, there would be surely armouries in
Ontario.

I met Sir Lomer but once, in his office in the Parliament Buildings.
There was no particular reason for seeing him except the pleasure of
encountering a descendant of the people who so gallantly fought under
Montcalm so that posterity could enjoy a city in part exclusively
English and for the most part idiomatically French.  A few evenings
previous I had talked on the Terrace to a glowing Nationalist, a young
expert in cynical idealism, who spoke very curtly about the Premier.
An ardent patriot, he talked freely and interestingly, as we gazed out
at the blue-hazed domes of the noble hills that mark the valley of St.
Lawrence.  The roofs of Old Lower Town were sizzling in heat.  Drowsy,
lumber-laden bateaux and ocean-liners crept and smoked about the docks.
Beyond the grey-scarped citadel the vesper bells of parish after parish
clanged a divine discord into the calm of the great river.

"What do you think of Gouin?" I asked him.

A cynical smile flicked over the Nationalist's face.  For a moment he
did not answer.

"Pardonnez-moi," I mumbled.  "I am Anglais."

"Oh!" he said, sharply, laughing.  "Have you seen the Montcalm suite in
the Chateau here?  Do so.  The C.P.R. discovered an old bed and some
creaky chairs said to have been used by the great general.  They placed
them in a suite of rooms which they rent to curiosity-hunting Americans
who sentimentalize over history at twenty-five dollars a day.  Such is
Quebec when she is commercialized into a highway for tourists."

"But what has that to do with Sir Lomer Gouin?"

"Directly--nothing.  Sir Lomer is not even a director of the C.P.R., or
of the Bank of Montreal, though one never knows what he may do with his
money and his talents when he gets tired of manipulating elections."

"Oh, you mean that Gouin--does not reflect the idealism of Quebec; its
love of the land that bore our fathers, its poetic isolation among the
provinces----?"

He blew a shaft of cigarette smoke.

"Sir Lomer," he said, "is Chairman of the Board of Directors of the
Province of Quebec.  His chief duty is to go about inspecting and
improving properties and to sit at directors' meetings declaring
provincial dividends instead of deficits."

I remarked that since Quebec is so prosperous and so large and populous
with so many cradles, the Premier need not perhaps vex himself deeply
about ideals such as the French language in schools outside the
province.

"What!" was the reply, as a glass banged upon the table.  "Would you
cage us in here like Indians on a reservation?  Has the French-Canadian
nation no rights outside Quebec?"

"What would you do?" I asked him.  "What could you do?"

"Secede!" he exclaimed.  "Become the Sinn Fein of Canada."

"What about the Pope of Rome?"

"Has as much to do with Quebec," he laughed icily, "as the President of
France.  If the Pope should issue instructions to the bishops of
Quebec, asking the clergy to educate the people of Quebec on their duty
to go to war or to vote for either of the old line parties, the people
would openly disregard them.  We would as much resent the interference
of Rome in our affairs as the American colonies did the tyranny of
George the Third."

Here was the superb inconsistency of the French mind wedded to a single
magnificent idea.  This Nationalist admitting the possibility of
secession, made sure that it would not be to the United States which
puts the French language on a par with Choctaw.  When I suggested as a
recipe for national unity that French and English be learned by both
English and French all over Canada, he flouted the idea of
French-Canadians learning more English than they needed in business,
and of English-Canadians learning French at all.  He fervently held to
the Keltic notion of making a preserve of the French-Canadian race,
language, literature and customs whatever may become of the religion;
yet he objected to penning the race into a reservation like the
Indians.  He observed that in 1911 the Nationalists bucked reciprocity
with the United States.

"I think we should become an independent republic," he said as he
plopped a fresh cigarette.  "We have the main part of the St. Lawrence.
No, you will not find Gouin say so.  Gouin is a Tory prefect.  He plays
politics, not nationalism."

I observed that the band was about to play.

"Ha!" he exclaimed, stretching his legs with a yawn.  "And the concert
will conclude with that amiable farce, 'O Canada,' followed by 'God
Save the King.'"

This Nationalist interview is given at some length because it
illustrates much of what Sir Lomer Gouin is not, and if he were would
not openly say so, because he stands for a majority the watchword of
which is "Stop, Look, Listen".  I went at once to see the Premier.  He
was closeted with confiding--perhaps confederate--priests, and with
simple habitant folk who stood, not in awe but in affection, of the
Premier.  He might have been himself a father confessor.

Talking to him I found Gouin peculiarly on his guard; broad-faced,
heavy-jawed, slow of speech, almost devoid of gesticulation, he was as
unamiably dispassionate as a bank manager.  There was no militant
passion of the minority in this man; no heroic tilting against
windmills; no expression of ideals; no suggestion of a delightful
outlaw.  He was amazingly practical, with no inclination to discuss
freely the native peculiarities of either race.  He understood
Ontario--as a politician only; England as a democracy and a form of
government.  He had no absorbing idiosyncracies and made no attempt to
pose or even to be interesting.  After the bounce of the young
Nationalist he was as tame as a grandfather's clock.

I felt that Sir Lomer was asking himself--what did the stranger want?
He would have been infinitely more at ease discussing with a bishop how
to prevent a strike in a cotton mill; or with a political outposter
what to do to keep some seat for the Administration.  If I had made to
him such a statement as once I had made with such volcanic results to
Bourassa, that nine-tenths of the population in a village like Nicolet
could speak no Anglais, he would have been eloquent.  Had I observed
that 70 per cent of the operatives in a great Quebec industry cannot
read and write French, that Ontario has a policy of good roads
comparable to that of Quebec, that Orangemen do not dominate Toronto,
that the Ontario farmer is a better producer than the habitant, or that
Protestant clerics do not interfere in politics, he would have bristled
with information to set me profoundly right.  But he created no
atmosphere of free discussion with a stranger.  He was coldly aloof,
yet earnestly endeavouring to say something worth while.

What I really wanted to tell Gouin was that he was personally very much
like the late great Tory, Sir James Whitney.  But he did not warm up to
personal comment.  The bilingual question was too complicated.  The
atmosphere of the Bonne Entente was lacking.  Gouin and myself were in
different envelopes.  He was the Premier.

From what is said of him I am sure most of the fault was my own.  I did
not understand him.  He was too much the Premier; the master executive.
The Nationalist was almost right; Gouin suggested the dividend and the
census.  He was the chief executive of a Province larger than almost
any country in Europe but Russia, and with a population about half that
of Roumania, of whom about one-sixth are the Anglo-Saxon minority.  He
seemed to know Quebec from Montreal to the edge of Labrador almost by
telegraph poles.  You recall that the French in Canada evolved the
modern census with its intimate penetration into the affairs of the
people, some time before the Germans did it.  The Premier of Quebec was
a handbook encyclopaedia of Quebec.  He knew the precise location by
the roads of almost any white village, pulp-mill, water-power, mine,
timber limit; knew as much as a man can about the number of horses and
cattle and cradles to a township; could talk with enthusiasm about the
pioneer arts of the habitant--the rugs, the baskets, the furniture, the
hand-made churns, the open-air bake-ovens.  He could give the address
and the full name of many and many a priest.

But beyond this there is a Quebec which Sir Lomer Gouin did not know,
because he himself with his _bourgeois_ excellences and his great good
citizenship has not the Gallic sparkle in his mentality.  He never
deeply knew the soul of Quebec.  He was too much concerned with its
practical and useful politics to be conscious of its passions.  From
the shrug of his shoulder, and a certain twinkle in his eye when he
mentioned diplomacy with clerics, one surmised that among the clergy he
was the master among politicians who must walk warily.  But he was too
stout, too thrifty, too much of a high type of budgeteer to be
spiritually informed of the crude but basically beautiful passions that
undercurrent all peasant communities.  There was no poetry in Gouin.
No fire.  Little imagination.

"Those Nationalists?" he repeated shrewdly, slowly.  "Yes, I know their
talk.  Oh, they are not so dangerous, but a troublesome minority.  I
think--I know Quebec better than they do.  You have, I daresay,
Nationalists in Ontario?"

What he perhaps expected was some statement about Orangemen, who of
course are nearly all Imperialists.  Yet these very Orangemen represent
an intense phase of Canadian life; the backwoods era, the simple
industries, the old villages, the quaint settlements of the U.E.
Loyalists as picturesque on the Upper, as the dormer-windowed villages
of the French are on the Lower St. Lawrence.  To these men the Empire
is as visual, as to the intense Quebecker it is nebulous.  And as the
politician in Ontario has to regard carefully the Orange vote, so the
Premier of Quebec had to be wary of the franchises of his emotional
friends, the Nationalists.  He was somewhat afraid of the minority as
all masters of majorities are.  Clearly--it was Gouin's main business
to continue being elected.  Had he gone out on behalf of enlistments,
to educate his people, even to speak for France, he would have been in
danger of converting Gouin Liberals into Nationalists.

Ontario cannot fail to make an asset of Gouin's anti-Nationalism.  He
was never for any of the violent doctrines propounded by my friend on
the Terrace.  He would not oppose Quebec going to war.  I am sure he
God-speeded the 22nd who died at Courcellette.  He was the Premier of a
free Province.  Those men had freely gone.  Others--the majority--had
freely stayed.  But an election was coming; where everybody would be
free to vote.

Then there were the clergy; most of them friends of Gouin.  The
Cardinal at Quebec had been interviewed by Sir Sam Hughes on aid to
enlistments.  Gouin could have told Hughes that he would fail; that
Begin, though not a Nationalist, was a reactionary.  The bilingual
controversy was still acute.  Gouin could not have gone out or sent
emissaries out, to reason with French-Canadians about marching with a
Province which had denied the French language rights in contrast to the
Government's own claim that it had given rights to the Anglo minority
in Quebec.

Conscription was coming.  It was a precarious time.  The master of
Quebec had to move cautiously.  His loyalty to Britain was never
questioned.  His faith in a United Canada was never doubted.  Had
Quebec been all for Gouin instead of Gouin all for Quebec, the
Premier's way would have been easier.  Better let well enough alone;
encourage those to enlist who really wanted to go--because Quebec was a
free country.

Then there was the Laurier influence.  Had the old man gone in with the
Premier to help the Ottawa Government--

Impossible.  Neither of them was asked before Coalition came on the
heels of conscription.  And when conscription came, the minority of
Nationalists opposed to the war became the majority of Quebeckers who
preferred not to comply with the law.  From disregarding the law to
rebellion, to Nationalism was not far.  Gouin had the balance to hold.

The Cardinal's attitude on conscription made Gouin's position still
more difficult.  His letter to the press bluntly put the Roman Catholic
Church above temporal law.  One heard of no rebuke from the Premier of
Quebec to the Cardinal.  A Cardinal may be above politics.

Sir Lomer was playing the game of safety, when from his own temperament
and position and unbacked by other leaders he could do little more.  He
stood for the law and did not hinder its operation.  But if there was a
chief executive in Canada who wished the war were righteously over, it
was Sir Lomer Gouin.  No Premier had such a predicament; so much at the
end to lose; so much at first to have gained--if only he could have
foreseen, as nobody did, that conscription was coming and that law
would be more awkward than liberty.

The Premier of Quebec had experience in keeping his Government immune
from agitators.  It was not alone the Nationalists who had made him
uneasy.  On the other extreme there had been for some time one Godefroi
Langlois, former editor of _La Patrie_, and later founder and editor of
_Le Pays_, whose platform was compulsory State education away from
control of the clergy and in defiance of the Archbishops.  Gouin did
not endorse Langlois.  How could he?  _Le Pays_, when it condemned
clerical schools, attacked the Administration.  Politically Gouin was
right in opposing Langlois.  Nationally he was playing provincial.
Langlois had a mission, in line with a broader, nationalized Canada;
the same mission which is now being reflected in the National Council
of Education.

So, between the reactionism of Bourassa and the radicalism of Langlois,
Gouin was the compromise; and Langlois was conveniently given an
official post in Europe.

Gouin has compromised his whole political career.  With the leverage of
enormous success in elections and administration, he never had the
vision to declare himself in favour of a bigger Quebec than could be
got by extending its boundaries to Ungava.

He was too old to begin.  Quebec to him was a vast prefecture to be
administered; not a vision to be realized.  Ontario--except
politically--was almost as far away as British Columbia.  He was seldom
in Toronto.  Montreal was as a rule the last west for this voyageur.
He seldom or never went to the Maritimes.  He knew the people down
there regarded the _bloc_ Quebec as a denationalizer.  He had little or
no desire to see the prairies.  He wanted Quebec to prosper.  He
delighted to see pulp mills and cotton factories and power plants and
railways and trolleys vibrating along the St. Lawrence.  He loved to
dream of the great unpeopled hinterland--all Quebec; of the other
hinterland--all the rest of Canada; of the transcontinentals converging
at Montreal; of the steamship lines terminating there; of a land where
there are few empty cradles or idle factories or wasting farms.

All these things Gouin, growing stout and somewhat heavy of face, loved
to behold; and out of that grew all the vision he seemed to have.  In
this enormous prefecture within the Empire he beheld a far more
comfortable State than the Nationalist dream of a separative Quebec;
glad when he could find time to motor grandly and amiably out among the
villages and be greeted as _le grand seigneur_ of politics, even when
he lacked the grand manners of the eminent patrician.

At any conference of Premiers in Ottawa he held himself somewhat aloof,
studying the lot, respecting them all, cordial with all, anxious to do
all that constitutionally in him lay to further co-ordination.  But
Gouin always sagaciously knew that there was no Premier in the pack who
already had so much, with so little to ask, from Federalism as he.  His
was the pivotal province of Confederation, the grand compromise of Old
Macdonald with Cartier; the basic sixty-five members of Parliament,
unchangeable except by ripping up the B.N.A. Act, an instrument of
Empire.  He could wink the other eye and reflect that from the
political concessions of the Act in official bilingualism and a fixed
representation, in the outlet of the St. Lawrence, in the possession of
the historic city, in the control of ocean navigation, in a solid
clergy, in fundamental virtues of thrift and an established
peasantry--he and his had more than any of the others could ever ask.

"Ah!" he said eloquently, with a fine twinkle of his eyes to the
interviewer at Quebec, "you have not seen our Province?  Then you must
come down again, when I am not busy, and let me take you to see--all we
have down here!"




A POLITICAL MATTAWA OF THE WEST

JOHN WESLEY DAFOE

First impressions are always tyrants.  The first time I heard John
Wesley Dafoe talk he was in his large sanctum of the _Manitoba Free
Press_, in the summer of 1916.  He was without a collar, his shirt
loose at the neck, and his hair like a windrow of hay.  He reminded me
of some superb blacksmith hammering out irons of thought, never done
mending the political waggons of other people, and from his many talks
to the waggoners knowing more about all the roads than any of them.
The wheat on a thousand fields was baking that day, and the 'Peg was
roasting alive.  Since that I have always pictured Dafoe sweltering,
terribly in earnest, whittling the legs of the Round Table and telling
somebody how it is that west of the lakes neither of the old Ottawa
parties has now any grip on the people.

Dafoe talked that way in 1916.  He was beginning to lisp a little along
that restless line of thought in 1910.  And in 1940 he may be sitting
in that same sanctum with walls of heavy books on two sides of him,
telling somebody just how it came to be that an economic cyclone on the
prairies once caught up all the Grits and Tories and nothing was ever
heard or seen of them again.

When Kipling wrote, "Oh, east is east and west is west, and never the
twain shall meet," he had never met Dafoe.  Some directive angel
planted him at Winnipeg shortly after Clifford Sifton crowded the gate
there with people going in that they might choke it again with wheat
coming out; and while people went in and wheat came out through this
spout of the great prairie hopper, Dafoe dug himself a little ship
canal which as it grew bigger sluiced the political rivers of the West
into his sanctum before he lifted the lock and let them on down to the
sea at Ottawa.  The West as he saw it was a place of coming mighty
changes.  His own party was pushing the transformations.  The prairies
were due to become the mother of great forces.  You could not be always
herding people into a land like that from south, east and west and not
come within an ace of fostering some revolution.

And of all cities west of the lakes, Winnipeg was the clearing-house,
as much for policies and programmes as for wheat and money and people.
No political cloud ever gathered on the prairies that did not get blown
into Winnipeg before it burst.  Dafoe stood ready for them all.  He
believed that no change had happened yet to the Liberal party
comparable with the changes yet to come.  He saw that party chaining
itself to tariffs and big interests and he said:

"Believe me, that won't forever do.  There's something just short of a
revolution going to happen to this party before the West gets done with
it; and if the party isn't ready for the West, so much the worse for
the party."

Just to get ahead of mere chronology, the bane of many a good man's
life.  In 1919 the most complete imitation of a little Moscow ever seen
on this continent was set up in Winnipeg.  For many weeks it looked to
some hopefuls as though the Wheat City would reconstruct the whole
economic structure of the nation to suit the ideas of a violent
minority.  The main recorded issue was "collective bargaining".  The
real issue was direct action in the form of the sympathetic strike.  By
its expected control of urban centres the Soviet organization aimed to
throttle big utilities, finance, shipping, railroads, telegraphs.  The
United Grain Growers were to be but a helpless giant in the hands of
Jack Proletariat.  Parliament was to be superseded by Direct Action.
The A.F.L. was to become obsolete.  Trades Unions were to be taken over
and painted red.  Citizens in starched collars were to become comrades
in shirt sleeves, or enemies.  Political parties would be
reconstructed.  The "workers" would own the country.  The British
Empire would be shaken into Soviets.  The Army and the Navy would be
internationalized.  The real Capital of Canada outside of Winnipeg
would be, not London, but Moscow.  The International would supplant
national anthems.  Public opinion would be exterminated except as
revised by the Red leaders on the Red River at its junction with the
Assiniboine.

In the unfolding of this Great Adventure we pause here to observe that
it was a newspaper which behind the Citizens' Committee administered a
black eye to this attempt to make Winnipeg the Soviet headquarters of
North America and 120 millions of people.  The name of the paper was
the _Manitoba Free Press_.

And the _Free Press_ was seeing Red.  What business had the Red Flag in
a city like Winnipeg at all?  If anywhere in Canada, why not in the
industrial, big-interest East--in Montreal or Toronto?

"One revolution at a time, please," we almost hear the _Free Press_
saying.  "Now the war is done the West has to settle the fate of
Government at Ottawa in its own way.  And the way of the West is not
with the Red Flag; not with Direct Action.  This city is a headquarters
of evolutionaries, not of outlaws.  You people of the Strike Committee
are trying to get the spot-light when you've no business anywhere
except right at back stage."

A perfectly straight argument, though not couched in those words.
Dafoe and his associates were profoundly busy with what to them was a
ten times greater issue than any form of Soviet anywhere in Canada.  As
a matter of record the paper did admit that the metal workers had a
right to strike for collective bargaining.

"But no other Union here or elsewhere," it thundered "has any right to
a sympathetic strike to help the metal workers.  This city is not going
to be throttled by a thug minority, who want to exercise governing
power as a revolutionary usurpation of authority."

A minority always leads.  Majorities follow.  The position of the _Free
Press_ was, that it is only a minority able to command a majority that
should rule; and the Soviet was no such minority--while the _Free
Press_ was.

A clear grasp of this is necessary in the business of judging Mr. Dafoe
and his coming influence upon Canadian affairs.  What Dafoe enunciated
about the strike will have a strong bearing in the case upon what he
thinks about the Agrarians.  The judge must get a fair judgment.  But
of this later.

Dafoe was, so far as we know, the first editor in Canada to advocate
from the beginning of the war a Coalition Government.  This was
natural.  The _Free Press_ had no faith in the Borden administration of
Bob Rogers, owner of the _Winnipeg Telegram_.  By the summer of 1916 it
was into a Coalition campaign.  A year later when the Premier came back
from England declaring for conscription and inviting Laurier to join in
a Coalition, the _Free Press_ supported him.

Why this anxiety?  We must pull off a bit of the makeup to find out.
The _Free Press_ was a Liberal paper.  It supported Laurier in the
West.  But the older it grew the more clearly Dafoe and his associates
saw that the man who had created the two new Western Provinces could
not hold them.  Other gods were now arising.  Their organ was the
_Grain Growers' Guide_; their parliaments were in grain growers'
conventions; their policy was radical Liberalism.  The Liberal organ of
a Wheat City could not consistently antagonize this radical movement.
The farmers must be studied.  So far as they could strengthen
Liberalism by becoming a Radical wing, they must be encouraged.  At the
point where they developed an extreme left away from the party they
must be checked.  The _Free Press_ which was yet to fight an economic
revolution must not itself be revolutionary.

This leads up to policy in Empire.  The paper had gone against Borden
in 1911.  It was against the taxation Navy of Borden even though it
could see the danger of war ahead.  It was opposed to the whole
super-Tory idea of a centralized British commonwealth of nations.  It
"hung the hide" of Lionel Curtis and his Round Table propaganda clubs
to the Canadian National fence.  It argued for "a progressive
development in Canadian self-government to the point of the attainment
of sovereign power to be followed by an alliance with the other British
nations", who it was assumed would do likewise.  For years before the
war the _Free Press_ had talked of this evolutionary Empire, deeply
regretting that Mr. Bourassa had coined the word "Nationalist" and made
it obnoxious.

Winnipeg seldom does things one half at a time.  In the summer of 1917
J. W. Dafoe was one of the most astounded men in Canada.  The other one
was Sir Wilfrid Laurier.  That was the year of the famous Liberal
Convention.  Had such a Convention happened in Chicago with such a man
as Roosevelt as the centre-piece, its doings would have been cabled the
world over.  In its small way the Winnipeg Convention was more
sensational than the Big Strike two years later.  Mr. Dafoe was in
Ottawa that summer.  He was needed there.  The Premier had come back
from England primed with a policy of conscription to be enforced by a
possible Coalition Government, an offer of which was made to the
Opposition leader.  Since early in the war the _Free Press_ had argued
for coalition, but opposed conscription until after the United States
entered the struggle because of the inevitable exodus of slackers
across the border.

There was a strong conscriptionist group of Liberals in Ottawa.  We
must assume that Mr. Dafoe, though not a member of Parliament, was
strongly behind them; his presence in Ottawa indicates that his
counsels were needed in view of the attitude to be taken by Western
Liberals.  It was the conscriptionist group of Liberals in Ottawa that
decided upon the Convention, whether on the advice of Mr. Dafoe is not
generally known.  The intention was to create a Western Liberal group
free from Laurier control, prepared to consider coalition--involving
conscription--on its merits.  So far, the policy of the Convention was
in line with the previous programme of Mr. Dafoe.  But the Liberal
machine in the West--which was not Mr. Dafoe's party at all, because
for some time he had been working on the principle that both the old
parties as such had lost their grip on the West--went out and captured
the delegates.  The Convention was suddenly stampeded for Laurier, a
result which Mr. Dafoe never expected but against which he had strongly
urged, the Liberal Unionist leaders.  The _Free Press_ thereafter
thundered against the Convention as entirely misrepresenting Western
Liberalism.  The subsequent South Winnipeg convention shewed that the
_Free Press_ was right.  Almost the entire strength of Western
Liberalism swung into the Union movement and the Coalition, and the
_Free Press_ became a temporary, though independent, supporter of the
Union Government for the purpose of winning the war.

Now for the larger front stage view; how does Mr. Dafoe's attitude in
the defeat of the Winnipeg Soviet idea of government and his former
campaign against Laurier Liberals match with his attitude towards the
Farmer Movement as embodied by Mr. Crerar?  The leader of the Agrarian
movement is a friend of the _Free Press_ for much the same reason that
the strike leaders in 1919 were a foe to it.  Crerarism in the West
looks for the support of that paper in its drive upon Ottawa.  From his
experience outwardly to the public, and intimately behind the scenes,
always concerned with building up a new Liberalism on the wreck of the
old, Dafoe endorses Crerar and his movement.  When Crerar went into the
Government the _Free Press_ favoured his going.  Mr. Dafoe clearly
states that, "if the Union movement could retain its Liberal elements
and produce an economic and taxation policy acceptable to Western
opinion, we could continue to support it."  In contemplating such a
miracle, did he expect that the ultra-Tories would lop away from the
Union, making a "rump" party to match the Laurier Liberals, and leaving
the Union Government free to make an alliance with the Farmer Group?
This we do not profess to know.  In a political age like this almost
any sort of alliance may be made for the purpose of capturing
Parliament.  But a permanent alliance between Western Liberalism
represented by Mr. Crerar and the Government by Coalition looks now as
fantastic as a Coalition between Lloyd George and de Valera.  Mr. Dafoe
probably knew that the Government and Mr. Crerar would lock horns over
the tariff--since any species of protection and free trade never could
sleep together.  When Mr. Crerar left the Government on the budget
issue, the _Free Press_ ceased its active support of the Government and
moved its guns to a detached position.  When Meighen became Premier and
in his programme speech at Stirling outlined his policy, Dafoe
definitely declared himself as no longer in support of the Union
Government.  As he could not support the Laurier Liberal party, which
he had formerly opposed, the only thing left was to make an active and
open alliance with Mr. Crerar.

Such a mobile course of action is incomprehensible unless we keep in
mind the fact that Mr. Dafoe has long found it impossible to support
either of the old parties.  The Coalition was a new one which he
consistently supported on its merits and up to a point.  The point was
reached.  Unionism and Agrarianism were incompatible.  Therefore
Unionism was a Tory institution; and the only Liberal programme left
for the _Free Press_ was to form an alliance with Mr. Crerar and his
great group of class-conscious Agrarians.

By this time, if he reads this, Mr. Dafoe will have observed that we
are trying to corner him on the question:

If you were opposed to a Labor Soviet which aimed at making a little
Moscow of Winnipeg, what are you going to do about a Farmer Soviet that
aims to capture Ottawa?

Already he has begun to answer.  He uses a label for the party led by
Mr. Crerar and evolved with the aid of Mr. Dafoe:

The National Progressive Party.

A good name, even if not new.  What is behind the label?  That the
party so named has now taken over all the Liberal economic traditions
in the West and after the next general election will become the real
Liberal Party of Canada.  In the opinion of Dafoe, Mackenzie King
should keep out of the West in the coming election in order to let Mr.
Crerar romp home with three-fourths of the entire representation in
Parliament.  He alleges that Laurier destroyed the old Western Liberal
party in 1917; that King has not revived it--though Mr. Fielding might
have done so; that Western Liberals have become Progressive except in
the cities, where some have become Unionists.  In making this statement
he probably reckoned on Michael Clark becoming a Progressive.  But
Michael Clark has turned out to be one species of even Free Trade
Liberal which Crerarism cannot absorb.

Let us concede that here is one of the most absorbing problems in
Canada.  If Dafoe backs Crerar in the effort to get that preponderant
majority away from Meighen and King, then he is afterwards committed to
Crerarism.  Dafoe cannot afford to take Crerar and abandon the
traditions of the _Free Press_.  If he is so keen about real
"nationalism" in this country as to regret that Bourassa made the word
obnoxious, he has surely decided that the policy of the N.P.P. must be
to build up a true national life in Canada.  And the man who was
Canada's press representative at the Peace Conference, with such
exceptional facilities for focussing Canadian national sentiment among
other nations, will not dare to countenance in Mr. Crerar and his
followers any policy that will open the gates for the United States to
walk in and walk over this nation as twenty years ago his _Free Press_
associate, Clifford Sifton, opened the doors to let Europe inundate us
with a polyglot, un-national flood.

No Canadian journalist has shouldered so perilous a responsibility.
Dafoe knows what a struggle it is to preserve national identity on a
basis of one to twelve against us.  Born in Ontario and experienced in
the East as few editors have ever been, he surely knows the value of
not surrendering our national birthright for a mess of free-trade
pottage.

If he knows this as well as we think he should, will he uphold the
_Free Press_ as the constant critic of Mr. Crerar if he attempts to
denationalize this country; or will he accept a portfolio of Minister
of the Interior in the Cabinet dominated by Messrs. Crerar and Drury,
and in his haste to establish the new Liberalism of the National
Progressive Party help to strike out the meaning of the word "National"
in the label?

Can a man who fought a Direct Action Strike because it aimed at
revolution, consistently endorse, lock, stock and barrel, a movement
which aims at a revolution by Indirect Action through Parliament?

Is government by a "National Progressive Party" Agrarian Group with a
business-farmer Premier and a farmer-dominated Cabinet any less of a
group government in principle than the One Big Union, even though it
does not tie up the nerve centres of the country by a minority general
strike, but merely throttles Parliament, which is supposed to be the
national brain, by the use of the group minority in voting?

Mr. Dafoe has already begun to answer.  Again we see him sweltering in
his sanctum, his hair like a windrow of hay, as he dictates something
like this to his stenographer:

"Your logic is good except that your major premiss is a case of being
off to a bad start.  The National Progressive Party is not a group; it
is a business majority.  It contains the people who produce the
majority of the nation's wealth for consumption and export and
therefore enable the nation to pay its bills.  It is Liberal because it
advocates free-trade and is opposed to big monopolies, and there is no
other Liberalism in Canada left worthy the name.  The N.P.P. is the new
Liberalism, not for the West alone, but for the whole country.  It
depends upon the franchise of the people, not upon the strike action of
revolutionary groups.  Agriculture, not industry, is the basis of
Canada's economics.  Even labour as embodied in the Trade Unions does
not aim at revolution: Only the Reds want that.  And the Reds are a
hopeless minority.  The farmers are not as yet a popular, though they
are an economic, majority; but the future of this nation depends upon a
voting as well as a producing majority of farmers."

This may not be the exact way in which Mr. Dafoe would state the case,
but it expresses the fact that sound economics are at the root of all
ideas which have to do with fair government.  And it suggests that J.
W. Dafoe with his _Free Press_ has more to do than the _Grain Growers'
Guide_ with what the people think about the N.P.P.

For this reason we hope that Mr. Dafoe, the judge and the advocate as
well, will always stay "behind the scenes" to keep Mr. Crerar on the
right track if ever he gets the right of way.




HEADMASTER OF THE MANCHESTER SCHOOL

MICHAEL CLARK, M.P.

The eminent headmaster of the Manchester School in Canada is one of the
few M.P.'s who know how to build a wheat stack.  He farms in the spot
north of Calgary where the poplar bluffs begin to mark that you are in
the black loam of wonderful crops at a maximum distance from Liverpool.
It is an art to build a wheat stack.  Michael Clark--so we believe--knows
exactly how many tiers to lay before he begins the "belly"; how to fill
up the middle so that the butts of the sheaves droop to run off the rain;
and how high to go with the bulge before he begins to draw in with the
roof.  All day long as he worked on his knees, not in prayer, he had
mental leisure to think about one vast, fructifying theme; which of
course is Free-Trade as they had it in England; unrestricted trade
according to the Manchester School.  And when he got his stack done he
could tell to a ten-dollar bill how much tariff the railways and
steamships would levy on that stack by the time the wheat got to
Liverpool.

During the War, Clark was a win-the-war Liberal.  He broke away from
Laurier on conscription, which he openly supported.  In July this year he
was scheduled in the press--another of those wish-father-to-the-thought
news items--to join Messrs. Drury and Crerar in an anti-tariff tour of
Ontario.  He did not go.  He probably never had the slightest intention
of going.  Michael Clark had other wheat to stack.  An Alberta election
was coming.  It came.  When it was all over Alberta was in the grip of
the Agrarians.  Liberalism by constituencies was swept out as clean as a
barn floor at fanning-mill time.  And Michael Clark sat down to think it
over.  He had half expected that tornado.  But he refused to like it.
The farmers had stolen his own programme of free trade and by means of it
had stampeded his Province for the sake of using it as a spring-broad to
make the grand jump into the Federal arena.  The apostle of free trade,
himself as good a farmer as any of them, was now regarded as a chip on
the Agrarian stream at high tide.

Wherefore Michael Clark, after certain "conversations" with Mr. Crerar,
wrote the letter which, if Mackenzie King is as wise as he is hopeful,
will be used to flood the country.  Hoardings and electric signs in the
interests of true-Liberalism should blazon abroad such sentences as these:

"The House of Lords, the Family Compact, the Manufacturers' Association
and the junkers and militarists of Germany are each and all examples of
group government."

"Class consciousness is none the less class selfishness, and therefore
doomed to die, because it suddenly appears in Farmer and Labour parties."

"The apostles of progress must unite upon common principles, sincerely
held to resist reaction, which is ever present like a dead weight to drag
down the aspirations of the race for freedom, justice and democracy."

"These were the things for which sixty thousand Canadians died in the
recent war. . . .  I have been fighting 'class' for forty years.  It
would be quite impossible for me to turn my back on my past and the right
in this election."

Our political history contains no declaration of independence more
significant, manly and sensational.  Repudiation of the Free Trade,
group-governed, National Progressives by Michael Clark, the farmer and
the apostle of Canadian Free Trade, is the first truly emancipating note
that has been struck in all this pre-election barrage of group against
group.  Michael Clark may be no bigger as a Canadian for such a stand,
but he is true to his own form as one of the rarest and manliest Radicals
that Canada ever had.  And his declaration should be of immense value to
the Government, which confesses that its real fear is, not of Liberals,
but of Agrarians.

The headmaster of the Manchester School in Canada has had a multitude of
pupils; none more brilliant than Mr. Crerar, who seems to have made Free
Trade a species of bondage.  In no other land could Michael Clark so well
have demonstrated the virtues of Free-Trade.  On those plains, buffaloes
worth multi-millions of dollars in trade annually migrated across
"Parallel 49" into Montana and back again into the Territories.  The
prairie schooner trekked northward over the border carrying migrants in
search of homes when there was no government official to turn them back
or to question the terminus of their travels.  The freight wagons creaked
up from the south into MacLeod and past it into the valley of
Saskatchewan, carrying goods made and bought in the land of the Western
Yankee long before the great antidote to Free Trade, the Transcontinental
Railway, put those crooked trails out of business.

Clark was spouting free-trade on the prairies at a time when many men in
the West scarcely knew that trade had any restrictions except in the
matter of beverages.  He was an apostle of Cobdenism almost before the
Territories were baptized into party politics at all; when Regina was the
home of a Territorial County Council that had neither Tories nor Grits.
He was farming and prophesying commercial union before James J. Hill
began to compete with the protective C.P.R. for trade north and south
instead of the long-haul east and west.  Before ever a real Agrarian
began to head out on the plains he was contending like a tribune of the
plebs, that unrestricted reciprocity between two halves of a great
productive continent, of which one-half contains nine-tenths of the
people, was not a prelude to annexation away from the grand old Empire.
And when he got into Parliament the voice that had been so mighty in the
trail-side school houses and the little town-halls became more potent
than ever as "Red Michael" went full tilt in the House against the high
protectionists.

High courage was here.  Bucking bronchos from the West who had gone to
Ottawa were duly corralled, haltered, hobbled, surcingled and thrown,
finally harnessed and driven by either of the old parties.  In breaking a
political broncho the Liberal party was as good as the other.  But the
House is full of insurgents now, lining up into a tyrannized and
tyrannous group organizing as a party.  In Clark's inaugural days, and
for years after, there was but one real solo voice calling like a
trombone from a high tower for Free Trade as the Kingdom of God which, if
they would first seek it, all other things would be added unto them.

French psychology traces certain forms of insanity to the fixed idea.
There have been times when Parliament has regarded Michael Clark as a
melancholy victim of this big idea that warped his whole political
mentality.  But it was a grand form of insanity.  Nobody ever heard Clark
in the House who did not realize that here was a fine British rebel whose
brain should be a great hope to his party.  The old chief knew that.  He
kept his ear towards Clark when he was sometimes deaf to his ministers.

Clark was the mountain peak which the party had left for its fleshly
sojourn in Egypt.  The Liberal party in Canada had once been a free trade
party--somewhat before Clark's time.  In free trade and the universal
franchise had been its life.  But Liberalism before 1896 was one thing;
afterwards another.  Laurier in practice knew that Clark was
magnificently wrong; in theory superbly right.  Therefore he indulged and
admired him; sometimes playing with him, conscious that Liberalism was
the only show in which Clark could be a national performer.

In truth Michael Clark was for long enough a man without a party.  But
from the benches of the Liberals he could stand and preach his Manchester
doctrines to Hansard and the nation, even when the party yawned and held
dangerously on to the tariff.

It was always a tonic to hear Clark in the House.  Like Carlyle he
breathed a certain inexorable vitality into public affairs.  To meet
Clark in the corridors was to get a breeze that swept like a chinook
across the frozen waste of old-line politics.  In the gloom of the lobby
this apostle of red hair and rubicund visage was a beacon light.  I have
met him so, of a Saturday afternoon when the House was out of session,
and when the member for Red Deer was ripe for a free talk to any
stranger.  A great friendliness possessed him always.  He could laugh at
the besetments of party and the tyranny that opportunism imposes on great
minds.  He himself was free.  He wanted others to be free.  He could
stand for half an hour in one gloomy crypt of those corridors in the old
Parliament and talk of the power of being that kind of Liberal.

It was the wheat that helped to keep Clark where he was on the outpost of
Liberalism.  When his old leader became enswathed with election bandages,
Clark looked out upon the landscapes of the wheat, not so long ago the
limitless pasture of the free-trade buffaloes, and felt again the vision
of the life that is Liberal but is sometimes called another name.

Alberta was leaping to a great life.  Almost in the middle of it north
and south is the town of Red Deer.  All about it were the settlements of
"nationals" emancipated from bondage in Europe.  What was the use, quoth
Clark, of bringing such people to a country of free homestead land, of
alleged free institutions and making them the slaves, first of political
machines, second of protected interests in the East?  If enslaved people
were to become free in a new land why should the wheat and the oats and
the cattle which they raised not be made free to move for a market as
naturally as the wind blows across the borders?

This may not have been the precise order in which such ideas generated in
the mind of Michael Clark; but it is the way those ideas confronting such
a man strike a contemporary.  I have lived in the land where Clark lives,
though not at Red Deer, and remember well the burning desire of twenty
years ago in that far northwest for economic emancipation.  Then at any
meeting, no matter what, any little dinner to a citizen no matter whom,
men rose to talk about the need of conquering the isolation of the
country.  They remembered the tyranny of the old Trading Company into
Hudson's Bay.  They clamoured for more people, more farms, more towns,
more railways, more life--from the East.  And when it came they said the
East was a tyrant, an economic monster to bleed them white.  Clark, as
one remembers him best, has not been so much a foe to the East as he has
wanted to be a friend to the South.

But a new oligarchy was arising on the great prairies.  As official
liberalism got its grip on the three Provinces and became itself a
tyrant, while unofficial Toryism in league with the big railways got a
stranglehold on British Columbia, and when even "Honest" Frank Oliver
ceased to be an independent Liberal and became a red-taped Minister of
the Interior, Clark the Free Trader in Parliament found himself striking
hands with a sect mainly of Liberal Radicals first called Grain Growers,
next Agrarians, and by some the very devil.  With official Liberalism as
expressed by Scott, Sifton, Cross, Norris and Martin he had only
superficial sympathy.  These men were more or less on masquerade.  The
Agrarians were barefaced, one-faced Radicals who would open the borders,
and abolish the customs houses, and set up a sort of Western political
autonomy whose root idea was that trade should be as free as
grasshoppers.  These people were not raising Old Flag wheat.

How far Clark fell in line with all the doctrines of the United Grain
Growers, I do not know.  But one thing clear about this insurgent is that
he has always stood four-square for the British connection--and for all
that it means to Canada.  Clark is a Britisher.  He still has his English
accent.  You would spot him at once as a transplanted Englishman.  He is
prouder of being a Briton in Canada than he ever would have been in
England.  Clark never forgot--Manchester and Cobden.  He stood among the
wheat and saw the Empire.

When the War came and his adopted Province of Alberta for a long while
held the lead in enlistments for war, no man was happier in the grim
outlook than the member for Red Deer.  The War to him was a great
emergence of Liberalism the world over when Peace should bring Free
Humanity, Free wheat, Free trade.  Why not?  His son went to the war--and
he lost him.  His speech on the Military Service Act was in many respects
the best of all in that debate, not in rhetoric, but in logical virility.
It was a howitzer broadside, slow, deliberate, but every shot a hit.  His
old leader had already declined a belated offer of Coalition and was now
opposing conscription and arguing for amendment by Referendum.  In all
his life he never got from a political foe such a searchlight on his soul
as his once devoted follower gave him in this speech.

Laurier had previously executed the Nationalist dodge of taking refuge
behind the Militia Act, asserting that it was right to enforce that Act
calling out the Militia for the defence of Canada; to which Clark replied:

"England is fighting this war wherever she sees the turban of a Turk or
the helmet of a Teuton.  She is fighting it in Egypt, Mesopotamia, in
Macedonia, in Belgium--most of all in France. . . .  America, whose
independence had been fought in a struggle of blood for sound fiscal
ideas was now immortalizing her reunion with Britain, her old
enemy. . . .  If organized labour was opposed to conscription, so much
the worse for labour, whose own trades unions were a form of
conscription; in England he had never named either lord or labour with a
capital L. . . .  Canada should be in the war to her last man and her
last dollar. . . .  As to the referendum amendment, it was fathered by
the man who down to his attitude on this question had gone into history
as the greatest of all Canadians, but who had applauded Pugsley when he
argued against extending the life of this Parliament, and who in the
matter of sending men to fight, in organizing the whole nation for war,
in conserving national unity, and in making an election a smaller matter
than the honour of a nation was opposed to the Government.  If the
amendment should carry, and the Referendum show a majority against the
Government measure by omitting the soldier vote and piling up the vote
from the Province which had given birth to the Referendum, then when the
author of that measure should be returned to power on a no-conscription
issue what chance was there for Canada to win her part of the war with
the lion Laurier and the lamb Oliver lying down together--and a little
child--Macdonald from Pictou--leading them?"

Not as a climax, but as a mere personal note midway in his speech, he had
said:

"I have a little toddling grandson on my farm out West to-day whose
father was killed with a gunshot wound in his neck two weeks ago.  I say
to you, sir, on my soul and conscience I support this Bill, because I
believe it to be a part of the necessary machinery which can save that
little fellow, born a Canadian, and thousands of others like him from
ever going through what his father and his uncles have gone through."

Parliamentary debate has risen to much higher levels of oratory, but
seldom to such a height of accusing vindication and personal affection
for the accused from whom an insurgent is driven to sever his allegiance.
Clark can always make some sort of big human speech with a natural knack
of getting at the vitals of a subject in simple, dignified language and a
searching logic--once you admit his major premiss.  That one speech flung
into bold relief, almost as the No Man's Land under a flare of a great
barrage, the issues between men who for so many years had been political
confederates.

A couple of years later I again met Clark when he was speaking guest at
an Empire Club luncheon.  His topic was--the Empire.  His brand of
political ideas was vastly different from those of the average man in his
audience, and he knew it.  The Club had invited him, because he was
Michael Clark.  He said not a word about trade.  He uttered no
propaganda.  He talked simply and strongly about the race that had made
the Empire which to him was a commonwealth of neither trade nor conquest
but of liberating ideas.

I don't think that any of the Chamberlain-Foster school could have
uttered quite so broad and noble a tribute to the inner vitality of the
British League of Nations.  And not even Mr. Rowell could have surpassed
it for breadth of view on that subject, Clark looked at the Empire from
within outwards.  He saw in it the expression of a great race of people
working the leaven upon other races; a mighty confederacy of free nations.

Red Michael has been a great informing Liberal, and a big illuminating
Canadian.  Whether grandly right or magnificently wrong, he is never
uninteresting; a man who could come off a stack of wheat, wash himself up
bare-armed, and in Sunday clothes but seldom well-dressed and never
groomed, step on to a platform over in the schoolhouse or the town hall
and make a great speech to men who believe in the simplicity of a big
mind that thinks hard on the welfare of the majority.  John Bright would
have loved such a man.  Even John Macdonald might have loved him.  And
the one regret among those who value the power of a big free nature in a
nation is, that owing to some fatalistic streak in his genius, Michael
Clark has not risen to the inspiring height from which the country might
get the best that he has to give.  Never cured of his insurgency in
Parliament, he has become an uncompromising conformist to one big and
bigoted idea that universal Free-Trade is the need of the world, and
especially of Canada.  He persists in the delusion that what has been
good for Britain must be good for Canada; not only is Canada at war when
Britain fights, but when Britain has no tariff Canada must have free
trade.

All which is freely forgiven this stalwart on account of his challenge to
the group who took his Free Trade luggage and attempted to label it
National Progressive.  The Free Trader who could watch that caravan of
adventurers going down the trail and stoutly tell them all to keep on
going to the devil, deserves well of his country.  Michael Clark's
advocacy of Progressivism might have got him the promise of a Cabinet
position.  His rejection of it is the proof that the free-man who
believes in great parties can never be bound by a class-conscious group.
"Better a dinner of herbs . . . ."  Michael Clark, whether M.P. or not,
is free to consider himself if need be a party of one man--without a
platform, but not devoid of a cause.

Whatever Michael Clark knows about the benefits of Free Trade and its
effect upon the exchanges, he knows peculiarly well the danger of
unrestricted reciprocity in sentiment between Canada and the United
States.




THE SPHINX FROM SASKATCHEWAN

HON. J. A. CALDER

The Hon. J. A. Calder has never seen the Sphinx.  But he has a looking
glass.  He has never been in Egypt.  But he has lived a long while in
Saskatchewan.  A man who can continue to know as much as he knows about
the confessional side of government, and who can say so little, has
some claim to be considered--Canada's political Sphinx.

Such a reputation is sometimes enviable.  The average public man
babbles.  Often he talks to conceal thought or as a substitute for
action.  The mental energy needed to turn end for end what some of
these garrulous people say, in order to decipher just what they mean,
is usually more than the wisdom is worth.  Calder spares us.  He tells
us nothing.  His silence may be golden, or it may be just a habit; but
from the known character of Calder it is never the omniscience of
stupidity.

A Sphinx in action may sometimes give himself away.  It is not usual
for a Sphinx to do anything except to conceal the riddle.  Calder has
all his life been a busy man.  He is still in middle age.  All but
fourteen years of his life up till 1917 he spent in the West, most of
it in the part now known as Saskatchewan.  Ten years ago he was
furtively discussed as successor to Laurier.  He is now a
Unionist-Liberal.  To give him work in the administration commensurate
with his ability--or somewhere near it--a new department was created in
Immigration.  Now he is slated for the Senate!

Little was heard about Calder's department.  He had a publicity bureau
which did not spend vast amounts of money on diffusing information.
The department is said to contain a moving picture section, some of
whose films probably creep into Canadian movie houses.  But nobody ever
saw a picture of J. A. Calder on a screen.  He had a Canadian novelist
as chief of publicity.  That novelist might have yearned for the chance
to immortalize his chief in a story, but so long as he is in the pay of
Mr. Calder's department he will continue to yearn.  And not even he has
been given to understand why when a reconstructed Liberal like Mr.
Rowell left the Cabinet at the appointment of Premier Meighen, the
Minister of Immigration stayed on.  One might surmise that the man who,
a decade ago, looked to some people like an Elisha to Laurier, would
run again in Moosejaw as a National Liberal Conservative with the
expectation of re-entering the Cabinet, probably as Minister of the
Interior.  But he was suddenly and humdrumly designated for the Senate.

Apparently the Sphinx is not a great deal concerned over the fact that
his action in the case would throw some light on the sort of government
we may expect, and the kind of man we are privileged to conjecture Mr.
Calder to be.  He seems to take very little interest in what any one
thinks about him.  He accompanied the Premier on his Western trip.  Now
and then he made a speech.  He was heckled.  He was in the land of his
critics, where he was unofficially known as "Jim".  What did he mean by
staying in a Government which was supposed to have finished its work in
1919?  Was he coming back as a Liberal?  Had he no longer any
fellow-feeling for the farmers among whom he had lived for so long?
The Sphinx did not directly say.  He was publicly and conventionally
endorsing the Premier, who was well able to speak for himself on behalf
of the administration.

Calder was headmaster of Moosejaw High School when he was twenty-three,
in the year 1891.  He must have learned reticence then.  Up in
Edmonton, a few years later one heard considerably of Goggin, the
speechmaking educationist of the prairie; rarely or never of Calder,
who about that time was Inspector of Schools for the Territories, not
yet provinces.  The silent young inspector must have looked like the
reincarnation of Socrates as he drove--sometimes a four-horse team on a
buckboard--through the sloughs of the Northwest.  No prairie doctor
with a radius of fifty miles, none but a pioneer missionary like
McDougall or Robertson, ever had so glorious a chance to study what the
life of a new country was going to be, as this inspector toiling
hundreds of miles over a land, where, if he stopped at three
school-houses a week, he was doing a good average in bad weather.

Regina had no party politics then.  All it had was the mounted police
and a leg-boot legislature.  Every man was then a trailsman.  In
Calder's time as Inspector, there were only 400 miles of railway north
of the C.P.R. main line--the two branches to Prince Albert and to
Edmonton.  It was only in the last year or two of this buckboard and
broncho inspectorate that there were even any Doukhobors in that part
of the world to bring back the days of Adam and Eve.  He saw all the
"nationals" beginning to arrive.  He could put his finger on a gaunt
anemic map of the Territories and point out just where there was
beginning to be some nucleus of a foreign settlement.  He could talk a
little Cree and he learned the jargon of several countries in Europe.
He saw the farmers arise, and railways begin, and little villages dot
the skyline, and here and there an elevator, when a box car was looked
at by a trailsman as a small boy gapes at a circus parade.

Calder lived in Regina when politics was born.  He shares with Frank
Oliver the memory of the day when Nicholas Flood Davin was the wonder
orator of the West, and when freight-carters from Winnipeg to Edmonton
via Saskatoon, which was then a temperance colony, carried demijohns of
whisky on traders' permits to make everybody at home ingloriously
drunk, including the mounted police.  He recalls the day when the first
lieutenant-governor was inaugurated in Regina and what Frank Oliver
said about it.  Four years he was Deputy Commissioner of Education for
the Territories up till the inauguration of two new Provinces when,
travelling on a thousand miles of new railway and over the old main
line of the C.P.R., Laurier paid his first visit to the Great West and
discovered as one of its greatest potentialities J. A. Calder, who
under Premier Scott became Provincial Treasurer and Commissioner of
Education.

To people outside Saskatchewan--even in Alberta, he was very little
known--Calder has always been a somewhat nebulous figure; to some
critics, a rather suspicious character; but always--clever.  Being a
Sphinx he never courted popularity and seldom got it.  Scott was
brilliant, popular and impulsive.  His chief executive in Education,
Railways and Telephones and Premier _de facto_ during more than half of
Scott's term, was cold and calculating.  The West prefers warm-blooded
politicians.  Calder succeeded in spite of his manner, or his mask, or
whatever it may have been; and he did it by a penetrating knowledge of
the country, a superb capacity as administrator and a talent for
keeping out of trouble.  He was no man for prima donna scenes.  Even
the Education Department, a witch's cauldron of troubles over the
Separate School question in the new provinces, never entangled him in
theatricals.  He was unpopular with the Opposition as soon as the new
Government began, because he was regarded as a Civil Service
interloper.  What business had a school inspector in politics, and in a
Cabinet?

Calder demonstrated that best when he handed over the educational
cauldron to Scott and became Minister of Railways and Telephones.  Here
was a department of utility administration in which he shone.  He had
great political executive ability.  When Scott was absent more than
half his time through illness, Calder was Premier.  There was no other
man to choose.  The liquor problem was more his to handle than the
Premier's.  Calder did not share the popular enthusiasm for
Government-dispensed liquor.  He knew the weaknesses of officials and
the historic thirst of the prairie.  The Opposition constantly accused
him of being in league with the liquor men.  Calder made no denial or
affirmation.  He was Mephisto enough to let people wonder whether he
was one thing or the opposite.

A man who knew Calder twenty-two years ago gave, not long ago, some
impressions of the Minister in connections with the liquor
administration.

"About two weeks after Saskatchewan went dry," he said, "I was spending
a night in one of the larger towns in the Province.  Among the other
guests at the hotel was a member of the Government.  In the lobby an
interesting argument waged throughout the evening, the Minister of
course, defending the action of the Government in closing the bars.
Among other things he told us about the relief work carried on by the
Dominion and Provincial Governments in certain districts where there
had been crop failures, in order that the destitute settlers might earn
or borrow enough to keep themselves and their families through the
winter.  He emphasized one mistake the Government had made in not first
closing every bar in the districts affected, because there were many
instances where every dollar that had been earned or borrowed had been
spent in the bars on the very day that it was received, by the men
whose families it was intended to save from freezing and starvation.

"I was telling this afterwards to one of the leading social reformers
of Saskatchewan, and a smile played over his face as I was speaking.
When I had finished he said:

"'He didn't tell you the whole story.  We recognized the necessity of
closing those bars before that relief work was started, and urged it so
strongly on the Government that they agreed to do it.  The
Orders-in-Council were drawn up and ready to be signed when Calder, who
had been absent from the Province on business, returned and immediately
it was all off.'"

Calder has a sister who is one of the leading social workers in Regina.
She has a profound regard for her talented brother Jim.

The liquor did more than even Separate Schools to disrupt Government
forces in Saskatchewan.  Calder was no hypocrite to weep over the moral
issues in prohibition.  He was not a profound governmentarian or a
champion of enforced morality.  A Government might own and operate
telephones, but not so well consciences.  The liquor administration
turned out to be a mess in Saskatchewan, largely because the
administration did not unanimously believe in the thing that the
majority seemed to want.  Calder was no more to blame than anybody
else, except that he was highest in the Government when the Premier was
away.

The reformers said that Calder was pro-liquor in the administration.
He seemed to have no opinions about that--at least for publication.
Ideals often run away with communities.  If he had only spouted a
little now and then he would have given people a chance to bring
something home to him, and himself a chance to get near the people.
Two or three scandals came up in departments over which he had control.
Commissions were appointed to investigate; they always exonerated
Calder.  Even in the search-light on liquor--as many as four, one after
another--no technical blame attached to the silent Minister.  Calder
may have had a contempt for either commissions or public opinion.  A
Sphinx is as a rule not much of a burning avenger of wrongs to the
community.  Besides Scott was continually running into emotional
trouble.  The Premier _de facto_ had the balance to keep.  He must work
while other people talked.

A German-born but thoroughly loyal detective engaged by the Borden
Government to report upon seditious activities of the German element
who were so badly disgruntled over the Wartime Elections Act, repeated
to the writer more than once with great vehemence that Mr. Calder had a
special interest in the _Regina Leader_, which was used to get votes
for the Administration, particularly among the German element.
Governments had been known to own newspapers before Calder ever began.
_The Leader_ was naturally a Government organ and may have needed pap.
This is a form of patronage hard to uproot.

When Scott finally retired the chief administrator did not succeed him.
Martin was picked, a safe, genial and popular man.  The Sphinx, it is
said, might have had the post; but he preferred to stay behind the
scenes.  Before that he had been much talked about as a possible
successor to Laurier--but with not much hope of succeeding.  There are
probably a number of reasons why Mr. Calder did not take the Provincial
Premiership.  Dig them out of Calder if you may.  He has never
explained.  He leaves it to his commentators.

We are privileged therefore to conjecture that:

Mr. Calder was pretty well sick of Saskatchewan politics and was
looking hard in almost any direction for a good way out;

Mr. Calder could see far enough into the near future of prairie
politics to know that Liberalism was becoming a label for something
else; and he was not disposed to come out as an Agrarian Liberal;

Mr. Calder wanted a chance to begin politics all over again, because
with all his practical success he felt that he had travelled some wrong
trails.

Possibly all of these had something to do with the case.  At the
Winnipeg Liberal Convention in 1917 he was a coalition-conscription
Liberal.  He worked against the Liberal machine that captured the
Convention by a fluke for Laurier.  Before that he was known to believe
in Union Government.  It was only common sense to make him one of the
Prairie triumvirate--Calder, Sifton, Crerar, who carried the West into
the Union.  Cloudy as his career has been, for no reason that anyone
specially cared to name, he might in Ottawa be a big force for the
Government.  He was a behind-the-scenes actor.  He knew something about
the art of winning elections and converting immigrants into voters.  He
was practical.  He would be needed in Ottawa--more than he could see
any use for his talent in Saskatchewan with its farmer-dominated
Cabinets.

Alberta has gone Agrarian.  All Saskatchewan needs is a change of
label.  Some psychological morning Premier Martin will get up and rub
out "Liberal" after his name, buy a big farm and set up as a National
Progressive.  Provincial Legislatures are things to be captured.  The
old parties shrewdly used them in the Ottawa game.  The new ones are
just as apt.  Too long these Western elective bodies have been on the
switch.  It is time to shunt them, once more, on to the main line that
leads to Ottawa--with a different company label on the cars.

By no exercise of the imagination can one behold Jim Calder becoming a
Grain-Grower Progressive.  The thing is anomalous.

On the other side of the Sphinx he is credited by those also who know
him well in Regina with going to Ottawa purely as a patriotic duty.  He
wanted some work to do for the whole country bigger than any he had
done in Regina.  The authority formerly quoted in this article had this
to say about Calder in 1917 when Calder took office in Ottawa:

"About the time of the Winnipeg Convention I was talking with the same
man whom I have already quoted, and we were discussing the enigma which
Calder's character and public record seemed to present.  I knew that my
friend was not especially a friend of Calder's, so his words seemed to
carry greater weight.

"'There is no person in Canadian public life,' he said, 'who has been
trying more conscientiously and consistently to be good than Calder.  I
will not say that his motive may be higher than that of political
expediency; but he has been and is more scrupulously careful to do
nothing that may reflect in any way upon his honour and integrity.  I
believe that he has set before him the highest possible ideal of public
service and that he is doing everything he can to live up to it.'"

A prominent citizen of Regina who has seen a good deal of Calder, both
in his home city and in Ottawa, has the same opinion; adding that
Calder never bamboozles a deputation with suave words or false hopes;
what the Cabinet thinks about any particular programme of a deputation
he already knows and suggests that a typed memo, which he will present,
will be as good as waiting days for a personal appeal.  In 1919 he
informed the writer that he proposed to enact much-needed reforms in
immigrating Canada, especially as to the quality of new-comers.

Why has Mr. Calder never made a big study of this absorbing question?
When the Premier went to the Imperial Conference, with his mind pretty
well made up on the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, why had he not in his
grip, to show the Conference, one common sense, powerful little book
signed by Hon. J. A. Calder, Minister of Immigration, giving a complete
exposition of Japanese life in Canada?  When we are all talking about
the good _entente_ with the United States why can't we get from the
Immigration Department in Ottawa a hand-book giving a complete picture
of what Americans have done in the West?

However, the Sphinx may have the best of reasons for not doing these
simple things.  But there is scarcely a Department of administration
that does not regard itself as a machine for winning elections as much
as for serving the people who pay for it.  Apart from all he has not
told us, I have no doubt Mr. Calder is doing a big reforming work on
immigration in Ottawa.

The Immigration Minister should be our leading sociologist.  He should
be able to diagnose communities.  He might easily begin upon Ottawa.
What a study a cross section of the Smart Set would be, especially upon
the arrival of a new king at Rideau Hall!  There's nothing in other
democracies quite like that.  Washington has a White House, but the
inmate is merely an elected servant of the State.  Rideau Hall is an
endowment, a gift of the gods.  The 30,000 people of greater and lesser
degree in Ottawa who normally or abnormally live by the Civil Service
are profoundly affected by the arrival, sojourn and departure of the
Governor-General.  They are vitally influenced and entertained by the
Parliamentary restaurant, even without the bar.  The social show
provided by Ministers' and members' wives and their visiting friends is
itself a subtle study in the art of getting on in the new world, which
is at the root of all immigration.  Bridge for money and dining out
with your friend's wife are within the reach of any ambitious
immigrant.  The Smart Set in Ottawa is an exotic colony all by itself.
Montreal and Toronto and Winnipeg can merely copy it.  Some of the
farmers have their eye on the Set; no, not to abolish it.  Women must
have their share in the Government.  Petticoats and politics are
affinities.  Farmers are no more necessarily immune from what is said
to have corrupted the Roman Empire than Tories or Grits.  Farmers in
fact, as Mr. Calder knows, are not the hope of the world; neither are
lawyers nor manufacturers.

Suppose we ask the Sphinx about this.  Listen in imagination to this
once Liberal, as with an astounding burst of candour he says:

"My friend, your description of my make-up may be as right or as
foolish as anybody feels disposed to think.  None of it bothers me.
What does bother me is the law of compensation.  Agree with me that the
manufacturer had his drastic innings with Canadian governments; that
tariffs and protected industries are the result; that lawyers--yes, I'm
a lawyer--have had a big day in our affairs because they had the talent
for schemes and speeches.  Admit that and conclude--that the very human
farmer thinks his turn is coming, and rather soon.  But--somebody who
was never educated as a Tory has got to help the
National-Liberal-Conservative Government to get an even chance to
administer this nation after the upheavals of war.  Somebody who moves
silently while others are talking their tongues loose may be needed to
manipulate----"

Before the Sphinx could complete his statement of the case he was
politely asked if he would care to inter his talents in the Canadian
Senate, and he suavely answered that such a thing might be a good way
to solve the conundrum, even though it would make a thoroughly stupid
last act in the play.




A TRUE VOICE OF LABOUR

MR. TOM MOORE

Many years ago an Irish poet visiting Canada and voyaging down the
Ottawa wrote a poem of which may people recall only the lines--

  "Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
  The rapids are near, the daylight's past."


The Tom Moore about whom this article is sketched is not a poet.  He
is, in fact, one of the prosiest public men in Canada.  But we may
leave it to any of those who have known him during the past three years
when he has been President of the Trades and Labour Congress, if many
and many a time he has not felt some such sentiment as--

  "Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
  The rapids are near, the daylight's past."


Since Mr. Charles Draper first became Secretary of that Congress he has
never known a period when so much was expected of a President by way of
limitless patience, statesmanship and self-control as has been shown by
Tom Moore.  The rapids were always close to this man, and there were
rocks under the rapids.  It took steady piloting by the captain to keep
the crew of the labour ship from getting holes in her bottom and going
down.

So far as one has been able to follow the career of Moore at the head
of the Congress, and as reported in the public press, he stands now and
always for adherence to the principle of Union in evolution.  He
believes in labour getting ahead; but not by the method of upturning
everything that is established just to see what kinds of crawling
things there may be underneath.

When we reflect that Canada is not primarily an industrial so much as
an agricultural country, it is startling to remember that two years ago
it was the home of the only organized attempt ever made in America on a
scale of efficiency to establish something closely resembling a Soviet
government.  The big Winnipeg Strike was a lurid menace to the
solidarity of labour in Canada.  West of Winnipeg, once the Red River
Soviet had been set up, there was a chain of inflammable centres to
link up with the revolution.  Calgary was the scene of one convention
which had sent a cable of sympathy to Moscow.  British Columbia was
full of seething susceptible elements, regarded by some of the Reds
across the border as the real centre rather than Winnipeg, of the One
Big Union idea.  The mines of Alberta were dominated by swaggering
foreigners who owed no allegiance to the British or any other flag
except the Red emblem.  Long ago under the influence of the clergy and
the Archbishop of Montreal, Quebec had created a Canadian Labour
movement intended to cut Canadian labour away from the American
Federation.  This was a phase of the Nationalism that had its
headquarters in Quebec, but had spread in various strange guises to
other parts of the country, when none of the clergy or intellectuals
behind the movement dreamed that the One Big Union insurgent against
the A.F.L. would be the most theatrical result.  Once get the O.B.U.
idea rampant in Quebec with its scores of big industries and its
thousands of poorly educated workers, and the Red movement was due to
spread faster than the United Farmers' programme had ever done.

In the propagation of the Red programme Ontario, and especially
industrial Toronto, was regarded as the buffer state.  But if the
Soviet had succeeded in Winnipeg and further West, then the whole
weight of that success marching upon Ontario, with Quebec bringing up
the eastern end, would form a sort of nutcracker device from which
Ontario would have had a hard time to escape.

This was the dazzling formula propounded at a time when every nation in
the world was in a state of ferment, and when the vast loose-jointed
nation known as Canada was in a condition of instability unknown since
it became a Confederation.  The apostles of the Red programme had all
the advantages of being able to sling the paint on to the canvas of the
future without caring overmuch about the drawing.  Men in large numbers
everywhere seemed ready to grasp at and embrace the unusual.  People
who for years had been ground down by high prices for the commonest
necessities, considered seriously the question of the "salariat"
joining forces with organizing labour under a banner that might be red.
Civilization, physically shattered by the war and hysterically
stampeded by the doctrine of self-determination of peoples--a high form
of Bolshevism--stood ready to inquire whether the theories being tried
in Russia were not, after all, right, no matter what butchery might be
perpetrated in working them out.

Revolutionary ideas were everywhere.

Everything prepared the public mind.

A barrage of propaganda had been set up--and kept up.

Legitimate Trades Unionism itself in Britain had subscribed to The Aims
of Labour put forth by Arthur Henderson, who foreshadowed barricades
and bayonets in London streets if the proletariat did not get their
"rights".

Canada did not surely escape.  We had the Winnipeg flare-up, which was
watched by legitimate labour across the border.  The A.F.L. was
challenged for authority in this country.  It came to the peculiar
pass, that in order to maintain the solidarity of Canada as constituted
by Government under the Old Flag, the legitimate leaders of labour had
to fall back upon the one continental organization which makes
brotherhoods, not across the seas, nor so much across Canada, but
across the border.

It was Ontario's opportunity; the steady old Province of some bigotry,
great industry, many labour unions, and more or less fixed ideas
regarding the function of Government.  The office of Tom Moore is in
Ottawa.  There the President of the Trades and Labour Congress is in
close touch with the Labour Department, with the _Labour Gazette_, with
the Government in Council.  We shall never know just how much of the
steady conservatism of Moore at the first Congress following the
Winnipeg strike, as well as at other Congresses later, was developed
and held steady by association with Government.

But whether or no, even though it was nothing but loyalty to the
established brotherhoods of the A.F.L. or a deeper loyalty to his own
ideas of the case, the rock-steady influence of Tom Moore at the
conventions was the one biggest hope of the indirect action element
winning out.  He was not opposed to Socialism.  He has to work with
Socialists--of many sorts.  The whole basic idea of the Federation of
Labour is a degree of Socialism.  But it was the Marxian brand of
Socialism born in Germany and transplanted to Russia to which Moore was
opposed.  He saw no field for this in Canada.  He believed that Canada
had a right to freedom of action.  At least if it came to a choice
between authority from the Gompers organization in the United States,
and the Lenine tyranny in Russia, the course was clear.  Time and time
again he was bombarded and machine-gunned by the Red elements in
Congress and Convention.  As often he solidly stood his ground, based
upon the older idea of labour getting its rights through negotiation
and later through the ballot.

  "Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
  The rapids are near----"


But the daylight was not yet past for this Tom Moore.  He could see
ahead.

"I have seen Moore," says a close observer of him for two years, "faced
by labour opponents in a number of Western cities.  In all the howling
he has never lost his temper or his dignity."

It would have been so much easier for this man to lose his temper,
except that he knew it would be harder at the end when he had to face
his own steady rank and file accusing him of poor chieftainship.  It
would have been so much easier to compromise with the preachers of
glittering formulae, except that in the settling up he would have to
justify himself to those who suspected him of defection.

Moore stuck to the commonplace business of wages and hours and
agreements.  He had no head for the poetry of Utopias.  He knew, as he
knows, that wages are the chief item of cost in all commodities, and
that no matter what form of capitalism you choose, whether embodied in
a Soviet or in a close corporation of dividends, wages of labour must
be paid.  He knows that prices of living and of labour are almost
convertible.  Amid all the howling and paeaning for a better day, for
the new life, for the heaven upon earth, for the glorification of the
proletariat, he could stand hard and fast by the common necessity of
sticking to an agreement and as fast as possible bettering conditions.

We have heard independent observers say that the Reds have always shown
a grasp of the new life, while the Trades Union men were crawling along
with the uninspired programme of wages and hours; that the Reds were
the sacrificing idealists and the Unionists the selfish Tories who
wanted nothing more than to slowly improve their condition.  Well, the
logic of events seems to show that in the long run the Moores have the
gospel.  One scarcely cares to think what might have happened in
Canadian industry and common living had Tom Moore given way to the Reds
who came at him from almost every quarter.

At the 1920 Congress Moore had the old-fashioned courage to ask the new
Premier of Canada, Arthur Meighen, to address the delegates.  Of all
men, the man who prosecuted the leaders of the Winnipeg Strike was the
last to say anything to organized labour about milleniums or about
anything more Utopian than a common agreement between labour and
capital for the good of all.  Moore had no fear.  He believed that he
was right.  Had he invited Mackenzie King he would have got a speech
with more in it about the philosophy of Industry and Humanity, and
perhaps more to the point in the practical study of the labour
question.  By inviting the Premier, Moore paid respect to government.
Even Mr. Crerar might have made a more sympathetic speech.  But in the
Moore philosophy there is no radical connection between Crerar and
Labour.  In the organization of the Drury coalition between Labour and
the Farm he can see one way of getting the rights of each incorporated
into legislation.

But the Government is the final thing.  Statesmanship is bigger than
programmes painted on the clouds.  There's a vast deal to be done yet
in this country for the enfranchisement of labour in industry as it is
franchised in government.  There are pig-headed Tories of industry who
will have to illustrate tombstones before some of the old spirit of
repression of labour will die out in the nation.  But the die-hards are
fewer every year.  Some wages had to come down to get everything else
down.  But we believe also, as Moore probably does, that wages which
are the chief item of cost in all commodities ought to be as high as
production will stand and pay reasonable profits on investment; that
collective bargaining is sound as applied to individual industries, but
a form of bigoted tyranny when extended to the whole group or to the
sympathetic strike; and that the slogan, "Union is Strength", does not
mean levelling efficiency to the lowest common denominator.

The day may come in the recorded minutes of Trades and Labour
Congresses in Canada when a man of broader and more constructive vision
may be needed to build the brotherhood out into labour statesmanship.
But for the past few years, and for the few to come, Canadian labour
and common weal may well arise to thank Tom Moore, who, when the rapids
were near and the rocks were under the rapids, kept his craft rowing
into safe water.  Tom Moore of Ireland was a poet.  Tom Moore of Canada
is not.  The play on the names is only an accident.  The parallel
holds.  May we never again need such a man in this country to be sure
that labour does not run us all on the rocks under the Red rapids.




A MAN WITHOUT A PUBLIC

SIR WILLIAM MACKENZIE

A few years ago, before Stefansson reported on the blond Eskimos, the
first Eskimo movie ever taken was shown in Toronto to a small audience
who waited an hour for the film, which did not begin until a thick,
grizzly man with shrewish, penetrating eyes came in with his party.

"Sir William Mackenzie, late as usual," whispered one.  "He never
arrives on time at a public function, often sleeps at a play, and
sometimes when his family invite musicians to his home he plays bridge
in a distant room so as not to hear the music."

"Oh, yes," nudged the other; "but Sir William, you see, owns this film.
It was taken by his own exploration party."

"Oh!  Then the last scene will probably be Eskimos laying railway ties."

"Oh, no.  Digging up mineral deposits.  Iron--Sh!"

It was a wonderful film full of epical energy and primitive beauty;
picturing one of the few kinds of people in Canada that Mackenzie had
never been able to link up to civilization.  The room was hung with
costumes, curios and weapons of these folk, all of which were
afterwards presented to the Royal Ontario Museum by Sir William, who
was never enormously interested in ethnology.  And that exploration of
the far North was the last act in the complicated drama of William
Mackenzie's great discoveries in Canada.

A study of Mackenzie is useful under the head:

    WHAT DID YOU--NOT--DO TO WIN THE WAR?


He was appointed in 1915 on an "Economic Commission" which seems to
have practised a rigid economy on what it did for the country, because
it was never heard of again.  However, it was No. 1A of the 46 war-time
commissions, and because Mackenzie was a member it should have a
memorial.

There is one man in Germany something like William Mackenzie, who makes
money almost by magic out of utilities and buys up concerns in other
countries with money which he made in his own.  His name is Hugo
Stinnes.  Mackenzie is a bigger man and a higher type than Stinnes; but
each man regards his country as a commercial asset to be developed;
each is a wizard of a species of applied finance.  For years Mackenzie
was of speculative interest in Canada to people who had never even seen
his photograph.  He was the man who had a second headquarters in Ottawa
and a branch office in every provincial legislature except Prince
Edward Island.  We almost had Provincial Premiers lullabying to their
Cabinets:

  "Hush ye, hush ye, do not fret ye,
  The Black Douglas shall not get ye."


Mackenzie seemed to arise about twenty-five years ago from some magic
mountain and to stride down upon the plains with the momentum of a Goth
army.  He was a contractor who became for ten years a demigod.
Sometimes before the war when people saw him on the street they paused
to watch him walking as though a black bear had suddenly wandered down
from Muskoka.

"By Jove!  Mackenzie's back again."

"And is that William Mackenzie?"

"Did you never see him before?"

"No, sir, I never saw him before."

"Well, take a good look.  He's just going to lunch.  That man brought
back sixty million dollars this time from Threadneedle Street.  A gang
of reporters met him at Montreal to get the good news---more money for
Canada.  Great game!  He got forty millions a year ago or so."

"Who's that benign man with him?"

"That's a Provincial Premier.  His province wants more railways and the
Government has to guarantee more bonds----"

"Oh, then he sells bonds with Provinces for security?"

"That's the big idea.  Why, what's wrong with it?"

"Oh, I guess it's all right."

"Of course it is.  Railways can't be built out of earnings of lines
built last year.  Traffic's too thin; has to be developed.  Mackenzie's
building lines for a real population Canada, my boy, is a terrific
country to railroad.  The C.P.R. got land and cash grants.  Mackenzie
takes Government-guaranteed bonds.  The whole country is on the same
road.  We import people on to homestead land and we have to borrow
money to set the people up so that they'll become real Canadians----"

"Yes, especially at election time.  But tell me--who finally owns these
railroads?"

"Well, you've got me.  Nobody has figured that out yet.  Everything is
too new.  All I know is that Governments are behind Mackenzie, and the
people elect the Governments, and the people want the roads, and if
they don't get 'em the Government probably goes out.  Anyhow I take off
my hat to Sir William Mackenzie as a great man."

Nine-tenths of Canada used to think that Mackenzie was a great man.
The more he borrowed in England on Government-guaranteed bonds, and the
more he invested in Mexico and South America, and the greater number of
street railways, power plants, transmission lines, ore mountains, new
towns, smelters, docks, ships, whale fisheries, coal mines and land
companies that he and his able partner Mann were able to octopize, the
greater the country thought both these men were--and especially
Mackenzie.

Toronto Board of Trade once gave a dinner to these men to celebrate the
fact that by the building of the new line to Sudbury at a cost of about
fifteen millions, Toronto was at last actually located on a Mackenzie
road and had a right to be made the headquarters of the system.  A deer
in some places could have jumped from that line to the new line of the
C.P.R. built at the same time--and about the same cost.  There was no
farmer in Ottawa to prevent the C.P.R. from getting a charter to
double-track this line.  It was the same year that Mackenzie
inaugurated the Canadian Northern line of steamships, the two Royals,
and for lack of tidewater was compelled to dock them at Montreal under
the shadow of the C.P.R., who of course did not join in the civic
welcome.  And in the same year people were talking--as they are now
again--about Toronto and Port Arthur becoming ocean ports.  The wonder
was that Mackenzie did not see to it.  But he was fairly busy, tying
Halifax to Vancouver by the Yellowhead Pass, and giving Provincial
Cabinets new ideas about government.

Without a doubt William Mackenzie had a mandate from this country to do
a great work--and he overdid it.  Bankers and other financiers agreed
that he had found new ways of investing creative money.  Scarcely a
teacher of geography but admitted that Mackenzie was changing the map
of this country so fast that a new one became necessary every three
years.  New towns sprang up at the rate of a mile a day of new railway
built by Mackenzie.  Every new town became a monument to this man's
faith in the future of Canada.  Even the old city of Montreal, preserve
of the C.P.R., lent its mountain to Mackenzie for a tunnel and a "Model
City" on the hinter side.

There was always money to be had.  A map of Canada in Mackenzie's
satchel when he went to England to see money lenders seemed under his
talk as big as the whole British Empire.  It was not common Empire
patriotism to refuse either the money or the guarantees for the bonds.
The whole of Canada backed Mackenzie's notes.  It was he, not Sir
Thomas White, who invented the principle of Victory Loans whereby the
nation becomes your banker.  Between building a new line and operating
a line built last year, there was no system of accounting that could
audit his books.  The centipede became so vast and complex that no
banker could begin to understand it.  Mackenzie never made the effort.
He was developing Canada.

The Saskatchewan valley was the one great trunk Eldorado, the greatest
discovery of natural resources ever made in Canada.  The settlers in
that valley wanted more people, the people wanted the railways, the
Government needed the voters, and Mackenzie wanted settlers, people,
voters, Government and all.  If a Government was obstreperous,
Mackenzie might lend a heavy hand to help turn it out at the next
election.  It was not proper for a Government to obstruct him.  He was
the over-man.

In no other nation has there ever been a man who could play such a
prodigious and prodigal game with the resources of the whole country.
Mackenzie mobilized the nation before the war.  Millions of people in
Canada used to regard him as a sort of magnified Daniel Drew--the
father of Wall Street and watered stock and corrupt-contract railways.
But Mackenzie was a broader man than Drew, with a much higher sense of
honour.  Drew admitted that he was a wonderful Methodist, that he had
been a profiteer of the Civil War, and that he had starved a railway of
rails so that it killed a large number of people in an accident.
Mackenzie was no Methodist; and he never was a profiteer from any
emergency of the people.  He wanted Canada to prosper.  All his profits
must come from greater wealth in Canada, which he did much to produce.

Mackenzie had more faith in Canada than most of the politicians had.
He wanted a great Canada, chief Dominion in a great Empire, The best
way to conserve a nation's wealth, he said once, is to develop its
resources.  We never had such a developer.  He never was a born
railwayman, any more than he was a pure financier.  He was a colossal
exploiter of national resources by means of borrowed money.  In the era
before Mackenzie we had Clergue at the Soo.  Clergue was a pigmy
forerunner of Mackenzie.  What Clergue did in Algoma the other man
aimed to do for the whole country, And he almost did it.

Asked once why he gave so much leeway to men like Mackenzie and Mann,
Sir Wilfrid Laurier is reported to have said:

"Well, what other kind of men could you have to do such remarkable
work?"

Beaverbrook said at a dinner in Canada not long ago:

"I never was a William Mackenzie.  I created nothing as he did."

The debacle of Mackenzie railways was never contemplated by Mackenzie.
He did not even imagine that it was possible--except that he was
prophetically troubled by the ambition of Laurier to create a third
transcontinental.  He had the right of way in this.  He and Mann had
developed the Canadian Northern out of a little stub line in Dauphin,
Manitoba.  The thing grew because it served the people, and the people
lived in a fertile country that needed a road to market.  The whole
basic idea of the Mackenzie roads was to give more and more people a
road to market.  The original idea of the Grand Trunk Pacific and the
National Transcontinental was to rival the Canadian Pacific monument to
John A. Macdonald by erecting a railway monument to Wilfrid Laurier.

The race of the railways just about broke the nation's neck.  It was
not all the fault of Mackenzie that the race ever began, or that it was
carried on to insanity.  He was a practical philosopher to perceive
that a Government is an elective corporation capable of manipulation in
the interest of an all-Canada enterprise needed and wanted by the
people.  He was a master cynic to surmise that when the future came to
balance the accounts, Father Time would be a very bewildered assignee.

The war was very ill advised.  Mackenzie had no use for war.  He never
could see in the predicament of a nation any chance to profit for
himself.  He wanted perpetual prosperity.  It never occurred to him,
perhaps, that some day critics would arise to say that the country
called Canada had done more for William Mackenzie than he had ever done
for the country; and that when the parent utility of the cycle which he
had helped to create was declared bankrupt, he had no rights in the
case whatever and never should have been paid a dollar of indemnity for
the common stock.

But as the country had submitted to Mackenzie's system of building
railways, so it was compelled to be content with the Royal Commission
method of adjudicating what the builders should get out of the wreck.

Financiers and politicians and common citizens may wrangle till
doomsday about the ethics of this debacle.  They will never get anybody
to understand it.  The thing is an economic outlaw like its author.
Mackenzie as a common storekeeper would have been sold for taxes.  As a
railway builder he staged the greatest pageant of industry ever known
in Canada, and when the show went off the road because it was no longer
able to pay its bills, took what he could salvage of the properties and
left other men to wrestle with the reconstruction.

We shall never have another Mackenzie.  Bigger men may arise.  More
unusual characters may stalk out of obscurity into places of eminence
and power.  But there never again can be an era like the Mackenzie
epoch, because that kind of experience is suffered and enjoyed but once
in a nation's lifetime.  He still has big interests, some of them
gradually being taken over by governments and municipal corporations.
But he has shot his bolt, and it was a Jovian big one.  No doubt he is
enormously rich.  That does not matter.  Canada no longer cares whether
he is rich or poor.  Once a demigod in our national ledgers, he is now
a grizzled relique of his former energy.  He used to be a despot feared
by those who had to work under him, admired for his superhuman audacity
and power to get what he wanted just because he knew why and when he
wanted it, and capable of inspiring an almost insane loyalty to a
man-made system that never was anything at all but an economic mirage.
He is now just William Mackenzie, more or less a citizen, now and then
interviewed laconically by a reporter who never can extract anything
but arid commonplaces from what he says to the public.

Because, to William Mackenzie there never was any real public.  What he
cared about was the prosperous nation upon which he could build and
build without limit till he died.  When the nation came to a crisis in
the war he did nothing to help it, except to let the Railway War Board
pool his lines for traffic and the Government commandeer his ships.
The man who years before had been regarded as the greatest doer in
Canada, when the country and all Mackenzie's works along with it came
to the great test, never so much as lifted a personal finger to help in
the work that had to be done.  Mackenzie had done his work in
prosperity.  In the great predicament he had no function.  The nation
paid him his ducats and let him go.

This, if we are concerned about the man value of Canada, is a tragedy.
For there was in William Mackenzie somehow, with all his ruthlessness
and audacity and semi-piratical creed, the element of a kind of great
man.  There is in his uncommon face the look of a man who with less
excess of one quality might have become a wonderful citizen.  Nature
made him vastly selfish on a scale big enough to devise a totally new
scheme for over-capitalizing Canada.  She denied him the commoner human
qualities that make a man a constructive citizen whether his country is
in weal or woe.

The epic which Mackenzie and his partner achieved in this country
out-bid in dimensions, variety and the use of practical imagination,
even the work of Rhodes in South Africa.  It was a feat of economic and
financial engineering which but for its peculiarly selfish energy and
ruthless characteristics, might have become a monumental contribution
to the human welfare of Canada.  No man of common brain or conventional
ethics could have been the dynamic head of such a work.  For years,
decades, this astounding adventurer exercised his precarious despotism
over the country that he might make its prosperity a factor in his own
success.  In gambling with its securities he hoped to multiply its
wealth without diminishing its happiness.  The constructive imagination
and tireless energy that he expended on his great cycle of utilities,
had it been spent by a poet would have produced epics and dramas.  But
in all the things he did and the words he said, there is no record of
any sentiment of sacrifice for the good of a nation.

William Mackenzie had his day, while Governments rose and fell.  His
day is done.  The public which he dazzled and outwardly despised has no
credulity left for any further hero-worship of such a man.  "Well, what
does Mr. Mackenzie want now?" was the oft-repeated query of the
bewildered Laurier to Mackenzie agents in Ottawa.  No Canadian Premier
will ever ask such a question again.  Ottawa has no further
possibilities for William Mackenzie of any interest to the public.  The
kind of prosperity created by such men as he is played out in Canada
forever.

The forecast than Mackenzie and Flavelle might form a new two-man junta
to operate National railways was too absurd even to merit denial.  Such
a partnership would merely revive the old Schoolman debate of the
Middle Ages--What happens when an irresistible force meets an immovable
object?  The two mentalities are incompatible.  For twenty years the
chief common ground between them was the Canadian Bank of Commerce, of
which Sir Joseph is a director, who long ago discovered that the total
assets of the bank were but a turbine in the Niagara of Mackenzie
finance.

And William Mackenzie who built the conspiracy of enormous interests
with which his name is identified, was never meant to be a railway
operator at all.  One might as well expect Lloyd George to be a
successful manager of Sunlight Soap and of Lord Leverhulme.




THE IMPERIAL BRAINSTORM

LORD BEAVERBROOK

Lord Beaverbrook could stroll into an Arab camp and in five minutes be
psychologically persona grata as the man who could make something out of
almost nothing.  He could learn the Arab language, adopt their customs,
interpret their ideas, transact their tribal business, and go away
without an Arab to admit that the strange new chief--or whatever they
might call him--would ever learn to be a true Arab.

This man without a congenial country has an unlimited talent for adapting
himself to the necessities of time, place and opportunity.  He has little
or no power to assimilate himself to the real life of the people.  He
trailed like a comet through the land of his birth and left it in a
mirage of finance before Canada had made him a citizen.  He went to
England where in a few months he had made himself intimate with public
affairs; and in ten years, "with all his honours thick upon him," he has
not yet become an Englishman.

Once only I met this extraordinary man, at close range, for a number of
hours.  He was a most absorbing study; and he knew it.  There never was a
moment when Beaverbrook could not consciously estimate the effect of his
actions upon some other man, or group of men.  As an actor he is not a
mediocrity.

A personal friend vividly describes meeting him at a small semi-private
dinner in a Canadian city.  The ostensible occasion was a mere
complimentary affair to his lordship.  The psychological objective
was--something else.  There began the conjecture.  What was it?

It must be inferred.  There are some men who study the effect of
themselves upon a group.  The group method of psychology is essentially
Beaverbrookian.

A number of speeches had been pre-arranged for this dinner on behalf of
various interests.  At the close of the talks Beaverbrook was asked to
respond to a toast of his own health.  He did so in a perfectly amazing
confessional of a speech, saying things which he said he felt sure no
journalist present would publish.  He was asked questions.  Each question
meant one more speech.  He made four in all, occupying much more than an
hour of time in a most graphic and humanly interesting account of things
that had happened behind the curtain in British politics, shrewd
estimates of the signs of the times, forecasts of coming events and vivid
delineations of great men whom he had intimately met in various parts of
Europe.

In all this there was not a trace of embarrassment or of suspicion.  The
little dynamo with the prodigious head and the baby mouth and the
intense, deepset, restless eyes stood by his chair, and with knuckles on
the table much of the time, talked down into the flowers directly in
front of him.  He spoke sometimes in a husky, low voice, now and again in
a smothered shriek, again in a tragic whisper.  He was in a small
gathering and he seemed to know that though the dingy, mysterious room
was somewhat high, he had no need to lift his voice to the shrill
impetuous discord that is said to characterize his speeches in Commons or
Lords.  He was carried away by some indefinable atmosphere.  What it was
he scarcely knew.  After the dinner he shook hands with people, delivered
himself of a number of snappy brusqueries, laughed a good bit and, almost
the last to leave the charmed precinct where he had unbosomed himself
among "congenial" souls, he wandered out.

Next day, lying poseurishly on a lounge in his room at the hotel, he said
to a confidante who had been with him at the dinner:

"Bunting!" (that is not the true name) "Will you kindly repeat to me some
of the things I seem to have said last evening.  I know I talked an
unconscionably great deal.  What on earth did I say?"

As it had been a perfectly abstemious occasion, one imagines that
Beaverbrook at the dinner was sincere, though playing the actor, and that
in his room he was both theatrical and insincere.

This man has a confusing, but in his own mind seldom confused, orbit of
his own.  He was a conundrum in Canada.  He is an enigma in England.
That he still considers himself a Canadian, because he was born here,
fortuned here and voluntarily exiled from here after he had completely
mystified a large number of people as to his working psychology, is
proved by the fact that he continues to come back here.  He also
professes to be manning the _Daily Express_ with Canadians.  He has been
for ten years the intimate of Bonar Law, also a distinguished Canadian of
sorts.  And a few months ago there was a rumour, which no one remembers
him to have refuted, that he was a likely candidate for the
Governor-Generalship of Canada.  Of course if ever Rideau Hall should
take Beaverbrook for a tenant, it will be time to take refuge in a
Canadian republic.

It is easy to think disagreeable things about Beaverbrook, because he is
so enormously interesting, so pathologically unusual, and altogether so
brilliant and resourceful a phenomenon.  I have called him the Imperial
brainstorm.  A dozen other titles would fit him as well.  There are times
when one almost imagines himself mingling an element of real liking for
the man with one's unfailing admiration of his remarkable ability.  But
always when you feel like that cordial handshake and talking to him with
brusque familiarity, there is the intuitive feeling that one of the two,
perhaps both, might live to regret it.

You cannot absorb the atmosphere of such a man.  Whatever the sterling
qualities of his character, the approximate miracles of his achievements,
the warlike strategy of his career, you judge him at last by that
indefinable but inexorable law of common congeniality.  To live at close
range with Beaverbrook, to become part of his daily scheme of vibrations,
to work either with, or for, or even over him as a regular part of one's
programme would be to a normal man a penalty almost amounting to a crime.

Though of course tastes differ, even in companions.  There are people who
rather like hobnobbing with Beaverbrook.  Some are interested in his
idiosyncrasies, as though he were a good subject for a novel.  Some enjoy
the sensation of playing moth to a social flame.  Others--perhaps--have a
deep respect for his money which, like Carnegie's, is supposed to be a
perplexity to himself to know how to spend it that he may die poor.

Well, the noble lord has his idioms.  Discussing the details of the
little dinner already referred to a flippant but devoted critic said:

"I think he would enjoy speaking right in front of that huge fireplace.
He would consider it Napoleonic."

As to the social orbit of Beaverbrook, one may suspect that it is a
rather exotic atmosphere in which the sense of true human equation is
lost in a jumble.  A man who can entertain almost simultaneously, at his
country home, financiers, politicians, authors, and actresses from his
own theatre at Hammersmith, may be regarded as a shrewd social mergerist
but scarcely as a subtle entertainer of congenial souls.  As for the
discomfort of knowing what to do with his money, Beaverbrook has never
complained; during his latest visit to Canada he was offered and he
refused the purchase of two bankrupt newspapers each of which thought
that the acquisition of such a side line to the _Daily Express_ might
enable him to do some of the good in this country which he failed to
achieve while he lived here.

Estimating this man by the superficial but rather subtle qualities by
which he has achieved success, it seems a sort of irony to think what he
might have done and did not do for the country of his birth.  What did he
ever do for Canada?  Before the war--nothing.  He made huge fortunes
here.  He created mergers here.  He started consolidated companies here
that in time fought their way into the appreciated valuations of the
stock market.  He became Canada's greatest adventurer in creating a sort
of "wealth" from the merging of small, sometimes decrepit, concerns under
a new name and new issues of stock; just as Mackenzie was our greatest
adventurer in creating wealth from borrowed money.  Beaverbrook worked
mainly with small groups to whom he left the task of raising most of the
capital.  Thus his personal gains came neither from the immediately
increased earnings of companies which he amalgamated, nor directly from
the pockets of the shareholders.  Beaverbrook never made a dollar by
defrauding a director or luring unsuspicious dollars out of the pockets
of common people.  That species of tactics so often practised by men who
are near criminals was quite beneath him.  The laboratory where he got
his results was the stock market, which of course has its own codes of
ethics and plays its own remorseless game of making or breaking men.

His career here had most of the elements of romance.  Son of a poor
parson born in a cross-roads Ontario hamlet, brilliant but erratic
student at Dalhousie University, down-at-the-heels insurance agent in
Halifax, youthful merger of two small banks at a time when he was unable
to pay for his own clothes--we have here symptoms of a career which might
have turned into a character of high value in Canadian politics, public
service or social reform.

But Nature thrives on migrations.  Even a man sometimes takes better root
when he is transplanted.  The Beaverbrook that England has is a more
unusual character than the Max Aitken that Canada lost.  Canada to be
sure had lost enough brilliant men to other nations and imported enough
able men from abroad.  It was time to produce and to keep our own.  There
was national work for them all to do.  Aitken came up in the boom time of
Canada.  He fitted the time.  A nation's financial adversity was no
occasion for him.  He followed the wake and profited by the experiences
of builders of railways, industries, banks and provinces.  Every move
forward of the country in commercial expansion was a nudge ahead for his
chariot of fortune.  He was the most successful "bull" factor Canada ever
had.  But in all probability, were he to be flung into one of the
demoralized nations of democratized Europe he could make money even in
disaster.

Before he was thirty-five Max Aitken had become a multi-millionaire.  He
worked much as clever but humbler men have invented formulae to beat
bookmakers at the races.  Having done all this, at so early an age, what
was left?  Superficially we should have said--public life.  He had the
money, the talent, the leisure.  Canada had the need.

But Max Aitken never so much as became a pound-keeper in Canada, not
because he had not the opportunity, but because he had the shrewd sense
to feel that the land where he had made "his pile" was not the land in
which to serve his country.  To serve a nation means as a rule to deal
directly with the public.  Max Aitken had never dealt with the public.
Neither does he yet--except indirectly through a big daily newspaper of
phenomenal circulation.  On his last visit to Canada he was invited to
public functions.  He consistently declined; not because he shunned
popularity or hated the limelight, but because he would not have felt
comfortable.  In one of his speeches he pointed out that the securities
which he put on the market years ago were all now listed as paying
ventures.  It was more comfortable to make that remark as a returned
celebrity than to have made it as a citizen.

His own story of why he went to England, and stayed there, is ingenuous.
He said that he went in order to do business; that he tried to talk
business; that the public men with whom he had conference insisted on
talking politics; that he succumbed and stayed, winning a seat in the
Commons, and almost before an ordinary man could have said "Jack
Robinson", he was hobnobbing with men the calibre of Bonar Law, Lloyd
George, Northcliffe.

Only fragmentary accounts of Beaverbrook's political history in England
have as a rule drifted over here.  To show what an amazing story it is,
nothing can be better than to quote a curiously apt summary written for
two Canadian periodicals by Arthur Baxter, who for some years now has
been a sort of Boswell to Beaverbrook.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

In 1910 captured the seat for Ashton-under-Lyne.

In 1912 a vigorous and successful attack on Lloyd George concerning
finance matters in the House.

From 1911 to 1914 he entered parliamentary intrigue and gradually his
home at Leatherhead became a Mecca for puzzled politicians.

During this time somebody made him a Knight.

The Irish situation was more than threatening; the tariff issue was
causing bitterness; Austen Chamberlain with a minority following was
fighting Walter Long to lead the Tories and on this troublesome sea Sir
Max Aitken's barque bobbed up and down with the skipper's eyes keenly
alert.  He saw the possibilities in Bonar Law.  When Chamberlain and Long
created a deadlock, Beaverbrook advocated Bonar Law as leader of the Tory
Party.  To make his voice heard more distinctly he purchased the _Daily
Express_ and backed his candidate with a powerful but (then) not very
profitable newspaper.  Law has the reputation for modesty, but his
fellow-Canadian led him to the barrier, started him off and when he
stopped running he found himself leader.

For some time it had seemed as if Asquith's Coalition Government would
survive the war, but late in 1917 it was obvious that the old ship was
leaking badly.  Carson was the first to propose scuttling the frigate.
The others argued that even a sinking ship was better than no ship at
all, so the Irishman went overboard and sailed away on his own raft.
Bonar Law representing the good old Tory element kept on working the
pumps; Mr. Asquith kept on assuring the crew that all they needed was to
"wait and see"; and Lloyd George was wondering whether he had better take
a hand at the pumps as well or throw both Asquith and Bonar Law into the
sea.

At this juncture a sail was sighted.  It was Max Aitken's barque that
"hopped aboard" and took in the spectacle of his old Maritimian sweating
at the pumps; and noticed with a critical eye the extremely able
appearance of that able-bodied politician, Lloyd George.

Beaverbrook thought the situation over--swiftly.  He saw that the genial
Micawber on the Bridge could not be routed as long as Bonar Law and Lloyd
George stuck to him.  But even if they could be persuaded to heave the
skipper overboard, could they sail the ship and keep the crew loyal as
well?

He decided that Carson had to be brought back to the fold, so jumping
into his little craft he scoured the political sea and returned shortly
with the uncrowned king of Ireland on board.

But Lloyd George, Bonar Law and Sir Edward Carson loved each other as
much as three Prima Donnas.  They all agreed that Asquith was sailing to
disaster, but they weren't sure that they didn't prefer disaster under
the Old Chief to prolonged life in each other's company.

Beaverbrook had seen a vision and he knew that Lloyd George was the only
man in England capable of forming a ministry that would last six months.
Day after day the Canadian stuck to his task and gradually the three men,
all smarting from old political quarrels, agreed to send an ultimatum to
the skipper that they demanded a sailing committee under the leadership
of "Pincher" Lloyd George.

In other words they demanded a War Cabinet with the Welshman as Chairman.

Finally, in desperation, Lloyd George called for a mutiny.  Bonar Law
summoned all the Tory crew around him.  They went to the bridge and told
the Skipper that they were sorry to break the news to him, but it had
been decided that, all things considered, he had better walk the plank.

Mr. Asquith was dismayed, blustered, then resigned--defying the mutineer
Welshman to do any better.  His Majesty called on Bonar Law to form a
cabinet; the Canadian declined with thanks but mentioned the name of a
certain Welshman as a likely candidate for the job.  The Welshman was
asked--and accepted.  Two days later his Cabinet was formed.  Carson took
over the pumps; Bonar Law went up to the bridge and Lloyd George
delegated to himself the rank of Commander and Pilot of Britain's ship of
State.

And that is the story of Beaverbrook's tremendous contribution to winning
the war.  He secured most of the Labour Party, the Tories, and Carson for
Lloyd George; without them the Prime Minister could never have formed a
government.

Sir Max Aitken wanted more than a Peerage for his work; he had hoped for
a position of tremendous power, but the Government made him a Lord and he
went back to Canadian publicity.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Imagination tries to conceive of any Englishman coming over here to merge
Borden, Laurier and Crerar.  Imagination fails.  Not even Aitken could
have done it.  That he succeeded in England where he must have failed in
Canada must have reasons.

1. Experience in mergers.

2. Prestige as a Canadian.

3. Advantage of being--Max Aitken.

The first we understand.  The second involves the Empire.  Aitken was--if
anything that could be labelled--a Tory.  He had no trouble becoming a
Unionist.  His success with Bonar Law made it possible in getting rid of
Asquith.  He could call Carson "Edward".  He could think as fast as Lloyd
George.  It was a time for quick thinking--and action.  He had opened all
the heavy doors in Montreal--and closed them upon all but those he wanted
inside.  He tried the same thing in England.  His audacity was inspired.
Something had to be done.  Somebody must be the middleman.  Aitken had an
uncanny faculty for sizing up situations; for manipulating men; for
interpreting ambition--because no man in England had an ambition
surpassing his own.  He could play political chess and absorb superficial
culture at the same time.  Books, plays, authors, artists, manners,
accent--all were grist to his mill.  He was an astute actor.  He could
assume a virtue; simulate anxiety; hover about closed doors on tiptoe;
speak in the awed whisper; in the event of a crisis peer tragically into
men's faces.

England knew she had taken a queer character to bosom; a child who was
growing up at Gargantuan speed, an _enfant terrible_ of sudden and
prodigious experience; a creature who could sit up o' nights and plot and
organize and cabal and next morning rub out the wrinkles at tennis,
amiable if he beat his opponent, growling and savage if beaten, ready for
a campaign in the afternoon, a speech in the evening and a conference at
midnight.  Or he could plunge into polite arts, talk familiarly of
literature with duchesses, undergo a surgical operation to-day and sit up
for correspondence to-morrow.  He has a brain whose recipe for complete
rest is "change of work"!  Barring Lloyd George and De Valera, he has
perhaps the most unusual brain in Great Britain.

No Canadian, already a millionaire, had ever done these things.  Not even
Gilbert Parker had so amazingly cultivated the accent.  Greenwood,
diligent and talented, had been slow and determined.  Aitken--opened the
heavy doors.  As in Canada, he was at last able to close out all but
those who could play the game of the hour.  This Canadian could not only
talk, but act, Empire; not merely ape, but superficially assimilate,
England; and he understood the United States--because he was
temperamentally something of an American.

His success on the surface is incomprehensible.  The one key to it is his
persistent cultivation of Bonar Law, who in the Coalition was the great
prop to the Premier.  Beaverbrook hugely admires Lloyd George.  He
reverences Bonar Law.  The Premier and himself had too many points,
though not characteristics, in common to become running mates.
Intimately congenial to the Unionist leader, Aitken was never allowed to
become indispensable to the Premier.  His brief term as member of the War
Cabinet terminated almost suddenly.  Was it voluntary?  Or ambitious?
What did this Warwick want as reward more than the peerage which may have
been designed to chloroform an electric battery?

We are not told.  Once during the second year of war he offered to raise
and equip and command a battalion from New Brunswick.  His offer was not
accepted.  He went to Sam Hughes.  "Sam," he said, "I want a job in the
Canadian Army!"

He got it.  Aitken's work as Eye Witness to the Canadian troops and the
publication of "Canada in Flanders" was the performance of a man who in
the great crisis of war had found a sudden and sincere interest in his
native land that he had never exhibited while he was a citizen of this
country.  He showed a grasp of the human as well as the technical side of
war.  A man who could so rediscover his own nation could surely do
something new in helping to co-ordinate the Empire.  He has an
astonishing knowledge of great public men in all countries, a thorough
commercial knowledge of Europe and Asia, and--may we say a genius for a
sort of secret diplomacy?  His war record demonstrates most of these
qualities.  His Canadian War Memorials are a proof that he understands
how to make his own country useful to British artists.

What then did Beaverbrook expect as reward for his political services,
beyond a peerage and the sublime sense of having "done his duty" where he
saw it?

Governor-Generalship of Canada?

Ambassadorship to the United States?

Secretaryship of State for the "Colonies"?

Or the Chancellorship of the Exchequer?

There is really nothing else left for an ambition like this except the
Premiership of Great Britain.  Brilliant, plotting, crafty and
phenomenal, this young man has still the spirit of the corsair.  England
has not absorbed him.  But there is a general election pending over
there.  The Coalition is not on Gibraltar.  Party cleavages are rife.
Labour, Liberals, Socialists, Syndicalists, Bolshevists and old-line
Unionists are all pitching camps about the Premier's Verdun.  When the
battle really begins will Gen. Beaverbrook be in the citadel, or working
in a headquarters tent to merge any three of the common enemy into a
force that will haul down the Coalition flag?

"Why do you think Lloyd George will come back as powerfully as ever?" he
was asked here, after his admission that for the time being the Premier
was in the doldrums of unpopularity.

"Because--he always does!" was his cautious reply; in which one almost
detected the suspicion that he might not; and if so--what?

These are some of the unpredictables.  Even the answer Beaverbrook
himself might give to-day might be challenged by his action of to-morrow.
But this man has always succeeded in finance when a country was
prosperous, and in politics when the nation was confronted by emergency.
He is still too ambitious to adjourn permanently to Leatherhead, Surrey;
too young to write his memoirs.  England is a new world.  And it may
be--unless he has already alienated his personality from his genius--that
one of its picturesque discoverers will be Lord Beaverbrook.

Meanwhile he remarks that most of his friends are in Canada.  One misses
at least a fumbling guess, if in the days to come he will not value those
friends, whoever they may be, more than he ever did when he was making
millions here or merging politicians over there.  Such a man seldom moves
his forces just for parade.  As Aitken used this country to get himself
preferment in England on account of the Empire, so it may be suspected
that he has used England--not impossibly--to reclaim in this country
whatever credit he lost some time before he left it.

Meanwhile until the Government of Great Britain finds some better
function for this phenomenon, we recommend that he be made the official
economic investigator of the Empire.  Up to the present this has been a
pastime for leisured travellers like Lord Southesk, Sir Charles Dilke,
and Rider Haggard.  A man with Beaverbrook's ability to analyze economic
conditions and gain the confidence of men in high positions could be of
incalculable value in getting a thorough survey of the commercial and
political resources of a commonwealth which as yet nobody seems to
understand.  After that the Government might well make him Viceroy of
India, where he might apply his talent for group-coalition to the great
problem of constitutional Home Rule.




CONCLUSION

A Canadian newspaperman once flippantly asked the late W. T. Stead:

"What do you think about continentalism in North America?"

The answer came just as flippantly:

"Every nation has a right to go to the devil in its own way.  Canada
should not be denied the privilege."

There was a blunt candour about the reply that even from an egotist like
Stead meant infinitely more than the soothing-syrup idealism dispensed by
some of the visiting prophets to this country.  Stead did not mean that
in establishing independence of the United States, Canada should cut the
painter from the Great British Commonwealth.  But he was a trifle cynical
about the young nation, just as Disraeli was fifty years ago when he said
that "these colonies would yet be a millstone about Britain's neck".
Neither of them was more cynical about us than we usually are about
ourselves, never in theory, but in practice.

Most of the men sketched in the foregoing pages, as well as hundreds of
others in public life, realize that Parliament and Legislatures have a
hard time to keep themselves from going to the devil, and that so far as
they go along that road the nation travels with them.  As an experiment
in nationhood we have some peculiar and original weaknesses, as well as
strengths.  Belgium, for instance, could be tacked by Atlas overnight on
to one of our northward coasts, or set down as an island in some of our
northern waters, when only a geographer would notice the difference.
Belgium has a king and two million more people than Canada.  We have
slightly more territory than the United States, when New York State alone
has as many people as our whole country.  We are as big as many Britains
and we have enough railway mileage to make Britain a spider-web, when our
population is about one-fifth of hers and our ultimate authority in
democratic government comes from Downing Street.  Yet there are prophets
among us who predict that we shall yet be the pivot of the Empire.

Once you begin to speculate about the future of this country there is no
end.  And the past of the nation has rather little to do with estimating
its future.  We have been a wide-open immigration country.  In twenty
years we have transformed ourselves by a foreign policy with which
Britain had nothing to do.  Twenty years more and we could do it again
with even more disastrous results.  In 1867 the great compromise known as
Confederation tied four and a half millions of people into a political
unity.  In half a century we doubled our population; built 30,000 miles
of transcontinental and branch lines of railway; made ourselves a race
congress imitation of the United States; enacted a National Policy of
protective tariffs that failed to protect us from ourselves; created an
Oriental problem on the Pacific, exaggerated a race problem on the
Ottawa, and developed an American-penetration system clear across the
country; sent a small army to help establish a similar government and
dual problem to our own in South Africa and a huge army to Europe to help
make the world safe for the kind of democracy of which we consider
ourselves a fair sample; created a small army of millionaires and had
bestowed upon us about an equal number of knighthoods as well as a number
of peerages, and four years ago petitioned the King through Parliament to
abolish the practice; gave a first mortgage on the country to one great
transcontinental railway, and a second and a third to two more which we
have since nationalized into government ownership because the roads were
bankrupt for the present and built for the future, which is yet a long
way off; developed a cycle of quite remarkable big industries and
federalized banks which a large element of our heterogeneous democracy
now consider a menace to the nation; and on the prairies which, shortly
after Confederation, we bought for a few millions sterling from the
Hudson's Bay Company, a Liberal Government, never contemplated by the
Fathers of Confederation, carved out two new great Provinces which for
ten years have tried to kill the Tory Party which gave the Northwest its
birth, all Liberalism that does not go back to the furrow, and aims to
abolish even the moderately successful economic system by which we have
come to our present state of comparative prosperity.

If that is the kind of thing that Stead meant by "every nation going to
the devil in its own way" it must be conceded that we have lost no time
over the going.  We are among the forward nations, even though we are
less radical than Australia.  No young nation ever accomplished visibly
and materially so much in so brief a period.  We had the enormous
scientific resources of the 20th century to give us momentum.  Perhaps we
were a little too fast on the down grade.  We still take some inspiration
from looking at the map to reflect that no other part of the British
Empire occupies so strategic a position as Canada.  We note that Canada
is not only the natural interpreter between Britain and the United
States--which it took some of our far-seeing statesmen a long while to
discover--but that we are also a transformer between the power-house at
Downing Street and the one at Tokio; that we are fair on the highway of
traffic and travel between London and Yokohama; that we have room within
a reasonable time for as many people as are now living in Britain, and
that if we are not too awfully anxious about going to the devil we can
make that population one of the most potential in the world for its size,
not only in producing things to eat and wear and export, but in helping
to hold the British Commonwealth steady long enough to let the old thing
work out its big share of the world's salvation.

Such is the outlook.  Meanwhile we have our innate defects, the first of
which arises from the vastness of geography and the littleness of
politicians.  Little politics in Canada are pocketed away in sections.
Some of our native born are the most parochial.  There are groups in
Canada as un-national as Eskimos who in some respects are our best
citizens because they owe nothing to, and expect nothing from, any
Government.

People shout about assimilation, not knowing to what pattern, if any,
foreign peoples should be assimilated.  The missionary goes abroad and
extracts from the heathen even the nobilities of his own faith and leaves
him often the miserable animosities of a creed.  Political and social
missionaries in Canada make the same mistake about foreigners.  It is a
great thing to Canadianize a race.  But we ought to begin by
Canadianizing some of our native-born.

Even our public men believe in political servitude.  A man goes to Ottawa
burning with zeal to inaugurate political liberation.  Six months or a
year produces sleeping-sickness.  He is given a hyperdemic [Transcriber's
note: hypodermic?] of conformity.  He gravitates into the formula of a
group.  His message is muzzled.  If not, it too often breaks loose in a
tirade on behalf of some section littler than even any of the groups in
Ottawa.

Big men do not, as is often said, go into Parliament.  There is a great
reason.  The wonder is that the few big men we elect stay there so long.
Government is supposed to be business.  But the business takes a long
while to do--even badly.  Ottawa is the place where the national
field-glasses too often get turned wrong end about.

We are seldom honest about public men.  A man's own party praises, the
opposite party damns him.  In an old nation this intellectual strabismus
is pardonable.  In a young nation it is a form of political suicide.  We
too often wait for a man to make a great speech before admitting
independent of party, that he is anything great as a man.

Because Canada is so vast, political leaders find it necessary to
enunciate one doctrine here, another one there.  This is an old trick;
playing the lights on stage when the spot-light is reserved for the big
local issues.  We are constantly besieged by "national policies".  Many
of them have very little to do with national citizenship.  Most of them
sketch out milleniums that are never realized.  We are a people of
extremisms.  When national prosperity is the objective we tolerate, and
even idolize, any man who is bold and big enough to capture the country
with his special-interest programme.  Then the delirium is over, heyday
is done, and the nation wakes up to classify as public plunderers the
very men whom it once regarded as the economic saviours of the country.

Our faculty of national criticism is not as yet strongly developed.
Thank heaven, we are not cynical; but it is better to be a hopeful cynic
than a disgruntled idealist.  Men will arise with specious programmes by
means of which they can hypnotize a group and aim at capturing the
country.  Progress carries on by means of such men and such groups.  But
the devil himself stands behind the stage bush to prod these zealots into
the limelight and the next moment to lead the claque in the gallery.  We
are carried away by the act, afterwards find that we have been duped and
hold indignation meetings after the show is safely ten miles down the
line.

Like all other nations we have had our share of "the new time coming".
During the war we had all the old parties dead and buried along with
patronage and race cries and public graft.  But while the preacher was
busy over the funeral rites a number of chief mourners were somewhere
"making hay".  A nation's adversity is too often some man's opportunity.
In moneymaking this is even worse than in politics.  It is too easy to
shout and to shed tears.  We deplore the past, suspect the future and
work hard to make ourselves solid for the present.

Many men in Canada do not regard public life as public service.  There is
little or no preparation for doing the nation's business.  Men are
log-rolled into Parliament and pitchforked into Cabinets.  The work they
are expected to do has little or no relation to the work for which nature
and experience intended them.  It is regarded a simpler matter to
administer a great State department than to manage a big industry.

Ottawa is the natural objective of all those who "want" something.  When
interests camp on the trail of Governments and of Parliament, the
interest of the nation is going to suffer--and it always has.  We are
paying in taxes now for the lobbying that went on ten years ago.  No
Government is ever considered so patriotic and humanly powerful that can
resist the inroad of "big interests".

Bigger interests arise.  In a storm of newly patented virtue they declaim
against the "big" ones.  They fail to admit that they merely want to
usurp instead of to magnify Government.  The political machine of the
country is regarded as a part of the machine by which special interests
prosper.  In its efforts to repudiate such a connection Governments
resort to the trick of clamouring on behalf of "the people".

Presently even the people lose faith in Government.  They come to believe
only in class-conscious groups.  No nation can be big whose parties are
small.  No parties can be great whose platforms are for the good of a
class or the veneration of what "my grandfather" used to think.

Elections are eternally war.  A general election has for a sure sign the
prediction on the part of the Opposition that the Government intend to
"put one over" in order to grab another lease of power.  Experience has
taught us that the prediction is too often true.  It does not teach us
that it is time to abandon the expectation or the practice.  Men who in
party bondage have helped to win elections by redistribution after a
census, and to award patronage to the victors, arise years later in
Opposition to denounce such practices when carried on by the present
Government.  The pot usually succeeds in calling the kettle black.  Hence
a bad black eye to political sincerity.

The average parliamentarian knows very little about Canada; much about
his own Province, or his own constituency, or his own group.  Politicians
do not even travel except on business.  A country of vast and variegated
human interest, of wonderful charm even for scenery, without considering
people at all, is the home of a large number of people burning to do
national work who know little or nothing about the life of the nation,
historically or otherwise.

President Harding solemnly predicts that the United States will produce a
race of supermen.  He does not say how.  He merely observes the need.  He
knows that his country has gone the pace that will take generations of
coming back before any superman nation can begin to be.  In Canada we
have not gone so far that we cannot easily come back.  But we have no
vision of any future for this nation except a larger instalment of what
we have been.

We talk about being a nation when we ignore the very disadvantages that
militate against true nationalism.  We bluster about national sentiment
and spend our money on paying to have ourselves Americanized.  When we
are tired trying to explain that, we fall back into dithyrambics on the
Old Flag and the great British Empire.

But if we are ever going to be anything but a national and polyglot
sandwich between the United States and Great Britain, it is time we paid
some respect to the innate democracy of the British idea by developing
our own national identity.  Our strategic position in the Empire will be
worth no more to us than our great native resources, or our bilingual
nationalism, or our pioneering history, or all combined, unless we elect
to make the biggest and best we have dominate our national life.  This is
a big country that must become a great nation if those who aim to lead it
will abstain from little ways.  We need more poetry in our public
affairs.  More imagination in Parliament.  More vision in the
Administration.  More faith in the country.  Less sectionalizing
propaganda everywhere.  If we rise to the measure of opportunity, we may
yet prove that when the Fathers of Confederation hung our national future
on a great compromise and a transcontinental railway they were not
talking in their sleep; and that when Empire statesmen look to our
leaders for counsel we shall not send unto them any man who represents a
class-conscious economic group instead of a nation.

It is true that Governments have always capitulated to groups.  We have
sacrificed a great deal for the sake of protection when that was merely a
tariff to keep certain industries from obliteration.  But a nation cannot
be forever built upon smoke-stacks and blue-books.  We can better afford
to have continental free trade and spiritual freedom as a nation, than a
high tariff and bondage to an industrial-financial-transportation group.
But if we gobble the bait of free trade, and find ourselves on the hook
of economic and national domination by the United States, our last state
will surely be worse than our first.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASQUES OF OTTAWA ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

