










Pearl and Periwinkle

BY

ANNA GRAETZ

[Illustration: Emblem]

          L. B. C.
          Col. O.
          1917




CONTENTS


          Chapter I

                                               Page

          Myra's Dreadful Children                5


          Chapter II

          Pigs, Cabbages and--Mr. Robert Grey    11


          Chapter III

          At the Shrine of Joe Smith             19


          Chapter IV

          The Clan                               29


          Chapter V

          The Wall that Parted                   37


          Chapter VI

          Joe Smith's Choice                     41


          Chapter VII

          Periwinkle Breaks the Ice              49


          Chapter VIII

          "Even Unto Bethlehem"                  55




CHAPTER I

MYRA'S DREADFUL CHILDREN


Miss Hetty Maise, having spent the night in fitful spells of slumber, at
last awakened by the beams of sunlight, sat up in bed with a start,
quite unrefreshed and possessed of an uncomfortable feeling that
something unpleasant was about to happen. A venturesome sunbeam, casting
its light upon a picture on the heavy walnut dresser, seemed to recall
the cause of her sleepless night and present uneasy state of mind.
Drawing her lips tightly together she frowned severely at the
inquisitive intruder.

"Those children," she thought, "Myra's dreadful children! If the
minister himself hadn't insisted that it was my plain duty to take them
I shouldn't have done it. It seems almost a sin to take in two children
who have been circus performers."

Miss Hetty was up by this time, for she hated to be idle. In fact the
minister's son had once remarked that she was accustomed to stir her
cake batter while she was reading her Bible; but then the minister's son
was inclined to be irreverent at times.

But even he would have felt sorry for Miss Hetty this morning. To adopt
two children when you know nothing whatever about their care was by no
means a pleasant prospect. Besides, these children were the son and
daughter of the outcast of the family, an only sister half-forgotten
though only two months deceased. The thing itself was pathetic, yet it
seemed an imposition: above all to adopt two children who had traveled
all their young lives with a circus was at least to Miss Hetty's mind
almost scandalous.

Often during the morning she absently folded her hand and in
unaccustomed idleness gazed, as if dazed, down the quiet village street
as if expecting help from that source. Once, having aroused herself, she
had gone to an old trunk, her deceased mother's, and drew out two faded
pictures tied with an old ribbon and folded over a lock of yellow hair.
The first picture, the face of a girl that smiled up at her so sweetly
and trustingly, caused unbidden tears to well up in her eyes, just as it
had always affected her mother. The second picture was regarded with
more interest though with less affection. Here was the same loved face,
but beside it the merry, dark face of the actor husband for whom she had
left her home, and in her arms their first baby branded--as Miss Hetty
thought--with the heathenish name of Periwinkle. A letter had
accompanied this photograph, but it had never been answered. Several
years later another letter had been received, telling of the death of
her husband and of the illness of Periwinkle's two year old sister,
Pearl.

Though Myra had died but two months before and if perhaps then her
younger sister had felt any pang of pity for the orphaned children, it
did not enter her thoughts this morning. She plumped up the pillows on
the prim horsehair sofa, painfully recalling the pillow fight she had
once seen between her cousin's children. Children were a nuisance, and
these two--Myra's dreadful boy and girl--were bound to be more than
that.

Her sense of indignation reaching a higher pitch every minute, she
spitefully slammed the front door and left the house just as the clock
struck eleven. Her heels clicked on the sidewalk sharply in full
sympathy with her state of mind as she walked down the street of the
village. And then, as she might have expected, she met the one person
whom she least of all desired to meet. An icy stare on her part, a stiff
formal bow from the man passing--that was all, but she knew that in that
brief interval he had had ample opportunity to observe that she was
worried and cross and looked every day of her twenty-nine lonely years;
and of course it could not but give him much satisfaction. This
disturbing thought crowded out the remembrance of the unloved, unwelcome
niece and nephew until a sharp curve in the road brought into view the
smoke begrimed depot and, drawn up before it, the train which had just
come to a puffing, throbbing standstill like a wild horse unwilling to
pause in its mad race.

Several of Miss Hetty's acquaintances, gathered on the station platform,
were not accorded the usual recognition, for her eyes were fixed
intently on the childish pair alighting from the train. The one, a tall,
slender lad of about thirteen, with curls of golden yellow hair
clustering over a broad forehead, a mouth whose sensitive delicately
modeled lips together with the shadowy depths of deep grey eyes
indicated even in one so young the temperament of a dreamer, first
engaged her attention. But little Pearl! Hair black as night when only
one star is shining and eyes like the double image of that star; a
figure as tiny as the dream of a fairy: that was Pearl.

It was not her childish charm however that made Miss Hetty gasp. It was
the enormous bow, half covering her head, and the butterfly comb that
caught back her curls. The ribbon seemed larger than the silk frock
buoyant with many skirts and quite abbreviated, while the little
high-heeled shoes seemed designed for anything rather than wear.

For a time the children stood quite alone on the platform. Their first
appearance had held Miss Hetty spellbound at her position near the door.
She felt rather than heard a suppressed chuckle run through the small
crowd. Then suddenly her gaze met a pair of compelling brown eyes, not
cold and scrutinizing as they had been when their owner had passed her a
short time before, but sympathetic and friendly. She blushed furiously
and, quickly walking toward the forlorn pair, extended to each a cold
hand of welcome.

"Come Periwinkle, come Pearl," she said, not ungently. "I am your Aunty
Hetty and have come to take you home." And holding her head high and her
eyes straight ahead, she lead the strange pair past the tall gentlemen
on the platform.

"Do you know, Aunt Hetty, I thought it was you," said the boy eagerly as
they left the station. "You look a little like our mother did. She told
us lots about you, and so did the Fat Woman."

"The fat woman," exclaimed Miss Hetty somewhat in surprise. "Who is
she?"

"She looked after us," replied Pearl in a voice so sweet that in spite
of her aversion to her duty Miss Hetty's heart began to warm to her
unwelcome charges. "Even while mother was living she cared for us, and
she told us all we know. She got me all my clothes. She was so jolly and
nice, and so was Mr. Barleydon, and I didn't want to leave the circus, I
didn't, but Periwinkle did."

"Why did Periwinkle want to leave," asked Miss Hetty, now becoming much
interested, although she did purse up her lips when she spoke the
obnoxious name. Periwinkle answered for himself: "I didn't like the
trapezes, nor the everlasting traveling. I wanted to be in a home like
mother told us about and go to school. And besides that, I didn't want
Pearl to be like the spangled circus ladies, even if some of them were
lovely and the Fat Woman perfectly grand; so was one of the clowns. You
can't imagine, Aunt Hetty, what a noble, charitable fellow Jerry was. I
disliked to leave them. But how I hated the snake-charmer; you can't
imagine, Auntie."

Aunt Hetty shivered at the mere mention of a snake-charmer. She could
easily sympathize with Periwinkle in his aversion for her.

"You use pretty big words for a boy, Periwinkle," was, however, all that
she said.

"Yes, the Fat Woman said she couldn't account for them, but she taught
us, and she is a very brilliant woman. Little Pearl can read splendid.
You can't imagine, Aunt Hetty."

"You said that the Fat Woman told you about me," hinted Miss Hetty,
forgetting that she didn't wish to know anything about these worldly
people.

"O yes," replied Pearl, also desirous of furnishing her aunt with some
more information concerning her friend, the Fat Woman. "She said as you
would be different from the ladies we were used to, but you'd be our
relation and mean all for our good, and we was to put up with you as
you'd put up with us, and to respect you and love you like we did her.
But you won't mind just at first, will you, if we can't love you quite
so much as her, 'cause the Fat Woman was very dear to me and
Periwinkle."

A sudden something gushed up in the heart of Miss Maise, the something
that makes the Fat Woman and the clown and all of us kin, but it died
down as quickly, and she only said:

"I shall expect you to be good children and obey me, that is all."

"Not love you?" asked her young nephew in surprise.

The hard look faded again from Aunt Hetty's face as she yielding to such
an irresistible entreaty, hesitatingly replied:

"Yes--yes, a little if you can."




CHAPTER II

PIGS, CABBAGES, AND--MR. ROBERT GREY


The day following the arrival of Pearl and Periwinkle at their Aunt
Hetty's home was Sunday. But the children were not permitted to attend
the church service since the time had been too short to procure suitable
clothing for Pearl. Miss Maise, feeling that she would be setting a poor
example in remaining at home herself, determined at least to attempt the
instruction of the children in their Sunday-school lesson. Immediately
then after the breakfast dishes were washed she called them into the
living room.

Miss Hetty did not know just how to begin. The children sat quietly,
regarding her with wide-open eyes, and under their questioning gaze she
felt rather uneasy. A cloth-covered catechism was lying on the table and
this she finally took up. Glancing at the first page opened she abruptly
asked her niece:

"Are you a Christian?"

Pearl gazed at her inquiringly, but gave no answer. Miss Hetty was
prepared for the worst now.

"Do you believe in God?" she continued.

"Yes," answered the child in a surprised tone.

"Who is He?" was the next question asked.

Pearl pointed a little forefinger upward. "Up there," she said in that
awed tone in which little children speak of God, no matter how limited
their knowledge concerning Him. And all of Miss Hetty's questions
convinced her that Pearl's religion was limited to the knowledge that
God lives "up there."

Periwinkle admitted that he knew little more except that their mother
had told them that God always sees them.

"And don't you know any Scripture passages, nor Bible stories, nor your
Catechism? and don't you know that God punishes children who do not love
His Word?" asked their aunt in much surprise.

"But we never heard him speak a word," cried Pearl in reply.

Miss Hetty gazed at the child in eloquent silence. Then she arose,
unlocked the bookcase and selected two books.

"Learn the first two pages by the time I come back," she said. "I'll
leave you for half an hour. I know no other way of helping you."

There was silence for five minutes after their aunt with an indignant
swish of skirts had left the room. Pearl was the first to break the
silence.

"Do you think this is much fun, Peri?" she inquired, looking up with a
puzzled frown.

"No, I don't. I don't understand it. The Fat Woman never gave us a
lesson unless she explained it first."

"Let's not study any more then. It's dreadfully hot in here and the air
smells awful nice comin' through the window. Just like tulips and roses
and several brands of perfume jumbled together. Say, Periwinkle, if you
opened that window ever so little I could just fly right out to that
yellow butterfly that's wiping his feet on Aunt Hetty's flowers."

Pearl's wish was always law to her adoring brother. He set her free, and
as soon as he saw her "flying away," he daringly raised the window still
higher and jumped out quietly himself.

Hand in hand they skipped down the street as noiselessly as snowbirds in
the snowdrift and as gracefully as two windblown leaves. Many people
were walking along the street, all dressed in their best clothes and all
going in one direction. Suddenly Periwinkle clutched his sister's hand.

"Look, Pearl," he exclaimed excitedly, "there's that tall man with the
nice brown eyes, and the tan shoes who looked at Aunt Hetty so funny at
the station yesterday. Should we speak to him?"

"It would be nice of us," Pearl replied, and always accustomed to act on
the impulse, she called, "Howdy do, Mister! Why is everybody going this
way this morning?"

The man, thus addressed, stopped and, looking down on them with one of
those smiles of comradeship that won their hearts at once, replied:

"Why, hello! It's Sunday, you know, and we are all going to church.
Don't you want to come along?"

"Oh, Aunt Hetty wouldn't--she don't like my clothes, you know."

"I think they're real pretty," replied their new-found friend, smiling a
little because of their answer. "Silk aren't they?"

"Yes, trimmed with satin and snow-flake chiffon. I guess we'll go with
you, Mister."

"Good!" There was a ring in his voice that the children could not
understand. To walk to church hand in hand with the niece and nephew of
Hetty Maise would be a novel experience not unattended with some
humor--that appealed to him: to win their love would be the victory he
most desired.

"Won't you tell me your names, please," he whispered as they entered the
church.

"Periwinkle and Pearl Toddles, relatives of Miss Hetty Maise," was the
whispered reply.

Having introduced himself as Robert Grey, their new acquaintance led
them down the broad aisle of the church. As soon as the organ began to
sound its sonorous tones Pearl forgot her strange surroundings entirely
and sat between her brother and Mr. Grey as if in a trance. Not until
the sermon was well under way did she move, and then only to lean
against Periwinkle and whisper, "Isn't this fun, Peri?" "Not fun
exactly," he whispered in reply, "but awfully nice. Hush, Pearl, and if
you get tired just practice on your multiplication table."

It was not until after the doxology had been sung and they had come out
into the open air that the children spoke again.

"Wasn't it wonderful?" asked Periwinkle dreamily. "Do you know what I
thought of, Mr. Grey, when the man was speaking? He said we should do
good to all people. How I wish I'd have heard him say that before I hit
that boy that sneaked around the tent at Higginsport. That man makes you
feel like you want to be good, doesn't he?"

"Will you bring us again?" asked Pearl, with a wistful look on her
anxious face. "I like music even better than riding around the ring."

"Your aunt, Miss Maise--will bring you next Sunday," was the only
promise that Mr. Grey could hold out for them.

"We wish you could go with us too. Thank you for taking us," they called
as they left him.

The hands of the clock on the school-house were pointing to twelve when
Pearl and Periwinkle crawled quietly into the parlor through the still
open window. Their books were on the floor where they had dropped them,
but before they could have picked them up, had they so desired, Miss
Hetty came in. "Came in" is expressing it very mildly. Even Periwinkle
with his extensive vocabulary could not think of an adequate word to
describe the manner of her entrance.

"You have been disobedient. Don't tell me you haven't. You've been
playing on the street. Don't tell me--"

The children, however, did not attempt to interrupt her or defend
themselves until she had finished her scolding. Then her nephew let his
thunderbolt fall.

"We've been to church with Mr. Robert Grey."

"To church--with--Mr. Grey!" gasped Miss Maise, sinking into the nearest
chair and staring at the two young culprits as if she thought that the
heat had affected their minds. "To church--with--Robert Grey!"

"Yes, Aunty Hetty. Mr. Robert Grey with the brown eyes. I should think
if anybody was named Grey their eyes ought to be grey,--"

"Periwinkle Toddles! Did Mr. Grey have the nerve to come to my house and
steal you away to be made a laughing stock of in church?"

The boy flushed but tried to be courteous in his answer.

"I didn't see anybody laugh at us, Aunt Hetty. And Mr. Grey didn't steal
us away. We got tired of sitting here and so we ran out in the street
and he saw us and took us with him. Some children sang, and a man talked
and we had a dandy time. I'm sorry that I disobeyed you, but I'm glad I
went and I don't know whether I'm gladder or sorrier. So I don't much
care what you do to me."

"You will be punished severely," replied their aunt, "for running away
and going to church with that man."

"Why, what is wrong with him?" queried the niece, remembering Mr. Grey's
wonderful smile and how nicely he had treated them.

Miss Hetty was silent for a moment. She was uncertain just which was the
best way to answer this question. Finally she said, "Pearl, Periwinkle!
There is something I must tell you; something that you must find out
before you begin school the week after next. It may be hard for you to
understand this but you must know it so that you will not make any
mistakes again. You know there are only two families in this village,
two families that have any influence, I mean. They are the Maises and
the Greys and their relatives. They used to be good friends; in fact,
such good friends that two of them promised to become even more to one
another. Three years ago a quarrel began. My father had a very fine pig,
a Poland China, very fat--I remember. One night it strayed into neighbor
Grey's cabbage patch, and being a pig, did much damage. Mr. Grey came to
father who promised to keep Glenny--the pig--at home. That same night it
got out again and Mr. Grey who was rather hot tempered sicked his dog
on it. The big fellow killed our finest pig. Father went to law about
it, but died before it came to court, and the lawsuit was dropped. But
the quarrel kept on just the same. The Greys clung together and so did
the Maises. Every one else in the village sided with one or the other. I
thought I'd better tell you this before you started to school. The
Maises and Greys pass each other without speaking now."

"Why, I think that's silly," said Peri energetically "and Mr. Grey don't
look like a fellow to get sore over a pig."

"He did his best to avoid getting mixed up in the trouble," admitted
Miss Maise, "but it was his father's dog that killed the pig, and he
just couldn't help himself perhaps. Everyone got mixed up in it somehow,
and I don't believe any power under the sun can make the Maises and the
Greys friends again. But if you think I've forgotten how disobedient
you've been, you are much mistaken!"

"It's a shame, Periwinkle, to tie a big boy like you to a chair, but I
see I can't trust you." With these words she drew a ball of twine from
her pocket and to his great shame began securing him. Then she fastened
little Pearl in a like manner.

"I'll bring you bread and milk for your dinner," she said, "and perhaps
you won't be so anxious to run away the next time."

"But just the same," said Pearl when her aunt had left, as if she at
least had found much consolation in the thought, "we went to a good
place."

Her brother however did not reply; he was thinking of a Poland China pig
in a cabbage patch and comparing its loss with that of Mr. Grey's
priceless friendship.




CHAPTER III

AT THE SHRINE OF JOE SMITH


The occasion of the first meeting with the minister was a memorable one
for Pearl and Periwinkle. "As good as Clown Jerry," was Pearl's rather
startling statement, while Periwinkle assured Aunt Hetty that the
preacher was even more brilliant than the Fat Woman.

It so happened that this meeting took place that very Sunday afternoon
when the two children were doing penance for their morning's escapade.
The minister had called for the special purpose of meeting Miss Hetty's
new charges, very much to that good lady's dismay. She afterward
declared it to be one of the tricks of fate that the minister should
have called at that particular time, especially since her niece still
wore that horrid blue dress of which she so much disapproved. But the
minister did not seem to notice neither the dress nor the fastenings
which confined the children. He seemed rather to be impressed by Pearl's
wonderfully expressive face and the startling sweetness of her voice,
while Periwinkle's precociousness and quaint, grown-up ways attracted
him very much.

"Let the children come to see me soon, Miss Hetty," he urged, "and I may
be able to give them some instruction along the lines in which you say
they lack so much. Joe could help them in their lessons too." And then
turning to Pearl and Periwinkle, he asked: "How would you like to come
to the parsonage, and go over your lessons with my son?"

"Would he play with us?" queried Pearl.

With a hearty laugh the minister replied: "I'm almost afraid he would.
He is still a boy even though he is nineteen and goes to college. I am
sure that he still knows how to play. He's the only boy I have--all I
have--and I suppose I've spoiled him."

"When shall I send the children, Rev. Smith?" asked Miss Maise.

"Tomorrow, or the next day," was the prompt reply. "This is mid-August.
We can't begin too soon."

Tuesday afternoon the children wended their way to the parsonage. Pearl
was clad in a starched gingham dress, uncomfortably high about the neck,
and with sleeves of an unaccustomed length. The minister himself met
them at the door and ushered them into a room that from all appearances
was meant to be used as a comfortable and cozy living room--even though
there were some evidences of disorder which they knew their aunt would
not have approved of.

"Amuse yourselves for a minute, while I try to find Joe. It is rather
difficult to keep track of him," said the minister as he left them
alone.

When a few minutes later, the minister, followed by his son, was about
to enter the room he stopped, and, grasping his son's arm warningly,
they both, unperceived, watched the two children.

Left to their own resources the children had not remained inactive.
Their curious eyes taking in all the strange surroundings, they saw many
things that interested them. One of the pictures on the east wall
particularly impressed them. It portrayed the figure of a man, his face
lighted up with a wonderfully tender expression, while in his arms and
round about him were small children, alone or with their mothers. The
afternoon sun, shining through the open window, seemed to shed a radiant
halo over the whole group and to make the picture stand out in bold
relief. Standing before the picture in silent wonder, they had not
noticed the approach of the minister and his son. The minister quietly
withdrew, and when the children turned as if by common impulse, they saw
only a young man whose ingratiating smile at once opened a way to their
hearts.

Their previous experience in coming in contact with people enabled them
to become acquainted with the minister's son and to feel themselves the
very best of friends in less time than it ordinarily takes children to
overcome their natural timidity in the presence of strangers. Nor was it
any wonder that a close friendship was formed so quickly, for Joseph
Smith was that type of grown up boy whom all children feel instinctively
to be their friend.

After the first greetings and establishment of this friendship, Pearl
turned with childlike determination to the matter uppermost in her
curious mind.

"What is the name of that picture?" she asked, pointing at the one which
had attracted their attention.

"That is 'Christ Blessing the Children,'" replied Joe, and then he
hesitated. His father had asked him to help the children with their
arithmetic; he had not specified that he turn missionary as well as
teacher. Work of that kind was not exactly in his line. Like so many
lads of his age he seldom spoke on religious topics, although his faith
was a vital factor in his life. But catching sight of the enraptured
face of little Pearl, he felt certain facts flashing through his mind,
something about Christ's love for little ones and that we should not
offend one of them.

So he bravely began to tell the sweet story, though somewhat rapidly and
not any too clearly.

"Jesus Christ, the only Son of God whom God loved very much, lived on
earth and walked with His disciples. His disciples were the men who
followed Him and heard His teachings and tried to be like Him by doing
good and helping others. The mothers who lived where Jesus was preaching
heard of His kindness. They had heard also how He healed some of their
sick friends. So they brought their children to Him so that He might
bless them. Now when the disciples saw the women with the little
children they told them to go back to their homes. They said that Christ
was too busy to bother with children. But Jesus did not want them to do
this and he told his disciples, 'Suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of God.' He loved
little children and He also wanted them in His kingdom. He then took
them in His arms and blessed them, just as you see in this picture."

A solemn stillness followed while the two turned again to view the
lovely painting. Finally Periwinkle broke the silence:

"He must have been very good to take such an interest in the little
children." Thereupon all thought of the arithmetic lesson vanished, and
Joe briefly told the whole beautiful story from the night of the
angels' song until Jesus Christ again returned to His throne in heaven.

When Joe had finished his recital, Periwinkle looked up with sparkling
eyes.

"Oh, how glad I am to know that! How I wish the Fat Woman could have
heard it! She'd been so interested. I think she always thought herself
better than the rest of the circus people."

A certain short prayer with somewhat similar meaning occurred to the
minister's son, but he only smiled at the pharisaical egotism of the Fat
Woman. After all she had trained the children morally, if not
religiously, and this made the teaching of Christian truths far less
difficult. Children reared in love are almost always ready to accept the
story of the Supreme Love.

"She never said anything about faith," continued Periwinkle in his
thoughtful way. "But she told us, 'Do unto others as you would have them
do unto you.' Maybe," he ventured with some hesitancy, "that was her
faith. Do you suppose it would be just as good, Joe?"

Joe was somewhat surprised that his young pupil had thus unconsciously
stumbled upon a disputed point that has led many minds astray, but he
answered firmly and with conviction:

"No, Peri; the Fat Woman could not keep the law of love perfectly. Do
you think she did?" he challenged suddenly.

"No," cried Pearl, who had been listening intently. "Once or twice she
slapped us when we hadn't done a thing, and sometimes she got very
spiteful at Mr. Barleydon, and she used to tell mother that the
tight-rope walker made her sick. That's not doing unto others as we wish
them to do unto us. But," the loyal youngster hastened to defend her
friend, "the tight-rope walker was enough to make anybody sick and then
I guess the Fat Woman never heard about Jesus saying: 'Love your
enemies.'"

"Perhaps she did know it," replied Joe, "but she couldn't have kept the
rule perfectly anyway. Nobody can, Pearl, even those who know God's law
best, although they must always try very hard. God showed His great love
for us by sending Jesus Christ to keep the law for us. He could not do
wrong or fail to keep the law. And now if we believe in Him and come to
Him as children come to their father for help, He will count it the same
as if our lives were as good and perfect as His own.--But I'm afraid
that I can't make it clear to you and it will be pretty hard to
understand," he added.

"Joe," said Periwinkle gravely, his hands in his pockets and his eyes on
his young friend's face, "did you ever hear anything you didn't just
exactly want to understand, something that's too nice to get right down
on a footing with yourself? Once I was reading one of Mr. Barleydon's
books of poetry that made you feel like a breeze was carrying you right
up to the gates of heaven. Mr. Barleydon looked at me in surprise, then
looked at the book and asked kind of funny, 'Do you understand it, boy?'
'No sir!' I told him, 'but somehow I feel it better for not being able
to understand it quite.' And that's how I feel about some of the things
you told us. Do you suppose that's all right?"

"I think, Peri," said Joe soberly, "that is the real understanding."

"Say, you know what a fellow's driving at," cried Periwinkle with
delight. "Jerry, the clown was sympathetic like that. I think that
Jerry, next to you and your dad, is the most Christian person, I know.
Aunt Hetty ain't one though," he finished rather bluntly.

"Why Peri," protested the minister's son, "your Aunt Hetty is one of the
best workers in the church. She belongs--" Joe smiled as he hesitated,
"to our Ladies Aid, the Adult Bible Class, the Ladies Missionary
Society, and if I am not mistaken also to a Temperance Union, an
Anti-cigarette Club and a host of others."

"But she doesn't love her enemies," was Periwinkle's reply.

Joe smiled to see how deep an impression this injunction made on both
children.

"And all the Greys are her enemies," continued Periwinkle, "especially
Mr. Robert Grey. Now I think he is a fine man."

"He is," was the warm rejoinder.

"I guess they were in love once. And then--just because of a pig--I
think it's dreadful, Joe."

The boy had touched on a subject that was a matter of concern with his
teacher and one to which he had given much thought.

"Peri," he cried, "if I had the chance my father has every Sunday, I
would tell them that they are showing themselves to be mighty poor
Christians. But then dad knows best, of course. He's had years of
experience to help him. Only I don't see how he stands it. For three
years he has been trying to bring the Maises and the Greys together and
he is not discouraged, though I can't see any results, Peri--" Joe
stopped suddenly.

"What, Joe?"

"You'll be starting to school soon. There will be Greys and Maises
there. I know that if I speak to them about it--and I will--the Greys
won't pitch into you unless you start something."

"I won't do it. I'd just as lief fight a Maise as a Grey any day. I
ain't--b i g o t e d."

A sudden smile lit up the features of Joe Smith. It shone from his eyes,
parted his lips, lurked in the dimple in his chin, and then slowly died
away. His eyes held it the longest.

That smile had won many a friend for the lad. It made him a favorite at
college, in the village, and in the church with the Greys and the Maises
alike. But never had it made a greater conquest than now. Every child
and every grown-up whose heart is young is a hero-worshiper. In the
heart of Periwinkle a new fire was kindled, a new shrine built. Then and
there he decided that his every deed should be worthy of his Ideal.

"You don't want me to fight at all," he questioned after a moment of
silent adoration. "And I won't unless they pitch into Pearl. Why, here
comes your father and I guess it's most supper-time."

"Oh," laughed the minister, entering the room, "Miss Hetty's table would
make an appeal to anyone. I know you could not resist it, or I would ask
you to stay here for your supper."

"We'll come again, thank you," said Pearl, "but it's cream pie tonight,
please, and I helped Aunt Hetty make it."

"Pearl," said Periwinkle when they were started on their way home,
"there's one thing I want you to notice, Smith called me Peri and from
now on that's my name. Periwinkle sounds like a sissy. There was once a
great man named Perry. Will you remember, Pearl?"

"Yes, Periwinkle," replied his sister absent-mindedly, "but don't you
love the story he told us?"

"It was beautiful," replied her brother, "and I think it's splendid to
try to do good because Jesus loved people so, and because Joe Smith
loves Him too."




CHAPTER IV

THE CLAN


Preparations for the "big dinner" to which all the Maises had been
invited and to which, knowing the good treat which was in store, they
had been eagerly looking forward, were about complete. This dinner was
to be held at Miss Hetty's home, as a birthday celebration in honor of
the "clan leader," as the minister's son had designated that worthy man.
Jeoffrey Maise was the twin brother of the deceased owner of the famous
pig and it was he who had always maintained the bloodless but bitter
feud with the greatest fervor. It was always his eloquence and burning
hatred that rekindled the flame when the blaze of enmity showed any
signs of abating.

He had now reached his sixty-fifth year and to do him honor Aunt Hetty
assisted by a bevy of rosy-cheeked nieces and cousins, had brewed and
baked and stewed one hot morning in late August. Altogether eight
families of Maises, arrayed in their best, sallied out to the
white-gabled home of their spinster relative. Not only were they
prompted to attend because of the prospect of revelling in the contents
of Miss Hetty's famous kitchen, but they would also have the opportunity
of meeting the "circus children."

Pearl and Periwinkle had up to this time met only a few of their
mother's relatives, but on this day they submitted to a deluge of
kisses, questions, stares, and advances that wellnigh overwhelmed them,
but which they nevertheless met with commendable equanimity. On the
whole their aunts and great-aunts, uncles and great-uncles, cousins and
near-cousins were better pleased with the children than perhaps the
children were with them. The common agreement was that Myra's boy and
girl were exceptionally pretty, bright, and not at all ill-mannered;
although they perhaps lacked the shyness of their village cousins.

When dinner at last was over, the big living room became the scene of an
important family council. A vivacious girl of sixteen clad in a smart
white linen frock with shoes to match, took her young cousins in charge,
expecting to entertain them, while their elders were engaged in a
discussion that would in no way likely be of interest to young minds.
She informed them that she was the only child of Eldon Maise and how she
spent her winters in a fashionable boarding school, only coming to the
country in summer to spend her vacation. Eldon Maise, as Peri knew, was
the rich man of the "clan." But the lively prattle of his sister and
their dainty cousin on topics of interests common only to girls, bored
him and he soon found himself becoming interested in the conversation of
his elders.

"You say Jim Grey's son-in-law is running for postmaster?" the guest of
honor was asking.

"So I hear," replied his nephew Eldon in his cold, quiet way.

"You don't intend to sign his petition, Eldon?" demanded the old man,
his suspicion aroused by the matter-of-fact answer of his nephew.

"Oh, business is business, Uncle," retorted the younger man, rather
abruptly. "I can't afford to provoke the illwill of the Greys. If Holner
comes to me, I dare say I shall sign his paper."

"And you a son of your father!" cried Jeoffrey Maise, much aroused by
this apparent defection from a family duty. "You to go back on us and
help the other side!"

"Oh, Uncle," replied his broader-minded nephew in an even tone, "that
little thing occurred so long ago. We aren't living in the Kentucky
hills, you know. Family feuds are not in fashion in this state. I'm sure
I don't care much if you want to keep up the old grudge, but I don't
want it to interfere with my business. It's been damaging enough
already."

An older brother of Hetty and Eldon drew his pipe slowly from his mouth
and looked impressively upon the company. Jim Maise had never received
the "larnin" of which the younger members of the family boasted, but he
had what he himself fondly called "hoss sense." At any rate he was
always listened to attentively as befitted an eldest son.

"Wall," he drawled, "I reckon this here post-office affair don't come
too late for us to get even with some of the things the Greys have done
to us. Only it don't strike near enough home. Holner ain't nothing but a
son-in-law of the old man's half-brother. Now if we could strike a blow
to Robert Grey, or his sister Kitty and her family, it would be
something like. Nothin' real bad but just humblin'-like."

Periwinkle's heart beat faster at the mention of Robert Grey in this
connection and Hetty stirred nervously in her chair. She had it in her
power, as they all knew, to humiliate Kitty Farwell and incidentally
Kitty's brother, Robert Grey. Hetty had not forgotten that Kitty was
quite influential in causing the final "break" between herself and
Robert. When she spoke her voice sounded strange and hard.

"The mortgage on Mrs. Farwell's place is due in October," she suggested
rather hesitatingly.

"I was coming to that, Hetty," cried Jeoffrey eagerly. "Who holds the
mortgage now that Myra is gone. It always seemed to me to be mighty
generous of your ma, to will all her property to Myra when your pa
disinherited her."

"I hold it," replied Miss Hetty tersely, "as legal guardian of Myra's
children and heirs."

"Kitty cannot pay it?" questioned her brother Eldon quietly.

He and Mrs. Farwell had been playmates and youthful sweethearts.

"Hardly," replied his sister with a grim smile. "Kitty is scarcely worth
the eight hundred it demands. Since that shiftless husband of hers died,
she has all she can do to make ends meet and keep her three children
together."

At this heartless reply a smile of ill-disguised contempt might have
been detected on the face of at least one of the men present. But as he
was only a "poor relation" dependent for his very means of livelihood
upon the generosity of Jeoffrey and Eldon Maise he wisely remained
silent.

"Won't Robert interfere?" urged one of the women. "He'll surely help his
sister."

The leader of the clan laughed shortly.

"What's Robert got," he demanded, "that ain't tied up so tight it won't
do him any good now? Of course the Greys will pretend to come to Kitty's
aid, if Hetty closes up on her. But it will be humiliating enough to all
of them even if they do pay the money. You see it isn't generally known
that there is a mortgage on the Farwell place."

"I'm not so sure that they can pay it," interrupted Eldon in that cold
tone that was like a mask, hiding perhaps a warm depth of feeling; or
perhaps it was only the expression as cool as the iciness of his spoken
thoughts. "I happen to know of an account against Elbert Grey that will
cripple that branch of the family for the time being. Ashur could no
more turn over the money than could Robert, and Lisbeth is so tied up
that he is out of the question. As a matter of fact the Greys would be
up against it."

"Have you warned Kitty?" asked Jeoffrey Maise, turning to Miss Hetty.

"Not yet. But I shall warn her, and give her as much time--as the law
allows."

"Good for you!"

"Hetty!" Eldon's voice held a note of cold reproach. "You--a
woman--would you try to ruin a widow and three helpless orphans?"

"There you go again," passionately declared his sister, feeling the
force of his argument, yet anxiously seeking to justify her position.
"You claim to be a man of business, and yet you would condemn me for
taking what is lawfully mine. Please remember, Eldon, that I am doing it
for the sake of our departed sister's children. Aren't they orphans
themselves? Won't they need the money as much as those Farwell young
ones do? Pearl's voice is little short of remarkable, but it takes money
to train it. Peri must go to college some day, you all agree. Very well.
But some one must pay the expenses. They shall have it too, in spite of
you, Eldon. I'll warrant you wouldn't do less for your Alois."

Throughout this conversation Periwinkle had remained silent, though his
interest and bewilderment increased every moment. At Miss Hetty's words
a look of understanding displaced his puzzled frown. Springing to his
feet, he unhesitatingly addressed the astonished company in such a
respectful yet determined manner that his presumption could not but be
pardoned.

"Aunt Hetty," he demanded, "did you say that thing that you called a
mortgage belonged to Pearl and me?"

"Yes," replied his aunt shortly, "and I as your legal guardian, may do
with it as I see fit."

"That is a strange law," replied her questioner. "But I tell you, Aunt
Hetty, I won't have any of the money you take from those poor people,
nor will Pearl. I'd rather be a beggar. And I know I'd feel worse than a
beggar, if we took her place from her. Oh, how can you, how dare you
work against Mr. Grey when he is so good? Hasn't Joe Smith's father ever
told you to love your enemies?"

"Periwinkle," protested his aunt weakly. For the first time in her life
she felt utterly helpless and incapable of reply.

"Periwinkle Toddles!" she repeated, but she could not meet the look in
his reproachful grey eyes. His great-uncle Jeoffrey recovering first
from the shock finally came to her aid.

"Boy," he thundered. "What do you know of this? In my day children
didn't speak until they were told to do so. The young rascal needs a
sound thrashing, Hetty."

But Miss Hetty had been so affected by the childish rebuke that she
could not find it in her heart to be angry with her nephew.

"Think how the child was raised, Uncle," she pleaded.

"Peri, didn't the--the Fat Woman ever tell you to respect your elders?"

"Yes, Aunt Hetty, I think so," the boy replied, surprised at unexpected
softness of her tone. "Least ways she told us to respect everybody that
was worthy of it. She was a very brilliant woman," he added, turning to
his Uncle Eldon with a rare smile. And then for a moment the mask that
hid the soul of that man was lifted, for he replied with a sudden and
unusual warmth: "At any rate she deserves credit for training a boy,
whom I would be glad to call my son."

It was too much for Periwinkle. Tears suddenly filled his eyes. He
wanted to thank his good, kind uncle but he could not let them see him
in tears. Turning his back abruptly on the company and starting for the
door, he said in muffled tones:

"I must find sister--But, Aunt Hetty, if it's for her and me you want to
take that money from Mrs. Farwell, please, please don't. We'd much
rather not and--" he stopped at the door and turned about for his final
thrust, "don't you think that Jesus would much rather you wouldn't?"

He was gone and silence reigned for a time. It was Jeoffrey, as usual,
who broke it.

"Perhaps, Hetty, we had better not be too hasty with that mortgage," he
said as if almost ashamed to express any feeling of charity toward the
Greys.

"I've already decided that," was her curt reply.

Eldon looked at his sister in approval and the "poor relative" in the
corner was so pleased that, forgetting for once to be cautious, he burst
forth in a hearty "hurrah."




CHAPTER V

THE WALL THAT PARTED


While this exciting conference was in session, dainty Alois Maise and
little Pearl, finding that the deliberations of their elders were
interfering too much with their own private conversation, had left the
room. After tripping gaily down the village street at Alois's urgent
invitation, Pearl consented to visit the Eldon Maise mansion. The
beautiful home captivated the orphan whose life in the circus had
deprived her of all real comfort such as she saw here. But it was before
the piano that she paused the longest. And when she sang for Alois, that
young lady was much gratified to discover that Pearl's singing was as
exquisite as the charm of her spoken words.

"I'm going to tell Joe Smith," she cried in delight. "You must sing in
the Children's Choir." The expectation that these words aroused was
sufficient to make Pearl happy as a lark for a week. Joe heard her and
Peri sing and both were admitted in the choir.

On the second week in September, when the magic of autumn had
transformed the fields and orchards and groves into tints of gold, and
colors of brilliant hue, the village school began. It was the first time
Myra's children had ever gone to school, but the Fat Woman had proved
such a good teacher that they were only a year or so behind in their
studies. This only served as an incentive to make them study.
Periwinkle especially made rapid progress. Pearl however was not so
fond of books, but her ways were so gentle and charming that no one
objected when she had to count up her sums on the rosy tips of her
dainty fingers.

Joe Smith had kept his promise to use his influence with the Greys to
protect his young friends from annoyance: for all the little Greys, from
Zeke to Mehitable, treated the newcomers quite politely. But this
attitude on the part of the Greys was not quite to the liking of the
rest of the Maises and they showed their resentment. To have the Greys
patronizing their two prime favorites was too bitter a pill to swallow.
But a few days after school opened, Emil Maise and Zeke Grey spent two
hours at the brook, each bathing a pair of swollen eyes.

The "accident" had occurred when the two had fought a rough and tumble
battle because Pearl--a Maise--had presumed to give her pencil to Zeke
Grey to sharpen; and the courageous Zeke had dared to sharpen it before
the very eyes of Emil. Such accidents are hard to explain to parents and
so the brook had been the only alternative. But when news of the fight
reached the ears of the teacher, the ruler descended on Grey and Maise
alike, while Pearl wide-eyed, wept for both and made the lads shake
hands before she would speak to either of them.

When Esther Tull of the Grey "camp" furtively pushed Ruth Hayton's
lunchbox out of the open window, Pearl shared her own lunch with her
cousin Ruth. Periwinkle however had regarded the Tull girl with such
fine contempt that she gave Ruth a bead ring as a peace offering and
Ruth then wrote her name in Esther's autograph album.

These incidents did not escape the notice of the teacher who with
growing hope saw that what had appeared to be impossible was gradually
taking place. She had tried everything within her power to break down
this wall of hatred that separated the two factions, but the barrier had
proved invincible to her every effort. And now she saw that while she,
armed with the rod of authority and exercizing the strictest discipline,
had made a dismal failure, these two orphaned circus children were
unconsciously melting the icy wall with the benevolent sunshine of their
smiles and the warm love beams of their tender young hearts.

The minister heard of it too and although he shook his head rather
doubtfully over the teacher's hopeful predictions, yet he wrote
cheerfully to his son: "I can't understand it. The children seem to know
the magic of some fairy alchemy, for whatever they touch becomes like
them--lovely."

But it was not all smooth sailing, especially for the boy. Periwinkle
had never known his grandfather Maise, but he nevertheless held the old
gentleman in high esteem. Therefore when Washington Grey called that
relative "a mean old fellow," Peri's fist darted out with amazing
rapidity but was just as quickly withheld before it reached Washington's
eye. And that lad, wondering at his escape, showed his appreciation by
presenting Periwinkle a horse-hair chain the next day which was accepted
with all the graciousness of Peri's sweet nature. The teacher, observant
as ever, and wondering too, blessed Myra's "dreadful" children in her
heart.




CHAPTER VI

JOE SMITH'S CHOICE


Joe Smith's den in the dormitory of his dearly beloved Alma Mater was
the favorite haunt of not only his intimate friends but of many other
students who had yielded to the charm of his personality. His influence
for good and his popularity with the student body had also attracted the
attention and commendation of the faculty, whose opinion was best
expressed by one of their number who had openly made a statement to the
effect that when the boys were with Smith they were quite as safe as
when in company with their teachers. But on this particular evening in
early November Joe was alone. It had been a dreary depressing day with
the cold rain beating on the rattling window panes and a complaining
wind whistling mournfully through the bare trees. The young man's face
almost seemed to reflect the gloominess of the dull gray evening sky
into which he gazed with the vain hope of discovering a let-up that at
least would permit a pleasant evening's walk.

A knock at the door interrupted his gloomy reflections and in his eager
haste to admit his visitors he knocked over several pieces of furniture
that impeded his progress.

The next moment four boisterous forms, not awaiting Joe's invitation
burst into the room rather unceremoniously. Two of them were Sophomore
room-mates whose rooms were located on the same floor of the dormitory.
Joe did not know them intimately but he did know that they were regarded
rather dubiously by some of the students who had had dealings with them.
In fact there was a rumor that the younger of the two was closely
watched by the authorities. The other two were from the city, but were
frequent callers at the college.

As a rule Joe shunned the company of the two "Sophs," but this evening
he was glad that it was the merry quartette that had thus visited him
rather than some of his quieter and more studious friends.

"What's on tonight, Joe?" began one by way of opening the conversation.

"Nothing," replied Joe gloomily, kicking spitefully at the mantle top,
"unless you fellows will stay and spend the evening."

"And all become as glum as you," replied another, mimicking Joe's
dejected appearance.

"See here, Joe, we want you to come with us tonight. Why can't you?"

Joe whistled dolefully, but his interest aroused, he inquired
questioningly:

"Where are you going?"

"To Bordell's--for a harmless little game of pool. Everybody goes,
everybody but a 'Percy dear,'" replied the younger of the Sophomores
with an air of superiority.

Joe's face flushed and he faced the speaker, but the other Sophomore
spoke before Joe's indignant thoughts could find utterance.

"That's all you know about it, Rex," he said reprovingly. "Why, lots of
splendid fellows never play billiards and they aren't mollycoddles by
any means. I do think though that they are depriving themselves of
innocent pleasures."

Then turning to Joe in a very conciliatory tone he again urged, "Come
Smith, you'll go with us tonight," and he rested his hand persuasively
on Joe's shoulder. There was something wonderfully fascinating about the
older of these two Sophomores; so Joe thought. But he only said, "And
after Bordell's, I suppose, will come Steinberg's?"

His four visitors laughed in hearty unison, and the one whom they called
Rex exclaimed in a sarcastic tone:

"There's no harm in that, is there? A drink never hurts a _gentleman_."

"But it doesn't always leave them gentlemen," remarked Joe emphatically.

"Of course, Smith," replied the elder of the Sophomores assuming a
persuasive tone, "we shan't urge you. We asked you because we like you,
and because you like a little harmless fun. If you don't come I'm afraid
you'll regret it when you are here alone. Or, by the way, won't Reydal
come?"

"Yes, Reydal," and from the woe-begotten tone of his voice the
happy-go-lucky visitors knew they had scored a point. Suddenly Joe's
boyish laugh rang out--that laugh that won for him so many friends.
"Reydal," he repeated, still laughing. "Reydal, with his philosophy of
gloom, and his face as long as a gypsy's tale of woe. He will sit
opposite me here by the fire; he'll spread his coat, open his book, and
try to hide his mouth and chin behind his number twenty collar. Then
from the depths of shining celluloid he'll quote his own views,
contradicting some by-gone philosopher, until the welcome stroke of ten
relieves me. Poor Reydal, how can I escape him?"

A sense of shame for this uncharitable attitude toward his most intimate
college chum possessed Joe Smith before he had finished his humorous
sarcasm, but he was in an unaccountable mood just then.

"We've told you how you can escape him," urged one of the boys from town
as they started for the door. "We've got some visiting to do in the
dorm, but will call for you in an hour or so, and if you should decide
not to go with us--there is always Reydal."

Joe joined with them in the laughter that followed this sally, and then
reentered the room, thrilled with a delightful feeling of anticipated
adventure.

"There's no harm," he assured himself as if repeating a lesson. Just
then another knock sounded and a cheery voice called, "The lion's share
for you tonight Smith," and the evening mail was thrown on the table.
The minister's son looked it over carelessly, too excited to take an
interest in it, until his eyes caught the sight of a square envelope
addressed in round childish letters.

He tore it open with a quick characteristic gesture, and as he did so a
small photograph fell out. Two childish faces with eyes equally
appealing and lovely gazed up at him. Joe regarded it with the look of
tenderness which he always felt for children, and then placed it on a
conspicuous place on the mantle. He then directed his attention to the
enclosed letter which was written in Periwinkle's now familiar hand. The
letter told of their experiences at school, of Pearl's singing in the
children's choir, and of his interest in a boys' Bible class which he
had joined. He mentioned that Aunt Hetty had given Mrs. Farwell a long
extension on the mortgage held against her and that Robert Grey had paid
in part already and that the money had been laid aside until he was old
enough to go to Joe's college.

"Aunt Hetty is very good to us," the letter continued. "She says we are
improving in conduct. But I told her it was because of you, Smith. Pearl
says I can't be as good as you. She is right, but that don't keep me
from trying. I am afraid, Smith, that Washington Grey would still have a
black eye, if I hadn't thought of you just before I was going to hit
him. I thought to myself, 'Smith wouldn't do anything that wasn't right,
and if I want to be like him I've got to try pretty hard.' Pearl sends
her love, Smith, and so do I. She is making you something for Christmas,
but it's going to be a surprise. Good-bye for now.

                                       Your friend,
                                               Perry Toddles."

Having finished reading the letter, Joe rose and flung the window
wide-open, breathing deeply of the moisture-laden air. Something seemed
to be choking him--"Smith wouldn't do anything that wasn't right!" His
mind was in a turmoil--how that thought conflicted with the impulse of
the previous moment. Below, the city lights, seductive and full of
mystery, sent their alluring invitation through the fog. Down there he
would find congenial friends and pleasure--as youth desired it.
Here--yes, but "Smith wouldn't do anything that wasn't right, and I want
to be just like him."

The sound of music, alluring, enticing, came faintly to his ears; the
lights signalled frantically and the wily city smiled her invitation
more urgently than ever before--and then that compelling voice of a
conscience that responded to the inviolable faith of his little
hero-worshipper--"Smith wouldn't do anything--"

The door burst open violently. "Ready, old Pal?" Their chorused inquiry
brought him to his feet--he hesitated--and then closing the window with
a bang the minister's son faced his questioners.

"I'm not going," he replied quietly but resolutely.

"Not going?" echoed his visitors quite taken aback. They had been so
sure of him. They needed him, a student who stood in so well with the
professors.

"Not going," said Rex and continued with a sneering laugh, "I suppose
you prefer Reydal?"

"Yes," was the rejoinder, "I prefer--Reydal."

Then moved by a sudden impulse Joe called out: "Come in fellows I want
to tell you why I can not go."

He took the picture from the mantle and handed it to them.

"Here is a little girl who believes in me with all her heart, and here
is a boy who wants to be just like myself. He doesn't believe that Smith
would do anything that was not square. It makes a lot of difference when
anyone believes in you like that."

Feeling the force of Joe's argument and realizing the futility of
attempting to change his decision, his disappointed visitors left. But
many times that evening, in the midst of their hilarious fun, thoughts
of those who believed in them as the boy and girl believed in Joe
persisted in rising uncalled in their minds.

Some minutes after the four had left, a tall broad form, whose neck
encased in an enormous collar rendered him especially conspicuous,
entered the room without the ceremony of knocking.

"I've come to discuss with you a rather abstruse statement which I have
found in Bersey's 'The Human Mind,'" boomed forth a voice from the
depths of the said collar.

"Sit down, Reydal, sit down," urged Joe, placing the easiest chair in
the den before the fire. "We still have two hours for our chat."




CHAPTER VII

PERIWINKLE BREAKS THE ICE


The opening days of December brought in their wake a cold spell that was
more severe than had been experienced for many years so early in the
season. The thermometer began to drop suddenly Friday evening, and
Monday morning found the ponds ice-covered and crowded with merry school
children on skates. Winter's little joke in arriving ahead of scheduled
time met with their approval, even though their elders may have had
reason to complain. Periwinkle and Pearl were also there, taking their
first skating lesson. The teacher, watching at the window, was glad to
see that Emil Maise and Washington Grey were helping Peri, while the
girls of both "clans" were trying to keep Pearl on her feet.

After school was dismissed Pearl and Peri in company with one of their
second cousins (George--a freckled-face red-headed youngster) hurried to
a pond that glistened in the field back of Robert Grey's home. The three
had been there but a few minutes when a wistful little face peered at
them from Mr. Grey's back fence. It was Kitty Farwell's second son,
timid little Bobby, one of the primary pupils at the village school.
Pearl called to him to join them.

Bobby came running gleefully, his red-stockinged legs kicking up the
soft snow in mimic clouds. After racing with the little chap for a few
minutes, Pearl ran back to the older lads to have her skates put on
again. Then laughing and shouting, the three joined hands and skated
along the pond edge while little Bobby, left alone, slid nearer and
nearer toward the center of the pond. Suddenly a piercing scream reached
the ears of the three skaters and they turned just in time to see
Bobby's golden head disappear under the ice. For a moment all stood
still as though rooted to the spot; then Pearl and George ran as fast as
their legs could carry them to the house of Mr. Grey. Peri, obeying the
heroic impulse of his brave heart ran quickly but cautiously toward the
thinning ice in the centre of the pond. Bobby had come to the surface
and, though much frightened, had managed to grasp the edge of the broken
ice. When Periwinkle came within a few feet of the child he flung
himself down and wriggled carefully toward Bobby until he was able to
get hold of his collar. In this position he managed to hold Bobby's head
above water, but found it perilous to move or attempt to pull him up on
the ice. His right arm grew numb with the weight and his left hand,
cramped and twisted by his sprawling posture, pained him severely. He
knew that help would come soon, but an eternity seemed to pass before he
heard Mr. Grey's encouraging call, "Hold on Peri, just a minute longer."
Periwinkle did hang on desperately until Mr. Grey, with the help of
rails and a rope, rescued them both from their dangerous position. Then
Periwinkle grew faint and dizzy and knew nothing more until he found
himself on Mr. Grey's couch with Mr. Grey and Pearl bending anxiously
over him. Bobby's mother, having bundled the little fellow up like a
department store package, had wheeled his little cot close up to the
stove, while Bobby himself howled lustily, really none the worse for his
little adventure. But Periwinkle had sprained his left wrist as Mr. Grey
saw when he bathed and dressed the injured hand. His first thought was
to call the doctor, but before he could do so the boy opened his eyes
and begged to be taken home. Thereupon Robert Grey wrapped him up in his
great fur coat and carried him as easily as if he were a baby to Miss
Hetty's home.

Hetty met them at the door, her heart cold with fear. She now realized
for the first time how dear Myra's children had become to her. Without a
word she admitted Mr. Grey with his burden and calmly heard his account
of Periwinkle's heroic deed. Not until he had placed Periwinkle in a
large armchair before the fire and had turned to go did Miss Hetty
address him.

"I must thank you," she said tremulously, holding Peri's hand tightly in
her own, "you have saved his life."

"As he saved my nephew's," replied Robert Grey, but his voice faltered
as he realized that for the first time in years he was speaking to _her_
and that _she_ was grateful to him.

Miss Maise however took no notice of his emotion.

"That was his duty," she said coldly. "Peri is a Maise through and
through. He is too brave and kind to let anyone or anything perish. He
risked his life to save your nephew as he would have risked his life to
save Alois' terrier."

Stung by her words and manner, Mr. Grey turned again to go; yet in spite
of his rebuff he thought that Hetty looked very beautiful with the
sunset glow lighting up her golden head, though as cold as the snow
clad peaks lighted up by the gold of the descending sun. It was
Periwinkle's voice however that called him back again. "I'm so glad you
came just when you did Mr. Grey," he murmured gratefully, "and Aunt
Hetty and Pearl and I ain't no end thankful to you for being so kind as
to carry me home, when I weigh such a heap, thanks to Aunt Hetty's
corn-bread, the minister says. You do believe in the Fat Woman's golden
rule, don't you?" and then he added meditatively, "I wonder whether you
believe in that other rule, 'Love your enemies,' you know?"

The color rose to Miss Hetty's cheeks at her nephew's last words and
deepened as Mr. Grey said quietly:

"Perhaps I believe in them too much for my own good." And the glance he
directed toward the boy's aunt was half reproachful, half tender. Hetty
turned quickly to wipe a bit of imaginary dust from the table, but Mr.
Grey turned once more as he reached the door:

"May I send the doctor up, Miss Maise?"

Miss Maise had been trying to muster up courage to ask him that very
thing, for she did not want him to think too harshly of her. Now that he
had really asked, however, she replied crisply:

"Thank you, Pearl can go for me. Good evening, Mr. Grey. You have been
most kind to Periwinkle."

Mr. Grey felt as if she had tried to hurry his departure, but, had he
been able to read Miss Hetty's thoughts just then, his heart would have
been much lighter.

Naturally enough, Peri became a hero in the village. He had saved the
life of one of the Greys at the risk of his own, and the Greys could
not but help making a fuss over him. The village children had learned
already to love the kindhearted boy and his sweet sister; now their
parents came to regard them with the same affection.

This change was noticed by the minister and in his next letter to his
son he wrote: "The barriers between the two factions are slowly
crumbling, simply because those children will not recognize them.
Strangely enough, the strongest resistance is made by Hetty and Robert
Grey, but Pearl or her brother will take them by surprise some time and
then all will be well. I must tell you of something that will cause you
much pleasure. It seems that the children's mother had told them of our
Christmas services here and they were making great plans for Christmas
eve. They have never seen a Christmas tree. Miss Hetty had not the heart
to tell them that for three years we have had no Christmas Eve service,
neither had Robert Grey--nor I. So one Sunday when Peri was home with
his sprained wrist and Pearl of course was with him I made one final
appeal to the congregation after the Sunday-school service. I could see
that it was what they had all been longing for. To show you how both
families feel toward those children I need mention only that Eldon Maise
and Robert Grey, almost in one breath, made the motion that we have
children's services on Christmas Eve this year. You must hurry home for
the event."

When Joe finished reading these good news he indulged in a regular dance
of delight, waltzing his table and other articles of furniture around in
such a way that, had they been possessed of the power of speech, a very
strong protest would have been forthcoming.

"Hurrah! Peri has broken the ice at last," he exclaimed. "At least he
has cracked it and it won't take much more to finish the job. Won't
there be a big splash though when the Maises and Greys all tumble in.
Those circus children of Myra Maise are the best things that ever
strayed into the parish."




CHAPTER VIII

EVEN UNTO BETHLEHEM


After Periwinkle's recovery the children's visits to Mr. Grey's home
became quite frequent. Miss Maise wisely concluded that if the Greys
wanted to idolize Myra's children she might as well not interfere. Pearl
especially loved to visit there, for Mr. Grey, who was quite an
accomplished musician, seeing her interest, helped her in her music and
they spent many delightful hours in playing and singing. One Friday
evening, two weeks before Christmas, Pearl had just finished singing a
most wonderful melody with such sweetness and tenderness that Mr. Grey
seemed almost entranced.

"Isn't it lovely?" asked Pearl breathlessly. "If that were only a church
song I could sing it in the choir. The music is really church music,
isn't it?" she added critically. "I believe the angel's 'Glory' song
must have sounded something like this one."

"The very thing," exclaimed Mr. Grey with delight. "Nothing could suit
your voice better than this song. Now if I would write a Christmas song
for this music would you sing it at church on Christmas Eve?"

"Oh, Mr. Grey," cried the excited girl, "could you do that? I thought it
took a wise man to write a poem." Mr. Grey passed over the
uncomplimentary remark with a smile.

"I used to be rather clever at rhyming things, Pearl," he said. "If I
only could write half of what is in my heart, it might make a very
presentable song. And now if you will come tomorrow afternoon we'll
practise it," adding, "but, Pearl dear, you must promise me not to sing
it to anybody--not even to your aunt--before Christmas."

The Christmas season found Pearl and Periwinkle busily engaged in all
sorts of preparations. They helped Miss Hetty bake wonderful Christmas
cakes. Their combined efforts were necessary to make what they thought
would be just the thing for Joe Smith. And Pearl did not hesitate to
call on Miss Hetty to show her how to hemstitch a handkerchief for
Robert Grey. The most fun of all, however, was to get Miss Hetty's
present into the house and stow it safely away, which they finally
accomplished when Miss Hetty happened to discover that there were some
things which had to be attended to in the attic.

But best of all was the joy of helping Zeke Grey and Emil Maise cut down
the enormous tree for the church. Nor did the children wonder, nor take
any credit to themselves when the son-in-law of Jeoffrey Maise worked
side by side with the nephew of Jim Grey, to set the tree in place.

Yet when it came to filling the candy sacks and decorating the tree
these tasks were assigned as separate duties to the ladies of the two
clans. Both parties still could not forget the past even around the
children's Christmas tree. The minister's son was everywhere and so too
was Alois Maise who was just home for the holidays.

While the church was thus the scene of festive preparation, Pearl was
busily engaged in rehearsing her song with Mr. Grey.

"Splendid!" he exclaimed enthusiastically. "I didn't imagine that my
words would fit so well. They don't amount to much in themselves,
girlie, but you must sing into them all that my heart would say. Sing as
you do now, and the minister and Joe and I, and perhaps--perhaps Aunt
Hetty will bless you forever, dear."

The delight of dressing that evening, the joy of the hurried supper, the
happiness in walking hand in hand with the beloved aunt to the brightly
lighted church! How could Miss Hetty or the children ever forget that
night!

"Do you know, Auntie," said Peri thoughtfully, while the soft snow fell
about them, "I'm thinking of my last Christmas. How much different this
one is. Now we have you, and a home, and Mr. Grey, and Joe and
everything we need and everybody loves us. Even Pearl wouldn't go back
to the circus for anything. But I keep thinking tonight of what the Fat
Woman said, last Christmas when Jerry the clown gave her a silver
mirror. She said, 'Thanks awfully for making me remember that Christmas
is here again. But I guess it ain't so much what we give and get as it
is the way we feel about giving and getting it round Christmas time.' I
told this to Joe Smith yesterday and he said, 'Yes, Peri, the spirit of
Christmas is the Spirit of Him whose birthday we celebrate.' Oh, Aunt
Hetty, aren't you--aren't you hoping that I'll grow up to be like Smith
some day? I wish that I could do something for him. It's grand to do
things to make people happy and good. I reckon the two are about the
same thing, happiness and goodness. Oh, just look how the church is lit
up! Have I talked too much, Aunt Hetty?"

By this time they were at the church door and, trembling with
excitement, they entered. Pearl and Periwinkle took their places in the
children's choir, beaming with happiness and joy, while Aunty Hetty,
with a sparkle in her eyes and a new warmth in her heart, took her place
near the front.

Joe Smith occupied an advantageous position from which he could see
everything that was going on. There for the first time did he realize
all that the children of the circus had done for the parish.

His heart was gladdened when he saw an old lady of the Grey "clan"
smiling sweetly as she accepted Alois Maise's proffer of her little
gilt-edge hymnbook. He smiled to himself as Hetty Maise made room for
Kitty Farwell when the latter, arriving late, found her own pew
occupied. His smile broadened into a grin as he watched them singing
from the same book, held at arm's length, as if they still were afraid
of each other.

The program "passed off" much as all Christmas Eve services do, an
occasional prompting, a song a trifle off key, a crying baby quickly
hushed with peppermints or crackers.

But beneath it all there was a deep undercurrent of some unexplainable
feeling. A ruddy glow suffused Miss Hetty's cheeks. Robert Grey felt the
presence of some great unknown joy. The primary youngsters lisping their
faltering words, the men lighting the candles that sent forth the
glorious message sparkling from the trees, all seemed moved.

"Was the angels' song, 'Peace, good will,' at last to be realized? was
it finally to find its true response in the forgiving, loving hearts of
his faction-split congregation?" that was the minister's hopeful
thought. Wise in experience, he recognized this pervading
influence--knew that it only needed an impulse, like a spark in a powder
magazine, to bring about its expression.

At last it was all over but Pearl's song. A dainty figure dressed
entirely in white stepped reverently before the altar--the sweet charm
of childish innocence making its appeal even before a note was sung.

The tense silence was broken. Sweet tones with throbbing notes of
appeal, carrying with them that Christmas message of immeasurable love,
penetrated every corner of the house of worship and the heart of every
listener. The story that she sung--that oft-repeated but never old
message of love, of peace, of good-will, that binds the heart to God and
makes the whole world kin--yes they had heard it often--but now their
hearts, long irritated by selfish pride and hate, yielded to this
sweet-voiced appeal, so softly yet so compellingly beating on these
fast-crumbling barriers.

The song was ended. For a moment there was hushed silence. Then
Jeoffrey, then Herman Grey Lane, Miss Hetty, Robert Grey--everyone
arose, and the minister stood before them with tears streaming from his
eyes and falteringly yet fervently pronounced upon them the benediction.

After the doxology had been sung with more fervor than melody, things
happened so fast that Pearl and Periwinkle never could get them
straightened out. Very little was said, but people smiled at one another
through tears and clasped hands silently. And strangest of all Mr. Grey
and Aunt Hetty were leaving church together, and seemed to have actually
forgotten their existence. But she turned at the door, and they heard
her say softly:

"The children, Robert, the dear children!" and she came back and kissed
them as she had never done before.

"Peri shall go to college in a few years," said Mr. Grey, "and Pearl
shall study music." Then he kissed them also and Miss Hetty with a
pretty blush called him their Uncle Robert.

The last candle on the tree twinkled and went out. Pearl, borne aloft in
Uncle Robert's arms, had grown very tired and sleepy. It was Peri who
told her the next day how the minister had come up just as they were
leaving and had spoken some words that sounded very much like a
benediction.


FINIS

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 21, "particulary" changed to "particularly". (particularly
impressed them)

Page 23, "though" changed to "thought". (always thought herself)

Page 25, "kow" changed to "know". (person, I know)

Page 29, "Joeffrey" changed to "Jeoffrey". (Jeoffrey Maise was)

Page 32, "Kity" changed to "Kitty". (Kitty was quite)

Page 43, "billards" changed to "billiards". (never play billiards)

Page 50, "to to" changed to "to". (rooted to the)

Page 53, "walzing" changed to "waltzing". (waltzing his table)

Page 58, "a a" changed to "a". (her a silver mirror)

Page 60, "immeasureable" changed to "immeasurable". (of immeasurable
love)






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PEARL AND PERIWINKLE ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

