




Transcriber's Note

Certain statements given in this cookbook about distinguishing between
toxic and non-toxic mushrooms, and the use of certain herbs, in
particular pennyroyal, do not conform to modern knowledge and may be
dangerous to follow. Please consult reliable modern resources for these
products.

Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. A list of the changes
is found at the end of the text. Inconsistency in spelling and
hyphenation has been maintained. A list of these inconsistencies is
found at the end of the text.




                              Vaughan's
                         VEGETABLE COOK BOOK


                           [Illustration]


                         How to Cook and Use
                     Rarer Vegetables and Herbs

                        A Boon to Housewives


                         Fourth Edition 1919


                          --PUBLISHED BY--
                        VAUGHAN'S SEED STORE


                              NEW YORK
                          43 Barclay Street

                               CHICAGO
                      31-33 W. Randolph Street

 Greenhouses, Nurseries and Trial Grounds, Western Springs, Illinois.

 3-19 2M




French Endive or Witloof Chicory

A Wholesome and Useful Winter Vegetable

[Illustration]


=How to Grow.= Sow the seed in Spring on well prepared land 1 ft. apart in
rows, and thin out same as parsnips. Lift the roots in fall. These roots
produce during winter months, the beautiful young crisp leaves, which
make one of the most delicious winter salads. Here's how it's done.


=Forcing the Roots.= Prepare a convenient sized bed of good rich soil
about a foot deep, in the basement and board up the sides. Place the
roots in it until the crowns are just covered, and about 2 inches apart,
in rows 6 to 8 inches apart then place on top about 8 inches of any kind
of light covering such as leaf mold or other light compost. This =must be
light= or otherwise the heads which will grow from the crown will open
out instead of keeping firmly closed and conically shaped. On the top of
the light soil, manure (if it can be procured fresh, all the better)
should be placed to a thickness of about 12 inches, or even more. This
will cause the soil to warm slightly and hasten the making of the head.
Horse manure is better than cattle manure for the purpose. The heads
will be ready to cut in from 4 to 6 weeks. By putting in a batch at 10
day intervals, a succession of cuttings may be made from the bed. Store
the roots in dry sand until they are to be put in the bed.

Roots may also be forced in a Greenhouse or Conservatory by planting
under the benches or in a specially prepared place, but not too high a
temperature; say anywhere from 55 to 60 degrees F. To give more is
running the risk of getting spindly, weak heads. They may also be grown
in pots of say 12 inch drain. Place from five to six roots in a pot,
leaving the crown of the root exposed and place another pot inverted
closely over it, covering up the top hole, so as to keep the roots as
dark as possible. Water about once a day and in a temperature of from 55
to 65 degrees. It will take about one month, or even less before the
heads may be cut. After cutting they must be kept dark, else they turn
green quickly. The roots after being forced, indoors or outdoors, become
useless.


=Use.= The leaves can be used in every way that lettuce can, and are
delicious either alone, or in combination salads. It is beautifully
crisp, tender and has a delightful appetizing flavor of its own. Large
quantities are imported into this country from Europe every year and it
is found on the bill of fare of all First Class Restaurants during the
winter months.

Grown at home (and so easily grown at that) and served fresh and crisp
from the bed, its true qualities are doubly appreciated.




PREFACE

THIRD EDITION

[Illustration]


The suggestions and recipes of this cook book have been gathering
through the years from sources far and wide. Friends and neighbors have
contributed, personal experience has offered its lessons, thrifty
housekeepers in home departments of newspapers, reports of lectures, and
recipes given to the newspaper world, from teachers in the science of
cookery, have all added color or substance to what is herein written.
The recipes of the CHICAGO RECORD-HERALD, rich in material, have been
drawn on to a limited extent, credit is given to an owner of a recipe if
known, if not it is given to the paper. Compound recipes have been made
up from the study of several cook books. "The Cook's Own Book," "The
Household," "Practical Housekeeping." French and German recipes have all
in some degree been a source of supply to this compilation. We offer the
result to you, hoping it will fill a need, and though a wee thing among
its grown up sisters, that it will find a place, all its own, in your
esteem and good will.

The demand which has made a Third Edition now necessary is the best
proof that the volume has found favor, and the ever increasing love of
gardening finds its definite expression in this direction as in many
other new ones.

Chicago, January 9th, 1919




Chinese Cabbage--Pe Tsai

[Illustration]


A few years ago this delicious vegetable was introduced into this
country, though it has been well known and extensively cultivated in
China for a long time.

We have grown it at our trial grounds two seasons and have found it a
novel, easily grown delicious vegetable. In shape it resembles a giant
cos lettuce forming a head some fifteen inches long.

When nearing maturity the outer leaves should be tied up to blanch the
heart and when cut two weeks later and the outer leaves removed, appears
as a grand oblong solid white head, of crisp tender leaves. We have
noticed that late sowing i. e. July gives the largest and best heads.
Sown earlier it runs to seed.


=Plant= in rows 1 ft. apart, with 2-1/2 or 3 ft. between the rows. Water
and cultivate freely. For Winter use store same as cabbage, keep from
freezing.


=Uses.= The heads may be cut into convenient sizes and served like
lettuce, but is we think, more delicious, when cooked like cabbage and
served up in any of the many ways that cabbage is.




Sea Kale


An easily grown vegetable, especially valuable when forced during the
winter months.

To raise from seed sow in April, lift the roots in Fall and plant out
the following Spring in rows 2 ft. apart.

Sea Kale needs well dug, well manured soil and plenty of water. We
recommend planting roots (3 year old preferably). Cover the bed with
light blanching material, 7 or 8 ins. deep and cut same as Asparagus
(Coal ashes is what is usually used for Seakale). It should be ready to
cut in 6 or 8 weeks. To get it early, plant 3 roots in hills 4 ft.
apart. Place an old bucket or box over the hill and cover all over with
fresh stable manure. The heat from the manure will make cutting possible
in 2 or 3 weeks; 4 or 6 buckets or boxes may be used and transferred to
other hills when first hills are through. (Roots can be procured in the
Fall.)


=Forcing Inside.= Plant 3 to 5 roots in an 8 in. pot and invert a similar
pot over it and cover the hole in the top. Place under bench in
conservatory or Greenhouse, or in a warm basement where 50 or 60 degrees
may be maintained. Water every day. Cutting should be made in from 18 to
21 days, according to heat maintained.


=Use.= Seakale is considered a great delicacy, the young shoots when
cooked are more tender than the youngest Asparagus. They are usually
cooked whole and served with white (cream) sauce as Asparagus, or may be
chopped up and cooked like celery and served in the same manner. It has
a nice buttery flavor of its own, that has to be tasted to be
appreciated, a flavor that will take with the household. We do not
hesitate to say that if once grown the demand will soon exceed the
supply.




Vegetables are at their best in their own season, just as nature
develops them, not as man forces them. Gathered not quite full grown
with the dew of the morning upon them, they are solid, tender, juicy,
sweet and full of flavor, fit for a feast of the gods. But the
crispness, sweetness and fresh flavors are fleeting, and few but owners
of, and neighbors to gardens know the prime flavors of the fruits and
vegetables upon their tables. Therefore in selecting vegetables for your
table choose first the freshest possible, select medium sized and not
overgrown ones, though small sized turnips and large rutabagas are best,
egg-plants should be full grown, but not ripe. If vegetables are not
fresh refresh them by plunging them into cold salt water an hour before
cooking. Old potatoes should be pared as thin as possible and be thrown
at once into cold salt water for several hours, changing the water once
or twice. Wipe plunged vegetables before cooking. Old potatoes are
improved by paring before baking. Irish or sweet potatoes, if frozen,
must be put into bake without thawing. Onions should be soaked in warm
salt water an hour before cooking to modify their rank flavor. Lettuce,
greens, and celery are sometimes best cleaned by using warm water,
though they must be thrown at once, when cleaned, into cold water. To
steam vegetables is better than to boil them, their flavors are held
better, they are less liable to be water-soaked and their odors are
confined instead of escaping through the house. If they are to be boiled
always draw fresh water. Mrs. Rorer says, "Soft water should be used for
dry vegetables, such as split peas, lentils and beans, and hard water
for green ones. Water is made soft by using a half teaspoonful of
bi-carbonate of soda to a gallon of water, and hard by using one
teaspoonful of salt to a gallon of water." As soon as the water boils,
before it parts with its gases, put in the vegetables. Use open vessels
except for spinach. The quicker they boil the better. As soon as tender,
take them out of the water, drain and dress for the table. Never let
them remain in the water after they are once done. Fresh vegetables boil
in about 1/3 of the time of old ones. A little bi-carbonate of soda
added to the boiling water before greens are put in will serve to keep
their color. A pinch of pearl ash put into boiling peas will render old
yellow ones, quite tender and green. A little sugar improves beets,
turnips, peas, corn, squash, tomatoes and pumpkins, especially if they
are not in prime condition. A little lime boiled in water improves very
watery potatoes. A piece of red pepper the size of a finger nail, a
small piece of charcoal or even a small piece of bread crust, dropped in
with boiling vegetables will modify unpleasant odors. Vegetables served
with salt meats must be boiled in the liquor of the meat after it has
been boiled and removed. Egg-plant and old potatoes are often put on to
cook in cold salt water. It is claimed that onions, carrots, and turnips
cook quicker if cut in rings across the fiber. Clean all vegetables
thoroughly to remove all dirt and insects. To free leaves from insects,
throw vegetables, stalk ends uppermost, into a strong brine made by
putting one and one half pounds of salt into a gallon of water. Leave
them in the brine for two or three hours, and the insects will fall off
and sink to the bottom.


BOILED ARTICHOKES.

The edible part of a French Artichoke is the base of the scales and the
bottom of the artichoke. The Jerusalem artichoke is a genuine tuber
something like a potato. They are differently treated in preparation for
cooking, but are cooked similarly. To prepare a French artichoke for
boiling, pull off the outer leaves, cut the stalks close to the bottom,
wash well and throw into cold salt water for two hours. To boil, plunge
them into boiling salted water, stalk end up with an inverted plate over
them to keep them down. Boil until very tender, season well, drain and
arrange on a dish with tops up. Pour over any good vegetable sauce. (See
Sauces.) To prepare Jerusalem artichokes for boiling pare and slice thin
into cold water to prevent turning dark, boil in salted water, season
and serve with drawn butter or a good sauce.


CREAMED ARTICHOKES.

Slice six artichokes, boil in salted water and when tender, drain. Brown
slightly in a saucepan one tablespoonful of butter and a dessert
spoonful of flour, add a cup of rich milk, season with a half
teaspoonful of salt, the same amount of sugar and a dash of pepper; boil
two minutes, then stir in two eggs well beaten in two tablespoonfuls of
milk, add the artichokes and the juice of half a lemon and let simmer
three minutes longer; when dished up sprinkle one-third of a salt spoon
of pepper over them and serve hot.


FRIED ARTICHOKES.

Boil and drain six artichokes, season with a sprinkling of vinegar, a
little salt and pepper and stand them aside for an hour; beat an egg,
add to it a tablespoonful of warm water, dip each slice in this, then in
flour and fry in hot fat. Serve with Sauce Tartare. (See Sauces.)

MRS. S. T. RORER.


ARTICHOKES A LA LYONNAISE.

Boil, drain, put into a saucepan with melted butter and sweet oil and
brown on both sides, season with salt. Add a half cupful of meat stock,
thicken with a little flour and butter, and boil three minutes, squeeze
a little lemon juice into it, add a sprinkling of parsley and a dash of
pepper, pour over the artichokes and serve.

FRENCH RECIPE.


PICKLED ARTICHOKES.

Parboil artichokes, and pour over good strong vinegar. They make
excellent pickles.


ARTICHOKE SOUP.

Slice into cold water to keep the color, boil an hour or more in two
quarts of water, season highly with butter, pepper and salt, and just
before taking up, add a cup of cream.


ARTICHOKES A LA VINAIGRETTE.

Pare and throw into cold water at once. When ready for use cut into thin
slices, arrange them on lettuce leaves and serve with a French dressing.
(See Salad Dressing.)


AMBUSHED ASPARAGUS.

[Illustration]

Use one quart of the tender tops of asparagus, and be rid of the white
part, which will not cook tender, boil and drain. Cut off with care the
tops from rolls or biscuits a day old, scoop out the inside, and set the
shells and tops into the oven to crisp. Boil a pint of milk, and when
boiled stir in four eggs well whipped. As it thickens season with a
tablespoonful of butter; salt and pepper to taste. Into this mixture put
the asparagus cut up into small pieces. Fill the shells, replace the
tops, put into the oven for three minutes and serve very hot.


BAKED ASPARAGUS.

Choose the freshest asparagus possible, trim the tops, scrape or peel
the stalks, cut them into equal lengths and tie into small bunches; boil
in salted water, drain, cut into inch pieces and put into a buttered
baking dish; pour over a white sauce, (See Sauces) cover the top with
grated cheese and bread crumbs, and bake until a golden brown.


BOILED ASPARAGUS.

Prepare as for baked asparagus, and when boiled tender in salted water,
pour over a drawn butter sauce; or prepare a sauce from the water
drained from the asparagus by thickening with one tablespoonful of
butter, one tablespoonful of flour and the beaten yolk of an egg, to
which add seasoning and lemon or nutmeg to suit taste.


ESCALLOPED ASPARAGUS.

Make alternate layers of boiled asparagus, a sprinkling of chopped hard
boiled eggs and a sprinkling of grated cheese until the baking pan is
full, having asparagus the top layer. Make a well seasoned milk gravy
and pour gradually into the pan that it may soak through to the bottom,
cover the top with bread crumbs and a light sprinkle of cheese; bake
until a light brown.


FRIED ASPARAGUS.

Parboil the asparagus, dip in egg, then in bread crumbs, or use a batter
and fry in hot fat. Sprinkle with salt and serve.


ASPARAGUS WITH EGGS.

Put boiled asparagus into a heated baking dish, season well, break eggs
over it and put into the oven until the eggs are set, or beat the yolks
and whites of four eggs separately; mix with the yolks two tablespoonfuls
of milk or cream, a heaping teaspoonful of butter, salt and pepper, and
lastly the beaten whites of the eggs; pour all over the asparagus and
bake until the eggs are set.


ASPARAGUS OMELET.

Make a plain omelet and when the eggs are firming, lay over one half of
it hot seasoned tops of asparagus, and fold over the other half.


ASPARAGUS SALAD.

Drain boiled asparagus and set on ice until used. Make a bed of crisp
tender lettuce leaves, lay on these slices of fresh solid tomatoes, and
over these a layer of asparagus: pour over all a French or mayonnaise
dressing. (See Salad Dressing.)


ASPARAGUS SOUP.

Boil tips and stalks separately, when the stalks are soft, mash and rub
them through a sieve. Boil a pint of rich milk, thicken it with a
tablespoonful each of butter and flour and add the water in which the
asparagus was boiled and the pulp. Season with salt, pepper, a very
little sugar, and lastly a gill of cream, add the tips, boil all
together a minute and serve with toast or crackers.


STRING BEANS AND APPLES.

[Illustration]

Take three parts of string beans to one part apples. Break the beans
into small pieces, pare and quarter the apples. Boil the beans in salted
water until soft, and drain. Mix a tablespoonful each of butter and
flour in a saucepan, and add to this, three tablespoonfuls each of
vinegar and water and season with salt. Pour over the beans and let cook
until they are well seasoned. Boil the apples and add thin slices of
lemon. When all is ready add the apples to the beans without too much
juice. Serve either hot or cold.

GERMAN RECIPE.


FAVRE BEANS.

Beans and oysters form this dish. Cook the beans until tender and they
must not be dry either. Put an inch thick layer of beans in a baking
dish, sprinkle with salt, pepper and bits of butter, cover with a layer
of raw oysters, then beans, seasoning and oysters again, and so continue
until the dish is full. Sprinkle cracker dust or bread crumbs thickly
over the top, strew over bits of butter and bake in a well heated oven
three-quarters of an hour. Do not let the top get too deep a brown.


FRICASSEE OF BEANS.

Steep one pint of haricot beans for a night in cold water, then remove
them, drain and put on the fire with two quarts of soft water. When
boiling allow the beans to simmer for another two hours. While they are
cooking thus, put on in another saucepan two ounces of butter, an ounce
of parsley (chopped) and the juice of one lemon, and when the butter has
quite melted throw in the beans and stir them round for a few minutes.
To be served with rice.


HARICOT BEANS.

Soak a pint of beans over night, cook the next morning until perfectly
soft, strain through a sieve and season with one teaspoonful of salt and
a saltspoonful of pepper. From this point this mass is capable of many
treatments. It is made into a plain loaf sprinkled with bread crumbs,
dotted with butter and baked, or it is mixed with a cream sauce and
treated the same way, or it is made into a plain croquet, dipped into
batter and fried, or it is seasoned with a tablespoonful of molasses,
vinegar and butter and made into croquets, or it is mixed with a French
dressing and eaten while it is warm as a warm salad.


LIMA BEANS.

After shelling a quart of lima beans, cook in boiling salted water until
tender, then stir in a lump of butter the size of an egg and pepper and
salt to taste; or season with milk or cream, butter, salt and pepper, or
melt a piece of butter the size of an egg, mix with it an even
teaspoonful of flour, and a little meat broth to make a smooth sauce.
Put the beans in the sauce and let them simmer very slowly for fifteen
minutes. Just before serving add a tablespoonful of chopped parsley and
salt and pepper to taste.


STRING BEANS BOILED.

Take the pods as fresh and young as possible and shred them as finely as
a small knife will go through them, cutting them lengthwise. Put into
salted water and boil until tender. Then drain and serve with plenty of
sweet butter, and they will be as delicate as peas. If one likes
vinegar, a little of it will improve the dish.


STRING BEANS PICKLED.

Boil beans until tender, and then put into strong vinegar; add green
peppers to taste.


STRING BEAN SALAD.

Cook the beans in salted water, drain and season while warm with salt,
pepper, oil and vinegar. A little onion juice is an improvement. (See
French Salad Dressing.)


STRING BEAN SOUP.

Boil one pint of string beans cut in inch lengths, in one pint of veal
or celery stock and one pint of water, add a few slices of potatoes, a
stalk of tender celery chopped, half a small onion, two or three leaves
of summer savory and a clove. When soft rub through a sieve. Put in a
saucepan and cook together a tablespoonful of butter, a heaping
tablespoonful of flour and a pint of rich milk. Add this to the stock
and pulp, season with pepper and salt and serve.


WHITE NAVY BEANS CURRIED.

If the fresh kidney beans are not obtainable soak a pint of the dried
over night. Boil in two quarts of water for two hours or until tender.
Drain, when soft, and put into a saucepan with an ounce of butter, one
small onion chopped fine, one saltspoonful of salt and a
half-teaspoonful of curry powder. Toss the beans in this mixture for a
few moments over the fire; then mix smoothly a tablespoonful of flour
with a large cup of milk and season highly with a tablespoonful each of
chopped parsley, chopped bacon, tomato catchup and chutney, adding also
a saltspoonful of salt, and add to the beans; set the saucepan on the
back of the range and let the contents simmer three-quarters of an hour,
adding more milk if the curry becomes too thick. Serve with plain boiled
rice.

CHICAGO RECORD.


BAKED BEETS.

[Illustration]

Bake two large beets, take off the hard outside, and the inner part will
be surprisingly sweet. Slice and pour over a sauce made with two
tablespoonfuls of butter, juice of half a lemon, a half teaspoonful of
salt and a dash of pepper.


BEETS AND BUTTER SAUCE.

Boil three or four beets until tender in fast boiling water, slightly
salted, which must entirely cover them. Then scrape off the skin, cut
the beets into slices, and the slices into strips. Melt an ounce of
butter, add to it a little salt, pepper, sugar and a teaspoonful of
vinegar. Pour over the beets and serve. A small minced onion added to
the sauce is sometimes considered an improvement.


BEET SALAD.

Slice cold boiled beets; cut into neat strips, and serve with white
crisp lettuce; pour over a mayonnaise dressing; or slice the beets and
put in layers with slices of hard boiled eggs, or, with new potatoes and
serve on lettuce with French dressing garnished with water cress.


SWEET PICKLED BEETS.

Boil beets in a porcelain kettle till they can be pierced with a silver
fork; when cold cut lengthwise to size of a medium cucumber; boil equal
parts of vinegar and sugar, with a half tablespoonful of ground cloves
to a gallon of vinegar; pour boiling hot over the beets.


SUGAR BEET PUDDING.

The following recipe of Juliet Corson's was traveling the round of the
newspapers a few years ago:--Boil the beets just tender, peel and cut
into small dice. Take a pint of milk to a pint of beets, two or three
eggs well beaten, a palatable seasoning of salt and pepper and the least
grating of nutmeg; put these ingredients into an earthen dish that can
be sent to the table; bake the pudding until the custard is set, and
serve it hot as a vegetable. A favorite Carolina dish.


BOILED BORECOLE OR KALE.

[Illustration]

Use a half peck of kale. Strip the leaves from the stems and choose the
crisp and curly ones for use, wash through two waters and drain. Boil in
salted water twenty minutes, then pour into a colander and let cold
water run over it, drain and chop fine. Brown a small onion in a
tablespoonful of butter, and add the kale, seasoning with salt and
pepper, add a half teacupful of the water in which the kale was boiled,
and let all simmer together for twenty minutes. Just before taking from
the stove add a half cup of milk or cream, thickening with a little
flour. Let boil a moment and serve.


KALE GREENS.

These make excellent greens for winter and spring use. Boil hard one
half hour with salt pork or corned beef, then drain and serve in a hot
dish. Garnish with slices of hard boiled eggs, or the yolks of eggs
quirled by pressing through a patent potato masher. It is also palatable
served with a French dressing.


KALE ON TOAST.

Boil kale, mix with a good cream sauce and serve on small squares of
toast.


BROCCOLI.

Broccoli if not fresh is apt to be bitter in spite of good cooking.
Strip off all the side shoots, leaving only the top; cut the stalk close
to the bottom of the bunch, throw into cold water for half an hour,
drain, tie in a piece of cheese cloth to keep it from breaking and boil
twenty minutes in salted water. Take out carefully, place upon a hot
dish, pour over it a cream sauce and serve very hot; or it may be served
on toast.


BRUSSELS SPROUTS.

Wash in cold water, pick off the dead leaves, put them in two quarts of
boiling water, with a tablespoonful of salt, and a quarter teaspoonful
of bi-carbonate of soda. Boil rapidly for twenty minutes with the
saucepan uncovered, then drain in a colander, and serve with drawn
butter or a cream sauce.


BOILED CABBAGE.

[Illustration]

Slice a cabbage fine and boil in half water and half milk, when tender
add cream and butter. This is delicious.


A CABBAGE CENTER PIECE.

Take a head of cabbage, one that has been picked too late is best, for
the leaves open better then, and are apt to be slightly curled. Lay the
cabbage on a flat plate or salver and press the leaves down and open
with your hand, firmly but gently, so as not to break them off. When
they all lie out flat, stab the firm, yellow heart through several times
with a sharp knife, until its outlines are lost and then place flowers
at random all over the cabbage.

Roses are prettiest, but any flower which has a firm, stiff stem,
capable of holding the blossom upright will do. Press the stems down
through the leaves and put in sufficient green to vary prettily. The
outer leaves of the cabbage, the only ones to be seen when the flowers
are in, form a charming background, far prettier than any basket.

Roses are best for all seasons, but autumn offers some charming
variations. The brilliant scarlet berries of the mountain ash or red
thorn mingled with the deep, rich green of feathery asparagus, make a
delicious color symphony most appropriate to the season.

G. L. COLBRON.


CREAM SLAW.

Chop a crisp head of cabbage fine, place in the individual dishes in
which it is to be served; fill a cup with white sugar, moisten it with
vinegar, add a cup of sour cream beaten until smooth, mix thoroughly,
pour over the cabbage and serve at once.


CABBAGE A LA HOLLAND.

The following is a favorite dish in Holland:--Put together in a
saucepan, either porcelain or a perfect granite one, a small head of red
cabbage shredded, four tart apples peeled and sliced, one large
tablespoonful of butter or of drippings, a teaspoonful of salt, a half
teaspoonful of pepper, and a little sprinkling of cheese or nutmeg; stew
over a slow fire at least three hours. Mix together one tablespoonful of
vinegar, a little flour and one tablespoonful of currant jelly, just
before taking from the fire add this mixture to the cabbage, boil up
once or twice and serve.


RED CABBAGE PICKLE.

This is an improvement on saur kraut. Slice a large red cabbage in fine
shreds, place on a large platter and sprinkle well with salt; allow it
to stand three days and then drain. Heat enough vinegar to cover it
nicely, and put in one ounce of whole spices, pepper, cloves, allspice
and mace. Put the cabbage into a stone jar, pour the boiling vinegar
upon it, cover and let stand three days.


CABBAGE PUDDING.

Chop up small, enough white cabbage to fill a large baking pan when
done. Put it in a pot of boiling water that has been salted, let it boil
until tender, then drain thoroughly in a colander. In two quarts of the
cabbage stir half a pound of butter, salt and pepper to taste, one pint
of sweet cream and four eggs beaten separately. Add also, a pinch of
cayenne pepper; put in a pan and bake for half an hour.


PURITAN CABBAGE.

Take half of a small very solid head of white cabbage, cut into eighths,
from top to stem, without cutting quite through the stem so that it does
not fall into pieces; cover with cold water for one hour; then immerse
it in a porcelain kettle of rapidly boiling water, into which has been
dropped a teaspoonful of salt and soda the size of a pea. Cover the
vessel well and continue boiling for five minutes; drain, cover again
with fresh boiling water and let boil for eight or ten minutes longer.
Take out of water, draining, flat side down, on a hot platter for a
moment. Then turn right side up, allowing the slices to spread apart a
little, and drop slowly over it the following sauce: One tablespoon
butter and two tablespoons sweet cream, melted together. Select and have
ready to use at once, eighteen or twenty plump, good sized oysters,
dried on a towel. Take a double-wire gridiron and butter it well; spread
the oysters carefully on one side of the gridiron and fold the other
side down over them. Have a clear fire and broil them quickly, first one
side, then the other, turning iron but once. Dot them over the hot
cabbage, giving all a faint dust of curry powder and two or three dashes
of white pepper. This is a most dainty and delicious dish.

CHICAGO RECORD.


CABBAGE SALAD.

This salad requires about a pint and a half of chopped cabbage. The
cabbage should have the loose leaves removed, the stem cut out, and then
be laid in cold water twelve hours. Chop rather fine, pour over and mix
with it a boiled dressing. Heat three-quarters of a cup of milk and beat
two egg yolks with a fork. Mix with the egg a half-teaspoonful of
mustard, one half-teaspoonful of salt, a teaspoonful of granulated
gelatine that has been softened in a little cold water, a teaspoonful of
sugar and a few grains of cayenne. Cook a tablespoonful of butter and
flour together and add half a cup of vinegar. Now cook the milk and egg
mixture together like a soft custard and combine with the other part.
This dressing, if sealed tight, will keep a long time. When the cabbage
and dressing are mixed, fill little individual molds and set away to
cool. After-dinner coffee cups, wet in cold water, make good molds. Bits
of red beet or half an olive put in the bottom of the mold before the
cabbage is put in will make a pretty garnish when the salad is turned
out.

CHICAGO RECORD.


SOUR CABBAGE.

Beat one half-cupful of sour cream until smooth, add three
tablespoonfuls of vinegar, and one beaten egg, pour over chopped cabbage
raw or boiled, and mix thoroughly. Serve on lettuce.


STUFFED CABBAGE.

Use a savoy cabbage, open up the leaves and wash thoroughly in cold
water, put in salted boiling water and boil five minutes, then take out
without breaking, and put in cold water. Make a stuffing of sausage
meat, and bread crumbs which have been moistened and squeezed. To a half
pound of sausage allow one egg, two tablespoonfuls of minced onion
browned in butter, a pinch of parsley and four tablespoonfuls of minced
cooked ham. Drain, and open up the cabbage to the center, between the
leaves put in a half teaspoonful of the stuffing, fold over two or three
leaves, put in again and so continue until the cabbage is filled. When
finished press it as firmly as the case will allow, tie up in a piece of
cheese cloth and put into boiling water; boil two hours. Serve the
cabbage in a deep dish and pour over a cream sauce.


TURKISH CABBAGE.

Prepare the cabbage as above for stuffing, then cut out the stalk
carefully. Cut each leaf in pieces about three inches square and fold
into it a forcemeat of some sort, or a highly seasoned vegetable
dressing. These little rolls are arranged in layers in a saucepan and
are held in place by the weight of a heavy plate; a broth is then turned
over them and they are boiled half an hour over a moderate fire. Serve
in a hot deep dish and pour over a good sauce made from the broth in
which they were cooked.


CARROTS A LA CREME.

[Illustration]

Take a large bunch of very small new carrots, scrape them, tie them
loosely in a piece of coarse muslin and put into a saucepan almost full
of boiling water, to which has been added a small lump of beef drippings
and two ounces of salt. In about twenty minutes they will be tender,
when remove from the hot water and plunge for a moment in cold. Next
melt an ounce of butter in a saucepan and stir into this a dessert
spoonful of flour, a small quantity each of pepper, salt and cayenne,
also a little nutmeg and half a teacupful of cream. Remove the carrots
from the muslin, put them into the saucepan with the other ingredients
and let them simmer in them for a few minutes; then serve very quickly
while hot. Green peas and carrots mixed and dressed in this way make an
excellent variation.


CARROTS A LA FLAMANDE.

When par-boiled and drained, put the carrots into a saucepan with a
piece of butter, a small lump of sugar and as much water as may be
necessary for sauce; add some finely minced parsley and pepper and salt
to the taste. Let the carrots simmer until done (about fifteen minutes)
shaking them occasionally. Beat together the yolks of two eggs and two
tablespoonfuls of cream; stir this into the carrots off the fire and
serve.


CARROT CROQUETTES.

Wash six small, fine-grained carrots and boil until tender. Drain and
mash them. To each cupful add one-half spoonful of salt and one-fourth
as much pepper, the yolks of two raw eggs, a grate of nutmeg and one
level teaspoonful of butter. Mix thoroughly and set away until cold.
Shape into tiny croquettes, dip in slightly beaten egg, roll in fine
bread crumbs and fry in smoking-hot fat.

CHICAGO RECORD.


FRIED CARROTS.

When the carrots are boiled tender, slice them lengthwise. Into a frying
pan put one tablespoonful of butter, and when very hot put in the
carrots; brown them lightly on both sides, sprinkle them with salt,
pepper and a little sugar and garnish with parsley.


ESCALLOPED CARROTS.

Take six small fine-grained carrots and two small white onions, boil in
water until tender, from forty-five to sixty minutes, just enough water
to keep from burning. Do not scrape them, and the flavor will be
retained; do not cover them and the color will be preserved. When the
onions are tender remove them. When the carrots are done peel them and
slice thin. Put in baking dish a layer of carrots, sprinkle with salt
and pepper and dots of butter. Proceed in this way until you have used
all the carrots. Moisten with a cup of new milk, into which a beaten egg
has been carefully stirred, and a good pinch of salt. Spread over the
top a layer of bread crumbs and bake until a nice brown.

CHICAGO RECORD.


PRESERVED CARROTS.

Scrape carrots clean, cut into small pieces and boil with sufficient
cold water to cover them. Boil until tender, and put through the
colander, weigh the carrots, add white sugar pound for pound and boil
five minutes. Take off and cool. When cool add the juice of two lemons
and the grated rind of one, two tablespoonfuls of brandy and eight or
ten bitter almonds chopped fine to one pound of carrot. Stir all in well
and put in jars.


CARROT SOUP.

Boil a pint of carrots with a piece of butter about as large as a walnut
and a lump of sugar until they are tender. Press through a colander and
put into a pint of boiling milk, thickened with a tablespoonful each of
butter and flour, dilute this with soup stock or chicken broth, and just
before taking up add the yolks of two eggs well beaten and two
tablespoonfuls of cream.


BAKED CAULIFLOWER.

[Illustration]

Boil cauliflower in salt water, separate into small pieces, and put in a
baking dish, make a cream sauce and pour over it. Cover the mixture with
bread crumbs, dot with butter and bake a light brown.


BOILED CAULIFLOWER WITH WHITE SAUCE.

Cut off the stem close to the bottom of the flower and pick off the
outer leaves. Wash well in cold water and let it lie in salt and water
top downward for an hour to remove any insects which may be in the
leaves. Then tie in a cheese cloth or salt bag to prevent its going to
pieces, and put, stem downward, in a kettle of boiling water with a
teaspoonful of salt. Cover and boil till tender, about half an hour.
Lift it out carefully, remove the cloth and arrange, stem downward, in a
round, shallow dish. Pour over it a cream sauce.


FRIED CAULIFLOWER.

Take cauliflower cooked the day before, divide into small tufts, dip in
egg and roll in cracker or bread crumbs, or make a batter in the
proportion of one egg, two tablespoonfuls of milk and one tablespoonful
of flour. Beat the eggs very light before adding to the milk and flour,
and into this dip the cauliflower. Have the butter boiling hot in the
frying pan, put in the cauliflower and fry a light brown, garnish with
parsley.


PICKLED CAULIFLOWER.

Boil the cauliflower not too soft and break up into small tufts. Drain
and put into bottles with horse-radish, tarragon, bay leaves and grains
of black pepper. Pour over good cider vinegar and cork the bottle
tightly.


CAULIFLOWER SALAD.

This salad is what Mrs. Rorer terms delicious served with her favorite
French dressing. Take a head of cauliflower and boil in a piece of fine
cheesecloth. Remove from the cloth, drain and sprinkle over it two
tablespoons of lemon juice or vinegar and stand aside to cool. At
serving time break the head apart into flowerets, arrange them neatly on
a dish; sprinkle over a little chopped parsley or the wild sorrel; cover
with French dressing made as follows; put a half-teaspoon of salt and as
much white pepper into a bowl; add gradually six tablespoons of olive
oil. Rub until the salt is dissolved, and then add one tablespoon of
vinegar or lemon juice. Beat well for a moment and it is ready to use.
It is much better if used at once.


CAULIFLOWER SOUP.

Boil a head of cauliflower in water, or if convenient in soup stock or
chicken broth. If water is used add an onion. Lift out the cauliflower,
lay aside one half-pint of tufts. Mash the rest through a sieve using
the water in which it was boiled to press it through. Put one large
tablespoonful of butter over the fire in a saucepan and when melted stir
in a large tablespoon of flour. Stir this into the puree until of a
creamy consistency, add a pint of hot milk, a beaten egg, salt and
pepper to taste and a little grated nutmeg if liked. Add the reserved
tufts, simmer five minutes and serve.


CAULIFLOWER AND TOMATO SOUFFLE.

Boil cauliflower in salted water until tender, then drain and separate
into tufts. Put in a buttered baking dish a layer of tufts, then a layer
of tomatoes, salt and pepper the tomatoes. Continue these alternate
layers until the dish is full. Make a boiled sauce of two tablespoonfuls
of butter, one and one half-tablespoonfuls of flour, one cup of milk,
and the yolks of two eggs, lastly add three tablespoonfuls of grated
cheese and the beaten whites of the two eggs. Pour into the baking dish
and cover all with a layer of bread crumbs dotted with bits of butter.
Bake one half hour.


TO CRISP CELERY.

[Illustration]

Let it lie in ice water two hours before serving. To fringe the stalk,
stick several coarse needles into a cork and draw the stalk half way
from the top several times, and lay in the refrigerator to curl and
crisp.


CELERY A LA VERSAILLES.

Cleanse two or three heads of well-blanched celery and trim them nicely,
leaving on just as much of the stalk as is tender; parboil the vegetable
in well-salted water, then rinse in cold water and drain on a sieve.
Have about a pint of boiling white stock ready in a saucepan, lay in the
celery, with a large onion cut in quarters and a good seasoning of salt
and pepper, and cook very gently until the celery is quite tender, then
drain the vegetable carefully on a napkin so as to absorb the moisture,
and cut each head into quarters lengthwise. Fold the pieces into as neat
a shape as possible and make them even in size; mask them entirely over
with thick bechamel sauce and allow this latter to stiffen; then dip the
pieces in beaten egg, roll thickly in fine white bread crumbs, and fry
in boiling fat. When sufficiently browned, drain on blotting-paper, and
pile up high in the center of a hot dish covered with a napkin. Garnish
with sprigs of fried parsley and serve.


CELERY-POTATO CROQUETTES.

To a pint of mashed potatoes add half a teacup of cooked celery, season
with a tablespoon of butter, half a teaspoon of salt, a dash of white
pepper; add the yolk of one egg. Roll in shape of a small cylinder three
inches long and one and a fourth inches thick. Dip them in the beaten
white of egg, roll in cracker or bread crumbs and fry.

CHICAGO RECORD.


CELERY AU GRATIN.

Wash and trim four heads of celery; set in a stewpan with a teaspoonful
of vinegar, salt and cold water; boil until tender and drain dry. Make
some sauce with a tablespoonful of butter, the same quantity of flour
and half a pint of milk. Cook while stirring till it thickens; add the
yolk of one egg and a tablespoonful of grated cheese; stir the sauce,
but do not let it boil. Arrange the celery in a pie dish, sprinkle bread
crumbs over and little bits of butter; cover with sauce and brown in the
oven. Serve in the dish in which it is cooked.

CHICAGO RECORD.


CELERY SALAD.

Take the inner and tenderest heads of three stalks of celery, cut them
into strips an inch long and about the thickness of young French beans.
Rub the salad bowl lightly with shallot. Mix the yolks of two hard
boiled eggs with three tablespoonfuls of salad oil, one of tarragon
vinegar, a little mustard and pepper and salt to taste. Add the celery
to this sauce, toss well with two silver forks, garnish with slices of
hard boiled eggs. If you have any cold chicken or turkey, chop it up,
and mix with some of above in equal proportions; or a few oysters will
be a great addition.


STEWED CELERY.

After celery is cut up and soaked in cold water for fifteen minutes,
then cooked until tender, it must be drained in the colander, thrown
into cold water to blanch and become firm, and then thoroughly heated in
a white sauce. If the cold bath is neglected the result will be flat and
discolored instead of white and crisp.


CELERY SOUP.

The ingredients are two heads of celery, one quart of water, one quart
of milk, two tablespoonfuls of flour, one teaspoonful of salt, two
tablespoonfuls of butter and a dash of pepper. Wash and scrape celery
and cut in half inch pieces, put in boiling water and cook until soft.
Mash the celery in the water in which it is boiled and add salt and
pepper. Let the milk come to a boil; cream together the butter and flour
and stir the boiling milk into it slowly; then add celery and strain
through a sieve mashing and pressing with the back of a spoon until all
but the tough fibres of the celery are squeezed through. Return the soup
to the fire and heat until it is steaming when it is ready to serve.


BOILED CELERIAC.

Pare the roots and throw them into cold water for one half hour. Cut
into squares, boil in salted water until tender and serve with a butter
or cream sauce.


CELERIAC SALAD.

Boil the roots in salted water, throw into cold water and peel; slice,
serve on lettuce leaves and pour over a French or mayonnaise dressing.
(See Salad Dressing.)


CHERVIL SALAD.

Clean the leaves thoroughly in cold water and shake to drain. Serve with
French salad dressing. The leaves are aromatic and are used for
seasoning dressings, salads, sauces and soups and also for garnishes.


CREAM CHICORY.

Clean well and boil several heads of chicory, drain and cool; squeeze
out the water from the chicory and mince it; melt some butter in a
saucepan and cook until the moisture has evaporated; sprinkle with flour
and add hot milk; boil up stirring all the time; season, and cook on
back of the stove fifteen minutes; serve with croutons or bits of toast.

FRENCH RECIPE.


CHICORY SALAD.

Wash and shake well; select the white leaves and cut in one or two inch
lengths. In the salad bowl mix the oil, salt and vinegar then add the
chicory and mix vigorously with a wooden fork and spoon; add the vinegar
sparingly--1-1/2 tablespoons of vinegar to 6 of oil. A crust of bread
rubbed with garlic is usually added, but the bowl itself may be slightly
rubbed with a cut clove.

FRENCH RECIPE.


CITRON PRESERVES.

Select sound fruit, pare and divide them into quarters, and cut each
quarter into small pieces, take the seeds out carefully; the slices may
be left plain or may be cut in fancy shapes, notching the edges nicely,
weigh the citron, and to every pound of fruit allow a pound of sugar.
Boil in water with a small piece of alum until clear and tender; then
rinse in cold water. Boil the weighed sugar in water and skim until the
syrup is clear. Add the fruit, a little ginger root or a few slices of
lemon, boil five minutes and fill hot jars. Seal tightly.


CITRON PUDDING.

Cream together half a cup of butter and one cup of sugar; add the well
beaten yolks of five eggs, the juice and grated peel of one lemon, and
whip until very light, then add the whites beaten to a froth alternately
with two full cups of flour, through which must be sifted two even
teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Butter a mold lavishly, line it with
strips of preserved citron, using a quarter of a pound for a pudding of
this size, put in the batter, cover and set in a pan with boiling water
in a good oven. Keep the pan nearly full of boiling water and bake
steadily one and one half hours. Dip the mold in cold water, turn out
upon a hot dish, and eat at once with any kind of sweet pudding sauce.
The mold must not be filled more than two thirds full, in order to give
the pudding a chance to swell.


SWEET PICKLED CITRON.

One pound of sugar and one quart of vinegar (if too strong dilute with
water) to every two pounds of citron. Boil the vinegar, sugar and spices
together and skim well. Then add the citron and cook until about half
done. Use spices to suit taste.


CORN CHOWDER.

Chop fine one-quarter pound of salt pork, put in a kettle, and when well
tried out add two white onions sliced thin. Brown lightly, then add one
pint of raw diced potatoes, one can of corn, chopped fine, and
sufficient boiling water to cover. When the potatoes are tender stir in
two tablespoonfuls of flour, blended with one of butter, one teaspoonful
of salt and saltspoonful of white pepper and one quart of boiling milk.
Simmer five minutes longer, add one cupful of hard crackers, broken into
bits, and serve.

MISS BEDFORD.


CHICKEN WITH CORN OYSTERS.

Clean and joint a chicken, one weighing about three pounds, as for
fricassee. Wipe each piece with a damp cloth, dip in slightly beaten
egg; then roll in seasoned fine bread crumbs. Arrange in a deep dish,
and bake in a very hot oven for forty-five minutes, basting every ten
minutes with melted butter. While the chicken is baking chop one cup
full of cold boiled corn fine, add to it one beaten egg, one-quarter of
a teaspoonful of salt, a dash of pepper, one tablespoonful of milk, two
tablespoonfuls of flour and one-quarter of a teaspoonful of baking
powder. Heat one tablespoonful of drippings in a pan, drop the batter in
in spoonfuls, and brown quickly on both sides. Prepare a sauce with one
tablespoonful of butter, blended with one of flour and one cupful of
chicken stock (made from the neck and wing tips), one-half of a cupful
of cream, one teaspoonful of lemon juice, a saltspoon of salt,
one-quarter as much pepper and the yolks of two eggs. Do not add the
eggs and cream until just before it is taken from the fire. Arrange on a
warm, deep platter. Garnish with the corn oysters and sprigs of parsley.
Serve the sauce in a boat.

CHICAGO RECORD.


CREAM OF CORN.

Use one can of corn for one quart of soup. Crush it thoroughly with
pestle or potato-masher to free the pulp from the tough outside coating;
rub through a fine colander, then through a sieve. Add one teacupful of
cream to the strained pulp and enough milk to make a quart altogether.
Put in a dash of cayenne pepper, a piece of butter the size of a
filbert, and salt to taste--it requires a surprising amount of salt to
bring out the flavor. Use a double boiler as it burns easily. Serve very
hot stirring well before taking up.

MRS. THOMPSON.


GREEN CORN FRITTERS.

Cut the corn from three good sized ears and chop it slightly. Add one
well beaten egg, one-half cup of milk, one tablespoonful of sugar,
one-half teaspoonful of salt, one-quarter teaspoonful of pepper, and
flour enough to make a thin batter. Put one teaspoonful of baking powder
in the flour, fry to a golden brown in boiling fat.


CORN OMELET.

Take cold boiled corn and after cutting the grains through the middle,
scrape it from the cob. Make a plain omelet, and have the corn with very
little milk heating in a saucepan, seasoning to taste. When the omelet
is ready to turn, put the corn by spoonfuls over half the top, and fold
the omelet over. Serve at once.


GREEN CORN PUDDING.

Take one dozen ears of tender corn; grate them; then add one quart of
sweet milk thickened with three tablespoonfuls of flour made free from
lumps, a full tablespoonful of butter, four eggs, and pepper and salt
to taste. Butter an earthen baking dish and pour into it this mixture.
Bake one and one-half hours. This is to be served as a vegetable, though
with the addition of sugar and a rich sauce it can be used as a dessert.


CORN SOUP.

Take three ears of corn, remove the corn from the cob and boil the cobs
in three pints of soup stock or water very slowly one half hour. Remove
the cobs, put in the corn and boil twenty minutes, then rub the corn
through a sieve and add salt and pepper to taste. Boil up again and stir
into the soup a tablespoonful of flour and butter mixed. When it
thickens add one cupful of boiling milk. Let this new mixture come to a
boil, add one well beaten egg and serve.


CORN VINEGAR.

Add to one gallon of rain water one pint of brown sugar or molasses and
one pint of corn off the cob. Put into a jar, cover with a cloth, set in
the sun, and in three weeks you will have good vinegar. Most people
prefer it to cider vinegar.


CORN SALAD.

Corn salad makes a most refreshing salad in winter and spring as a
substitute for lettuce. Serve with French dressing. It is also used as
greens and is cooked like spinach.


CRESS.

[Illustration]

Water cress has a pleasant and highly pungent flavor that makes it
valuable as a salad or garniture. Tear water cress apart with the
fingers and put them loosely in a bowl to clean; use cold water; break
off the roots, do not use a knife; dress with salt, vinegar, and a
little powdered sugar. Some send them to the table without any dressing
and eat them with a little salt.


CUCUMBER AND CRESS SALAD.

Pare two cucumbers and cut them into quarters, lengthwise, then into
half-inch pieces. Pick over, wash and drain a pint of fresh cress, and
dry in a cloth. Add the cucumbers; mix and turn into the salad-bowl and
pour over a French dressing, made by mixing together four tablespoonfuls
of olive oil, one-quarter of a teaspoonful of salt, and the same of
white pepper, then dropping in, while stirring quickly, one
tablespoonful of tarragon or plain vinegar, or lemon juice.

CHICAGO RECORD.


WATER CRESS SOUP.

Look over carefully one large bunch of water cress and chop it fine.
Melt one large tablespoonful of butter in a granite stew-pan, add the
cress and one teaspoonful of lemon juice. Cook about ten minutes, until
the cress is tender. Do not let it burn. Add one egg, well beaten, with
one heaping teaspoonful of flour, also one saltspoonful of salt and two
dashes of pepper. Then pour in three pints of well-flavored soup stock.
Let boil five minutes longer and serve with croutons.

CHICAGO RECORD.


WATERCRESS AND WALNUT SALAD.

Crack fifty walnuts and remove the meats as nearly as possible in
unbroken halves. Squeeze over them the juice of two large lemons, or
three small ones, and leave them for several hours, or a day if
convenient. Just before dinner pick over in a cool place one quart of
watercress, wash it carefully and drain on a napkin. At the last moment
drench the cress with French dressing, spread the nuts over it, give
them a generous sprinkling of the dressing and serve.

CHICAGO RECORD.


BOILED CUCUMBERS.

Peel the cucumbers unless very young and tender, put into boiling salted
water, and when boiled throw them into cold water to firm them. When
ready for use, heat them in butter quickly without frying them, season
with salt and pepper, pour over any good sauce and serve. Ripe cucumbers
can be treated quite similarly unless the seeds are tough, if they are,
mash the cucumbers through a sieve and serve with butter, pepper and
salt.


CUCUMBER CATSUP.

Take twelve large, full-grown cucumbers and four onions. Peel the
cucumbers and take the skin off the onions; grate them, and let the pulp
drain through a sieve for several hours, then season highly with salt
and pepper, and add good cider vinegar until the pickle tastes strongly
of it, and it rises a little to the top. Put it in jars or wide-mouthed
bottles, and cork or seal them so as to be airtight. The pickle tastes
more like the fresh cucumber than anything else, and will pay for the
making.


FRIED CUCUMBER.

Boil a good-sized cucumber till nearly soft in milk and water flavored
slightly with onion. Remove and drain dry, cut it up into slices when
cold and brush each slice, which should be about a third of an inch
thick, with egg, and dip in bread crumbs or make a batter and dip each
slice in this, after which fry in butter till amber brown. To be served
in the center of a hot dish with mashed potatoes round.


CUCUMBER MANGOES. (See Mangoes.)


CUCUMBER A LA POULETTE.

Pare and cut in slices three good-sized cucumbers; cover with water and
let soak for half an hour, then drain and dry on a cloth. Put in a
saucepan with two tablespoonfuls of butter and fry over a moderate fire
without browning for five minutes. Add one scant tablespoonful of flour,
and, when well mixed, one and one-half cupfuls of chicken or veal broth.
Simmer gently for twenty minutes, season with a small teaspoonful of
salt, a saltspoonful of pepper and half a teaspoonful of sugar; draw the
pan to one side, add the beaten yolks of two eggs and one tablespoonful
of finely chopped parsley. Take from the fire as soon as thickened,
being careful not to allow the sauce to boil again.

MARION C. WILSON.


CUCUMBER SALAD.

Peel the cucumbers, slice as thin as possible, cover with salt, let
stand one hour covered, then put in colander and let cold water run over
them until all the salt is off. Make a bed of cress or lettuce leaves
and pour over French dressing; or prepare as above, pour over vinegar,
give a little dash of cayenne pepper and add sour cream. Cucumbers
sliced very thin with a mayonnaise dressing make a very excellent
sandwich filling.


CUCUMBER SALAD CUPS.

Choose medium sized cucumbers, pare carefully and cut off the two ends,
cut them in halves lengthwise, take out the seeds and put the cucumbers
into ice water for two hours. When ready for use wipe the cucumbers dry,
set them on a bed of lettuce leaves, asparagus leaves, cress, parsley or
any other pretty garniture, and fill the shells with lobster, salmon or
shrimp salad, asparagus, potato or vegetable salad, mix with mayonnaise
before stuffing and put a little more on top afterwards.


STUFFED CUCUMBERS.

Choose medium sized cucumbers, pare, cut off one or both ends, extract
the seeds, boil from three to five minutes, drain and throw into cold
water to firm, drain again and fill the insides with chicken or veal
forcemeat; line a pan with thin slices of pork, on which set the
cucumbers, season with salt and pepper and a pinch of marjoram and
summer savory, baste with melted butter, or gravy, chicken gravy is the
best, cover with a buttered paper and let bake. Or stuff with a sausage
forcemeat, make a bed for the cucumbers of chopped vegetables and
moisten with stock or water; or fill with a tomato stuffing as for
stuffed tomatoes, baste often with butter, or a nice gravy, put over a
buttered paper and bake until done, in about fifteen or twenty minutes.
The Chicago Record gave the following recipe for cucumbers stuffed with
rice:--Pare thinly five five-inch cucumbers. Cut off one end and remove
the pulp, leaving a thick solid case, with one thick end. Season one cup
of hot boiled rice, salted in cooking, with a tablespoonful of butter, a
"pinch" each of marjoram and summer savory, saltspoonful of grated
nutmeg, four shakes of cayenne and a tablespoonful of lemon juice. Fill
the cucumbers with this mixture; replace the end, fastening it with
small skewers; place in a pan of boiling water, salted, in which are two
bay leaves and a clove of garlic, and boil for ten minutes or until
tender. Drain and serve covered with a cream sauce.


DANDELIONS.

Use the dandelions in the early spring when they are young and tender.
They take the place of spinach and are treated the same. (See Spinach.)
Dandelions may be used as a salad with a French dressing.


EGG PLANT CROQUETTES.

[Illustration]

Peel, slice and boil until tender, mash and season with pepper and salt;
roll crackers or dry bread, and stir into it until very thick. Make into
croquettes or patties; fry in hot lard or with a piece of salt pork.


ESCALLOPED EGG PLANT.

1 egg plant, 2 tablespoonfuls butter, one teaspoonful salt, 1/3
teaspoonful pepper, 1 egg, 4 tablespoonfuls grated cheese, 1
tablespoonful Worcestershire sauce, 3 tablespoonfuls bread crumbs.

One good sized perfect egg plant. Let stand in cold water one hour. Do
not remove skin, but put the egg plant whole in a deep kettle of boiling
water, cover, and cook thirty minutes, or until tender. Be careful not
to break the skin while cooking. Drain on large platter and cool. Cut in
half and turn cut surfaces to platter while removing skin with knife and
fork. Egg plant discolors readily, also stains easily; so, keep covered
from the air when not preparing it. Use silver knife and fork for
chopping; porcelain frying pan for seasoning process and an earthen dish
for baking if you desire best results. Chop the plant moderately fine,
season with salt and pepper and simmer in two tablespoonfuls of butter
over a slow fire for ten minutes, keeping it closely covered. Add one
tablespoonful of Worcestershire Sauce after taking from the fire, and
divide the mixture into two equal portions. Put the first half into a
hot buttered baking dish; sprinkle over it one half of the grated cheese
and one tablespoonful of bread crumbs. Stir one well beaten egg into the
second portion; add to the first, cover with remainder of cheese and
finish with two tablespoonfuls of bread crumbs. Bake in moderately hot
oven for twenty minutes. Cover the dish for first five minutes, or until
the bread crumbs shall have lightly browned. Serve hot as an entree,
with or without tomato sauce, according to taste.

ALICE CAREY WATERMAN.


FRIED EGG PLANT.

Select a plant not too large or old. Cut in slices one fourth of an inch
thick, and lay in weak salt water over night. In the morning remove the
purple rind and wipe dry, dip in beaten egg, then in fine bread crumbs
or cracker dust; fry on the griddle or in a spider in hot butter and
drippings until a nice brown. It must cook rather slowly until
thoroughly soft, otherwise it is unpalatable.

MRS. MALLORY.

They can be more daintily fried if they are steamed first, in which case
the slices should be cut one inch thick and should lie in salt and water
two hours before frying. Crumbs sifted through a coarse sieve are an
improvement.


STUFFED EGG PLANT

Choose four rather small egg plants and cut in halves; with a spoon
scoop out a part of the flesh from each half, leaving a thin layer
adhering to the skin. Salt the shells and drain; chop the flesh. Mince
two or three onions, brown with a little butter, mix with the flesh of
the egg plant, and cook away the moisture; add some chopped mushrooms,
parsley and lastly an equal quantity of bread crumbs. Season with salt
and pepper, remove from the fire and thicken with yolks of eggs. Now
fill the shells, dust with bread crumbs, put in a baking-pan and
sprinkle with olive oil, or bits of butter and bake.

FRENCH RECIPE.


ENDIVE SALAD.

Endive is wholesome and delicate. If the curled endive be prepared, use
only the yellow leaves, removing the thick stalks and cutting the small
ones into thin pieces; the smooth endive stalk as well must be cut fine.
It may be mixed with oil, vinegar, salt and pepper, and a potato mashed
fine, or with sour cream mixed with oil, vinegar and salt. When mixed
with the last dressing it is usually served with hot potatoes. Endive
may also be used as spinach. (See Spinach Recipes.)


A FLOWER SALAD.

The most beautiful salad ever imagined is rarely seen upon our tables,
although the principal material for its concoction may be grown in the
tiniest yard. Any one who has tried growing nasturtiums must admit that
they almost take care of themselves, and if the ground is enriched but a
little their growth and yield of blossom is astonishingly abundant. It
is these same beautiful blossoms that are used in salad, and, as if
nature had surmised that their beauty should serve the very practical
end of supplying the salad bowl, the more one plucks these growing
flowers, the greater number will a small plant yield. The pleasant,
pungent flavor of these blossoms would recommend them, aside from their
beauty, and when they are shaken out of ice-cold water with some bits of
heart lettuce, they, too, become crisp in their way. One of the
prettiest ways of arranging a nasturtium salad is to partly fill the
bowl with the center of a head of lettuce pulled apart and the blossoms
plentifully scattered throughout. Prof. Blot, that prince of
saladmakers, recommends the use of the blossoms and petals (not the
leaves) of roses, pinks, sage, lady's slipper, marshmallow and
periwinkle, as well as the nasturtium, for decorating the ordinary
lettuce salad, and reminds his readers that roses and pinks may be had
at all seasons of the year. In summer the lovely pink marshmallow is to
be found wild in the country places near salt water; so abundant are
these flowers in the marshes (hence the name) and so large are the
petals that there need be no fear of robbing the flower vases to fill
the salad bowl. These salads should be dressed at the table by the
mistress, as, of course, a little wilting is sure to follow if the
seasoning has been applied for any length of time. A French dressing is
the best, although a mayonnaise may be used if preferred. Opinions
differ greatly as regards the proportions of the former, but to quote
Blot again, the proper ones are two of oil to one of vinegar, pepper and
salt to taste. If the eye is not trained to measure pepper and salt and
the hostess is timid about dressing a salad, let her have measured in a
pretty cut-glass sprinkler a teaspoon of salt and half of pepper mixed,
for every two of oil. For a small salad the two of oil and one of
vinegar will be sufficient; measure the saltspoon even full of oil,
sprinkle this over the salad, then half the salt and pepper; toss all
lightly with the spoon and fork, then add the other spoonful of oil, the
vinegar and the remainder of the salt and pepper; toss well and serve.
How simple, and yet there are women who never have done the graceful
thing of dressing lettuce at the table.

REBECCA UNDERWOOD.

Potatoes and tomatoes in alternate layers may take the place of lettuce.
Just before serving toss all together.


FLOWER SANDWICHES.

Make a filling of two-thirds nasturtium blossoms, one third leaves, lay
on buttered bread, with buttered bread on top, sandwich style.

CHICAGO RECORD.


PRESERVED ROSE LEAVES.

Put a layer of rose leaves in a jar and sprinkle sugar over them, add
layers sprinkled with sugar as the leaves are gathered until the jar is
full. They will turn dark brown and will keep for two or three years.
Used in small quantities they add a delightful flavor to fruit cake and
mince pies.

MRS. ROLLINS.


SACHET POWDERS.

In making sachet powders one general direction must be borne in
mind--each ingredient must be powdered before mixing. Potpourri should
be made before the season of outdoor flowers passes. Pluck the most
fragrant flowers in your garden, passing by all withered blossoms. Pick
the flowers apart, placing the petals on plates and setting them where
the sun can shine upon them. Let the petals thus continue to dry in the
sun for several days. Each flower may be made into potpourri by itself,
or the different flowers may be mixed in any variety and proportion that
pleases the maker. Flowers which have little or no scent should be left
out. When the leaves are well dried sprinkle them with table salt. Do
not omit this, as it is important. The right proportion is about two
ounces of the salt to each pound of leaves. If also two ounces of
powdered orris root is added and well mixed in with the dried petals
the fragrance and permanence are improved. Now the potpourri is ready to
put in the jars that are sold for that purpose.

H. J. HANCOCK.


VIOLET MARMALADE.

Crush three pounds of violets to a pulp; in the meantime boil four
pounds of sugar, take out some, blow through it, and if little flakes of
sugar fly from it, it is done. Add the flowers, stir them together; add
two pounds of apple marmalade, and when it has boiled up a few times,
put the marmalade into jars.

THE COOK'S OWN BOOK.


GARLIC BUTTER SAUCE.

Bruise half a dozen cloves of garlic, rub them through a fine sieve with
a wooden spoon; mix this pulp with butter and beat thoroughly, put in a
wide mouthed bottle and keep for further use.


GROUND CHERRY PUDDING.

Half fill a pudding dish with ripe ground cherries or husk tomatoes, dot
with bits of butter and cover with a soft batter made of one cup milk,
one egg, one tablespoonful butter, two teaspoonfuls baking powder and a
half-saltspoonful of salt. Bake quickly and serve with lemon sauce. This
fruit is so easily raised, so prolific and so delicious, used in various
ways, that I wonder it is not more widely known and used. For pies,
preserves, puddings and dried, to put in cake, it is inferior to none.
It will keep a long time in the husks in a dry place. It will flourish
in the fence corners or any out-of-the-way place, and seems to prefer a
poor soil and neglect.

HARRIET I. MANN.


HERBS.

Whether food is palatable or not largely depends upon its seasoning.
Good, rich material may be stale and unprofitable because of its lack,
while with it simple, inexpensive foods become delicious and take on the
appearance of luxuries. A garden of herbs with its varying flavors is a
full storehouse for the housekeeper, it gives great variety to a few
materials and without much expense of money, time or space as any little
waste corner of the garden or even a window box, will afford a fine
supply. Besides use as flowers the young sprouts of most of the herbs
are available as greens or salads, and are excellent with any plain
salad dressing; among them might be mentioned mustard, cress, chervil,
parsley, mint, purslane, chives, sorrel, dandelions, nasturtiums,
tarragon and fennel. Many of these herbs are ornamental and make
beautiful garnishes, or are medicinal and add to the home pharmacy.
Though not equally good as the fresh herbs, yet dried ones hold their
flavors and do excellent service. Just before flowering they should be
gathered on a sunshiny day and dried by artificial heat, as less flavor
escapes in quick drying. When dry, powder them and put up in tin cans,
or glass bottles, tightly sealed and properly labeled. Parsley, mint and
tarragon should be dried in June or July, thyme, marjoram and savory in
July and August, basil and sage in August and September.

=Anise.=--Anise leaves are used for garnishing, and the seeds for
seasoning, also are used medicinally.

=Balm.=--Balm leaves and stems are used medicinally and make a beverage
called Balm Wine. A variety of cat-mint called Moldavian balm is used in
Germany for flavoring food.

=Basil.=--Sweet basil an aromatic herb is classed among the sweet herbs.
It is used as seasoning in soups, sauces, salads and in fish dressings.
Basil vinegar takes the place in winter of the fresh herb.

=Basil Vinegar.=--In August or September gather the fresh basil leaves.
Clean them thoroughly, put them in a wide mouthed bottle and cover with
cider vinegar, or wine for fourteen days. If extra strength is wanted
draw off the vinegar after a week or ten days and pour over fresh
leaves; strain after fourteen days and bottle tightly.

=Borage.=--Its pretty blue flowers are used for garnishing salads. The
young leaves and tender tops are pickled in vinegar and are occasionally
boiled for the table. Its leaves are mucilaginous and are said to impart
a coolness to beverages in which they are steeped. Borage, wine, water,
lemon and sugar make an English drink called Cool Tankard.

=Caraway.=--Caraway seeds are used in cakes, breads, meats, pastry and
candies and are very nice on mutton or lamb when roasting. Caraway and
dill are a great addition to bean soup. The root though strong flavored
is sometimes used like parsnips and carrots.

=Catnip or Catmint.=--Its leaves are used medicinally and its young leaves
and shoots are used for seasoning.

=Chives.=--The young leaves of chives are used for seasoning, they are
like the onion but more delicate, and are used to flavor sauces, salads,
dressings and soups. They are chopped very fine when added to
salads--sometimes the salad bowl is only rubbed with them. Chopped very
fine and sprinkled over Dutch cheese they make a very acceptable side
dish or sandwich filling.

=Coriander.=--Coriander seed is used in breads, cakes and candies.

=Dill.=--The leaves are used in pickles, sauces and gravies, and the
seeds, in soups, curries and medicines.

=Fennel.=--The leaves of the common fennel have somewhat the taste of
cucumber, though they are sweet and have a more delicate odor. They are
boiled and served chiefly with mackerel and salmon though sometimes with
other fish, or enter into the compound of their sauces. The young
sprouts from the roots of sweet fennel when blanched are a very
agreeable salad and condiment. The seed is medicinal.

=Henbane.=--Henbane is poisonous and is only used medicinally.

=Hops.=--The young shoots of hops are used as vegetables in the early
spring, prepared in the same way as asparagus and salsify. The leaves
are narcotic and are therefore often made up into pillows.

=Horehound.=--The leaves are used for seasoning and are a popular remedy
for a cough. It is much used in flavoring candies.

=Hyssop.=--The young leaves and shoots are used for flavoring food, but
their principal use is medicinal. A syrup made from it is a popular
remedy for a cold.

=Lavender.=--The leaves are used for seasoning, but the chief use of the
plant is the distillation of perfumery from its flowers which are full
of a sweet odor.

=Marjoram Sweet.=--Sweet marjoram belongs to the sweet herbs, the leaves
and ends of the shoots are used for seasoning, and are also used
medicinally.

=Pennyroyal.=--The leaves are used for seasoning puddings and other
dishes, and also have a medicinal use.

=Pot Marigold.=--Marigold has a bitter taste, but was formerly much used
in seasoning soups and is still in some parts of England. The flowers
are dried and are used medicinally and for coloring butter and cheese.

=Pimpinella, or Salad-Burnet.=--The young tender leaves are used as a
salad; they have a flavor resembling that of cucumbers.

=Rosemary.=--A distillation of the leaves makes a pleasant perfume and is
also used medicinally. It is one of the sweet herbs for seasoning.

=Rue.=--This is one of the bitter herbs yet is sometimes used for
seasoning.

=Saffron.=--The dried pistils are used for flavoring and dyeing. Some
people use it with rice. It is often used in fancy cooking as a coloring
material.

=Sage.=--The leaves both fresh and dried are used for seasoning, meats and
dressings especially.

=Summer Savory.=--Summer savory is used for flavoring, and especially for
flavoring beans.

=Tarragon or Esdragon.=--Esdragon with its fine aromatic flavor is a
valuable adjunct to salads and sauces.

=Tarragon or Esdragon Vinegar.=--Strip the leaves from the fresh cut
stalks of tarragon. Put a cupful of them in a wide mouthed bottle and
cover with a quart of cider or wine vinegar, after fourteen days,
strain, bottle and cork tightly.

=Tagetis Lucida.=--Its leaves have almost the exact flavor of tarragon and
can be used as its substitute.

=Thyme.=--Thyme is one of the sweet herbs and its leaves are favorites for
seasoning in cooking.

=Winter Savory.=--The leaves and young shoots, like summer savory are used
for flavoring foods.

=Wormwood.=--Wormwood is used medicinally as its name implies.


HORSERADISH CREAM APPLE SAUCE.

Stew six sour apples and sift; let cool, and add two heaping
tablespoonfuls of grated horseradish; when cold and ready to serve add
double the amount of whipped cream, slightly sweetened.

CHICAGO RECORD.


KALE. (See Borecole.)


KOHL RABI.

[Illustration]

Strip the leaves from the stem, put on in salted water and boil. Peel
the tubers, slice thin and boil until tender; drain and chop very fine
both leaves and tubers separately, then mix thoroughly; brown a
tablespoonful of butter and a little flour in a saucepan, add the kohl
rabi and cook for a moment, then add a cup of meat broth and boil
thoroughly; serve very hot.


LEAVES FOR CULINARY PURPOSES.

In addition to sweet and bitter herbs, we have many leaves available for
seasoning. The best known and most used are bay leaves, a leaf or two
in custards, rice, puddings and soups adds a delicate flavor and aroma.
A laurel leaf answers the same purpose. Bitter almond flavoring has a
substitute in fresh peach leaves which have a smell and taste of bitter
almond. Brew the leaves, fresh or dry, and use a teaspoonful or two of
the liquid. Use all these leaves stintedly as they are strongly
aromatic, and it is easy to get too much. The flowering currant gives a
flavor that is a compound of the red and black currant; gooseberry
leaves in the bottled fruit emphasize the flavor, and it is said keep
the fruit greener. A fresh geranium or lemon verbena leaf gives a
delightful odor and taste to jelly. A geranium leaf or two in the bottom
of a cake dish while the cake is baking will flavor the cake. Nasturtium
leaves and flowers find a place in sandwiches and salads. The common
syringa has an exact cucumber flavor and can be a substitute for
cucumber in salads or wherever that flavor is desired. Lemon and orange
leaves answer for the juice of their fruits. Horseradish and grape
leaves have use in pickles. Carrot, cucumber and celery leaves give the
respective flavors of their vegetables. Tender celery leaves can be
thoroughly dried and bottled for winter use. The use of leaves is an
economy for a household, and a source of great variety.


LEEKS.

Leeks are generally used to flavor soups, sauces and salads and are
seldom brought to the table as a separate dish. However, they are
semi-occasionally served as follows:--Boiled and dressed with a cream
sauce; or when two-thirds done are put to soak in vinegar seasoned with
salt, pepper and cloves, then are drained, stuffed, dipped in batter and
fried.


BOILED LETTUCE.

[Illustration]

Take the coarser part of lettuce not delicate enough for a salad, boil
in salted water until soft, then drain thoroughly. Slightly brown a
tablespoonful of butter and a dessertspoonful of flour in a saucepan,
put in the lettuce, let it cook up once or twice, then add a half-cup of
stock and boil thoroughly, just before serving add a gill of cream and
give a sprinkle of nutmeg if the flavor is liked.


LETTUCE SALAD.

Lettuce leaves whole or shredded are served with vinegar, salt, pepper,
mustard and a little sugar, or with a French or mayonnaise dressing; or
it is shredded and mixed with veal and egg, sweetbreads, shrimps, cress,
cucumber, tomatoes or other salad material and is treated with the
various salad dressings, mentioned above.


STEWED GREEN PEAS WITH LETTUCE.

Shell a half peck of peas, and shred two heads of lettuce; boil together
with as little water as possible to keep it from burning, and stir often
for the same purpose. Stew one hour, set back on the stove, and add one
tablespoonful of butter, one teaspoonful of sugar, salt, and a dash of
cayenne pepper and just as it is taken up, one well beaten egg, which
must not be allowed to boil. Serve at once.


STUFFED LETTUCE.

Use five clean heads of lettuce, wash thoroughly, open up the leaves and
fill between with any highly seasoned meat--sweetbreads, chicken or veal
preferred--or make a forcemeat stuffing. Tie up the heads, put into a
saucepan with any good gravy, stock or sauce and cook until thoroughly
heated through; serve in the gravy.


LETTUCE SOUP.

Use three small lettuce heads, clean, drain, chop and put into a
saucepan with a tablespoonful of butter, cover and let steam for a few
minutes, then add two quarts of good soup stock or one quart each of
stock and milk, add a half-cup of rice and boil until the rice is soft.
Strain through a sieve, or not, as one fancies, season with salt,
pepper, return to the fire, add a pint of cream, let it come just to the
boiling point and serve.


MANGOES.

Mangoes are made from cucumbers, melons, peppers, tomatoes and peaches.
The following recipe applies to all but the peaches. Select green or
half grown melons and large green cucumbers, tomatoes, or peppers.
Remove a narrow piece the length of the fruit, and attach it at one end
by a needle and white thread, after the seeds of the mango have been
carefully taken out. Throw the mangoes into a brine of salt and cold
water strong enough to bear up an egg, and let them remain in it three
days and nights, then throw them into fresh cold water for twenty-four
hours. If grape leaves are at hand, alternate grape leaves and mangoes
in a porcelain kettle (never a copper one) until all are in, with grape
leaves at the bottom and top. Add a piece of alum the size of a walnut,
cover with cider vinegar and boil fifteen minutes. Remove the grape
leaves and stuff the mangoes. Prepare a cabbage, six tomatoes, a few
small cucumbers and white onions, by chopping the cabbage and tomatoes
and putting all separately into brine for twenty-four hours and draining
thoroughly. After draining chop the cucumbers and onions. Drain the
mangoes, put into each a teaspoonful of sugar, and two whole cloves. Add
to the vegetable filling, one-fourth ounce each of ground ginger, black
pepper, mace, allspice, nasturtium seed, ground cinnamon, black and
white mustard, one-fourth cup of horseradish and one-fourth cup sweet
oil. Bruise all the spices and mix with the oil, then mix all the
ingredients thoroughly and stuff the mangoes, fit the piece taken out
and sew in with white thread or tie it in with a string around the
mango. Put them into a stone jar and pour over them hot cider vinegar
sweetened with a pound or more of sugar to the gallon to suit the taste.
If they are not keeping properly pour over again fresh hot vinegar.


MARTYNIAS.

Gather the pods when young and tender enough to thrust a needle through
them easily, later they become hard and useless for pickles. Leave half
an inch of stem on each, and lay them in salt water a couple of days,
then cook in weak vinegar until tender, but not so long as to break
them. Drain well from this, place them in jars and prepare vinegar for
them in the proportion of an ounce each of cloves, allspice and black
pepper to a gallon of vinegar; scald all these together with half a
teaspoonful of prepared mustard. Pour hot over the martynias, cover
closely and keep in a cool place. They will soon be ready for use.

MRS. HOOD.


MELON, MUSK.

[Illustration]

It is said a muskmelon can be chosen by its odor. If it has none, it is
not good, if sweet and musky it is quite sure to be ripe. Another
indication of ripeness is when the smooth skin between the rough
sections is yellowish green. To serve, cut the melons crosswise and fill
with chopped ice an hour before using. Try pouring a little strained
honey into the melon when eating.


CANTALOUPE FRAPPE.

Select two large cantaloupes that are ripe and of fine flavor; cut into
halves and scrape the pulp from same after removing the seeds (not using
any of the rind); put the pulp through a potato ricer, which will keep
out all the stringy parts; add to the pulp a pinch of salt, four
tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar and a gill of cherry juice (sweetened
with a spoonful of sugar), or use some other nice tart juice. Soak a
tablespoonful of gelatine in a quarter-cupful of water; then set cup in
pan of boiling water until it is dissolved; add this to the prepared
cantaloupe and when cold turn into a freezer and freeze slowly. Serve in
sherbet glasses.

MRS. SADETTE HARRINGTON.


COOKED MUSKMELON.

Miss Corson, in one of her lectures, gives the following directions for
making a very nice dessert from muskmelons:--Make a rich syrup from a
pound of white sugar to half a pint of water. Pare and slice the melon
and boil it gently in the syrup five to ten minutes flavoring with
vanilla or lemon. Then take it up in the dish in which it is to be
served, cool the syrup and pour it on the melon. To be eaten cold.


MELON MANGOES. (See Mangoes.)


MUSKMELON PICKLE.

Use ripe muskmelons, pare, remove seeds, and cut in pieces and put into
a stone jar. Cover with scalded vinegar and let them stand until the
next day, when the vinegar must be reheated and poured over them again;
repeat this until the fourth day, then weigh the melons and to every
five pounds of the fruit allow three pounds of sugar and one quart of
vinegar with spices to suit. Let all simmer together until the fruit is
tender. The second day pour off this syrup, and boil down until it shall
only just cover the melons. The result justifies the pains taken.


MELON, WATER.

The following is said to be an infallible sign of a ripe watermelon, it
takes close inspection to find sometimes, but the sign is there if the
condition for it exists. When the flesh of the melon changes color and
its seeds begin to turn black a small scale or blister appears on the
rind. They increase in number and size as the melon ripens, until a ripe
one shows them thickly strewn over the surface. A small crop of blisters
indicates unripe fruit. A melon must be served ice cold. Cut it through
the middle, scoop out the flesh with a tablespoon in a circle as much as
possible that the pieces may be conical or egg shaped. Cover the platter
with grape leaves and pile the fruit upon them, allowing the tendrils of
the grapes to wander in and out among the melon cones.


WATERMELON ICE.

Cut a watermelon in halves, scoop out the entire center, taking out the
seeds; chop in tray; add a cup of sugar. Pack the freezer, turn a few
minutes. It will be like soft snow and delicious.


WATERMELON PICKLES.

Eat the flesh and save the rind. Cut the rind into finger lengths and
about an inch in width, pare and cut out all the red flesh, throw into a
strong salt brine and let stand over night. In the morning drain, boil
in water until the pickles are clear, drain again and put into a stone
jar. To one gallon of fruit, allow one quart of sugar and one pint of
vinegar. Do up cinnamon and cloves in little bags, in ratio of two of
cinnamon to one of cloves and boil them in the syrup. Pour the boiling
syrup over the pickles, tie up close and in a few days they are ready
for use.


MINT SAUCE.

Four dessert spoons of chopped mint, two of sugar, one quarter pint of
vinegar. Stir all together; make two or three hours before needed.


MINT VINEGAR.

Fill a bottle loosely with fresh, clean mint, pour over good vinegar,
cork tightly and let stand two or three weeks. Then pour off and keep
well corked. Use this vinegar as a condiment, or put a small quantity
into drawn butter sauce for mutton.


MUSHROOMS.

[Illustration]

The highest authorities say an edible mushroom can easily be
distinguished from a poisonous one by certain characteristics;--a true
mushroom grows only in pastures, never in wet, boggy places, never in
woods, never about stumps of trees, they are of small size, dry, and if
the flesh is broken it remains white or nearly so and has a pleasant
odor. Most poisonous varieties change to yellow or dark brown and have a
disagreeable odor, though there is a white variety which grows in woods
or on the borders of woods, that is very poisonous. The cap of a true
mushroom has a frill, the gills are free from the stem, they never grow
down against it, but usually there is a small channel all around the top
of the stem, the spores are brown-black, or deep purple black and the
stem is solid or slightly pithy. It is said if salt is sprinkled on the
gills and they become yellow the mushroom is poisonous, if black, they
are wholesome. Sweet oil is its antidote.


BAKED MUSHROOMS.

Hold the mushrooms by the stems, dip them in boiling hot water a moment
to help loosen the skin, cut off their stems. Boil the parings and stems
and strain. Pour this water over the mushrooms chopped fine, add parsley
and stew about forty minutes. Then add six eggs well beaten. Pour this
mixture into buttered cups and bake quickly. Serve with cream sauce.


MUSHROOM CATSUP.

Boil one peck of mushrooms fifteen minutes in half a pint of water,
strain, or not, through a sieve to get all the pulp; add a pint of
vinegar to the juice, two tablespoonfuls of salt, one half a teaspoonful
of cayenne pepper, two tablespoonfuls of mustard, one of cinnamon and
one of cloves. Let the mixture boil twenty minutes; bottle and seal
tightly.


FRIED MUSHROOMS.

Pare the mushrooms, cut off their stems, lay them on their heads in a
frying pan in which a tablespoonful of butter has been melted, put a bit
of butter into each cap, let them cook in their own liquor and the
butter until thoroughly done. Season with salt and butter and serve hot.


MUSHROOMS WITH MACARONI.

Boil half a pound of macaroni. Put a pint of water, one small onion, a
sprig of parsley, the juice of half a lemon, a teaspoonful of salt and a
quarter as much pepper into a saucepan. When boiling add a quart of
mushrooms and cook five minutes. Beat three eggs, stir in and take from
the fire. Drain the macaroni, put a layer in the bottom of a baking
dish, then a layer of the mushroom mixture, and thus alternately until
the dish is full. Have mushrooms on top, and set in a hot oven for five
minutes.

MRS. ELIZA PARKER.


MARROW WITH MUSHROOMS.

Procure a shinbone and have the butcher split it; remove the marrow and
cut it into inch-thick slices; then boil it one and one-half minutes in
a quart of salted water, using a teaspoonful of salt. Into a frying-pan
put a tablespoonful of butter; when hot add five tablespoonfuls of
chopped mushrooms and toss for five minutes, sprinkling them with three
shakes of salt and a speck of cayenne. Drain the marrow; squeeze over it
ten drops of lemon juice; then mix with it the mushrooms; spread on
slices of hot, crisp toast and serve immediately.

CHICAGO RECORD.


MUSHROOM OMELET.

Cook a dozen small, even sized mushrooms in a saucepan with half an
ounce of butter and half a saltspoonful of salt sprinkled over them.
Make ready a plain omelet, as it cooks at the edges place the mushrooms
over one half of it, fold over the other half, slip from the pan on to a
hot dish and serve immediately.


MUSHROOMS ON TOAST.

Prepare enough mushrooms to measure one half-pint when chopped, and
enough of raw ham to fill a tablespoon heaping full. Mix these and add a
teaspoonful of parsley, a trifle of chopped onion if liked, a
teaspoonful of lemon juice, pepper and salt. Fry in two tablespoonfuls
of butter, add a half-cupful of milk or cream, boil up again, and add an
egg thoroughly beaten. Serve on small squares of toast. This with the
addition of bread crumbs before the milk is added and with the use of
some of the relishing herbs makes an excellent stuffing.


MUSHROOM SOUP.

Get your butcher to crack for you a shank of beef. Put over it four
quarts of water. Let it boil hard for a few moments until all the scum
has risen and has been removed. Set it back on the stove now to simmer
five hours. At the end of the fourth hour add one carrot, one turnip,
one small onion, one bunch of parsley, two stalks of celery, twelve
cloves and two bay leaves. Let all these boil together one hour, then
strain and set away until the next day, when all the grease must be
skimmed off. To every quart of the stock add a quart of milk thickened
with two tablespoonfuls of flour and two tablespoonfuls of butter, one
saltspoonful of salt and a dust of pepper, add to this a half-pint of
canned mushrooms or small mushrooms stewed thoroughly in the liquor
obtained from boiling and straining the stems and parings.


MUSTARD.

In early spring the young leaves are used as a garnish, or, finely cut,
as a seasoning to salads. The Cabbage Leaved Mustard makes an excellent
green, and is treated like spinach.


AROMATIC MUSTARD.

Upon one tablespoonful of grated horseradish, an ounce of bruised ginger
root, and five long red peppers pour half a pint of boiling vinegar.
Allow to stand, closely covered, for two days; then take five
teaspoonfuls of ground mustard, one teaspoonful of curry powder, and a
dessertspoonful of salt, and mix well together. Strain the vinegar upon
this, adding a dash of cayenne if wanted very pungent. Mix very smoothly
and keep in a corked bottle or jar.


NASTURTIUM.

[Illustration]

The flowers are used to garnish salads, the young leaves and flowers
make a lovely salad (See Flower Salad). The young buds and leaves when
tender are made into pickles and are used like capers in sauces, salads
and pickles.


NASTURTIUM PICKLES.

Gather the seeds as soon as the blossoms fall, throw them into cold salt
water for two days, at the end of that time cover them with cold
vinegar, and when all the seed is gathered and so prepared, turn over
them fresh boiling hot vinegar plain or spiced with cloves, cinnamon,
mace, pepper, broken nutmeg, bay leaves and horseradish. Cork tightly.


BOILED OKRA OR GUMBO.

[Illustration]

The long seed pod is the edible part of this plant, it can be canned or
dried for winter use. If dried let it soak an hour or so before using.
To cook, cut the pods in rings, boil them in salted water until tender
which will be in about twenty minutes. Add butter, salt, pepper and
cream. Thin muslin bags are sometimes made to hold the whole pods
without breaking. After boiling tender, pour them out, season with
butter, salt and pepper and bake for five minutes.


FRIED OKRA.

Cut it lengthwise, salt and pepper it, roll it in flour and fry in
butter, lard or drippings.


OKRA FRITTERS.

Boil the okra, cut in slices, make a batter as for batter cakes, dip the
okra in and fry in plenty of hot lard.

MRS. E. C. DUBB.


OKRA GUMBO SOUP.

Use two quarts of tomatoes to one quart of okra cut in rings; put them
over the fire with about three quarts of water and let the mixture come
to a boil; take one chicken; cut it up and fry brown with plenty of
gravy; put it in with the okra and tomatoes; add several small onions
chopped fine, a little corn and lima beans, if they are at hand, and
salt and pepper. Let all simmer gently for several hours. To be served
with a tablespoonful of rice and a green garden pepper cut fine to each
soup plate.


ONIONS.

Peel and slice onions under water to keep the volatile oil from the
eyes. A cup of vinegar boiling on the stove modifies the disagreeable
odor of onions cooking. Boil a frying pan in water with wood ashes,
potash, or soda in it to remove the odor and taste of onions. To rub
silver with lemon removes the onion taste from it. Leaves of parsley
eaten like cress with vinegar hide the odor of onions in the breath.
Onions to be eaten raw or cooked will lose their rank flavor if they are
pulled and thrown into salt water an hour before use. Two waters in
boiling accomplish the same purpose.


ONION FLAVORING.

To prepare onion flavoring for a vegetable soup, peel a large onion,
stick several cloves into it and bake until it is brown. This gives a
peculiar and excellent flavor.


FRIED APPLES AND ONIONS.

Take one part onion to two parts apple. Slice the apples without paring,
and slice the onions very thin. Fry together in butter, keeping the
frying pan covered, to hold the steam which prevents burning. A very
slight sprinkling of sugar seems to give an added flavor. Add just as it
is to be taken up or else it will burn.


ONION OMELET.

Put a lump of butter or dripping in a frying pan, then put in sliced
onions, salt and pepper, cook slowly until done, but not brown. Beat the
eggs, allowing two for each person, pour in the frying pan, add a little
salt and stir until set. Serve hot.


ONION PICKLES.

Choose small uniform onions; make a brine that will hold up an egg, and
pour over the onions boiling hot. Let them lie in this twenty-four
hours, then drain and wipe dry and put into bottles. Pour over them cold
cider vinegar, seasoned with sliced horseradish, whole pepper and mace.
Put in bottles and seal.


BAKED ONIONS.

Boil in milk and water until just done, then drain and put them in a
buttered frying pan. Put a bit of butter, salt, and pepper on each one,
and add a little of the water in which the onions have boiled. Brown
them quickly and serve at once.


CREAM ONIONS.

Boil onions in two waters and drain; pour over them a little boiling
milk and set over the fire, add butter, cream, salt and pepper and serve
hot.


ESCALLOPED ONIONS.

Boil onions in salted water with a little milk until they are tender.
Put a layer of onions in a baking dish, scatter bread crumbs over them,
dot with butter, season with pepper and salt and a dash of powdered
sage, repeat this until the dish is full, pour over a half-cup of cream
or milk. Cover the top with bread crumbs dotted with butter. Bake a
light brown and serve.


STUFFED ONIONS.

Boil onions one hour in slightly salted water, and remove the centers.
Make a stuffing of minced liver or chicken in these proportions; to one
pound of meat one third of a cupful of gravy milk or cream, one
half-cupful of fine bread crumbs, one egg, pepper and salt and some of
the onion taken from the centers, mix well and fill the onion shells,
dust over a few bread crumbs, dot with butter and bake until brown. Put
the remaining onion into a stew pan, with a tablespoonful of butter, a
half-tablespoonful of flour, and after it boils up once, add a half-cup
of milk, a teaspoonful of parsley, salt and pepper, boil up again, pour
over onions and serve. This is a good second course after soup served
with apple sauce.


PARSLEY.

Parsley is the prime favorite of the garnishes. Its pretty curled leaves
are used to decorate fish flesh and fowl and many a vegetable. Either
natural, minced or fried, it is an appetizing addition to many sauces,
soups, dressings and salads.


FRIED PARSLEY.

Wash the parsley very clean, chop fine and fry in butter in the
proportion of one tablespoonful of butter to one pint of minced parsley.
When soft, sprinkle with bread crumbs, moisten with a little water, and
cook ten or fifteen minutes longer. Garnish it with sliced boiled egg.
To be eaten with pigeon.


PARSLEY VINEGAR.

Fill a preserving bottle with parsley leaves, freshly gathered and
washed, and cover with vinegar. Screw down the top and set aside for two
or three weeks. Then strain off the vinegar, add salt and cayenne pepper
to taste, bottle and cork. Use on cold meats, cabbage, etc.


PARSLEY SAUCE. (See Sauces.)


BOILED PARSNIPS.

Wash, scrape and cut them into slices about an inch thick, put them in a
saucepan with salted water and cook until tender, drain, cover with good
rich milk, season with butter, pepper and salt to taste, bring to a boil
and serve.


BROILED PARSNIPS.

After parsnips are boiled, slice and broil brown. Make a gravy as for
beefsteak.


BROWNED PARSNIPS.

Put two or three thin slices of salt pork in the bottom of a kettle and
let them brown, scrape and slice the parsnips and pare about the same
amount of potatoes, leaving them whole if they are small. Place in
alternate layers in the kettle, and add sufficient water to cook them,
leaving them to brown slightly. They must be closely watched as they
burn very easily. Requires about one and a half hours to cook and brown
nicely. Remove the vegetables and thicken the gravy with a little flour;
add pepper and salt, and a small lump of butter. Serve pork and
vegetables on a large, deep platter and pour over the gravy.


FRIED PARSNIPS.

Scrape and wash parsnips, cut off the small end and cut the thick part
into half-inch-thick slices. Put them in boiling water with a
tablespoonful each of salt and sugar. Boil an hour or until nearly done
and drain; beat two eggs, four tablespoonfuls of flour and half a pint
of milk together, season with salt and pepper. Dip the slices of parsnip
into the batter, then in bread crumbs and fry in boiling lard or
drippings until a golden brown. Pile them in a heap on a napkin and
serve very hot.


PARSNIP FRITTERS.

Scrape and halve the parsnips, boil tender in salted water, mash smooth,
picking out the woody bits; then add a beaten egg to every four
parsnips, a tablespoonful of flour, pepper and salt to taste, and enough
milk to make into a thin batter; drop by the tablespoonful into hot
lard, and fry brown. Drain into a hot colander and dish.


MASHED PARSNIPS.

Boil parsnips tender in salted water, drain and mash them through a
colander. Put the pulp into a saucepan with two or three tablespoonfuls
of cream and a small lump of butter rubbed in flour, stir them over the
fire until the butter is melted and serve.


MOCK OYSTERS.

Use three grated parsnips, three eggs, one teaspoonful of salt, one
teacupful of sweet cream, butter half the size of an egg, three
tablespoonfuls of flour. Fry as pancakes.


PARSNIP PUFFS.

Take one egg, well beaten, and add (without stirring until the
ingredients are in) one teacupful each of cold water and flour, one
heaping teaspoonful of baking powder, half a teaspoonful of salt, one
teacupful of well-mashed, boiled parsnips; stir very lightly and only
enough to mix. Do not let it stand long. Drop by the tablespoonful into
hot, melted fat in a frying pan, and cook until a delicate brown.

CHICAGO RECORD.


AMBUSHED PEAS.

[Illustration]

Cut the tops off of biscuits or buns twenty-four hours old. Scoop out
the inside and put both shells and tops into the oven to crust. Pour
into them peas after they have been boiled and mixed with a cream sauce
to which an egg has been added, also minced parsley or mint if liked.
Cover carefully with the tops and serve hot.


BOILED PEAS.

Do not shell peas until ready to cook. Salt, and slightly sweeten if
needed boiling water, drop the peas so slowly into the water it will not
stop boiling. Boil the peas until tender without covering and they will
keep their color. They will generally cook in about twenty minutes, take
them up with a little of the liquor in which they were boiled, butter
and pepper them, and they are much better to add a little sweet cream,
but will do without. If they are cooked immediately upon gathering, they
will need no sugar; if allowed to remain twelve hours or more, a
tablespoonful of sugar will be found an addition. A sprig of mint or a
little parsley may be added. Pea-pods are sometimes boiled in a small
quantity of water, then are skimmed out and the peas are boiled in this
liquor.


PEAS AND BUTTERED EGGS.

Stew a pint of young peas with a tablespoonful of butter, a little salt,
pepper and chopped parsley, until they are tender; beat up two eggs and
pour over them the boiling peas. Serve at once on toast before the eggs
harden.


CANAPES OF PEAS.

These form a dainty entree. To prepare the canapes take some slices of
stale bread about two inches thick and cut into neat rounds with a large
biscuit cutter. With a smaller cutter mark a circle in the center of
each round and scoop out the crumbs from it to the depth of one inch.
This must be carefully done, so there will be a firm bottom and sides.
Lay these around in a shallow dish and pour over them a half-pint of
milk in which one egg has been thoroughly beaten. This proportion of egg
and milk is sufficient for six canapes. Let them lie in this for a few
minutes; then take up very carefully and slip into very hot lard. When
of a pale golden brown remove with a skimmer and drain on blotting
paper. Boil a pint of freshly cleaned peas in unsalted water until
tender; drain well. Put into a saucepan with two spoons of butter,
dredge in a dessertspoonful of flour and add a saltspoon of salt and a
quarter of a pint of milk. Let it come to a boil; then fill the canapes
with this, give a dusting of pepper on the top of each, arrange on a
platter and garnish with parsley and slices of lemon.

CHICAGO RECORD.


PEAS AND LETTUCE.

Use a pint of peas and two young lettuces cut small. Put in as little
water as possible to use and not burn, let them boil until tender, then
add a square of sugar, the yolks of two eggs well beaten and two
tablespoonfuls of cream. Stir together a short time but do not boil.


PEAS AU PARMESAN.

Grate one and one-half ounces of cheese, add to it two tablespoonfuls of
cream, a gill of milk, a tablespoonful of butter, saltspoonful of salt
and four shakes of pepper. Place in an enameled pan and stir over the
fire until the butter and cheese are dissolved. Then put in a pint and a
half of fresh young peas, previously boiled until tender, drained and
seasoned with a half-teaspoonful of salt. Stir the mixture a few
moments. Serve as hot as possible.

CHICAGO RECORD.


GREEN-PEA SALAD.

Shred some lettuce and add to it the peas--they should be boiled with a
little mint, and be quite cold. Add the salad dressing just before
serving.


PEA AND NUT SALAD.

Use one cupful of chopped pecan nuts to three cupfuls of French peas.
Serve on lettuce with mayonnaise.


PEA SOUP.

Use chicken, mutton, or beef broth, or water for a liquor in which to
boil two cups of green peas, add to them one minced onion, one carrot
cut fine, a teaspoonful of chopped parsley, a stalk of celery cut fine,
a bay leaf and two cloves. When the peas are tender, rub all through a
sieve. Return the soup to the pot and add two tablespoonfuls of butter,
a teaspoonful of salt, two well beaten yolks and half a cupful of cream.
Let come to a boil and serve with croutons. Croutons are little squares
of bread hard baked in the oven, or fried in oil or butter.


DEVILED PEPPERS.

[Illustration]

Use green bell peppers, cut off the stem end and remove the inside. Chop
cooked cold ham, and with it as many eggs as one wishes, or chop tongue,
veal or chicken, and use the following salad dressing:--To a pint of
meat use the yolk of a hard boiled egg, rubbed smooth in a scant
tablespoonful of melted butter, a half teaspoonful of made mustard, half
a teaspoonful of sugar, add enough vinegar to make it thin and stir in
the meat. Fill the pepper shells with this mixture rounding it up high.
It is an excellent lunch dish.


PEPPER MANGOES. (See Mangoes.)


PICKLED PEPPERS.

Remove the seeds from large green peppers, slice them and lay them in a
jar alternating each layer of peppers with a layer of cabbage, then
cover them with salt and let stand over night. In the morning drain off
the water. For the pickle use enough vinegar to cover the peppers, an
ounce each of black and white mustard seed, juniper berries, whole
cloves and allspice, one half-ounce of celery seed and one large onion
chopped fine or one head of garlic if that flavor is liked. Let this
come to a boil and pour over the peppers. Pack tightly in a jar, cover
with horseradish leaves, and close up tightly.


PEPPER SALAD.

Shave as fine as possible one head of cabbage, use an ounce of mustard
seed, or an ounce of celery seed as one prefers either flavor; cut one
or two yellow peppers into thin shavings if mustard seed is used, or
four if celery seed is used. Pour cold cider vinegar over all, add a
little salt and sugar and let stand a day or two to really pickle the
cabbage and peppers. Pack in jars or cans and it will keep all winter.
Serve with oysters and cold meats.


STUFFED PEPPERS.

Cut off the stem end of green bell peppers. Mince cooked chicken or use
a can of shrimps, and mix with it almost an equal weight of bread
crumbs, a large lump of butter, two or three tablespoonfuls of cream,
salt and a sprinkle of parsley. Fill the pepper shells with the mixture,
sprinkle bread crumbs over the tops, dot with butter, and brown in the
oven.


OAKLAND STUFFED PEPPERS.

Cut off the tops and scoop out the seeds of six peppers, chop an extra
pepper without seeds, mix with it a small onion chopped, a cupful of
chopped tomato, two tablespoonfuls of butter or salad oil, a teaspoonful
of salt, and an equal measure of bread crumbs. Stuff the peppers,
replace the stem ends, and bake the peppers for half an hour, basting
them with butter or salad oil two or three times. Serve them hot as a
vegetable.


BROWNED MASHED POTATOES.

Whip up mashed potatoes with an egg-beater, add a few tablespoonfuls of
cream, the yolks of two eggs, a tablespoonful of butter, pepper and
salt. Cover with the whipped whites of the two eggs, bake until browned
and with a pancake knife transfer them to a hot dish and serve at once.


POTATOES WITH CHEESE SAUCE.

Use twelve good sized potatoes, mash, add pepper, salt, milk and butter.
Make a cup of drawn butter, (milk, butter and a very little corn starch
as thickening, with pepper and salt) into it stir two beaten eggs, and
two tablespoonfuls of grated cheese. Put a layer of potatoes on a pie
tin, cover with a thin layer of the drawn butter sauce, cover this in
turn with more potato and repeat until there is a mound, cover with the
sauce, strew thickly with cheese and brown in a quick oven.


LYONNAISE POTATOES.

Put a large lump of butter in a saucepan and let it melt; then add one
small onion chopped fine or sliced thin, when it is nicely browned but
not scorched, put in slices of cold boiled potatoes, salt and pepper and
cook until well browned. Just before taking up add a teaspoonful of
parsley.


POTATO PANCAKES.

Grate eight large pared potatoes, add to them one and one
half-teacupfuls of milk, the beaten yolks of two or three eggs, a lump
of butter the size of a walnut, pepper, salt, enough flour to make a
batter, and lastly add the whites of two or three eggs beaten stiff. Add
a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder if only one egg is used. Fry in
butter or drippings to a rich brown.


RINGED POTATOES.

Peel large potatoes, cut them round and round as one pares an apple, fry
in clean, sweet, very hot lard until brown; drain on a sieve, sprinkle
salt over them and serve.


POTATO TURNOVERS.

Use ten tablespoonfuls of whipped mashed potatoes with a little salt
added gradually, six tablespoonfuls of flour and three tablespoonfuls of
butter. When thoroughly mixed lay the mass upon a floured board and roll
out about an inch thick, cut in circles with a small bowl, lay upon each
circle minced meat, poultry or fish. Season the meat, wet the edges of
the circle with beaten egg and close each one like a turnover, pinch
them around the edges and fry to a light brown, or brush them with egg
and brown them in the oven.


POTATO SOUFFLE.

Choose large, smooth, handsome, uniform potatoes, allow an extra potato
for any waste. Bake and with a very sharp knife cut them in two
lengthwise. Remove the inside, season with butter, cream, pepper and
salt and fill the potato skins with the mixture; glaze them with the
beaten whites of eggs and over the top spread the whites of eggs beaten
to a stiff froth. Brown in the oven.


POTATO SOUP.

Use the water in which the potatoes were boiled, add three
tablespoonfuls of mashed potato to a pint of water, and as much rich
milk as there is water used, season with salt and a dust of cayenne
pepper, a little juice of lemon or a little minced parsley or tarragon.
Serve with crackers or croutons.


STUFFED POTATOES.

Bake handsome, uniform potatoes, cut off the tops with a sharp knife,
take out the inside. Add to the scraped potato, butter, milk, pepper,
salt and a little grated cheese, fill the empty shells and heap above
the top. Grate a little cheese over this and set in the oven to brown.
Serve hot.


POTATOES USED TO CLEANSE.

Small pieces of raw potato in a little water shaken vigorously inside
bottles and lamp chimneys will clean them admirably. To clean a burned
porcelain kettle boil peeled potatoes in it. Cold boiled potatoes not
over-boiled, used as soap will clean the hands and keep them soft and
healthy. To cleanse and stiffen silk, woolen and cotton fabrics use the
following recipe:--Grate two good sized potatoes into a pint of clear,
clean, soft water. Strain through a coarse sieve into a gallon of water
and let the liquid settle. Pour the starchy fluid from the sediment, rub
the articles gently in the liquid, rinse them thoroughly in clear water
and then dry and press. Water in which potatoes are boiled is said to be
very effective in keeping silver bright.


BAKED PUMPKIN.

[Illustration]

Slice the pumpkin a quarter of an inch thick, peel and put a layer in
the bottom of a baking dish, then a layer of sugar with a sprinkle of
cinnamon and dot with butter, repeat this until the pan is full. Let the
top be well covered with sugar. Bake in a moderate oven until the sugar
becomes like a thick syrup. Or cut the pumpkin in squares and do not
peel, bake, and when soft enough, scrape it from the shells, season with
butter and salt and serve like squash.


CANNED PUMPKIN.

Stew pumpkin as for pies, put while hot in cans and seal.


PUMPKIN LOAF.

Take one quart of stewed pumpkin mashed fine, one teaspoonful each of
salt and baking soda, one tablespoonful sugar, three pints of meal. Stir
all together while boiling hot; steam four hours, or steam three hours
and bake one. To be eaten hot with cream, or butter and sugar.


PUMPKIN MARMALADE.

Take ripe yellow pumpkins, pare and cut them into large pieces, scrape
out the seed, weigh and to every pound take a pound of sugar and an
orange or lemon. Grate the pieces of pumpkin on a coarse grater and put
in the preserving kettle with sugar, the orange rind grated and the
juice strained. Let it boil slowly, stirring frequently and skimming it
well until it forms a smooth, thick marmalade. Put it warm into small
glass jars or tumblers and when cold cover with a paper dipped in
alcohol and another heavy paper pasted over the top of the glass.


PUMPKIN PIE.

To one quart of rich milk take three eggs, three big tablespoonfuls of
sugar, a little salt, and a tablespoonful of ginger, a teaspoonful of
cinnamon and a grated nutmeg if one likes it highly spiced, add enough
finely stewed pumpkin to make a thin mixture. This will make three pies.
A good pumpkin pie will puff up lightly when done.


PRESERVING PUMPKINS FOR WINTER USE.

A good way to prepare pumpkin for winter use is to cook and sift it as
fine as for pies, then add nearly as much sugar as there is pumpkin;
stir well and pack in crocks. Better than dried pumpkin for winter use.


PUMPKIN SOUP.

For six persons use three pounds of pumpkin; take off the rind, cut in
pieces and put in a saucepan with a little salt and cover with water;
let it boil until it is soft (about twenty minutes) and pass through a
colander; it must have no water in it; put about three pints of milk in
a saucepan, add the strained pumpkin, and let come to a boil; add a very
little white sugar, some salt and pepper, but no butter. Serve hot.


HOW TO SERVE RADISHES.

[Illustration]

Let every housekeeper try serving radishes in this dainty way. Cut off
the root close to the radish and remove the leaves, leaving about an
inch of the stem. Then cut the skin of the radish from the root toward
the stem, in sections, as is done in removing the skin of an orange in
eighths. The skin can then be peeled carefully back to the stem by
slipping the point of a knife under it, and pulling it gently away from
the heart of the radish. The pure white heart, with the soft pink of
the peeling and the green stem makes a beautiful contrast. If they are
thrown into cold water as fast as they are prepared and allowed to
remain there until the time for serving, they will be much improved,
becoming very crisp and tender. The skin of the young radish should
never be discarded, as it contains properties of the vegetable that
should always be eaten with the heart; and, unless the radish is tough,
it will agree with a delicate stomach much better when eaten with the
peel on. They look very dainty when served in this way, lying on fresh
lettuce leaves, or are beautiful to use with parsley as a garnish for
cold meats.


RADISH, CUCUMBER AND TOMATO SALAD.

Slice a bunch of radishes, and a cucumber very thin, make a bed of cress
or lettuce, over this slice three solid tomatoes, and cover with the
cucumbers and radish. Pour over all a French or mayonnaise dressing.


BAKED RHUBARB.

Peel rhubarb stalks, cut into inch lengths, put into a small stone crock
with at least one part sugar to two parts fruit, or a larger part if
liked, but not one particle of water, bake until the pieces are clear;
flavor with lemon or it is good without. It is a prettier sauce and
takes less sugar than when stewed, and can be used for a pie filling if
the crust is made first. To prevent burning, the crock may be set in a
pan of boiling water. When done and while yet hot, beat up the whites of
two eggs and whip into the sauce. It makes it very light and very nice.


BOTTLED RHUBARB.

Use perfectly fresh, crisp rhubarb, peel and cut in small pieces as for
pies, fill a Mason jar with the fruit and pour over it freshly drawn
water. Screw on the top and by the next morning the water will have
settled in the jar. Fill the jars full with fresh water, seal again and
the fruit is ready for winter's use. In making pies it takes less sugar
than the fresh fruit. Or, boil the rhubarb a few moments, as for sauce,
with or without sugar and put into jars while it is very hot just as
other fruit is canned.


RHUBARB COBBLER.

Two cups of flour sifted with two teaspoons of baking powder and
one-half teaspoon of salt. Rub in two tablespoons of butter. Beat one
egg very light and add it to three-fourths of a cup of milk. Mix with
the other ingredients, line the sides of a baking dish with this crust.
Take one quart of chopped rhubarb sweetened with three cups of sugar,
fill the pudding dish with the rhubarb; roll out the remaining crust,
cover the top of dish and bake one-half hour.

MRS. LAURA WHITEHEAD.


CREAM RHUBARB PIE.

One cup of rhubarb which has been peeled and chopped fine; add one cup
of sugar and the grated rind of a lemon. In a teacup place one
tablespoonful of cornstarch and moisten it with as much cold water; fill
up the cup with boiling water and add it to the rhubarb. Add the yolks
of three eggs well beaten. Bake with an under crust. When cold cover
with a meringue made of the whites of the eggs and one-half cup of
sugar. Place in the oven to become a delicate brown. Very fine.

MRS. BYRON BACKUS.


RHUBARB JAM.

Use equal parts of rhubarb and sugar, heat the sugar with as little
water as will keep it from burning, pour over the rhubarb and let stand
several hours; pour off and boil until it thickens, then add the fruit
and boil gently for fifteen minutes. Put up in jelly glasses. Apples and
oranges may be put up with rhubarb allowing two apples or three oranges
to a pint of cut up rhubarb.


RHUBARB TAPIOCA.

Soak over night two-thirds of a cupful of tapioca. In the morning drain;
add one cupful of water and cook the tapioca until it is clear; add a
little more water if necessary. Then add a cup and a half of finely
sliced rhubarb, a pinch of salt and a large half-cup of sugar. Bake in
moderate oven an hour. Serve warm or cold and eat with sugar if liked
very sweet. Very nice.

SHIRLEY DE FOREST.


RUTABAGAS BOILED.

[Illustration]

Pare, slice and boil in as little salted water as possible, a little
sugar added is an improvement. When dry and tender serve plain, each
slice buttered and peppered as it is piled on the plate.


RUTABAGAS AND POTATOES.

Use three-fourths potatoes and one-fourth rutabagas; boil in salted
water until tender, add a lump of butter, a dust of pepper and more salt
if necessary, mash and stir until fine and light. Any good recipe for
white turnips is equally good for rutabagas.


SALAD DRESSINGS.

=Cream Dressing.=--Where oil is disliked in salads, the following dressing
will be found excellent. Rub the yolks of two hard-boiled eggs very fine
with a spoon, incorporate with them a dessertspoonful of mixed mustard,
then stir in a tablespoonful of melted butter, half a teacupful of thick
cream, a saltspoonful of salt, and cayenne pepper enough to take up on
the point of a very small pen-knife blade, and a few drops of anchovy or
Worcestershire sauce; add very carefully sufficient vinegar to reduce
the mixture to a smooth, creamy consistency.

=French Dressing.=--Use one tablespoonful of vinegar to three of salad oil
(melted butter will do) one teaspoonful of salt to half the quantity of
pepper and a teaspoonful of made mustard. Mix the salt, pepper, mustard
and oil together, then add the vinegar a few drops at a time, stirring
fast. A teaspoonful of scraped onion may be added for those who like the
flavor.

=Mayonnaise Dressing.=--Put in the bottom of a quart bowl the yolk of a
raw egg, a level teaspoonful of salt, and three-fourths of a teaspoonful
of pepper; have ready about half a cupful of vinegar, and a bottle of
salad oil; use a wooden spoon and fork for mixing the mayonnaise--first
the egg and seasoning together, then begin to add the oil, two or three
drops at a time, stirring the mayonnaise constantly until a thick paste
is formed; to this add two or three drops at a time, still stirring,
enough vinegar to reduce the paste to the consistency of thick cream;
then stir in more oil, until the mayonnaise is again stiff, when a
little more vinegar should be added; proceed in this way until the oil
is all used, being careful toward the last to use the vinegar
cautiously, so that when the mayonnaise is finished it will be stiff
enough to remain on the top of the salad. Some like the addition of a
level teaspoonful of dry mustard to a pint of mayonnaise.

=Plain Salad Dressing.=--Set a bowl over a boiling teakettle, into it put
a tablespoonful each of melted butter and mustard, rub them well
together, then add a tablespoonful of sugar, one half-cup of vinegar and
lastly three well-beaten eggs. Stir constantly while cooking, to make
the mixture smooth, when done, strain and bottle for use. If too thick
upon serving, thin with cream.


BOILED SALSIFY.

Scrape off the outer skin of the roots, cut in small pieces and throw
into water with a little vinegar to prevent turning brown. Boil at least
an hour, as they should be quite soft to be good. When done put in a
little salt codfish picked very fine. Season with butter, salt, and
cream, thickened with a little flour or cornstarch and serve with bits
of toast. The fish helps to give it a sea-flavor. Instead of fish the
juice of half a lemon may be used or it is good without any added
flavor.


ESCALLOPED SALSIFY.

Cook salsify in salted water until tender, alternate it in a baking dish
with bread crumbs seasoned with pepper and salt, and dot with butter.
Moisten it with cream or milk and a little melted butter, cover the top
with bread crumbs dotted with butter, and bake a light brown.


SALSIFY FRITTERS.

Scrape some oyster plant and drop quickly into cold water with a few
drops of vinegar to prevent its turning dark. Boil until soft in salted
water, mash fine, and for every half pint of the pulp add one well
beaten egg, a teaspoonful of melted butter, a tablespoonful of cream, a
heaping tablespoonful of flour, salt and pepper. Drop into boiling lard
or drippings and fry brown. Or, instead of mashing the salsify after
boiling, some prefer to drain it, and to dip each piece in batter and
fry it in hot lard. Season with salt and pepper after frying, drain in a
napkin and serve hot.


FRIED SALSIFY.

Scrape, cut into finger lengths and boil in salted water, drain and
cover with a dressing of oil and vinegar, salt and pepper. Let stand
until well seasoned, then drain again, sprinkle with parsley and fry in
hot fat. Put in but few pieces at a time as each needs attention. Dry in
a hot colander and serve.


SALSIFY SOUP.

Use a pint of salsify cut fine, boil until soft in a pint of water, mash
and put through a sieve. Have ready three pints of boiling milk, into
this put the salsify, liquor and pulp, thicken with a tablespoonful of
flour, and season with butter, pepper and salt. Roll crackers and stir
in three tablespoonfuls of cracker dust.


SAUCES.

=Asparagus Sauce.=--Use the tender part of the stalks for the main dish,
boil the tougher part until it is as soft as it will be, then rub
through a coarse sieve. Put the pulp into a mixture of one tablespoonful
each of butter and flour and let it simmer for a few moments, add a
half-cup of water in which the asparagus was boiled, season with salt
and pepper and boil thoroughly; just before taking from the fire add a
half-cup of hot cream or one-half cup of milk and water, and a
teaspoonful of butter; a little grating of nutmeg improves the flavor.

=Bechamel Sauce.=--Bechamel sauce is a white one and needs a white stock;
if there is none at hand make it in the following manner: cut up lean
veal, free from fat into three-inch cubes and put them into a stewpan.
Add one small onion, one small carrot cut into pieces, and six ounces of
butter. Fry the vegetables in the butter ten minutes, without coloring,
then stir in three ounces of flour, and continue stirring five minutes
longer. Add three pints of stock, one pint of cream, five ounces of
mushrooms, a small sprinkling of dried herbs, one half teaspoonful of
salt and a pinch of white pepper. Stir until it comes to a boil, skim
occasionally to remove the fat, and simmer for two hours. Strain through
a cloth or fine sieve into a porcelain stewpan with a gill of cream.
Simmer over the fire till it coats the spoon, strain again through a
cloth or fine sieve into a basin, and set till the sauce is cold. This
sauce requires the cook's utmost attention.

=Butter Sauce or Drawn Butter Sauce.=--Mix one tablespoonful each of
butter and flour to a smooth paste, put in a saucepan to melt, not to
brown, and add one cupful of water, broth, or milk. Season with one
teaspoonful of salt and one saltspoonful of pepper. Stir constantly
while boiling. This is a good sauce in itself and is the foundation of
many other sauces; it is varied with different vegetable flavors,
catsups, vinegars, spices, lemon juice, leaves and the different sweet
herbs.

=Brown Sauce or Spanish Sauce.=--Brown a tablespoonful of butter, add the
same amount of flour and brown again, add a cup of boiling water, stock
or milk, and stir while it is cooking, strain if necessary; a clove, a
bay leaf, and a tablespoonful of minced onion or carrot browned in the
butter varies the flavor.

=Caper Sauce.=--Stir into some good melted butter from three to four
dessertspoonfuls of capers; add a little of the vinegar and dish the
sauce as soon as it boils.

=Celery Sauce.=--Cut half a dozen heads, or so, of celery into small
pieces; cook in a little slightly salted water until tender, and then
rub through a colander. Put a pint of white stock into a stewpan with
two blades of mace, and a small bunch of savory herbs; simmer half an
hour to extract their flavor, then strain them out, add the celery and a
thickening of flour or corn-starch; scald well, and just before serving,
pour in a teacupful of cream, or if one has not the cream, use the same
amount of scalded milk and a tablespoonful of butter, season to taste
with salt and white pepper, squeeze in a little lemon juice, if one has
it, and serve. If brown gravy is preferred thicken with browned flour,
and it is improved by a little Worcestershire sauce or mushroom catsup.

=Cream Sauce.=--Rub to a smooth paste one tablespoonful of butter and the
same of flour, put into a saucepan and melt, do not brown; have ready a
cup of hot cream, or the same amount of milk enriched by a tablespoonful
of butter and add to the butter and flour. Stir constantly until it
thickens. A dusting of grated nutmeg, grated cheese or a saltspoonful of
chopped onion lightly browned in the butter is an agreeable addition.

=Cucumber Sauce.=--Use two tablespoonfuls of olive oil, a scant
tablespoonful of vinegar or lemon juice, a half-teaspoonful of salt, a
dash of pepper, and a saltspoonful of mustard with a teaspoonful of
cucumber; rub the oil and mustard together before adding the other
ingredients, stir well and serve very soon as it spoils by standing.

=Egg Sauce.=--Boil the eggs hard, cut them into small squares, and mix
them with good butter sauce. Make hot and add a little lemon juice
before serving.

=Hollandaise Sauce.=--One half a teacupful of butter, the juice of half a
lemon, the yolks of two eggs, a speck of cayenne, one-half cupful of
boiling water, one-half teaspoonful of salt; beat the butter to a cream,
add the yolks one by one, the lemon juice, pepper and salt; place the
bowl in which these are mixed in a saucepan of boiling water; beat with
an egg-beater until the sauce begins to thicken, and add boiling water,
beating all the time; when like a soft custard, it is done; the bowl, if
thin, must be kept over the fire not more than five minutes, as if
boiled too much it spoils.

=Horseradish Sauce.=--Two teaspoonfuls of made mustard, two of white
sugar, one-half teaspoonful of salt and a gill of vinegar; mix and pour
over sufficient grated horseradish to moisten thoroughly.

=Lyonnaise Sauce.=--Brown a small onion minced in a tablespoonful of
butter and the same of flour, add a half-cupful of meat broth, a
teaspoonful of parsley, salt and pepper and cook long enough to season
well.

=Mint Sauce.=--Four dessertspoonfuls of mint, two of sugar, one gill of
vinegar; stir all together; make two or three hours before wanted.

=Mushroom Sauce.=--Mix one tablespoonful each of flour and butter, melt in
a stewpan, add a cupful of rich white stock or cream and stir until it
thickens; put in a half-cupful of freshly boiled or of canned mushrooms,
let all come to a boil again, season with a saltspoonful of salt and a
dash of cayenne pepper; serve hot.

=Mustard Sauce, French.=--Slice an onion in a bowl; cover with good
vinegar. After two days pour off the vinegar; add to it a teaspoonful of
cayenne pepper, a teaspoonful of salt, a tablespoonful of sugar, and
mustard enough to thicken; mix, set upon the stove and stir until it
boils. When cold it is ready for use.

=Mustard Sauce, German.=--Four tablespoonfuls of ground mustard, one
tablespoonful of flour, two teaspoonfuls of sugar, one of salt, two of
cinnamon, one of cloves, one of cayenne pepper, three of melted butter;
mix with one pint of boiling vinegar.

=Onion Sauce.=--Mince an onion; fry it in butter in a stewpan. Pour over
it a gill of vinegar; let it remain on the stove until it is simmered
one-third away. Add a pint of gravy, a bunch of parsley, two or three
cloves, pepper and salt. Thicken with a little flour and butter, strain,
and remove any particles of fat.

=Parsley Sauce.=--Parsley sauce is the usual "cream sauce," to which is
added a tablespoonful of minced parsley and one hard boiled egg finely
chopped.

=Tartare Sauce.=--Tartare sauce is a French salad dressing to which is
added a tablespoonful each of chopped olives, parsley, and capers or
nasturtiums; instead of capers or nasturtiums chopped cucumbers or
gherkins can be used. Set on ice until used.

=Tomato Sauce.=--Boil together for one hour, a pint of tomatoes, one gill
of broth of any kind, one sprig of thyme, three whole cloves, three
pepper corns, and half an ounce of sliced onions; rub through a sieve
with a wooden spoon, and set the sauce to keep hot; mix together over
the fire one ounce of butter and half an ounce of flour, and when smooth
add to the tomato sauce.

=Vinaigrette Sauce.=--A vinaigrette sauce is a brown sauce flavored with
vinegar just before serving; it must be cider vinegar, or one of the
fancy vinegars, as tarragon, parsley, martynia and the like; or, rub a
teaspoonful of mustard into a tablespoonful of olive oil, to which add a
teaspoonful of salt and one-half teaspoonful of pepper. Lastly add very
slowly a half-cup of vinegar stirring vigorously.

=White Sauce.=--Put one tablespoon each of flour and butter in a saucepan
and stir together until they bubble; then gradually stir in a pint of
boiling water or white stock; season with salt and pepper and let boil a
moment longer. To vary it, the beaten whites of two eggs may be stirred
in just before serving.


SCORZONERA.

The roots are eaten boiled like those of salsify--or like the Jerusalem
artichoke. The recipes of either are applicable to scorzonera. The
leaves of scorzonera are used in salad with a plain or French dressing.


SHALLOTS.

The bulbs are more delicate than onions, and are used to flavor soups,
salads, dressings and sauces. The leaves when young help in forming
salads.


SORREL AND SWISS CHARD.

Sorrel and Swiss chard are often used together as the chard modifies the
acidity of the sorrel. They make acceptable greens when used together
and are treated like spinach.


SORREL SOUP.

Pick off the stems and wash the leaves of a quart of sorrel, boil in
salted water, drain and chop fine, mix butter and flour in a saucepan
and when the butter is melted turn in the sorrel and let cook for a
couple of minutes. Add three pints of beef or veal stock well seasoned
and stir until it boils. Just before serving beat up two eggs and turn
over them the boiling soup, which will cook them sufficiently. A sliced
onion, or a few blades of chives boiled with the sorrel is a welcome
flavor occasionally, also the stock may be half meat stock and half
cream or milk.


SORREL AND SPINACH SOUP.

To one quart of sorrel add a handful of spinach and a few lettuce
leaves. Put them in a frying pan with a large piece of butter and cook
until done. Add two quarts of boiling water, season with salt and pepper
and just before serving add two eggs well beaten into a gill of cream.
This is an excellent soup for an invalid.


BAKED SPINACH.

[Illustration]

Use one-half peck of spinach. Pick over the leaves carefully, remove all
wilted ones and roots, wash thoroughly and put in boiling water to which
a pinch of soda has been added to keep the color. When very tender,
drain, chop fine, and put into a baking dish. Put into a saucepan with a
cup of milk, a tablespoonful of butter, one small teaspoonful of salt, a
dash of cayenne pepper and a very little grated nutmeg. Let this come to
a boil, stir into the spinach, add two well beaten eggs and bake ten
minutes in a hot oven.


BOILED SPINACH, FRENCH.

Prepare as above, after it is thoroughly tender, throw into a colander
and drench with cold water. This gives a firmness and delicacy attained
in no other way. Shake it free from water, chop fine, put into a
saucepan, stir with a tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper to taste
and two tablespoonfuls of cream until hot, when it is ready to be heaped
in the dish with poached or boiled eggs or quirled yolks on top. To
quirl the yolks run them through the sieve of a patent potato masher.


"VICTORY" SPINACH

Carefully wash the spinach, scald it in boiling salted water, then pour
cold water over it, drain and chop fine. Stew an onion in butter until
it is soft, add the spinach, sprinkle flour over it and cook for ten
minutes stirring constantly, add salt, pepper, a little grated nutmeg,
and cover with meat stock or gravy. Boil a few minutes and when done,
add a little sour cream.


FRIED SPINACH.

Take cold spinach left from dinner, premising that it was boiled tender
in properly salted water, and that there were three or four poached eggs
left also. Chop the eggs thoroughly into the spinach and sprinkle with
pepper. Put into a frying-pan a large tablespoonful of butter, and when
it is sufficiently hot put in the spinach and eggs, and fry nicely.


RAVIOLI OF SPINACH.

Prepare a potato paste as for Potato Turnovers, or a good puff paste,
and with a saucer or tin cutter of that size cut out a circle. Place a
tablespoonful of spinach prepared French style upon one side, wet the
edges, fold over the other side and press it around with the fingers and
thumb, brush with egg and bake until a light brown. When served pour
around it cream or a cream sauce in which is a hard boiled egg chopped
fine, or peas.


SPINACH SALAD.

Take two dozen heads of spinach, season with salt and pepper, put in
salad dish and set away on ice. Take the yolks of three hard boiled
eggs, mash fine, add mustard, salt, pepper, a tablespoonful of melted
butter. Mix thoroughly, add vinegar and pour over the spinach. Garnish
with hard boiled eggs sliced.


COOKING SUMMER SQUASH.

Quarter, seed, pare and lay them in cold water. Steam over boiling soft
water if possible, or boil in salted water and drain thoroughly, mash
them smooth and season with butter, pepper and salt. If the seeds are
very young and tender they can be retained.


ESCALLOPED SUMMER SQUASH.

The squash is pared and sliced and laid in a baking dish alternating
with cracker crumbs, seasoned with butter, pepper and salt, until the
dish is full, the upper layer being cracker crumbs dotted with butter.
Bake three quarters of an hour.


FRIED SUMMER SQUASH.

Cut the squash in thin slices and sprinkle with salt. Let it stand a few
minutes, then beat an egg, in which dip the slices. Fry in butter and
season with sugar or salt and pepper to taste.


SUMMER SQUASH FRITTERS.

Use three medium sized squashes; pare, cut up and boil tender, drain
thoroughly and mash, season with pepper and salt; add one cupful of milk
(cream is better), the yolks of two eggs and sufficient sifted flour to
make a very stiff batter, or they will be hard to turn; lastly, stir in
the beaten whites of the eggs. Fry brown in hot fat.


BAKED WINTER SQUASH.

Cut in small pieces to serve individually, bake with the rind on, scoop
out the squash, season it with butter, pepper, salt, a little sugar and
cream and replace in shells; an allowance of two or three extra pieces
should be made to give filling enough to heap the shells, dust a few
bread or cracker crumbs over the top, dot with a bit of butter, bake a
nice brown and serve.


BOILED WINTER SQUASH.

Peel and cut into pieces a large squash that will, when cooked fill a
half gallon. Steam over hot salted water if possible, if not put it on
to boil in as little water as possible. Keep it closely covered and stir
frequently. When perfectly soft, drain in colander, press out all of the
water, rub the squash through a sieve and return it to the saucepan. Add
to it a quarter of a pound of nice butter, one gill of sweet cream and
salt and pepper to taste. Stew slowly, stirring frequently until it is
as dry as possible. In cold weather serve all vegetables on warmed
dishes.


SQUASH BISCUIT.

One and one-half cupfuls of sifted squash, half a cupful of sugar, half
a cake of compressed yeast, one cupful of milk, half a teaspoonful of
salt, four tablespoonfuls of butter, five cupfuls of flour. Dissolve the
yeast in a scant half-cupful of cold water, mix it and the milk, butter,
salt, sugar and squash together, and stir into the flour. Knead well and
let it rise over night. In the morning shape into biscuit. Let them rise
one hour and a half and bake one hour.

CHICAGO RECORD.


SQUASH CUSTARD.

Use a cupful of mashed squash, stir into it a pint of hot milk, then add
four well beaten eggs, a tablespoonful of butter, and season with salt
and pepper. Put into a hot greased baking pan and bake in a quick oven.


SQUASH PIE. (See Pumpkin Pie.)


SQUASH SOUP.

To one quart of thoroughly cooked pumpkin or squash allow two quarts of
milk, plenty of butter, pepper and salt. Serve with toasted bread.
Pumpkin and squash soups are French dishes.


SWEET POTATO BISCUIT.

One quart of flour, one quart of sweet potatoes--after they are boiled
and grated--one-half cupful of lard, one cup of yeast--mix with either
milk or water; let them rise twice. Bake like tea biscuits.


ESCALLOPED SWEET POTATOES.

Boil the potatoes the day before. Peel and slice them rather thick. In
the bottom of a baking-dish put bits of butter, sprinkle sugar and put
a layer of potato. Then more butter, sugar and potato, until the pan is
full. Let the top be strewn with sugar and bits of butter and pour over
it a teacupful of water. Put it in the oven, and after it begins to
cook, once or twice moisten the top with a little butter and water to
dissolve the sugar and prevent its merely drying on top of the potato.
Use a teacupful of sugar and half a pound of butter to a half gallon pan
of potato. Bake slowly.


SWEET POTATO LOAF.

Boil and mash sweet potatoes, season with butter, pepper and salt, put
into a buttered baking dish, cover with bread crumbs dotted with butter,
and bake until brown. Ornament with cress or a few sprigs of parsley.


SWEET POTATOES ROASTED.

Sweet potatoes roasted under beef or lamb are very nice. Take the skin
off carefully to leave the surface smooth, wash and put them under the
meat, allowing half an hour for a medium sized potato. They will brown
over nicely and receive an agreeable flavor.


SWEET POTATO SALAD.

Boil three large sweet potatoes. Cut into half-inch squares. Cut into
very small pieces two stalks of celery. Season with salt and pepper and
pour over a French dressing as follows:--Three tablespoonfuls salad oil,
two of vinegar, one tablespoonful onion juice, one saltspoon each of
salt and pepper. Let salad stand in refrigerator two hours. Garnish with
pickles, pitted olives and parsley.

CHICAGO RECORD.


SWISS CHARD OR SILVER LEAF BEET.

The leaves of Swiss Chard are boiled and used like spinach. The stalks
and midrib are very broad and tender and when young are used like
asparagus. The leaves of sorrel and spinach are often used together as
greens. (See Asparagus and Spinach receipts).


BAKED TOMATOES.

Tomatoes may be simply baked without stuffing. Peel them first, lay stem
end down in a dripping pan, cut a Greek cross on the top of each, season
with salt, pepper and sugar, dot with bits of butter and sprinkle
thickly with fine stale crumbs, adding a generous bit of butter on top
of each. Pour in at the side of the pan two tablespoonfuls of water.


BROILED TOMATOES.

Turn hot boiling water on to the tomatoes to peel them, cut slices at
least three-quarters of an inch thick, and small tomatoes in halves,
rub a piece of fat pork on the gridiron, put on the tomatoes, and broil
on both sides, or dip in sweet oil and broil, or cover both sides with
cheese and broil, or slice the tomatoes with their skins on and broil,
and pour melted butter over them. In all cases season nicely with salt
and pepper, garnish with parsley or cress and serve hot on a hot dish.


ESCALLOPED TOMATOES.

Arrange in a baking pan layers of tomatoes covered with bread crumbs
seasoned with salt, pepper, a little sugar, and dotted with butter. Let
the upper layer be of bread crumbs dotted with butter. Bake covered,
half an hour. A few minutes before serving take off the cover and brown.


TOMATO CATSUP.

Use ripe tomatoes, boil and strain. To every gallon of tomatoes use 3
tablespoonfuls of salt, 2 of mustard, 1-1/2 black pepper, 1/4 of
cayenne, cup of brown sugar and 1 pint of cider vinegar. Boil four hours
and watch carefully or it will burn. Set on back of stove and add 1
tablespoonful of cinnamon, 1/2 tablespoonful of cloves, and if liked, 1
pint currant jelly. Mix thoroughly, can while hot and seal.


TOMATO FIGS.

Scald and peel the tomatoes, then weigh them, place them in a stone jar
with an equal amount of sugar and let them stand two days, then pour off
the syrup and boil and skim until no scum rises. Pour it over the
tomatoes and let them stand two days as before, pour off, boil and skim
a second time and a third time. After the third time they are fit to dry
if the weather is good, if not let them stand in syrup until drying
weather. Place on earthen dishes and dry in the sun which will take
about a week, after which pack them in wooden boxes with fine white
paper between the layers; so prepared they will keep for years.


FRIED TOMATOES.

Do not pare the tomatoes, cut in slices, roll in flour and fry in butter
until both sides are brown, season with salt, pepper and a little sugar
sprinkled over while cooking; or after the tomatoes are browned, stir
into the gravy in the spider, one cupful of cream thickened with flour.
Let it boil up, and turn it over the tomatoes.


MACARONI WITH TOMATOES.

Remove from each tomato the pips and watery substance it contains; put
the tomatoes in a saucepan with a small piece of butter, pepper, salt,
thyme and a bay leaf, and a few tablespoonfuls of gravy or stock, keep
stirring until they are reduced to a pulp, then strain through a sieve,
and pour over macaroni already boiled soft and cover with grated cheese;
bake until a light brown.


TOMATO MANGOES. (See Mangoes.)


TOMATO MUSTARD.

To one peck of ripe tomatoes add a teaspoonful of salt; let it stew a
half hour, and strain through a sieve. Add two dessertspoonfuls of
onions chopped fine, a dessertspoonful of whole pepper, one of allspice,
one of cloves, and half a spoonful of cayenne pepper. Let it simmer down
one-third, adding a teaspoonful of curry, and a teacupful of mustard.
Then simmer half an hour longer.


FROZEN TOMATO SALAD.

Peel and chop fine a half dozen solid tomatoes, season with a
teaspoonful of salt, a saltspoonful of pepper and a teaspoonful of lemon
juice. Freeze the pulp solid in an ice cream freezer, when frozen mold
it into fancy shapes and serve on lettuce with a tablespoonful of
mayonnaise over each mold.


TOMATO SOUP.

Boil a quart of tomatoes in a pint of water for twenty minutes and
strain; put in a small teaspoonful of soda, and a quart of milk as it
foams. Add a tablespoonful of butter and two tablespoonfuls of
cornstarch rubbed together, plenty of salt and a sprinkling of pepper.
Put a tablespoonful of whipped cream in each soup plate.


STUFFED TOMATOES.

Cut off a transverse slice from the stem end of the tomato; scrape out
the inside pulp and stuff it with mashed potatoes, bread crumbs, parsley
and onions, or with any force meat, fish, or poultry well seasoned with
butter, pepper and salt, moistened with a little stock or cream and the
yolk of an egg added to bind it, bake. Or, scoop out the seeds, place
the tomatoes in a saucepan containing a gill of salad oil; next chop
about half a bottle of mushrooms, a handful of parsley and four
shallots, put them into a stewpan with two ounces of scraped bacon or
ham, season with pepper, salt, a little chopped thyme and fry five
minutes, when add the yolks of three eggs. Fill the tomatoes with this
mixture, sprinkle with bread crumbs and bake until brown.


TOMATO WINE.

Take fresh ripe tomatoes, mash very fine, strain through a thin cloth.
To every gallon of the pure juice add one and one-quarter pounds of
sugar and set away in an earthen jar about nine days or until it has
fermented; a little salt will improve its taste; strain again, bottle,
cork tightly and tie down cork. To use it as a drink, to every gallon of
fresh sweetened water add half a tumbler of the wine with a few drops of
lemon essence and one has a good substitute for lemonade.

KIZZIE BECKLY.


BAKED TURNIPS.

Peel and boil some turnips in salted water to which a half teaspoonful
of sugar has been added. Slice them half an inch thick and put them in a
stew-pan with two tablespoonfuls of butter to six or seven good sized
turnips, shake them until they are lightly browned. Season with salt,
pepper, a trifle of mace and sugar. Pour over a pint of good brown gravy
and serve.


BOILED TURNIPS.

Put three tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan and as soon as it is
melted put in one small onion, minced fine and one quart of turnips cut
in dice; stir until they are brown, when add one teaspoonful of salt,
the same of sugar, one tablespoonful of flour and half a saltspoonful of
pepper, stirring for two minutes. Then add a cupful of milk or stock and
simmer for twenty minutes, keeping the saucepan covered. Serve
immediately.


TURNIP SALAD.

Slice very thin three or four turnips; put them to soak over night,
change the water the next morning, then cut up very fine, put on salt,
pepper, celery salt, or celery seed and vinegar.


VEGETABLE ASPIC MOLDS.

In the bottom of some very small molds lay alternately small pieces of
chili, chervil and hard-boiled white of egg. Cover these well with
liquid aspic, then add a further layer of chopped parsley and finely
chopped yolk of hard-boiled egg. Having covered this also with aspic,
put in another layer of small squares of cheese and a few capers, and so
continue the operation till the molds are quite full. When set on ice
turn out of the molds and serve on lettuce leaves with mustard, cress
and chopped aspic jelly. The aspic is made by using a meat or vegetable
stock to which is added enough soaked gelatine to make a jelly when
cold.


VEGETABLE SOUP.

Put a half-cup of drippings into a saucepan, thicken it with two
tablespoonfuls of flour, cut into it and brown two small onions. Have
ready two quarts of boiling water, into this empty the contents of the
saucepan, slice into it six tomatoes, two potatoes, one carrot and one
turnip; add two cupfuls of green peas, one cupful of lima beans and a
half-dozen cloves. Let all simmer slowly for two hours, then put all
through a colander, return it to the pot, heat to boiling, thicken with
a tablespoonful of butter rolled in cornstarch, season with pepper and
salt to taste and serve hot.




[Illustration]

Vaughan's Seed Store

Chicago New York




Transcriber's Note

The following typographical errors have been corrected:

  2nd un-numbered page  delicous changed to delicious (two times)
  4th un-numbered page  i.c. changed to i.e.
  4th un-numbered page  what is usually, changed to what is usually
   1  oders changed to odors
   1  condidion changed to condition
  20  sprigs of parsley changed to sprigs of parsley.
  25  have lightly browned changed to have lightly browned.
  32  The first few letters were missing from the first line on this page.
      By context, they have been reconstructed as: [a l]eaf
  32  of great variety changed to of great variety.
  56  cayene changed to cayenne


The following words had inconsistent spelling:

  catchup / catsup
  dessertspoonful / dessert spoonful
  forcemeat / force meat
  Seakale / Sea kale


The following words had inconsistent hyphenation:

  corn-starch / cornstarch
  horse-radish / horseradish
  par-boil / parboil
  stew-pan / stewpan






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VAUGHAN'S VEGETABLE COOK BOOK (4TH EDITION) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

