








[Illustration]

  THE GOLD THREAD

  =A Story for the Young=

  BY THE REV. NORMAN MACLEOD, D.D.
  ONE OF HER MAJESTY'S CHAPLAINS

  ALEXANDER STRAHAN, PUBLISHER
  56 LUDGATE HILL, LONDON
  1867

  [_Eighth Edition_]




TO MY CHILDREN.


I dedicate this story to you, because it was for you I first wrote it,
and to you I first read it among the green hills of Moffat. It was
afterwards printed in _Good Words_, and now you see it again appears as
a little book for other children, who, I hope, will like it as much as
you do.

I wish to help and encourage you, and all who read this story, to learn
the great lesson which it is intended to teach; that lesson is, that we
should always trust God and do what is right, and thus hold fast our
gold thread in spite of every temptation and danger, being certain that
in this way only will God lead us in safety and peace to His home.

Now, God gives each of you this gold thread to hold fast in your own
house or in school, in the nursery or in the play-ground, on every day
and in every place. His voice in your heart, and in His Word, will also
tell you always what is right, if you only listen to it. You, too, will
be constantly tempted in some way or other to give up your gold thread,
and to be selfish, disobedient, lazy, or untruthful. Many things, in
short, will tempt you to do your own will rather than God's will.

You already know, and I hope you will always love and remember, those
true stories in the Bible about the good men of the olden time, whose
lives are there written. Now, what shewed that they were good? It was
this, that _they trusted God, and did what was right_. If they ever let
this their gold thread go, they lost their way and became unhappy; but
when they held it fast, it led them in a way of peace and safety. To see
how true this is, you have only to recall such stories as those of Noah,
Abraham, Joseph, Moses, Job, Caleb and Joshua, Samuel, David and
Jonathan, Elijah and Elisha, Hezekiah, Jeremiah, Daniel and his three
companions, &c., &c., with those told you in the Book of Acts, not to
mention the history of Jesus Christ, the perfect example for us all.

That you, my dear children, may be "followers of those who through faith
and patience now inherit the promises," and thus be "followers of God as
dear children," is the constant prayer of your mother, and of your
father,

  NORMAN MACLEOD.




  CONTENTS.

                                                              PAGE
  CHAPTER I.

  THE WANDERER--WOLF THE SWINEHERD,                              1


  CHAPTER II.

  THE ROBBER'S TOWER,                                           12


  CHAPTER III.

  THE JOURNEY HOME--THE BIRD WITH THE GOLD EGGS--TRIALS
  AND DIFFICULTIES,                                             23


  CHAPTER IV.

  THE GREAT LION--THE LITTLE SQUIRREL--AN OLD FRIEND--THE
  BLOODHOUND--THE LAST TEMPTATION,                              35


  CHAPTER V.

  THE GREEN ISLAND OF THE LAKE, AND THE RETURN HOME,            51




THE

GOLD THREAD.


CHAPTER I.

THE WANDERER--WOLF THE SWINEHERD.


[Illustration]

Once upon a time, a boy lost his way in a vast forest that filled many a
valley, and passed over many a hill, a rolling sea of leaves for miles
and miles, further than the eye could reach. His name was Eric, son of
the good King Magnus. He was dressed in a blue velvet dress, with a gold
band round his waist, and his fair locks in silken curls waved from his
beautiful head. But his hands and face were scratched, and his clothes
torn with the briars, as he ran here and there like one much perplexed.
Sometimes he made his way through tangled brushwood, or crossed the
little grassy plains in the forest, now losing himself in dark ravines,
then climbing up their steep sides, or crossing with difficulty the
streams that hurried through them. For a long time he kept his heart up,
and always said to himself, "I shall find it, I shall find it;" until,
as the day advanced, he was wearied and hungry; and every now and then
he cried, "Oh, my father! where is my father! I'm lost! I'm lost!" Or,
"Where, oh, where is my gold thread!" All day the forest seemed to him
to be very sad. He had never seen it so gloomy. There was a strange
sadness in the rustle of the leaves, and a sadness in the noise of the
streams. He did not hear the birds sing as they used to do. But he heard
the ravens croak with their hoarse voice, as their black forms swept
along the precipices which here and there rose above the trees. The
large hawks, too, always appeared to be wheeling over his head,
pausing, and fluttering as if about to dart down upon him. Why was he so
sad? Why was he so afraid?

But on Eric journeyed, in the hope of finding his way out of the
boundless forest, or of meeting some one who would be his guide. At
last, the sun appeared to be near its setting, and he could see the high
branches of the trees, shining like gold, as its last rays fell upon
them. But underneath, the foliage was getting darker and darker; the
birds were preparing to sleep, and everything soon became so still that
he could hear his steps echoing through the wood, and when he stopped,
he heard his heart beating, or a leaf falling; but nowhere did he see a
house, and no human being had he met since morning. Then the wind
suddenly began to rise, and he heard it at first creeping along the
tree-tops like a gentle whisper, and by and by to call louder and louder
for the storm to come. Dark clouds gathered over the sky, and rushed
along chased by the winds, that were soon to fight with the giant trees.

At last, he sat down at the root of a great old oak, burying his face
in his hands, not knowing what to do. He then tried to climb the tree,
in order to spend the night among its branches, in case wild beasts
should attack him. But as he was climbing it, he heard some one singing
with a loud voice. Listening attentively, and looking eagerly through
the leaves, he saw a boy apparently older than himself, dressed in rough
shaggy clothes, made from skins of wild animals. His long matted hair
escaped over his cheeks from under a black bearskin cap. With a short
thick stick he was driving a herd of swine through the wood. "Hey there,
you black porker!" cried the boy, as he threw a stone at some pig which
was running away. "Get along, you lazy long-snout!" he shouted to
another, as he came thump on its back with his cudgel. And then he sung
this song with a loud voice which made the woods ring:--

     "Oh, there's nothing half so fine,
      As to drive a herd of swine,
      And through the forest toddle,
      With nothing in my noddle,
    But rub-a-dub, rub-dub, hey-up, halloo!

     "When I wish to have some fun,
      Then I make the porkers run,
      Till they gallop, snort, and wheeze,
      Among the leafy trees;
    Oh, rub-a-dub, rub-dub, hey-up, halloo!

     "How their backs begin to bristle,
      When I shout aloud and whistle!
      How they kick at every lick
      That I give them with my stick!
    Oh, rub-a-dub, rub-dub, hey-up, halloo!"

"Get along, you rascals," cried the savage-looking herd, "or I'll kill
and roast you before your time." But soon the herd, with his swine, were
concealed from Eric's sight by the wood; though he still heard his
"rub-a-dub" chorus, to which he beat time with a sort of rude drum, made
with a dried skin and hoop. Eric determined to make his acquaintance, or
at all events to follow him to some house; so he descended from the
tree, and ran off in the direction from which he heard the song coming.
He soon over-took him.

[Illustration]

"Hollo!" said the wild-looking lad, with as much astonishment as if Eric
had fallen from the clouds: "Who? where from? where to?" "I have lost
my way in the wood," said Eric, "and want you to guide me." "To Ralph?"
asked the swineherd. "Ralph! pray, who is he?" "Master, chief, captain,
everything, everybody," replied the young savage. "I will go anywhere
for shelter, as night is coming on; but I will reward you if you bring
me to my father's home." "Who is your father, my fine fellow?" inquired
the swineherd, leaning on his stick. "The king," replied Eric. "You lie,
Sir Prince! Ralph is king." "I speak the truth, swineherd." The
swineherd by this time was examining Eric's dress with an impudent look.
"Pay me now," said he; "give me this gold band, and I will guide you."
"I cannot give you this gold band, for my father gave it to me, and I
have lost enough to-day. By the by, did you see a gold thread waving
anywhere among the trees?" "A gold thread! what do you mean? I saw
nothing but pigs until I saw you, and I shall treat you like a pig, d'ye
hear? and lick you too, for I have no time to put off. So give me your
band. Come, be quick!" said he, with his fierce face, and holding up his
stick as he came up to Eric. "Keep off, swineherd; don't touch me!"
"Don't touch you! why shouldn't I touch you? Do you see this stick? How
would you like to have it among your fine curls, as I drive it among the
pigs' bristles?" And he began to flourish it over his head, and to press
nearer and nearer. "Once, twice, when I say thrice, if you do not
unbuckle, I shall save you the trouble, and leave you to the wild
beasts, who would like a tender bit of prince's flesh better than pork.
Come; once! twice!" Eric was on his guard, and said, "I shall fight you,
you young robber, till death, rather than give you this band,--so keep
off." "Thrice!" shouted the herd, and down came his thick cudgel, which
he intended should fall on Eric's head. But Eric sprang aside, and
before he could recover himself, dashed in upon him, tripped him up, and
threw him on the grass, seizing him by the throat in a moment. The herd,
in his efforts to get out of Eric's grasp, let go his cudgel, which Eric
seized, and held over his head. "Unless you promise, Master Swineherd,
to leave me alone, I may leave _you_ alone with the wild beasts." "You
are stronger than I thought," said the herd. "Let me up, or I shall be
choked. Let me up, I say, and I promise to guide you." "I shall trust
you," said Eric, "though you would not trust me. Rise!" So the herd
rose, and picked up his cap, but Eric would not give him his stick until
he guided him to some house. "Come along," said he, sulkily. "What is
your name?" asked Eric. "They call me Wolf. I killed a wolf once with my
boar-spear." "Why, Wolf, did you try to kill me?" "Because I wanted your
gold belt." "But it is a great sin to rob and kill." "Other people rob
me, and would kill me too, if I did not take care of their pigs," said
Wolf, carelessly. "You should fear God, Wolf." "I fear that name truly,
for Ralph always swears by it when he is in a rage. But I do not know
what it means." "Oh, Wolf, surely your father and mother told you about
God, who made all things, and made you and me; God, who loves us, and
wishes us to love Him, and to do what is right?" "I have no father or
mother," replied Wolf, "nor brothers or sisters, and I do not know God.
No one cares for me but my pigs, and so I sleep with them, and eat with
them." "Poor fellow!" said Eric with a look of kindness, "I am sorry for
you. Here is all the money I have. Take it. I wish to shew you that I
have no ill-will to you;" and Eric gave him a gold coin. Wolf gave a
grunt like one of his pigs, and began his song of "Rub-a-dub." "No one
ever gave me money before," remarked Wolf almost to himself, as he
examined the coin on his rough hand, which looked like tanned leather.
"How much is this?" inquired Wolf. Eric explained its value. The herd
was astonished, and began to think what he could purchase with it. "It
would buy a large pig," he said. He seemed very anxious to conceal the
coin, and so he hid it in the top of his hairy cap. "See that tall
tower," said Wolf, "which looks like a rock above the trees; that is the
only house near for twenty miles round. You can reach it soon; and when
you do reach it," said Wolf, speaking low, as if some one might hear
him, "take my advice, and get away as fast as you can from my master
Ralph, for"--and Wolf gave a number of winks, as much as to say, I know
something. "What do you mean?" asked Eric. "Oh, nothing, nothing; but
take Wolf's advice, and say to Ralph you are a beggar. Put the gold band
in your pocket, and swear to remain with him, but run off when you can.
Cheat him; that's my way." "It is not my way," replied Eric, "and, come
what may, never can be, for a voice says to me,

    "'Better to die
      Than ever to lie.'"

"Ha! ha!" said Wolf; "I wish you lived with Ralph. He would teach you
another lesson, my lad." "I would rather that I had you, Wolf, to live
in my house. I would be kind to you, and help you to be good, and tell
you about God, who lives in the sky." "And is that He who is speaking?
Listen!" Thunder began to mutter in the clouds. "Yes, it is He," replied
Eric; "and if you will only listen, you can also hear Him often speak
with a small, still voice in your heart." "I never heard Him," replied
Wolf; "but I cannot stay longer with you, for my pigs will wander: there
is a black rascal who always leads them astray. Now, king's son, give
Wolf the stick; it is all he has." "Here it is to you, and I am sure you
will not use it wrongly; you will try and be good, Wolf? for it will
make you happy." "Humph," said Wolf, "I am happy when I get my pigs
home, and Ralph does not strike me. But I must away, and see you don't
tell any one you gave me money. They would rob me." And away he ran
among the trees in search of his pigs, while Eric heard his little drum,
and his song of "Rub-a-dub, halloo!" die away in the distance. Another
loud peal and flash of lightning made Eric start, and off he ran towards
a light which now beamed from the tower. But he thought to himself, "I
am much worse than that poor Wolf, for I knew what was right, and did
not do it. I heard the voice, but did not attend to it. Oh, my father,
why did I not obey you!"




CHAPTER II.

THE ROBBER'S TOWER.


[Illustration]

Sometimes he lost sight of the light, and again he caught it, till it
became brighter and brighter, and very soon he came to a high rock, on
the top of which was perched a tall, dark tower. After groping about, he
found a narrow path that led up to the tower, from one of the windows of
which the light was brightly shining. He ascended a flight of steep
steps till he reached a massive door covered with iron. He knocked as
loud as he could, when a large dog began barking furiously inside, and
springing up to the door, as if it would tear it down. Then a gruff
voice called out of a window over the door, "Who is there? Who disturbs
me in this way?" The little boy replied, "Please, sir, I am Eric, son of
King Magnus, and I have lost my way in this wood." "The son of the king,
are you?" asked the voice. "That is a grand joke! Let me have a sight of
you." Then the window was shut, and he heard footsteps coming tramp,
tramp, down the stairs, and the voice said to the dog, "Lie down, hound,
and don't be greedy! You would not eat a young prince, would you? Lie
down, Tuscar!" The door was then opened by a fierce-looking man, with a
long beard. The man bid him enter, and examined him about himself and
his journey. Eric answered truly every question. Then the man rang a
bell for an old woman who lived in the house, and bid her take the boy
with her, and give him his supper. The old woman looked very ugly and
very cross, and led him up, up, a great number of dark, gloomy stairs,
until she reached a small room, with a bed and table in it, where she
bade Eric wait till she brought him supper. The big hound followed them,
and stayed in the room while the woman went away. Eric was at first
afraid of the dog, he was so large and wild-looking, but he came and
laid his head on his knee, and he scratched his ears, and patted him,
and was very kind to him. The supper came, and the boy managed to keep a
few bits of meat out of his own supper for the dog, and when the old
woman went out of the room, he fed the hound, who seemed very hungry,
and said to him, "Tuscar, old fellow, I like you very much. Take another
bit, good dog, and be happy!" The dog wagged his tail, and looked up
kindly with his large eyes, for he was thankful for his supper, and ate
much more than Eric. "Now," said the old woman gruffly, when she took
away the remains of the supper, "you have ate what would do me for a
week. You won't starve, Master Prince. Go to bed." The old woman left
him, but suddenly returning, she discovered Eric on his knees. As he
rose, she scoffed and jeered him, and asked, "Do you always say your
prayers?" "Yes, always," replied the boy. "Who taught you?" "My mother,
who is dead." The old woman heaved a deep sigh, but the boy did not know
why. Perhaps she used to pray when she was a little girl herself, and
had given up speaking to God, or even thinking of Him, and so had become
wicked; or perhaps she thought of some child of her own whom she had
never taught to pray. She soon went away without speaking a word more,
and Eric was left in darkness. He looked out through the narrow window
of his room, but could see nothing but black clouds rushing over the
sky. Far down he heard a stream roaring, and the wind, which now blew a
gale, came booming over the tree-tops, and howling round the tower.
Every now and then a flash lighted up the forest, and the thunder
crashed in the sky. It was a fearful night!

[Illustration]

Some time after, he heard footsteps at his door, and immediately the man
with the beard entered, and sat down. "Do you know," he asked, "where
your father is?" "No," said Eric; "as I told you, I lost my way in the
forest, and have been wandering all day, and cannot find him; but
perhaps you will send some one to-morrow with me to shew me the way to
his castle, and I am sure my kind, good father will give you a rich
reward." "You are very, very far from your father's house," said the
man, "and I fear you will never see him again; but come with me, and I
shall shew you some beautiful things that will please you." So the man
took Eric by the hand, and, carrying a lamp, he led him into a room that
seemed full of gold and silver, with beautiful dresses, sparkling with
diamonds, and every kind of splendour, and he said, "Stay with me, my
boy, and I will give you all this, for I am a king too, and will make
you my heir." "Oh, no, no," said Eric; "I will never forsake my own
father." The man then said, "If you stay with me, you need never go
to school all day, but may amuse yourself from morning till night, and
have a beautiful pony to ride, and a gun to shoot deer with, and also
fishing-rods, and a servant to attend you, and any kind of meat and
drink you like best. Do stay with me!" "You are very kind," said Eric,
"but I cannot be happy without my father." "Come then with me, my fine
fellow, and I shall shew you something different," said the man, seizing
Eric firmly by the arm, and looking very angry. After walking along a
passage, from the end of which confused noises came, a door was opened,
and in a large hall, round a great oak table, sat a company of
fierce-looking men, drinking from large flagons which stood before them.
Their faces were red, and their eyes gleamed like fire. Ralph placed
Eric on the table. One of the robbers was singing this song:--

    "We're the famous robber band--
                       Hurrah!
     The lords of all the land--
                       Hurrah!
     A fig for law or duty,
     If we only get our booty;
     With a fa, lal, la, la, la!

    "'Every man to mind himself,'
                       Hurrah!
     Is the rule of Captain Ralph!
                       Hurrah!
     Then let the greatest thief
     And robber be our chief--
     With a fa, lal, la, la, la!"

No wonder poor Eric trembled as he heard that lawless band thus glorying
in their shame, and like demons singing their horrid song in praise of
all that was most dreadful and most wicked. He had read stories of
robbers, which sometimes made him think that they were fine, brave
fellows; but now that he was among them, he saw how depraved, cruel, and
frightful they were. Their savage, coarse looks terrified him; but he
was held by Ralph on the table. When the song was ended, one of them
asked, "Whom have we got here?" "Who do you think?" replied Ralph. "What
would you say, my men, to a young prince,--no less than the son of our
great enemy, King Magnus?" "A young prince! The son of Magnus! What a
prize!" they exclaimed. "What shall we do with him?" "First of all, let
us have his gold belt," said Ralph, unbuckling Eric's belt. "Ha! what a
pretty thing it is!" "My father gave it to me, and I don't wish to part
with it. The swineherd Wolf tried to take it from me, but I fought him,
and kept it," said Eric. "Wolf is a brave young robber," replied Ralph,
"and he shall have it for his trouble. In the meantime, my lad, it is
mine. But what, my men, shall we do with the prince?" "Kill him," said
one. "Starve him to death," said another. "Put his eyes out, and send
him back to his father," said a third. Eric prayed to God, but said
nothing. "I propose," said Ralph, "to make him a captain if he will stay
with us." "Never!" said Eric; "I would rather die!" "Let him die, then,"
said a fierce robber; "for his father hung my brother for killing one of
his nobles." "I tell you what we will do with the lion's whelp," said
Ralph; "let us keep him in prison, and send a message to his father,
that we have him snug in a den among the mountains, and that, unless he
sends us an immense ransom, we shall kill him." "That will do famously,"
said the robbers; "so off with him!" Then Ralph led the boy down
stairs,--down, down, until he thought they never would stop, and at last
they came to an iron door, with great bars on it, and a large lock, and
he turned to Eric, and said, "I know your father, and I hate him! for he
sends his soldiers after me, and tries to save travellers from me, and
now I have got his son. I will keep you here till you die, or till he
pays!" Then he opened the dungeon door, and thrust Eric in. When it
closed, it echoed like thunder through the passages. Eric cast himself
down on the dungeon floor.

All appeared to be a strange dream. Oh, how he repented having disobeyed
his father! and how he seemed to be as bad as the dreadful robbers in
having done what he pleased, and followed his own will, instead of doing
what was right! About an hour after, he heard some rustling, as if high
up on the wall, and a voice whispered "Eric!" "Who is there?" asked
Eric, and his little heart trembled. "Silence! quiet! it is Wolf. Here
is a small window in your prison, and I have opened it outside; climb
up, get out, and run for your life." Eric heard no more, but scrambled
in the dark up the rough stones in the wall until he reached the window,
where he looked out, and saw the stars and the woods. He soon forced his
way through, and dropped down on the opposite side. Some one caught him
in his arms. It was Wolf. "Here is your gold band, Eric. I got it from
Ralph; for He who was speaking in the thunder has been saying things in
my heart. You were kind to poor Wolf. Now escape! Fly! I shall close the
window again. Ralph will never know how you got out, and he will not
open the prison-door till after breakfast. So you have a long time. Run
as long as you can along that road till you reach a hill, then cross it,
until you reach a stream, which you must follow downwards. The worst of
the storm is over, and the night will soon be calm. Off!" "Bless you,
Wolf!" said Eric; "I shall never forget you." Poor Eric! how he ran,
and ran, beneath the stars! He felt no fatigue for a time. He thought he
heard the robbers after him; every time the wind blew loud, he imagined
it was their wild cry. On he ran till he reached the hill, and crossed
it, and came to a green spot beneath a rock, on the banks of the stream,
when he could run no more, but fell down, and whether he fainted or fell
asleep he could not tell.




CHAPTER III.

THE JOURNEY HOME--THE BIRD WITH THE GOLD EGGS--TRIALS AND DIFFICULTIES.


Eric knew not how long he slept, but, as in a dream, he heard a sweet
voice singing these words:--

    "Rest thee, boy, rest thee, boy, lonely and dreary,
       Thy little heart breaking from losing the way;
     Thy father has not left thee friendless, though weary,
       When learning through suffering to fear and obey."

[Illustration]

Eric opened his eyes, but moved not a limb, as if under some strange
fascination. It was early morning. High over head a lark was "singing
like an angel in the clouds." The mysterious voice went on in the same
beautiful and soothing strain--

    "Oh, sweet is the lark as she sings o'er her nest,
       And warbles unseen in the clear morning light;
     But sweeter by far is the song in the breast
       When in life's early morning we do what is right!"

Eric could neither move nor speak; but in his heart he confessed with
sorrow that he had done what was wrong. And again the voice sang--

    "Now, darling, awaken, thou art not forsaken!
       The old night is past and a new day begun;
     Let thy journey with love to thy father be taken,
       And at evening thy father will welcome thee home."

[Illustration]

"I will arise and go to my father!" said Eric, springing to his feet. He
saw beside him a beautiful lady, who looked like a picture he once saw
of his mother, or like one of those angels from heaven about whom he had
often read. And the lady said, "Fear not! I know you, Eric, and how
it came to pass that you are here. Your father sent you for a wise and
good purpose through the forest, and gave you hold of a gold thread to
guide you, and told you never to let it go. It was your duty to him to
have held it fast; but instead of doing your duty, trusting and obeying
your father, and keeping hold of the thread, you let it go to chase
butterflies, and gather wild-berries, and to amuse yourself. This you
did more than once. You neglected your father's counsels and warnings,
and because of your self-confidence and self-pleasing, you lost your
thread, and then you lost your way. What dangers and troubles have you
thus got into through disobedience to your father's commands, and want
of trust in his love and wisdom! For had you only followed your father's
directions, the gold thread would have brought you to his beautiful
castle, where there is to be a happy meeting of your friends, with all
your brothers and sisters." Poor little Eric began to weep! "Listen to
me, child," said the lady, kindly, "for _you cannot have peace but by
doing what is_ _right_. Know, then, that all your brothers and sisters
made this very journey by help of the gold thread, and they are at home
with great joy." "Oh, save me! save me!" cried Eric, and caught the
lady's hand. "Yes, I will save you," said she, "if you will learn
obedience. I know and love you, dear boy. I know and love your father,
and have been sent by him to deliver you. I heard what you said, and
know all you did, last night, and I was very glad that you proved, in
trial, your love to your father, your love of truth, and your love of
others, and this makes me hope all good of you for the future. Come now
with me!" And so the beautiful woman took him by the hand. The storm had
passed away, and the sun was shining on the green leaves of the trees,
and every drop of dew sparkled like a diamond. The birds were all
warbling their morning hymns, and feeding their young ones in their
nests. The streams were dancing down the rocks and through the glens.
"The mountains broke forth into singing, and all the trees clapped
their hands with joy." Everything thus seemed beautiful and happy to
Eric, for he himself was happy at the thought of doing what was right,
and of going home. The lady led him to a sunny glade in the wood,
covered with wild flowers, from which the bees were busy gathering their
honey, and she said, "Now, child, are you willing to do your father's
will?" "Oh, yes!" "Will you do it, whatever dangers may await you?"
"Yes!" "Well, then, I must tell you that your father has given me the
gold thread which you lost; and he bids me again tell you, with his warm
love, that if you keep hold of it, and follow it wherever it leads, you
are sure to come to him at sunset; but if you let it go, you may wander
on in this dark forest till you die, or are again taken prisoner by
robbers. Know, also, that there is no other possible way of saving you,
but by your following the gold thread." "I am resolved to do my duty,
come what may," said Eric. "May you be helped to do it!" said the lady.
She then gave him a cake, to support him in his journey. "And now,
child," she added, "one advice more I will give you, and it was given
you by your father, though you forgot it; it is this--if ever you feel
the thread slipping from your hands, or are yourself tempted to let it
go, pray immediately, and you will get wisdom and strength to find it,
to lay hold of it, and to follow it. Before we part, kneel down and ask
assistance to be good and obedient, brave and patient, until you meet
your father." The little boy knelt down and repeated the Lord's Prayer;
and as he said, "Thy will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven," he
felt calm and happy as he used to do when he knelt at his mother's knee,
and he thought her hand was waving over him, as if to bless him. When he
lifted up his head there was no one there but himself; but he saw an old
gray cross, and a GOLD THREAD was tied to it, and passed away, away,
shining through the woods.

With a firm hold of his gold thread, the boy began his journey home.
He passed along path-ways on which the brown leaves of last year's
growth were thickly strewn, and from among which flowers of every
colour were springing. He crossed little brooks that ran like silver
threads, and tinkled like silver bells. He passed under trees with
great trunks, and huge branches that swept down to the ground, and
waved far up in the blue sky. The birds hopped about him, and looked
down upon him from among the green leaves, and they sang him songs,
and some of them seemed to speak to him. He thought one large bird
like a crow cried, "Good boy! good boy!" and another whistled, "Cheer
up! cheer up!" and so he went merrily on, and very often he gave the
robins and blackbirds that came near him bits of his cake. After
awhile, he came to a green spot in the middle of the wood, without
trees, and a footpath went direct across it, to the place where the
gold thread was leading him, and there he saw a sight that made him
wonder and pause. It was a bird about the size of a pigeon, with
feathers like gold and a crown like silver, and it was slowly walking
near him, and he saw gold eggs glittering in a nest among the grass a
few yards off. Now, he thought, it would be such a nice thing to bring
home a nest with gold eggs! The bird did not seem afraid of him, but
stopped and looked at him with a calm blue eye, as if she said,
"Surely you would not rob me?" He could not, however, reach the nest
with his hand, and though he pulled and pulled the thread, it would
not yield one inch, but seemed as stiff as a wire. "I see the thread
quite plain," said the boy to himself, "and the very place where it
enters the dark wood on the other side. I will just leap to the nest,
and in a moment I shall have the eggs in my pocket, and then spring
back and catch the thread again. I cannot lose it here, with the sun
shining; and, besides, I see it a long way before me." So he took one
step to seize the eggs; but he was in such haste that he fell and
crushed the nest, breaking the eggs to pieces, and the little bird
screamed and flew away, and then suddenly the birds in the trees began
to fly about, and a large owl swept out of a dark glade, and cried,
"Whoo--whoo--whoo-oo-oo;" and a cloud came over the sun! Eric's heart
beat quick, and he made a grasp at his gold thread, but it was not
there! Another, and another grasp, but it was not there! and soon he saw
it waving far above his head, like a gossamer thread in the breeze. You
would have pitied him, while you could not have helped being angry with
him for having been so silly and disobedient when thus tried, had you
only seen his pale face, as he looked above him for his thread, and
about him for the road, but could see neither! And he became so confused
with his fall, that he did not know which side of the open glade he had
entered, nor to which point he was travelling. But at last he thought he
heard a bird chirping, "Seek--seek--seek!" and another repeating, "Try
again--try again--try--try!" and then he remembered what the lady had
said to him, and he fell on his knees and told all his grief, and cried,
"Oh, give me back my thread! and help me never, never, to let it go
again!" As he lifted up his eyes, he saw the thread come slowly, slowly
down; and when it came near, he sprang to it and caught it, and he did
not know whether to laugh, or cry, or sing, he was so thankful and
happy! "Ah!" said he, "I hope I shall never forget this fall!" That part
of the Lord's Prayer came into his mind which says, "Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil." "Who would have thought," said he
to himself, "that I was in any danger in such a beautiful, green, sunny
place as this, and so very early, too, in my journey! Oh! shame upon
me!" As he proceeded with much more thought and caution, a large crow up
a tree was hoarsely croaking, and seemed to say, "Beware, beware!"
"Thank you, Mr Crow," said the boy, "I shall;" and he threw him a bit of
bread for his good advice. But now the thread led him through the
strangest places. One was a very dark, deep ravine, with a stream that
roared and rushed far down, and overhead the rocks seemed to meet, and
thick bushes concealed the light, and nothing could Eric see but the
gold thread, that looked like a thread of fire, though even that grew
dim sometimes, until he could only feel it in his hand. And whither he
was going he knew not. At one time he seemed to be on the edge of a
precipice, until it seemed as if the next step _must_ lead him over, and
plunge him down; but when he came to the very edge, the thread led him
quite safely along it. At another, a rock which looked like a wall rose
before him, and he said to himself, "Well, I must be stopped here! I
shall never be able to climb up!" But just as he touched it, he found
steps cut in it, and up, up, the thread guided him to the top! Then it
would bring him down, down, until he once stood beside a raging stream,
and the water foamed and dashed. "Now," he thought, "I must be drowned;
but come what may, I will not let my thread go." And so it was, that
when he came so near the stream as to feel the spray upon his cheek, and
was sure that he must leap in if he followed his thread, what did he see
but a little bridge that passed from bank to bank, and by which he
crossed in perfect safety; until at last he began to lose fear, and to
believe more and more that he would always be in the right road, so
long as he did not trust mere appearances, but kept hold of his thread!




CHAPTER IV

THE GREAT LION--THE LITTLE SQUIRREL--AN OLD FRIEND--THE BLOODHOUND--THE
LAST TEMPTATION.


[Illustration]

But Eric had now to endure a great trial of his faith in the thread. As
he journeyed on, it led him up a winding path towards the summit of a
hill. The large trees of the forest were soon left behind, and small
stunted bushes grew among masses of gray rocks. The path was like the
bed of a dry brook, and was often very steep. There were no birds except
little stone-chats, that hopped and chirped among the large round
stones. Far below, he could see the tops of the trees, and here and
there a stream glittering under the sunbeams. Nothing disturbed the
silence but the hoarse croak of the raven, or the wild cry of a kite or
eagle, that, like a speck, wheeled far up in the sky. But suddenly, Eric
heard a roar like thunder coming from the direction towards which the
thread was leading him. He stopped for a moment, but the thread was firm
in his hand, and led right up the hill. On he went, and no wonder he
started, when, as he turned the corner of a rock, he heard another roar,
and saw the head of a huge lion looking out of what seemed to be a cave,
a few yards back from the edge of a dizzy precipice! He saw, too, that
the path he must follow was between the lion's den and the precipice.
What now was to be done? Should he give up his thread and fly? No! A
voice in his heart encouraged him to be brave and not fear, and he knew
from his experience that he had always been led in safety and peace when
he followed the road, holding fast to his thread. He was certain that
his father never would deceive him, or bid him do anything but what was
right; and he was sure, too, that the lady, from her love to him, and
her teaching him to trust God and to pray, would not have bid him do
anything that was wrong. And then an old verse his father taught him
came into his mind--

    "In the darkest night, my child,
     Canst thou see the Right, my child?
         Forward then! God is near!
     The Right will be light to thee,
     Armour and might to thee;
         Forward! and never fear!"

So Eric resolved to go on in faith. There was just one thing he saw
which cheered him, and that was a white hare, sitting with her ears
cocked, quite close to the lion's den, and he wondered how she had no
fear, but he could not explain it at the time. On he walked, but he
could hardly breathe, as the thread led still nearer and nearer to the
den. These big eyes were glaring on him, and seemed to draw him closer
and closer! There the lion stood, on one side of the path, while the
great precipice descended on the other. One step more, and he was
between these two dangers. He moved on until he was so near that he
seemed to feel the lion's breath, and then the brute sprang out on him,
and tried to strike him with his huge paw that would have crushed him to
the dust! Eric shut his eyes, and gave himself up for lost. But the lion
suddenly fell back, for he was held fast by a great iron chain, and so
Eric passed in safety!

[Illustration]

Oh, how thankful he was! and how gladly he ran down hill, the lion in
his den roaring behind him! Down he ran until all was quiet again. As he
pursued his journey in the beautiful green woods, something told him his
greatest trial was past. He felt very peaceful and strong. And now, as
he reached some noble old beech-trees, the thread fell on the grass, and
he took this as a sign that he should lie down too, and so he did,
grateful for the rest. He ate some of his cake, and drank from a clear
spring beside him, and feasted on wild strawberries which grew in
abundance all round him. He then stretched himself on his back among
soft moss, and looked up through the branches of the gigantic tree, and
saw with delight the sunlight speckling the emerald green leaves and
brown bark with touches of silver, and, far up, the deep blue sky with
white clouds reposing on it, like snowy islands on a blue ocean; and he
watched the squirrels, with their bushy tails, as they ran up the tree,
and jumped from branch to branch, and sported among the leaves, until he
fell into a sort of pleasant day-dream, and felt so happy, he hardly
knew why. As he lay here, he thought he heard, in his half-waking dream,
a little squirrel sing a song. Was it not his own heart, now so glad
because doing what was right, which was singing? This was the song which
he thought he heard:--

     "I'm a merry, merry squirrel,
      All day I leap and whirl,
    Through my home in the old beech-tree;
      If you chase me, I will run
      In the shade and in the sun,
    But you never, never can catch me!
      For round a bough I'll creep,
        Playing hide-and-seek so sly,
      Or through the leaves bo-peep,
        With my little shining eye.
          Ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha!

     "Up and down I run and frisk,
      With my bushy tail to whisk
    All who mope in the old beech-trees;
      How droll to see the owl,
      As I make him wink and scowl,
    When his sleepy, sleepy head I tease!
      And I waken up the bat,
        Who flies off with a scream,
      For he thinks that I'm the cat
        Pouncing on him in his dream.
          Ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha!

     "Through all the summer long
      I never want a song,
    From my birds in the old beech-trees;
      I have singers all the night,
      And, with the morning bright,
    Come my busy humming fat brown bees.
      When I've nothing else to do,
        With the nursing birds I sit,
      And we laugh at the cuckoo
        A-cuckooing to her tit!
          Ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha!

     "When winter comes with snow,
      And its cruel tempests blow
    All the leaves from my old beech-trees;
      Then beside the wren and mouse
      I furnish up a house,
    Where like a prince I live at my ease!
      What care I for hail or sleet,
        With my hairy cap and coat;
      And my tail across my feet,
        Or wrapp'd about my throat!
          Ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha! ha, ha, ha!"

As Eric opened his eyes, and looked up, he saw a little squirrel with
its tail curling up its back, sitting on a branch looking down upon him;
and then it playfully ran away with the tail down and waving after it.
"Farewell, happy little fellow!" said Eric; "I must do my work now, and
play like you afterwards;" for at that moment the thread again became
tight, and Eric, refreshed with his rest, and hearty for his journey,
stepped out bravely. He saw, at some distance, and beyond an open glade
in the forest, a rapid river towards which he was descending. When near
the river, he perceived something struggling in the water, and then
heard a loud cry or scream for help, as if from one drowning. He was
almost tempted to run off to his assistance without his thread, but he
felt thankful that the thread itself led in the very direction from
whence he heard the cries coming. So off he ran as fast as he could, and
as he came to the brink of a deep, dark pool in the river, he saw the
head of a boy rising above the water, as the poor little fellow tried to
keep himself afloat. Now he sank--again he rose--until he suddenly
disappeared. Eric laid hold of his thread with a firm hand, and leaped
in over head and ears, and then rose to the surface, and with his other
hand swam to where the boy had sank. He soon caught him, and brought him
with great difficulty to the surface, which he never could have done
unless the thread had supported them both above the water.

"Eric!" cried the gasping boy, opening his eyes, almost covered by his
long, wet hair. "Wolf!" cried Eric, "is it you?" It was indeed poor
Wolf, who lay panting on the dry land, with his rough garments dripping
with water, and himself hardly able to move. "Oh, tell me, Wolf, what
brought you here! I am so glad to have helped you!" After a little time,
when Wolf could speak, he told him in his own way, bit by bit, how Ralph
had suspected him; and how the old woman had heard him speaking as she
was looking out of an upper window; and how when Ralph asked the gold
belt he could not give it; and how he was obliged himself to fly; and
how he had been running for his life for hours. "Now let us fly," said
Wolf; "I am quite strong again. I fear that they are in pursuit of us."

They both went on at a quick pace, Eric having shewn Wolf the
wonderful thread, and explained to him how he must never part with it,
come what may, and having also given him a bit of his cake to comfort
him. "O rub-a-dub, dub!" said Wolf, squeezing the water out of his
hair, as he trotted along; "I am glad to be away. Ralph would have
killed me like a pig. The voice told me to run after you." So on they
went together, happy again to meet. Suddenly Wolf stopped, and
listening with anxious face, he said, "Hark! did you hear anything?"
"No," said Eric, "what was it?" "Hush!--listen!--there again--I hear
it!" "I think I do hear something far off like a dog's bark," replied
Eric. "Hark!" So they both stopped and listened, and far away they
heard a deep "Bow-wow-wow-wow-o-o-o-o-o" echoing through the forest.
"Let us run as fast as we can," said the boy, in evident fear; "hear
him!--hear him!" "Bow-wow-wow-o-o-o-o," and the sound came nearer and
nearer. "What is it? why are you so afraid?" inquired Eric. "Oh! that
is Ralph's bloodhound, Tuscar," cried Wolf, "and he is following us.
He won't perhaps touch me, but you he may." So Eric ran as fast as he
could, but never let go the gold thread, which this time led towards a
steep hill, which they were obliged to scramble up. "Run,
Eric!--quick--hide--up a tree--anywhere!" "I cannot, I dare not," said
Eric; "whatever happens, I must hold fast my thread." But they heard
the "Bow-wow-o-o-o" coming nearer and nearer, and as they looked back
they saw the large hound rush out of the wood, and as he came to the
water, catching sight of the boys on the opposite hill, he leaped in,
and in a few minutes would be near them. And now he came bellowing
like a fierce bull up the hill, his tongue hanging out, and his nose
tracking along the ground, as he followed their footsteps. "I shall
run and meet him," said Wolf, "and stop him if I can;" and down ran
the swineherd, calling, "Tuscar! Tuscar! good dog, Tuscar!" Tuscar
knew Wolf, and passed him, but ran up to Eric. As he reached Eric, who
stood calm and firm, the bloodhound stopped, panting, smelling his
clothes all round, but, strange to say, wagging his huge tail! He then
ran back the way he had come, as if he had made a mistake, and all his
race was for nothing! How was this? Ah, poor Tuscar remembered the
supper Eric had given him, and was grateful for his kindness!

[Illustration]

Wolf was astonished at Eric's escape, until he heard how he and Tuscar
had become acquainted; and then Wolf heard the voice in his heart say
that there was nothing better than kindness and love shewn to man or
beast. They both after this pursued their journey with light and hopeful
hearts, for they had got out of what was called the wild robber country,
and Eric knew that he was drawing near home. The thread was stronger
than ever, and every hour it helped more and more to support him. Wolf
trotted along with his short stick, and sometimes snorting and blowing
with the fatigue like one of his own pigs. They talked as best they
could about all they had seen. "Did you see big Thorold the lion?" asked
Wolf. "I did," said Eric; "he is very awful, but he was chained." "Lucky
for you!" said Wolf, "for Ralph hunts with him and kills travellers. He
will obey none but Ralph. I heard him roaring. He is hungry. He once ate
one of my pigs, and would have ate me if he had not first caught the
poor black porker. I escaped up a tree." And thus they chatted, as they
journeyed on through woods, and across green plains, and over low hills,
until Wolf complained of hunger. Eric at once gave him what remained
of his large cake; but it did not suffice to appease the hunger of the
herd, who was, however, very thankful for what he got. To their delight
they now saw a beautiful cottage not far from their path, and, as they
approached it, an old woman, with a pretty girl who seemed to be her
daughter, came out to meet them. "Good day, young gentlemen!" said the
old woman with a kind smile and a courtesy; "you seem to be on your
travels, and look wearied? Pray come into my cottage, and I shall
refresh you." "What fortunate fellows we are!" said Wolf. "We are much
obliged to you for your hospitality," replied Eric. But, alas! the
thread drew him in an opposite direction; so turning to Wolf, he said,
"I cannot go in." "Come, my handsome young gentleman," said the young
woman, "and we shall make you so happy. You shall have such a dinner as
will delight you, I am sure; and you may remain as long as you please,
and I will dance and sing to you; nor need you pay anything." And she
came forward smiling and dancing, offering her arm to Eric. "Surely you
won't be so rude as refuse me! you are so beautiful, and have such
lovely hair and eyes, and I never saw such a belt as you wear: do come!"
"Come, my son," said the old woman to Wolf, as she put her hand round
his neck. "With all my heart!" replied Wolf; "for, to tell the truth, I
am wearied and hungry; one does not get such offers as yours every day."
"I cannot go," again said Eric. _They_ could not see the thread, for to
some it was invisible; but _he_ saw it, and felt it like a wire passing
away from the cottage. "Who are you, kind friends?" inquired Eric.
"Friends of the king and of his family. Honest subjects, good people,"
said the old woman. "Do you know Prince Eric?" asked Wolf. "Right well!"
replied the young woman. "He is a great friend of mine; a fine, tall,
comely youth. He calls me his own little sweetheart." "It is false!"
said Eric; "you do not know him. You should not lie." But he did not
tell her who he was, neither did Wolf, for Eric had made a sign to him
to be silent. "I won't enter your dwelling," said Eric, "for my duty
calls me away." They both gave a loud laugh, and said, "Hear him! Only
hear a fine young fellow talking about duty! Pleasure, ease, and liberty
are for the young. We only want to make you happy: come!" "I shall go
with you," said Wolf; "do come, Eric." "Wolf, speak to me," whispered
Eric to the swineherd. "You know _I_ cannot go, for my duty tells me to
follow the thread. But now I see that this is the house of the wicked,
for you heard how they lied; they neither know the king nor his
children; and they laugh too at duty. Be advised, Wolf, and follow me."
Wolf hesitated, and looked displeased. "Only for an hour, Eric!" "Not a
minute. Wolf. If you trust them more than me, go; but I am sure you and
I shall never meet again." "Then I will trust you, Eric," said Wolf;
"the voice in my heart tells me to do so." And so they both passed on.
But the old woman and the girl began to abuse them, and call them all
manner of evil names, and to laugh at them as silly fellows. The girl
threw stones at them, which made Wolf turn round and flourish his stick
over his head. At last they entered the cottage, the old woman shaking
her fist, and calling out from the door, "I'll soon send my friend Ralph
after you!" "Oh, ho! is that the way the wind blows!" exclaimed Wolf,
with a whistle; and, grasping Eric's arm, said, "You were right, prince!
I never suspected them. I see now they are bad." "I saw that before,"
replied Eric, "and knew that no good would come to us from making their
acquaintance." "Were they not cunning?" "Yes; but, probably, with all
their smiles, flattery, and fair promises, they would have proved more
cruel in the end than either Ralph or old Thorold." "What would they
have done to us? Why did they meet us? Who are they, think you?" "I
don't know, Wolf; it was enough for me that they lied, and did not wish
us to do what was right. The gold thread given me by my father never
could have led me into the society and house of the wicked. I am glad we
held it fast."




CHAPTER V.

THE GREEN ISLAND OF THE LAKE, AND THE RETURN HOME.


[Illustration]

Not long after this strange adventure, they reached a rising ground,
from which a magnificent view burst upon them. Below, there was a large
lake, surrounded by wooded hills, above which rose noble rocks fringed
with stately pines, and higher ranges of mountains beyond, some of whose
summits were covered with snow that glittered like purest alabaster in
the azure blue of the sky. Eric gave a cry of joy; for he saw the house
of one of his father's foresters, which he had once visited with his
father. "Wolf! Wolf!" he exclaimed, "look yonder, that is the house of
Darkeye, the forester. We are safe!" and the thread was leading straight
down in the very direction which they wished. Darkeye's house was built
on a small green island in the lake. The island was like a little fort,
for on every side the rocks descended like a wall. It could only be
approached by a boat, which Darkeye kept on the island, and then by a
narrow stair cut out of the rock at the landing-place. No robbers could
thus get near it, and Darkeye was there to give shelter to travellers,
and to help any of the poor who had to pass that way. The thread led
down to the shore. They forgot their fatigue, and ran down till they
reached the ferry. "Boat, ahoy!" shouted Eric. By and by two boys were
seen running out of the cottage, and after looking cautiously at those
who were calling for the boat, they rowed off, and soon were at the
shore, where stood Eric with his gold belt, and Wolf in his rough skins.
"Olaf! Torquil! don't you remember me?" asked Eric, looking at his old
friends. The boys looked astonished as they recognised the young prince,
and received him joyfully into their boat, he holding by the thread,
which seemed to cross the ferry towards the cottage. How many questions
were mutually put and answered in a few minutes! They told him their
father was at home; and how he had lately seen the king; and how the
king was anxiously looking for Eric's return; and how glad all on the
island would be to see him; and the younger boy, Torquil, told him how
they had now a tame otter, that fished in the lake, and a fine golden
eagle which they had got young in her nest, that also lived on the
island with them; and how their mother had got another baby since he had
been there, and how happy they all were, and so on, until they arrived
at the island, and there was old Darkeye himself waiting to receive
them; and when he saw who was in the boat, he ran down the stone steps
and grasped the young prince's hand, and drew him to his heart.
"Welcome! welcome!" said he; "I knew you had been in the forest, but
your father would not tell me anything more about you. He only said that
he longed for your coming home. But who is this?" asked Darkeye,
pointing to Wolf. "A friend of mine," said Eric, with a smile. "My name
is Wolf," grunted the swineherd. "I think I have seen him before. But
no! What? Yes!" said Darkeye, examining him; then added, as if he had
discovered some old acquaintance, "Surely I _have_ seen him. Tell me, my
fine fellow, did you"---- It was evident Darkeye had seen Wolf killing
his game, or in some affray with the robbers. Wolf looked sternly at
Darkeye, then at Eric, but said nothing. "Oh, Darkeye, do not trouble
poor Wolf," said Eric, "but let him go into the cottage; and come you
with me, as I wish to tell you all that has happened to me during these
few days." So, while the boys took Wolf to the cottage, and food was
being prepared, Eric told Darkeye all his adventures; and you would
have been sure that the forester was hearing something which surprised
and interested him wonderfully, had you seen his face, and how he
sometimes laughed, or knit his brows and looked angry, or sad and
solemn, or sprung to his feet from the rock on which he was sitting
beside Eric. When Eric came to speak about the old woman and her
daughter, "Ah!" said Darkeye, "there are not worse people in that wicked
country! They say that the old woman is a witch of some kind. But
whether she poisons travellers or drowns them, I know not. No doubt she
is in league with Ralph the robber, and would have robbed you or kept
you fast in some way or other till you were handed over to him. You were
right, my prince, in all you did. The only way of being delivered from
temptation is to be brave, and do what is right, come what may." Then,
grasping Eric by the hand, he led him back to the cottage. There
Darkeye's wife received him like a mother, and all the children gathered
round him in surprise and admiration, he looked so brave and lovely.

[Illustration]

One of the walls of the cottage was reared on the edge of the rock, so
that it seemed a continuation of it, and to rise up from the deep waters
of the lake. The boys were thus able often to fish with a long line out
of the window. A winding-stair led to a look-out on the roof, from which
the whole island, called "The Green Island of the Lake," could be seen.
It was about a mile or more in circumference, and was dotted all over
with the cottages of the other foresters and king's huntsmen, each
surrounded with clumps of trees, through which the curling smoke from
the chimneys might be seen ascending. There were everywhere
beautifully-kept gardens, with fruits, and flowers, and bee-hives; and
fields, too, with their crops. On the green knolls and in the little
valleys might be seen cows and sheep; while flocks of goats browsed
among ivy-covered rocks. In the middle of the island was a little
shallow lake, beside which the otter had his house among the rocks; and
there the eagle also lived. All the children in the island were the
best of friends, and they played together, and sailed their boats on the
little lake, and every day met in the house of one of the foresters to
learn their lessons; and on Sunday, as they were very far away from any
church, old Darkeye used to read the Good Book to them, and worship with
them, and did all he could to make them love God and one another. There
was also in the island a house, where, by the king's orders, all poor
travellers could find refuge and refreshment. And it was a great
pleasure to the boys and girls to visit them; and if they were sick and
confined to bed, to attend to their wants. If the stranger had any
children, the young islanders always shared their sports with them. And
nothing pleased these stranger children more than to get leave to sail a
boat, or to have the loan of a fishing-rod, or to hear the boys call
Oscar, for that was the name of the otter, out of his den, and to play
with Tor the eagle; or to see them feed Oscar with some of the fish they
had caught, and Tor with a bit of meat. The dogs were so friendly, too,
that they never touched Oscar, but would swim about in the same pool
with him. And so all were happy in the Green Island; because Darkeye had
taught them what a wicked thing selfishness was, and that the only way
to be happy was by thinking about others as well as themselves, and by
becoming like Him, the Elder Brother of us all, who "pleased not
Himself." He also used to say: "Now, when you work, work like men, and
when you play, play like boys: be hearty at both." And so, while there
was no idleness, there was abundance of recreation. Another evil was
never permitted on the island, and that was, disobedience to parents, or
want of respect to the old. But, indeed, punishment for these offences
was seldom needed. The young learned to _like_ to do what was right, and
were too brave and manly to give pain and trouble to others, by forcing
them to find fault or to punish. I should have mentioned, also, that
they had a little band of musicians. One beat the drum, a few played the
fife, and others some simple instrument; while almost all could sing
tolerably well in parts. Thus, many a traveller would pause and listen
with delight, as he heard, on a summer's evening, the chorus sung from
many voices, or the music from the band coming from the island. "Young
people," Darkeye used to say, "have much wealth and happiness given
them, for themselves and others, if they only used their gifts."

But I am forgetting Eric and Wolf. They were both, you may be sure,
ready for their dinner, and there was laid for them on a table, cream,
cakes, and fresh trout, and such other good things as the kind woman
could get ready.

But now the thread began to move, as if it wished Eric to move also.
Before rising to depart, he told Wolf how Darkeye, for his sake, would
be so glad to take care of him, until he got his father's permission to
bring him into the castle; that he would learn to be a huntsman, and be
taught what was good, and to know about the Voice that spoke in his
heart; and that all the boys in the island would make him their friend
if he did what was right. "Ralph will come here!" said Wolf, hanging his
head. "I wish the rascal did," said Darkeye, "for he would never go
back. But he cannot enter my fort, and knows me and my huntsmen too well
ever to try it. I have had more than one brush with the villain, and we
hope soon to drive him and his brood from their bloody nest. Wolf, you
are welcome and safe, for Eric's sake!" Then turning to Eric, he said,
"I shall teach him, and make a man of him, my young prince, depend upon
it. And now, before we part, I have to ask a favour," continued Darkeye.
"You know our custom near evening? If the thread permits, remain, and be
one of us." "I remember it," said Eric, "and will remain and be one of
you, and let poor Wolf also be one." And so they entered the cottage,
and all sat down round an open window which looked out upon the
beautiful lake with its wooded islands, and surrounded by the noble
forest, above which rose the giant peaks and precipices. The water was
calm as glass, and reflected every brilliant colour from rock and tree,
and, most of all, from the golden clouds, which already began to gather
in the west. Darkeye read from the Good Book of one who had left his
father's house, and went to a far country, where he would fain have
satisfied his hunger from the husks which the swine did eat, and could
not, but who at last returned home after having suffered from his
disobedience. When he closed the book, all stood up and sung these words
with sweet and happy voices:--

    "Father! from Thy throne above,
       Bless our lowly home below!
     Jesus, Shepherd! in Thy love,
       Guard Thy flock from every foe.

    "Thine we are! for Thou hast made us;
       Thine, for we're redeem'd by Thee;
     Thine, for Thou hast ever led us,
       Thine, we evermore shall be!

    "May we love Thee, may we fear Thee,
       May Thy will, not ours, be done,
     Never leave us till we're near Thee
       In the Home where all are one!"

Then they knelt down, and Darkeye spoke to God in name of them all,
thanking Him for His goodness, and telling Him their wants. When they
rose from their knees, the gold thread shone brilliantly, and, like a
beam of light, passed out at the door in the direction of the ferry.
During the singing of the verses, Wolf seemed for the first time quite
overcome. He bent his head, and covered his face with his hands. He then
said, in a low voice, when the short service was over, and as if
speaking to himself, while all were silent listening to him, "I had a
dream. Long, long ago. A carriage--a lady. She was on her knees, with
her hands clasped, and speaking to the sky. She had hold of me. Ralph
was there and the robbers. I forget the rest." He rose and looked out of
the window, gazing vacantly. "What can he mean?" asked Eric aside to
Darkeye, who was looking tenderly on Wolf. "Ah! who knows, poor boy!
Singing always touches the heart of these wanderers. Perhaps--yes--it
may be," he said, so that Eric alone could hear him, "that he has been
taken when a child by Ralph from some rich traveller, and perhaps his
mother was killed! He may have been the child of good people. Was that
person his mother who, he says, prayed for him? If so, her prayers are
now answered, for her boy will be delivered,--poor Wolf! Wolf, my boy,"
said Darkeye, "come and bid farewell to your friend." Wolf started as
from a dream, and came to Eric. "Farewell, my kind Wolf, and I hope to
see you some day in my father's house." The herd spoke not a word, but
wiped his eyes with the back of his rough hand. "Cheer up, Wolf, for you
will be good and happy here." "Wolf is happy already, and he will take
care of the pigs, or do anything for you all." He then held out his
stick to Eric, and said, "Take it; keep it for my sake; it is all Wolf
has to give; Ralph has the gold coin." "Thank you, good Wolf; but you
will require it, and I need nothing to remember you." "Don't be angry,
Eric, for what I did to you in the forest when we first met. My heart is
sorry." "We did not know one another then, Wolf, and I shall never
forget that it is to you I owe my escape." "Wolf loves you, and every
one here." "I am sure you do, Wolf, and I love you. God bless you, Wolf,
I must go; farewell!" And thus they parted. But all gathered round Eric,
and accompanied him to the boat, blessing the little prince, and wishing
him a peaceful and happy journey. Eric thanked them with many smiles and
tender words. Darkeye alone went with him into the boat, wondering
greatly at the thread, and most of all at the prince, who shone with a
beauty that seemed not of this world. The prince landed, but Darkeye
knew, for many reasons, that he could not accompany him in his journey,
which he must take alone. Eric embraced Darkeye, and waving his hand to
all on the island, he was soon lost to their sight in the great forest.

[Illustration]

A winding pathway, over the ridge of hills, led down to a broad and
rapid but smooth river, and on its banks was a royal boat, splendid and
rich to look upon. She was white as snow, with a purple seat at the end
covered by a canopy, that gleamed with golden tassels and many gems.
The thread led into the boat, and though no one was there, Eric entered,
and sat on a purple cushion, on which the Gold Thread also laid itself
down. No sooner had he gone on board of the boat, than--as if his little
foot, when it touched her, had sent her from the shore--she slowly moved
into the centre of the channel, and was carried downwards by the
current. On she swept on the bosom of that clear stream, between shores
adorned with all that could delight the eye--rocks and trees and
flowers, with here and there foaming waterfalls, from mountain rivulets
which poured themselves into the great river. The woods were full of
song, and birds with splendid plumage flashed amidst the foliage like
rainbow hues amidst the clouds. Eric knew not whither he was being
carried, but his heart was sunshine and peace. On and on he swept with
the winding stream, until at last, darting under a dark archway of rock,
and then emerging into light, the boat grounded on a shore of pure white
sand, while the thread rose and led him to the land. No sooner had he
stepped on shore and ascended the green bank, than he found himself at
the end of a long broad avenue of splendid old trees, whose tops met
overhead. The far-off end of the avenue was closed by a great marble
staircase, which ascended to a magnificent castle. Wall rose above wall,
and tower over tower. He saw grand flights of stairs, leading from one
stately terrace to another, with marble statues, clear gushing
fountains, and flower-gardens, and every kind of lovely tree. It was his
father's castle at last! He ran on with breathless anxiety and joy. He
soon reached a large gate, that seemed to be covered with glittering
gold. As he looked at it, he saw the thread tied to a golden knocker
upon it, shaped like the old cross in the forest. Inscribed over the
gate were the words, "He that persevereth to the end shall be saved." He
seized the knocker, and the moment it fell, the thread broke and
vanished like a flash of light. A crash of music was then heard. The
door opened, and there, in the midst of a court paved with marble of
purest white, and on a golden throne, sat Eric's father, surrounded by
his brothers and sisters. The beautiful lady was there too, and many,
many more to welcome Eric. His father clasped him to his heart, and
said, "My son was lost, but is found!" While all crowded round Eric to
bid him welcome, with his weary feet and torn dress, kept together by
the golden band, a chorus was heard singing,--

    "Home where the weary rest,
     Home where the good are blest,
       Home of the soul;
     Glorious the race when run,
     Glorious the prize when won,
       Glorious the goal!"

Then there rose a swell of many young voices singing,--

    "Oh, be joyful, be joyful, let every voice sing!
     Welcome, brothers, our brother, the son of the king;
     His wanderings are past, to his father he's come;
     Little Eric, our darling, we welcome thee home!

    "Oh, bless'd is the true one who follows the road,
     Holding fast to his GOLD THREAD OF DUTY TO GOD,
     Who, when tempted, is firm, who in danger is brave,
     Who, forgetting himself, will a lost brother save.
     Then be joyful, be joyful, for Eric is come;
     Little Eric, our darling, we welcome thee home!"

And then the sun set, and the earth was dark, but the palace of the king
shone like an aurora in the wintry sky.


_The End._

_Printed by Dalziel Brothers, Camden Press_






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLD THREAD: A STORY FOR THE YOUNG ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

