Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









[Transcriber's Notes:

_About this book._ Although the title indicates that the Chronicle
begins in 1089, it actually begins in 1189 with the reign of Richard
I, and ends in 1483 with the death of Edward IV. It is based on two
manuscripts, now in the British Library, written by anonymous scribes
in the 15th Century. It recounts events not only in the City of
London--such as the elections of Mayors and Sheriffs--but also in the
British Isles and France, covering battles, coronations, births and
deaths of prominent people, tempests, earthquakes, plagues, and other
noteworthy occurrences.

The Chronicle was first published in 1827, in a limited edition of 250
copies, with copious notes and an extensive section of illustrative
documents. Although the editors of the 1827 edition are not named, the
British Library catalogue identifies them as Sir Nicholas Harris
Nicolas, G.C.M.G., and Edward Tyrrell (whose signature appears at the
end of the dedication).

This e-book was prepared from a 1995 reprint of the 1827 edition,
published by Llanerch Publishers, and from images of the 1827 edition
at the Internet Archive, www.archive.org.

_Orthography._ The Chronicle section is written in 15th-Century
English. The original spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and
hyphenation have been preserved in this e-book.

Numbers and dates in lowercase Roman numerals often end in a "j,"
signifying "i."

Superscripted letters are represented in curly brackets preceded by a
carat, e.g., A^{o}.

A crossed double-L is represented as [-ll-], and a tailed Z as [z/].

Blank spaces in the text are represented by long dashes (----).

_Formatting._ The Chronicle section of the original utilizes unique
page headers indicating the name of the monarch and the years covered
on that page, e.g., REX HENRICUS T'CIUS [1238-1242]. These have been
retained in this e-book and inserted in the appropriate chronological
place.

The original contains numerous sidenotes. In the Chronicle section,
sidenotes marked with an asterisk were added by the editors and are
here treated as footnotes. Otherwise, sidenotes are marked as such and
have been moved above the paragraph to which they refer. Where a
paragraph is very long, as in the documents at the end of the Notes
section, the sidenotes have been placed above the lines to which they
refer.]




A

Chronicle of London,

FROM 1089 TO 1483;

WRITTEN IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY,

AND FOR THE FIRST TIME PRINTED

FROM MSS. IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM:

TO WHICH ARE ADDED

Numerous Contemporary Illustrations,

CONSISTING OF ROYAL LETTERS, POEMS, AND OTHER ARTICLES DESCRIPTIVE OF
PUBLIC EVENTS, OR OF THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE METROPOLIS.


LONDON:

PRINTED FOR
LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN, PATERNOSTER-ROW;
AND HENRY BUTTERWORTH, No. 7, FLEET STREET.

M.DCCC.XXVII.

[ONLY TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY COPIES PRINTED.]

RICHARD TAYLOR, PRINTER,
SHOE-LANE.

[Illustration: ALERE FLAMMAM.]




[Illustration: Fac-simile of a page of the Chronicle of London in the
Harleian M.S. 565, fol. 37.

_J. Shuttleworth & Co. Lithog^{rs}. 28 Poultry._]




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORD MAYOR, ALDERMEN, AND COMMON COUNCIL
OF THE CITY OF LONDON.


This Volume presents to your notice an early Chronicle of the great
Metropolis over which you preside.

The rising taste for literature, and particularly that part of it
relating to the History of your ancient City, which has lately been
evinced by you in the formation of a Library, as well as in the
private Collections made by several of your members on the same
subject, renders it probable that the publication of this Chronicle,
which has never before been printed, may not be deemed unacceptable.

Amongst the "Illustrations" will be found some interesting and
important documents taken from the Archives of your Corporation;--they
give a faint idea of the valuable historical information contained in
your Records; and it may be hoped that these specimens will induce you
to follow the example set by the Great Council of the Nation in
printing the Parliamentary Records, and that at no very distant period
measures may be taken for the publication of such of the documents in
your possession as will illustrate the History of England, and of the
City of London.

[Illustration: [signature] E^{d.} Tyrrell.]

London, February 1827.




PREFACE.


The present period is so distinguished for historical research, that
the publication of an English Chronicle, written in the fifteenth
century, will not it is presumed require any other prefatory remarks
to recommend it to attention, than a brief account of the MSS. from
which it has been transcribed. Two copies are extant in the British
Museum; the one in the Harleian MS. 565, the other in the Cottonian
MS. Julius B. I. and the material variations between them are either
alluded to, or inserted in the Notes. The copy in the Harleian MS.
ends with the 22nd year of the reign of Henry the Sixth, Anno 1442,
about which time the volume was evidently written: but the other
transcript, which is in a much later hand, is continued to the death
of Edward the Fourth, Anno 1483, though after the accession of that
monarch the narrative is barren and unsatisfactory. It may therefore
be inferred that the original compiler did not survive the death of
Henry the Sixth, and that the continuation was by another person. With
the events of that period the writer is consequently to be deemed
contemporary; and all which he relates of the reigns of Henry the
Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth, are peculiarly deserving of notice; for some
curious facts are mentioned, many of which have never, it is
believed, been so fully detailed, even if they were previously known;
whilst of earlier times his statements are as worthy of credit as
those of other Chroniclers who did not live in the ages of which they
respectively treat.

This volume is called "A CHRONICLE OF LONDON" in the title-page, from
the author having so particularly confined himself to the Metropolis;
and still more, because he has, like his successor Fabian, commenced
each year with the election of the Lord Mayors and Sheriffs of London,
whose names are uniformly recorded, but unfortunately no clue exists
by which the name of the writer can be ascertained.

To the history of England however, no less than to that of London,
this Chronicle will, it is confidently expected, be considered a
valuable addition; and the laudable avidity evinced by the
Corporation, under whose patronage it appears, as well as by numerous
natives of the metropolis, to possess every work relating to its early
history, justifies the hope that by them at least it will be
favourably received.

Towards the end of the volume the following ILLUSTRATIONS are
introduced, the most important of which have, with the obliging
permission of Henry Woodthorpe, Esq. the Town Clerk, been copied from
the invaluable muniments in the City Archives.

     A curious Latin Poem on the dispute between King Edward the
     First and the King of France, relative to some lands in
     Gascony in 1295. From the MS. in the Town Clerk's Office,
     marked Liber Custumarium.

     A fragment of a French Poem on the treacherous conduct of
     Sir Thomas Turbeville, in 1296. From the Cottonian MS.
     Caligula A. XVIII.

     A Letter from King Edward the Third to Edward Prince of
     Wales, giving an account of the Battle of Scluyse, dated
     28th June, 14 Edward III. 1340. From the MS. in the Town
     Clerk's Office, marked Letter _F_.

     A Letter from Edward the Black Prince to the Mayor,
     Aldermen, and Commonalty of London, dated 22nd of October
     1356, detailing the proceedings of the English Army under
     his command, and informing them of the BATTLE OF POICTIERS.
     From the MS. in the Town Clerk's Office, marked Letter _G_.

     A Letter from a Priest, named Robert Prite, to some
     Nobleman, dated 8th of December 1356; in which he speaks of
     the Battle of Poictiers, and relates other news of the
     times. From the original in the Cottonian MS. Caligula D.
     III.

     A Declaration of Bernard Du Troy, a Gascon gentleman, made
     on his death-bed, 1st of July 1361, that he was the
     individual who took John King of France prisoner at the
     Battle of Poictiers. Also from the Cotton MS. Caligula D.
     III.

     A Proclamation of Richard II., dated at Chelmsford on the
     5th of July 1381, to the Earl of Warwick and others, denying
     that Wat Tyler and his followers were supported by his
     authority; and commanding them to use all possible means for
     the preservation of the peace in Warwickshire, and the
     places under their jurisdiction. Also from the Cottonian MS.
     Caligula D. III.

     A Poem, by Lydgate, describing the Expedition of Henry the
     Fifth into France, the Battle of Agincourt, and the
     magnificent Pageant prepared by the City of London, in
     honour of his return to the Metropolis. From the Harleian
     MS. 565.

     Another Poem, by Lydgate, describing the Pageant and
     Reception of Henry the Sixth into London on the 21st of
     February 1431, after his coronation as King of France. Also
     from the Harleian MS. 565.

     Two copies of a Poem on the reconciliation of the Lords of
     the Yorkist faction with King Henry the Sixth and his
     adherents; the one from the Cottonian MS. Nero A. VI., and
     the other from the Cottonian MS. Vespasianus B. XVI.

     A Ballad sent by a Pursuivant to the Sheriffs of London and
     their Brethren on May Day at Bishop's Wood, at an honorable
     dinner; each of them bringing his dish: by John Lydgate.
     From Ashmole's MS. No. 6943.

     Two copies of a Ballad, also by Lydgate, entitled "London
     Lickpenny;" the one from the Harleian MS. 542, and the other
     from the Harleian MS. 367.

     A short Ballad, also by Lydgate, upon the Emptiness of his
     Purse. From the Harleian MS. 2255.

     Another Ballad, by Lydgate, in ridicule of the Forked
     Head-dresses of Females. From the Harleian MS. 2255.

     A Ballad on Fraudulent Millers and Bakers; likewise by
     Lydgate. From the same MS.

The whole of these articles were written at the periods to which they
relate, and the greater part of them are for the first time printed;
whilst the few that have been before published, are inserted either
because more correct copies have been discovered, or because they are
so intimately connected with some of the others that they could not
with propriety be omitted.

Most of the pieces enumerated have escaped the notice of Historians;
and as they tend in an important degree to illustrate the Manners and
Customs of the Metropolis, their appearance in this volume cannot
fail, it is hoped, to be acceptable to those who are interested in the
early History of London or of this Kingdom.

February 1827.




WILL' CON'TOR. WILL' RUFFUS. HEN. PR. STEPHAN. HEN. SECUNDUS. RIC.
JOHN. HENRICUS. EDWARD TRES. RIC. HEN. IIIJ^{tus}.


NOMI'A CUSTODU' LONDON' TEMPORE REG' RIC'I PRIMI, QUI CORONATUS FUIT
APUD WESTM' TERCIO DIE SEPTEMBR' ANNO D'NI MILL'O C^{mo} lxxxix.

TEMPORE REG' RICI' PRIMI. [1189-1195.]

[Sidenote: Destruccione of the Jewes.]

[Sidenote: Will'm' rex Scotie fecit homagiu'.]

The same day that the king was crowned and the nyght folwynge alle the
Jewes that myghte be founden weren for the moste partie slayne and
brent. And in this yere began the ordre of seynt Tonyes in Pruce. In
that yere in the monthe of Decembre cam kyng William of Scotlande to
Caunterbury and dede homage to kyng Richard.

Custodes.--Herry Cornhill.         Anno primo.
           Richard Fitz Reyvery.

This same yere the emperor Frederyk with an huge ooste wente to
Jerusalem.

Custodes.--John Herlyonn.   Anno secundo.
           Roger le Duke.

This yere the emperor Frederyk deyde in his goynge to Jerusalem; and
in this yere began the orde of oure lady in Pruce, that is to sey in
the yere of oure lord a m^{l}'clxxxx.

Custodes.--William Hav'hille.   Anno tercio.
           John Buknote.

[Sidenote: The popes legat put oute al the monkes of the p'orye of
Coventry and put yn seculer chanons.]

This yere the kyng with many lordes of Engelond wente over the see in
to the holy land and toke the strong citee of Acres and killed manye
Sarasygnes. And in this yere Hugo Nonant bysshopp of Coventre and
Lychefelde, thanne beynge the popes legat, putte out alle the monkes
of the priorye of Coventre and putte in seculere chanons.

Custodes.--Nicholl Doket.   [Anno quarto.]
           Pers Newelyne.

This yere the kyng toke the Ile of Cipre; and the prynce of the same
ile he lete folowe hym in sylver cheynes.

Custodes.--Roger Duke.                Anno v^{to}.
           Ric' the sone of Aleyne.

           William Fitz Isabell.      Anno vj^{to}.
           William Fitz Arnulf.

[Sidenote: Kyng Richard was taken p'son' and raunsoned at an c m'
li'.]

This yere the kyng comynge homward fro the holy lond was taken of the
duke of Ostrich and brought to the emperor, and there he was
emprysoned and afterward raunsoned at an c m^{l}' li', whiche somme to
pay everych other chalys in Engelond was broken and coyned into
moneye, and the monkes of Cisteux' solden there bookes for to paye the
kynges raunsone.

TEMPORE REG' RICI' PRIMI. [1195-1199.]

Custodes.--Robert Besaunt.    Anno vij^{o}.
           Jokell le Josne.

[Custodes.]--Gerard de Antiloche.   Anno viij^{o}.
             Robert Duraunt.

[Sidenote: An heretike with the long berde.]

In this yere the kyng come in to Engelond, and tok the castell of
Notynghame, and disherited John his brother. And the same yere kyng
Richarde was crowned ayeyne at Westm'. And in the same yere an
heretyke called with the longe berd was drawen and hanged for heresye
and cursed doctrine that he had taughte

[Custodes.]--Roger Blount.    Anno ix^{o}.
             Nicholl Doket.

[Sidenote: Ordre of the Trynyte.]

[Sidenote: Slewe the frenche king.]

The same yere, the yere of oure lorde a m^{l}'clxxxxviij, began the
ordre of Trynyte. The same yere deyde pope Celestyne; and thanne
succeded Innocent. And in this yere kyng Richard seiled over the see
into Normandye and sclewe the kyng of Fraunce.

[Custodes.]--Constantyne Fitz Arnulf.   Anno x^{mo}.
             Robert le Beale.

[Sidenote: Rex Ric'us int'fectus fuit ap'd Castru' Gaillard in
France.]

[Sidenote: Bertram Gordon.]

In this yere, that is to sey the yere of oure lord a m^{l}'cxxxxix,
the kyng was sclayne atte the castell Gaillarde in Fraunce with schot
of a venemed quarelle in the heed. Neverthelees or he deyde the
castell was wonne and his body setthe entered at Pount Ebrarde with
hys fadir Henry the secounde. Whan the kyng Richard was thus hurt,
with his owne hand he pulled out the quarelle, and anon the wonde
rancled; and whan the kyng wyste that his wounde was dedly, he
comaunded anoone his peple scharply assawte the town, and so it was
wonne: and the kyng dede his will with them that were withinne: among
othere he lete comaunde hym to be brought before hym that schotte that
quarrelle; and whanne he cam the kyng asked his name. Sire, seide he,
my name is Bertram Gordone. Wherfore, seide the kyng, have ye sclayne
me? dede y yow ever ony harme? Nay, sire, q'd Bertram; but, sire, with
youre owne hond ye sclowe my fadir and my brothir, the whiche y have
quytte yow. Now thanne, q'd the kyng, he that deyde for us on the
crosse he save us from helle, he foryef yow my deth, and y foryef it
yow. And the kyng comaunded hym an hundred schillynges of silver, and
chargyd upon lyf and membre that no man schulde dow hym non harme:
natheless certeyn persones of the kynges hous sued after hym and sclow
hym after his departyng. And so kyng Richard obite is the vj day of
April.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMINA COSTODUM TEMPORE REGIS JOH'IS QUI CORONATUS FUIT APUD WESTM' IN
DIE ASCENSIONIS D'NI, ANNO M^{l}' C^{mo} NONAGESIMO NONO.

TEMPORE REG' JOH'IS. [1199-1200.]

[Custodes.]--Arnold Fitz Arnulf.   Anno primo.
             Ric'us Fitz Berthi.

In this yere kyng John loste all Normandye and Angoye be werre; and he
toke of every plowe lond in Engelond iii_s._ toward hise werres.

TEMPORE REG' JOH'IS. [1200-1203.]

[Custodes.]--Roger Desert.         Anno s'c'do.
             Jacob' Fitz Barthi.

[Sidenote: Parlement at Londoun.]

[Sidenote: S'cus Hugo de Lincoln isto anno monebat'.]

This yere the kyng held his parlement at Londone, and asked of the
clergye the stynte of every chirche in Engelond for to conquere ayen
Normandye and Angoye. And in this yere deyde Huberd erchebisshop of
Caunterbury; and thanne the priour and the covent of Caunterbury
chosen in there chapytre hous the noble clerk Stephen of Langeton,
ayens the kynges will, whome the pope sacred at Viterke. And this yere
deide seynt Hughe of Lincoln; also the erchebysshopp of Caunterbury;
and the priour of Cricherche, and all the monkes weren exiled.

[Custodes.]--William Fitz Alice.     Anno tercio.
             Simon de Aldermanb'y.

This same yere, be the avyse of wyse men of the citee of London that
were chosene xxxv men whiche were sworne to holde and mayntene with
the maire the assyses.

[Custodes.]--Normane Bloundene.   Anno iiij^{to}.
             John of Ely.

[Sidenote: Hailstones grete:]

[Sidenote: and foules were seyn berynge fyer in the eyr in there
billes.]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}'ccij, there fallen grete reynes, and
hailstones as gret as an ey medlyd with reyn, where thorugh trees,
vines, cornes, al manner frutes were moche distroied; and the peple
were sore abaysshed, for there were seyn foules fleynge in the eyre
berynge in there billes brennyng coles, whiche brenden manye houses.
And in this yere Engelond and Walys were enterdited, and stood so vj
yere and more, for the kynges trespas.

TEMPORE REG' JOH'IS. [1203-1208.]

[Custodes.]--Wat' Broune.           Anno quinto.
             Will'm' Chamb'leyne.

[Sidenote: A quart' of whete at xxv _s._]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}'cciij a quarter of whete was worth
xxv _s._, and a cistern of wyn was worth iiij _s._

[Custodes.]--Thomas Hav'yll.   Anno sexto.
             Hamo Bonde.

[Sidenote: In this yere were too mones seyn. Frere P'chours ordre
began. A gret wynt' and long durynge.]

In this yere were seyn at oones too fulle mones in the firmament. And
in this yere of oure lord a m^{l}'cciiij began the ordre of Frere
P'chours, in the cuntre of Tholomeis, undir duke Domynyk. Also in this
yere was a strong wynter and an hard, fro the circumcisione of oure
lord til the annunciation of oure lady.

[Custodes.]--John Walg've.      Anno vij.
             Ric' Wynchestre.

[Sidenote: The plees of the crowne were pletyd in the tour.]

This same yere the plees of the coroune were pleted in the tour of
London, and Hugh of Cisell was drawe and hanged.

[Custodes.]--John Holylond.        Anno viij.
             Edward Fitz Gerard.

             Rog' de Wynchestre.   Anno ix.
             Edmond Hardell.

This yere the enterdytynge of the reaume was new proclamed thorugh out
Engelond. Also in this yere was born Herry the kynges sone; and in
this yere the kyng wan Irlond.

TEMPORE REG' JOH'IS. [1208-1214.]

Henr' Fitz Aldewyne,   Petrus Duke.   Anno x^{o}.
  P'mus maior.         Thom' Neell.

[Sidenote: P'm's maior. Sent Mary Overy was begonne.]

In this yere was the firste maire of London; and seynt Marie Overeye
was that yere begonne.

Id'm maior.   Petrus Josne.     Anno xi^{o}.
              Will'm' Elande.

[Sidenote: The cessyng of the enterdytyng of this land. London brigge
was first begonne to make.]

In this same yere the land was reconsyled, and the enterdytyng cesed:
and in this yere the stone brigge of Londone was first begonne to
make.

Id'm maior.   Adam Whateley.      Anno xii^{o}.
              Stephen le Grace.

In this yere an eretyk was brent for eresye, the whiche be craft
quenchyd ofte the fire.

Id'm maior.   Joys Fitz Piers.   Anno xiij^{mo}.
              John Gerland.

[Sidenote: A gret parte of London was brent.]

In this yere was gret discencione be twen the kyng and hise lordes;
and Lowys the kynges son of Fraunce was waget to come into Engelond
with manye Frensshmen, whiche dede moche harme in the reaume or they
wenten home; and the kyng wente with his hoost to Berham Downe. And in
this yere, on seyn Benettes day, Southwerk, Londone brigge, and the
moost part of London was brent.

Id'm maior.   Rauf Eylond.         Anno xiiij^{mo}.
              Constantin' Josne.

In this yere was Castell Baynard cast done and distroied.

Rog' Fitz Aleyn,   Martin Fitz Alice.   Anno xv^{o}.
  maior.           Peter Bate.

In this yere, on candelmasse even, the kyng seyled unto Peytowe.

TEMPORE REG' JOH'IS. [1214-1216.]

Id'm maior p'p' anni,   Salamon Basynges.   Anno xvj^{o}.
  et Cerle, m'c'        Hugo Basynges.
  p' residuo.

[Sidenote: The ordre of Frere Menors began.]

In this yere, that is to seye the yere of oure lord a m^{l}'ccxiiij,
began the ordre of seynt Fraunceys, besyde the assise of Frere
Menours. And in this yere, in the fest of Gordiam in Septembre, the
barons entred the citee of Londone, and strong werre was betwen the
kyng and the lordes: and Rog' Fitz Aleyn, maire, was discharged of his
meiralte be the forsaid barons, and afterward they chosen Cerle meire,
and the schirreves as it folwith: and yet lasted the werres.

William' Hardel, drap'.   John Travers.    Anno xvij^{o}.[1]
                          Andr' Newlond.

[Footnote 1: _Sic._]

This yere, on seynt Lukes day, the kyng deyde and was beried at
Westm'.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VICECOMITU' LONDON' TEMPORE REGIS HENR' T'CIJ, QUI
CORONATUS FUIT APUD GLOUCESTR' IN DIE S'C'OR' SIMONIS ET JUDE ANNO
D'NI MILL'MO CC^{m} xvj, ET ANNO ETATIS SUE NONO.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1216-1219.]

Jacob' Alderman maior   Benet Seynturer,      A^{o}. p^{o}.
  p' p'te anni, et        goldsmyth.
  Salamon Basyng p'     Will's Blounitners.
  residuo.

In this yere Walys was entirdited: also Eustache the Monk wyth manye
Frensshemen as he was comynge into Engelond ward, for to helpe Lowys
the kynges sone of Fraunce, was taken in the see be Hubert of Burgh
and the V portes; and Eustache heed was smeten of, and the schippes
drowned. And in this yere Lowys retorned home ayene with his meyne,
and he hadde a m^{l}' mark of sylver.

Cerle, merc', maior.   Thomas Bokerell.   A^{o} s'c'do.
                       Rauf Guylond.

In this same yere the barons were take at Lincoln.[2]

[Footnote 2: _See note_ D.]

Id'm maior.   John Vyell.   A^{o}. t'cio.
              John Spyc'.

[Sidenote: Translacio' s'c'i Thome archie'pi Cantuar'.]

This yere the kyng hadde of every plough land in Engelond ij _s._ And
in this yere seynt Thomas of Canterbury was translated the l yere
after his martirdome.

Id'm maior.   Ric' Wymbulden.   Anno iiij^{to}.
              John Vyell.

This yere the kyng was crowned ayeyn at Westminster, and Hubert of
Burgh was mad the kynges chief justice.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1220-1221.]

Id'm maior.   Ric' Reng'.      Anno v^{to}.
              John le Josne.

[Sidenote: Plees of the crowne. Castell of Bedf' was stroid.]

[Sidenote: Ordre of Frere Carmes began.]

[Sidenote: A gret wynd.]

[Sidenote: Firy dragons were seyne.]

This yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccxxiiij,[3] the emperour Baldewyn which
whanne he wente to bataile to fyghte with Godes enemyes he hadde a
croos boren before hym, whiche crosse seynt Eleyne made of the crosse
that Cryst deyde upon; and there was an Englyssh prest that tyme with
hym that was called S^{r}. Hughe, and he was borne in Norfolke, the
whiche preest broughte the same crosse to Bromholm in Norfolke. Also
in this yere the plees of the crowne were pletyd in the tour of
London. Also in this yere was the castell of Bedford beseged, whiche
endured fro the ascencione of oure lord unto the assumpcion of oure
lady; at whiche day be greet crafte and strong assaught it was wonne
and distroid: and sithe it was not beldyd ayeyne because it was rebell
to the kyng. Also in this yere began the ordre of Frere Carmes. Also
in this yere upon seynt Lukes day there blew a gret wynd out of the
north, whiche caste doune manye houses, steples and torrettes of
chirches, and turned up so downe trees in wodes and in orchardes, at
whiche tyme fyry dragons and wykkes spirytes grete noumbre were seyn
openly fleyng in the eyre.

[Footnote 3: _Sic in the Harl. MS., and_ m^{l}ij^{c}xxiij _in the
Cotton MS._]

Id'm maior.   Ric' Reng'.    Anno vi^{to}.
              Th' Lambard.

This yere a gret discencione aros in London be empechement of Walter
Bokerell, so that Constantyne Fitz Arnulf the morwe aftere oure lady
daye, the assumpcion, was drawe and hanged. And in this yere the kyng
was purposed to have cast down the walles of London.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1222-1225.]

Ric' Reng', maior.   Will's Joynour.   Anno vij^{o}.
                     Thomas Lamberd.

[Sidenote: Frere Meno', ven' in Angl'.]

In this yere, that is for to seye the yere of oure lord a
m^{l}ccxxiiij, in the feste of seynt Bertylmewe the apostell, the
ordre of Frere Menours[4] cam ferst into Engelond. Also in this yere a
man of Alderbery feyned hym Cryst, whiche was brought to Oxon', and
there he was crucifyed.

[Footnote 4: Prechours _in the Cotton MS._]

Id'm maior.   John Travers.      Anno viij^{o}.
              Andrew Bokerell.

[Sidenote: Alyens put out of the ream.]

The same yere were alle the alyens put out of the reaume.

Id'm maior.   Martin Fitz William.   Anno ix^{o}.
              Rog'us Duke.

[Sidenote: Plees of the crowne.]

In this yere the plees of the crowne were pletyd in the tour of
London; and John Harleon failed of his lawe for the deth of Lambard
his liege.

Id'm maior.   Roger Duke.            Anno x^{mo}.
              Martin Fitz William.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1226-1228.]

Rog'us Duke, maior.   Steph'us Bokerell.   Anno xj^{mo}.
                      Henr' Cobham.

[Sidenote: Weres in Tempse were stroid.]

[Sidenote: The citezeynes of London scholde paye noo toll on this syde
the see, no beyonde the see.]

This yere the schirrevehood of London and Midd' weren leten to ferme
to the schirreves of London for ccc^{li} be yere, whiche was graunted
the xviij day of Feverere in this sayd yere. Also the same day it was
graunted be the kyng that alle the weres in Thamyse schulde ben broken
up and distroied, and never after schulde be set ayene. Also the xvj
day of March in this yere the kyng graunted be his chartre to hise
citezeyns of London, that no toll schulde be taken of them in no
kynges lond, as well on this syde the see as beyonde the see; and yf
ony toll were taken of ony citezeyn of London, that thanne the
schirreves of London schulde taken at London distresse of the folk of
the contre, what tyme that they myghte be founden in London
notwithstondynge. Also the xviij day of August suynge the kyng
graunted to the maire of London waryne.

Id'm maior.   Steph'us Bokerell.   A^{o}. xij^{o}.
              Henr' Cobham.

[Sidenote: Clerkes and seriaunts of the schirreve.]

[Sidenote: A comown seal.]

In this yere, the viij day of Juyn the libertes and the fraunchises of
London were ratified; and also the kyng graunted that every schirreve
of London schulde have too clerkes and too seriauntes and no mo for
that office. Also the kyng graunted the same tyme to the citezeyns of
London that they schulde have a comown seal, whiche schulde ben in
kepynge of too aldermen and too commons of the citee: and the forsaid
seal scholde nought be denyed nor warned to poure no riche of the same
citee whanne thei hadde nede, yf there cause were resonable; and that
no mede schulde be take no payed of eny man in no manner wyse for the
said seall.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1228-1232.]

Id'm maior.   Walt' Wynchestre.   Anno xiij^{mo}.
              Rob' Fitz John.

Id'm maior.   Ric' Fitz Walter.   Anno xiiij^{mo}.
              John Wobourne.

In this yere it was be the maire and be the aldermen, with the
counseill and assent of alle the citee, and be othe sworne on the
Evaungelies, that fro this tyme forth there schull never schirreves of
London abyde leng' in that office thanne on yere. And in this yere the
same Roger was discharged of the office of the meiralte.

Andrew Bokerell, m'.   Mich' of Seynt Eleynes.   A^{o}. xv^{o}.
                       Walt' Senford.

In this yere aroos a gret discord betwen the kyng and Hubert of Burgh;
which Hubert fledde to the chapell of Brendewode, and there he was
taken and thanne imprisoned in the tour of London, and after he was
exiled. Also this yere was a gret harm done in the citee of London for
the fyere of dame Jonet Lumbarde.

Id'm maior.   Herry Edelmetone.   Anno xvj^{o}.
              Gerard Batte.

Id'm maior.   Simon Fitz Marie.   Anno xvij^{mo}.
              Rog' Blounte.

[Sidenote: Quarantisme parte.]

In this yere S^{r}. Edmond was sacred erchebysshop of Caunterbury,
whiche now is called seynt Edmond of Pounteney, whiche Edmonde dede
afterwarde revoke Hubert of Burgh, that com ayene into Engelond and
submitted hym to the kynges grace. This yere, in the iiij idus of
Feverer', was a gret wynd, a gret erthequake, and a gret thondyr.
Eodem anno idem rex accepit ab om'ib' reb' mobilib' le quarantisme p'
totam Angl' in adjutor'm sibi in suis bellis.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1233-1238.]

Andrew Bokerell, m'.   Ric' Assheby.     A^{o}. xviij^{o}.
                       John Norman.

Id'm maior.            Gerard Batte.     Anno xix^{o}.
                       Robert Hardell.

[Sidenote: Henr' accep' in uxore' filiam count' P'vincie.]

[Sidenote: Statutu' Merton.]

In this yere, the morwe after seynt Hiller day Edmond the erchebisshop
of Caunterbury spoused the kyng and dame Elianore the erles doughter
of Provynce togidere at Caunterbury; and on the viij day of seynt
Hillar sche was crowned at Westminster, and thanne the statut of
Mertone was mad.

Andrew Bokerell, m'.   Herry Cobham.        A^{o}. xx^{mo}.
                       Jordan Coventre.

Id'm maior.            John Colsan.         A^{o}. xxj^{mo}.
                       Gerveys Cordewan'.

Ric' Reng', maior.     Joh'nes Wyghale.     A^{o}. xxij^{mo}.
                       Joh'n Saundres.

[Sidenote: Trantesime parte.]

This yere on seynt Botolf even was borne Edward the kynges sone. It'm
in cest an prist le roy en son eide le xxx^{me} des moebles p' tout la
terre.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1238-1242.]

William Joynour, m'.   Renerus Bungey.   A^{o}. xxiij^{o}.
                       Rauf Asshewy.

[Sidenote: Edwardus long' femorib'.]

Eod'm anno d'n's Simon Mountfort desponsavit Alianoram sororem d'm
reg' H. et comitissam Pembr'. Et anno sequ' fecit d'c'm d'n'm comitem
Leyc'. Et eodem anno, _i.e._ anno iiij^{to} natus fuit filius eius
Edwardus, int' ip'm et Alianoram reginam, qui postea vocab' Edwardus
longis femorib'.

Gerard Bate, m'   John Gysors.   A^{o}. xxiiij^{to}.
                  Michael Tony.

[Sidenote: Seynt Poules was halwed.]

In this yere seynt Poules chirche was halowed.

Renerus Bungey, m'.   John Vyell.      A^{o}. xxv^{to}.
                      Thomas Durh'm.

[Sidenote: Obiit Rog'us ep'us London'.]

This yere deide Rog' bysshop of London: and William of the Marche was
drawen and hangyd.

Id'm maior.   John Fitz John.   Anno xxvj^{to}.
              Rauf Asshewy.

In this yere seyled the kyng on the see ryally to Burdeux.

Rauf Asshewy, m'.   Hugo Blount.   A^{o}. xxvij^{o}.
                    Adam Basynges.

[Sidenote: The plees of the crowne. The kyng did cu' frome Burdeux.]

This yere the kyng com into Engelond fro Bordeux; and the plees of the
crowne were pletyd in the tour of London before William of York,
Richard Paschelewe, Herry Braha and Jerome of Saxton, justices. Also
werre began betwen the kyng and Thlewelyn prince of Walys; also
Griffith Thlewelyn sone fel out of the tour of London and brak his
nekke.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1243-1246.]

Mich' Tony, m'.       Ric' Spyc'        A^{o}. xxviij^{o}.
                      Nich's Batte.

John Gisors, m' p'    John Cornehull.   A^{o}. xxix^{o}.
  maiore p'te ann'.   David Benteley.

This yere Mich' Tony meire of London, and Nicholl Batte schirreve,
were convicte before the kyng of periuracion be the othe of alle the
aldermen, for as muche as Nicholl Batte lefte schirreve over his yere;
wherefore Michael Tony was deposed fro the meiralte and Nich' Batte
fro the schirevehod, and another chosen as it is aforeseid.

Idem maior.   Simon Fitz Marie.   A^{o}. xxx^{mo}.
              Laurens Frowyk.

[Sidenote: Renovacio Westm'.]

Eod'm anno idem rex renovavit eccl'iam Westm' ult' med'm p' unam
archam. And this same yere was seynt Edmond of Pounteney
translatyd.[5]

[Footnote 5: _See note_ B.]

Petrus Fitz Aleyn, m'.   John Vyell.   Anno xxxj^{mo}.
                         Nicholl Batte.

[Sidenote: Mon' de Hayles.]

Eod'm anno s'c'us Edmundus fuit canonizatus eciam frat' reg' H. et
comes Cornub' incep^{t} fundamentu' monast'ij de Hayles.[6]

[Footnote 6: _See note_ C.]

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1247-1252.]

Mich' Tony, m'.       Nicholl Jocie.         A^{o}. xxxij^{do}.
                      Geffrey Wynchestr'.

Rog' Fitz Rog', m'.   Rauf Hardell.          A^{o}. xxxiij^{cio}.
                      John Tholosan.

John Norman, m'.      Humfrey Bras faber.    Anno xxxiiij^{to}.
                      Will'm Fitz Richard.

In this yere, the Thorsday before the feste of Simond and Jude was a
gret wynd and an horrible tempest whiche dede muche harme thorugh all
Engelond; and Lodowyke the kyng of Fraunce tok Damaske the iiij kal.
of Juyne.

Adam Basynges, m'.   Laur' Frowyk.          A^{o}. xxxv^{to}.
                     Will's Fitz Richard.

[Sidenote: Ordre of frere Austyns began.]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccl began the ordre of frere Austyns;
also in this yere the kyng wente into Scotlond to marie his doughter
to Alisaundre the kyng of Scottes.

John Tholosan, m'.   Will'm Durham.    A^{o}. xxxvj^{to}.
                     Thomas Wyborne.

[Sidenote: vij^{li} is allowed for the office of the schirrefs of
London.]

This yere the kyng graunted be his chartre on the xij daye of Juyne,
that the schirreves of London schulde yerly ben allowed in the
Eschequier for there office of the schirrevehood vij^{li}. Also that
after the meire be chosene he schulde be presented to the barons of
the Escheker. And in this yere the kyng schipped at Portesmouth toward
Burdeux.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1252-1256.]

Nicholl Batte, m'.   John Northampton.   A^{o}. xxxvij^{o}.
                     Richard Pychard.

This yere the quene, and Edward here sone, and Boneface the
erchebysshop of Caunterbury sailed over the see toward Burdeux. Also
this yere, the day of S^{t}. Paulyne the bysshop, fell manye mervailes
be the watres of the see, as full grete hete and droughte.

Ric' Hardell, m'.   Rob^{t}. Lyntone, drap'.   A^{o}. xxxviij^{o}.
                    Will'm Asshwy, merc'.

In this yere Edward the kynges sone spoused the kynges suster of
Spayne. Also in this yere the kyng com from Burdeux thorugh Fraunce,
and arryved at Dovore on Cristemasse day: and on seynt John day he com
to London, and enprisoned the schirreves in the tour of London a
monyth and more, for on John Frome that was undyr there warde whiche
escapyd out of Newegate, the whiche John was taken in warde for the
deth of a priour that was the kynges alye; and new schirrefs mad, as
it folowith.

Id'm maior.   Stephan Distergate.[7]   A^{o}. xxxix^{o}.
              Herry Walmode.

Id'm maior.   Matheu Bokerell.         Anno xl^{o}.
              John le Mynour.

[Footnote 7: Oyster-gate _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: Obiit R. Grosted ep'us Lincoln'.]

[Sidenote: The crucifienge of a child.]

This yere deyde Robert Grostede bysshop of Lyncoln, in the vij idus of
Octobre. And in this yere, the Soneday before the translacion of seynt
Edward, the wyf of S^{r}. Edward the kynges sone com into Engelond
and to London; and S^{r}. Edward com hymself on seynt Andrew evene to
London. And in this yere a litell child called Hughe of Lincoln was
taken of Jewes and crucified.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1256-1258.]

Id'm maior.   Ric'us Ewell.    Anno xlj^{o}.
              Will'm Asshby.

Eodem anno fuit Ric'us comes Cornub' et frat' reg' H. coronatus in
regem Almiaine.

Id'm maior.   Th' Fitz Richard.    Anno xlij^{do}.
              Rob^{t}. Catelongre.

[Sidenote: Ric' comes Cornubie elect' est imp'ator.]

[Sidenote: A gret compleynt made to the kyng of the citee of London.]

[Sidenote: The parlement at Oxon.]

In this yere Ric'us erle of Cornub' was chosen emperor; and Thlewellyn
prynce of Walys held werre ayens the kyng. Also this yere, abougte the
convercion of seynt Poule, tydynges comen to the kyng that the cite of
London was nought trewly, no in due maner gowerned: wherupon was mad
an inquisicion be xxvj men of every warde; and John Mauncell, examyned
be the kynges counseill, tolde the tale for alle the companye, and
seyde that Richard Hardell mair, Robert Catelongre schirreve, John
Tholesone, Nich' Batte, Nich' Fitz Jocy, Mathew Bokerell, John le
Meynoure, Arnold Tednore, and Herry Walmode, aldermen, were worthy to
be prevyd of there offices, and never after to bere stat in the citee.
Also in this yere after Trynyte Sonedaye was the parlement at
Oxenford, where aroos a gret discord betweye the barons on the too
partye, and Audymere eslyte of Wynchestre, William Valence, Geffrey of
Wynchestre, and the kynges brethren, on the other partie, for divers
trespaces and transgressions; wherefore the kynges brethren were
somond to come to the parlement at Wynchestre; and whanne the
parlement was begonne, the forsaid kynges brethren wolde nought obeye
to the lawe; wherfore two of them weren exiled, whiche passed the see
at Dovorre.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1258-1260.]

John Gysors, m'.   John Adryan.     A^{o}. xliij^{cio}.
                   Rob' Cornhill.

[Sidenote: Scutagium.]

[Sidenote: Jewe.]

[Sidenote: A quart' of whete at xxiiij _s._]

This yere scutage was gadered in Engelond of every knyghtes fee xl
_s._ The same yere, the morwe after Al Sowlen day, Ric' of Gravesende
at Caunterbury was sacred bysshop of Lincoln be Bonoface erchebysshop
of Caunterbury. And in this yere, that is to seye the yere of our lord
a m^{l}cclviij, there fel a Jewe into a pryve at Teukesbury upon a
Satirday, the whiche wolde nought suffre hym selfe to be drawe out of
the preve that day for reverence of his Sabot day: and S^{r}. Richard
of Clare, thanne erle of Gloucestre, herynge therof, wolde nought
sufrre hym to be drawe out on the morwe after, that is to say the
Soneday, for reverence of his holy day; and so the Jewe deyde in the
preve. Also in this yere was a gret derthe of corn, for a quarter of
whete was worth xxiiij _s._ And in this yere Richard the erle of
Cornewaille was crowned emperour of Almayne.

Will'm Fitz Richard, m'.   Adam Brounyng.   A^{o}. xliiij^{to}.
                           Ric' Coventre.

In this yere, abougte Alhalwen tyme, the kyng with the quene, with
other barons and lordes, seyled over the see to the kyng of Fraunce,
and dwelled there half yere and more with gret honoure and love, so
that he hadde no wil homward; but he was thretned be the co'e
counsaill of Engelond that but if he come home here sounne they wolde
chesyn them a newe kyng: and there was gret discord, and a rysynge
betwen Edward the kynges sone and Richard thanne erle of Worcestre,[8]
so that all Engelond was meved to werre; for whiche, a lytel before
Whitsonday the kyng come into Engelond, an cam into London, and lay in
the bysshopes palys of London besyde Poules, unto the tyme that pees
was stablisched thorough alle Engelond.

[Footnote 8: Gloucestre _in the Cotton MS._]

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1260-1263.]

Id'm maior.   John Northt'.     A^{o}. xlv^{to}.
              Ric' Pychard.

              John Tallour.     A^{o}. xlvj^{to}.[9]
              Ric' Walbrooke.

[Footnote 9: _See note_ C.]

[Sidenote: Note:--That no record makes mention of an earle of
Worcester in this time.]

This same yere, abought the fest of the traunslacion of seynt Thomas,
the kyng with the quene sailled over the see into Fraunce, and the
erle of Worcestre[10] deyde.

[Footnote 10: Gloucestre _in the Cotton MS._]

Th' Fitz Thomas, m'.   Philip Walbrok.   A^{o}. xlvij^{mo}.
                       Ric' Taillour.

[Sidenote: The barons werres.]

In this yere began the barons werres, in whiche there were many ful
worthy lordes sclayn, and moche myschief and sorwe was that time in
Engelond.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1263-1265.]

Id'm maior.   Robert Mounpylers.   A^{o}. xlviij^{o}.
              Osbert Vynt'.

In this yere the town of Northampton was taken, and manye of the men
that were founden withinne were sclayn, forasmoche as thei hadde
ordeyned wyldefeer for to abrent the citee of London. Also this yere,
after the purificacion of oure lady, the kynges litell halle at Westm'
with the chaumbre were brent. Also in this yere, at Whitsontyde, there
aroos a grete discord betwen the kyng and his barons, and the bysshop
of Hereford was taken and lad into Walys into a castell. Also in that
discord Elianore the quene was foule repreved and almost sclayn upon
London bregge: and after this, a litel before Mighelmesse, the kyng
and the quene sailed into Fraunce, to the kynges parlement of Fraunce.

Id'm maior.   Th' de la Ford.     A^{o}. xlix^{o}.
              Gregor' Rokesley.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Redyng.]

[Sidenote: Barons werre.]

[Sidenote: Bellum de Lewes.]

[Sidenote: Stella comata.]

This yere the kyng com fro Fraunce and held his parlement at Redyng,
fro which parlement the kyng and the lordes departed in wrathe; and
the kyng wente ayene to the parlement into Fraunce: and after this,
for werre and defaute, the stretes of London were cheyned. And abought
the purification of oure lady the kyng com home fro Fraunce; and the
barons token the town of Northt' the Satirday nest before Passion
Sonday; and the Wednesday nest folwynge there were manye Jewes sclayn
and distroyd. And in the morwe of seynt Pancras, in the monthe of May,
was the bataile of Lewes, betwen the kyng and the barons of the
reaume, in whiche bataile manye men were sclayn on both parties: and
in this bataile the kyng was taken and S^{r}. Edward his sone, and
Richard erle of Cornewayle and manye othere were lad into diverses
castelles. And in the same yere appered stella comata whiche endured
xv dayes.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1265-1267.]

Id'm maior.   Edwardus Blount.   A^{o}. l^{mo}.
              Petrus Aunger.

[Sidenote: Bellu' de Evesham.]

In this yere Edwarde the kynges sone brak oute of warde of Sire Simond
Mountford erle of Leycestre and of Hereford, and he wente to the
barons of the March, and they reyceyved hym withe moche honour. And on
the Satirday in the myddes of August he scomfited Simon of Mountford
at Kelyngworth. And on the Wednesday nest after was the batall of
Evesham; and there was sclayn Simond of Mountford erle of Leycestre,
the lord Spenser, S^{r}. Rauff Bassett, S^{r}. Thomas Asteley, William
Maundevyle, S^{r}. John Beauchamp, S^{r}. Guy Bailliof, S^{r}. Roger
Roule, &c. and the barouns discomfited.[11]

[Footnote 11: _See note_ D.]

William Fitz Ric', custos.   John Lynde.      A^{o}. lj^{o}.
                             John Walravyn.

In this yere S^{r}. John Savylle was taken with strong hond at
Cesterfeld; atte whiche tyme the lord Ferrers fledde, and be a woman
was betrayed in the chirche, and so taken. And Octobon the popes legat
held a counseill at Northt', where he accursed alle thoo that stoden
with the erle of Leycestre Simond, or hym helpith or favoureth.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1267-1270.]

Aleyn South, custos.   John Adryan.        A^{o}. lij^{do}.
                       Lucas Batencourt.

[Sidenote: The greate Caem.]

This yere, that is to seye the yere of oure lord a m^{l}cclxvij, began
the empire of Tartaryn, the whiche emperour is called the grete Cane;
and he is now holden grettest and most myghty lord of alle the world.
In this yere the kyng held his parlement at Marleburgh, in the octaves
of seynt Martyn, where, be the assent of alle the nobles and choson
comoners of Engelond, were mad the statuts called the Statuts of
Marleburgh.

Id'm custos.   Walter Hervy.       A^{o}. liij^{o}.
               Wiliam Duremsone.

This yere Octobouns the popes legat held his counseyll at seynt Poules
in London.

Hugo Fitz Thom's, custos.   Th' Basyng.       A^{o}. liiij^{to}.
                            Rob't Cornhill.

[Sidenote: T'us s'c'i Edward.]

[Sidenote: Hoc A^{o} concessit civib' Londo'.]

[Sidenote: T're mot'.]

This yere the kyng lete translate ayeyne the body of seynt Edward into
a precious schryne; and there weren alle the lordes spirutuelx and
temporelx of Engelond. And in the xvj day of March the kyng ordeyned
that no man schulde gon ought of the citee of London be water no be
londe to regrate ony vitaile. Also in this yere after Estren the kyng
graunted to the citezens of London alle there liberties and
fraunchises. And on the morwe of seynt Lucye the virgyne was gret
erthequake aboughte evesong tyme.

REX HENRICUS T'CIUS. [1270-1272.]

John Adryan, m'.   Walter Potter.   A^{o}. lv^{to}.
                   John Taillour.

In this yere Edwarde the kynges sone, in the feste of Philip and
Jacob, tok his vyage into the holy lond with manye othere grete lordes
bothe of Engelond and of other londes.

Id'm maior.   Gregorius Rokesley.   A^{o}. lvj^{to}.
              Herry Waleys.

[Sidenote: Bowe stepil fil doun.]

[Sidenote: The Sowdon sente l'res to Edward the kynges sone be a
Sarasyn, whiche wolde a sclayn the said Edward, whiche Edward
strangled the Sarasyn.]

In this yere, the V kal. of Feverer', the yere of oure lord a
m^{l}clxx, the stepil of the chirch of seynt Marie at the Bowe fel
down in Chepe, and perysshed moche peple. And in this yere Edwarde the
kynges sone was wounded of a Saresyn at Acres, whiche broughte hym
lettres fro the Sowdone, the whiche Sowdone menynge tresone hadde sent
the same Sarasyn with the lettres unto the said kynges sone Edward,
whiche for hete of the contrey eyre satt on a bedde in his doublet,
and opened them. Whiles the lettres weren in redynge, the said
Sarasyn, knelynge befor hym, drowe out a knyf yvenymed, and wolde have
smyten the sayd S^{r}. Edward in the bely, and failed; but he smot hym
in the arm and eft ayeyne in the foot: whiche Saresyn he stranglyd
betwen his too handes to the deth; and sithens he was cured therof,
blessyd be God. Also in this yere the said S^{r}. Edward comynge hom
thorough Fraunce, he dede the tornement at Chalons, whiche was
proposed for his distruccion for envye.

Sire Wat' Hervy Miles, m'.   Robert Milborne.   A^{o}. lvij^{o}.
                             Petir Cosyn.

[Sidenote: The schirreves were deposyd for takynge mede of the
bakers.]

These two scherreves were convict before the barons of the Escheker,
in the fest of seynt Andrew; forasmoche as they token mede of the
bakers of London, and wolde nought leten them be corrected and
justified: wherefore they were deposyd of there offices; and in there
stedes were seet John Bedle and Richard Parys. And in this yere, on
seynt Edmondes day the bisshope, in the yere of oure lorde a
m^{l}cclxxij, kyng Herry the thridde deyde, and rially was beryed at
Westm'.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VICECOM' TEMPORE REG' EDWARDI PRIMI FILIJ REG' HENR'
T'CIJ, QUI INCEPIT REGNARE IN C'STINO S'C'I ED'I ARCHIEP'I ANNO D'NI
MILL'MO DUCENTESIMO SEPTUAGESIMO S'C'DO.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1272-1273.]

Sire Wat' Hervy Miles, m'.   John Horn'.     A^{o}. p^{o}.
                             Walter Pott'.

This yere Thlewyne the prynce of Walys rebelled ayens the kyng; and
the kyng scomfited hym in bataile, and drof hym to so muche myschief
that he cam and yeld hym, and paied to the kyng l m^{l} marc of silver
for to have his pees, and made hys othe for to comen to the kynges
parlement too tymes in the yere. Eod'm anno f'res in vestimentis
saccor' in exules mitabant'. It'm stat' erat concessum p' bigamis;
it'm p' p'sonis p'motis non consecratis ad eccl'ias.

Herry Waleys, m'.   Nicholl Wynchestre.   A^{o}. s'c'do.
                    Herry Coventre.

[Sidenote: For chastyse bakers and mellers.]

This yere, that is to sey the yere of oure lord a m^{l}cclxxiij, the
xiiij kal. of Septembre, the kyng Edward was crowned at Westm' of
Robert Kilward thanne erchebysshop of Caunterbury. Also in this yere
the kyng confermed to the citezeins of London alle there liberties and
fraunchises. Also he yaf them a chartre for to chastyse bakers and
mellers; that is to seye, for bakers that make nought breed after the
assise, and for mellers that stelen mele and corne, the herdell; and
for nyght walkers the toune. Et eod'm anno reveniebat a t'ra s'c'a et
coronabat' cu' sua regina Alianora filia reg' Hispanie apud Westm'.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1274-1276.]

Gregory Rokesley, m'.   Luk Batencourt.   A^{o}. t'cio.
                        Herry Frowyk.

[Sidenote: Tr'e motus.]

In this yere the kyng helde his parlement at Westm'; and at Estre next
suynge he sente be his lettre to Thlewelyne prynce of Walys that he
schulde comen to his parlement: wherof Thlewyne hadde gret dispite,
and rebelled ayeyne: and thanne the kyng made newe werre to Walys so
scharply that of verry nede the prynce of Walys yald hym to the kyng;
and longe tyme he knelyd before the kyng, and the kyng dede hym grace.
And in this yere, the day of seynt Parthi and Racmeti was a grete
erthe quake aboughte the houre of prime.

Id'm maior.   John Horne.    Anno iiij^{to}.
              Rauf Blount.

And in this yere of oure lord a m^{l}cclxxv, Mich' Tony, for manye
trespasces and defautes be hym in the werre tyme done, he was accused,
jugged, and dampned, and was drawen and hanged.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1276-1279.]

Id'm maior.   Robert Bras.     Anno v^{to}.
              Rauf Fynore.

Id'm maior.   John Adrian.     Anno vj^{to}.
              Walt' Langley.

[Sidenote: The remevyng of the kynges benche and the Eschqer to
Schrovesby.]

In this yere, in the fest of seynt Michell, the kynges benche and the
echeqer were removed fro Westm' to Schrovesbery, and in the xv day of
seynt Hillere next folwynge thei were brought ayeyn to Westm'.

Id'm maior.   Robert Basynges.   Anno vij^{mo}.
              Will's Maiser.

[Sidenote: Rex Scotie veniebat ad p'liamentu' R'.]

[Sidenote: Jewes and Englisshmen weren arested for clippyng of money
and for byenge of plate of silv'.]

[Sidenote: The hous of the Frere P'chours was founded at Castell
Baynard.]

[Sidenote: The town of Boston was brente 1275 [_In a modern hand_].]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}cclxxviij, the kyng of Scotlond come
to the kynges parlement at London. Also in this yere, the viij day of
seynt Martyn, alle the Jewes of Engelond were taken for clippyng of
money: and in the feste of seynt Lucie alle the goldsmythes of London,
and alle thoo that kepten the Change, and manye other men of the citee
weren arested and taken for beyenge of plates of sylver, and for
chaunge of grete money for smal money, whiche were indited be the
wardes of the citee. And on the Monday next after the Epithanie the
justyces setene at the Yeldhalle to make delivreaunce; that is to
seyn, S^{r}. Stephen of Pencestre, S^{r}. John of Cobham, and other
which that them lust to assocye to them. And there were forjugged and
drawen and hanged iij Englyssh Jewes.[12] And in the same yere the
hous of the Frere Prechours began to be founded at Castell Baynard.
Also Robert Kylwardby the erchebysshop of Caunterbury in this yere was
mad cardenall, and frere John Pecche, a Frere Menour, was thanne made
erchebysshop of Caunterbury. And in this yere the town of Booston was
brent.

[Footnote 12: _See note_ E.]

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1279-1283.]

Id'm maior.   Thomas Box.       Anno viij^{o}.
              Rauf Atte More.

[Sidenote: Hafpence and q' were first mad.]

[Sidenote: A gret snowe.]

In this yere the kyng made newe money of silver called half penys and
farthynges, alle rounde, of whiche were none sen before. Also in this
yere upon seynt Denys day fel a gret snow, of whiche cam grete floodes
and huge. Eod'm anno s'c'us Hugo Lincoln' ep'us t'nslatus fuit.

Id'm maior.   Will's Faryndon.      A^{o}. ix^{o}.
              Nicholl Wynchestre.

This yere Martyn the forthe was sacred pope at Rome.

Herry Waleys, m'.   William Masere.   A^{o}. x^{mo}.
                    Ric' Chikewell.

[Sidenote: The werre aroos betwen the kyng and the prynce of Walys.]

In this yere the werre aroos ayeyne betwen the kyng and the prynce of
Walys upon Palm Sonday; on whiche day David the princes brother tok
S^{r}. Roger Clyfford at Hawardyn, and sclowe and tok manye of his
mene, and beseged the castell of Flynt and Rothelan, and tok the toun
of Claupautern[13] and caste adowe the walles.

[Footnote 13: "Lambatre vanc" _in the Cotton MS._]

Id'm maior.   Rauf Blount.      Anno xj^{mo}.
              Hub't Botevyle.

[Sidenote: Prynce of Walys sclayn.]

[Sidenote: S'cus Thom' Hereford' ep'us obiit.]

In this yere the kyng with a gret oost wente into Walys and remeved
and brak the sege of the castell of Flynt and Rothelan. And in this
yere in the iij idus of Decembre, Thlewelyn prince of Walys was
sclayn, and his hed smyten of be S^{r}. Edmond Mortymer, and sente it
to the kyng, whiche that tyme lay at Rothelan; and the kyng sente it
to London, and comaunded that it schulde be sett upon the tour of
London. And that said prynce of Walys before or he was sclayn, come
into the landes of the forsaid S^{r}. Edmond Mortymer, and occupied
manye of hise lordschippes, wherfore the said S^{r}. Edmond manly with
meyne fillen on hym as it is before seyd. And it was seid that yif the
forseid prince hadde lyved too dayes longere than he dede, alle the
Walssh tonge hadde holly ben enclyned to hym. And in this yere, on
seynt Leonard day, S^{r}. Roger Clyfford the yonger was droughned
betwen Snowdon and Englessey, and manye othere also, whiche because
there myghte nought abyde the comynge of the Walsshe men, unwysly,
withoughten hors, passed the bregge of Penbroke.[14] Also in this yere
deide seynt Thomas the bysshop of Hereford, whiche was called Thomas
Cantel'. After hos disses succedyd into the bysshopriche, Richard of
Swynfeld.

[Footnote 14: "Devy" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1283-1284.]

Id'm maior.   Jordan Goodchief.   Anno xij^{mo}.
              Martyn Box.

[Sidenote: The brother of the prynce of Walys was taken and afterward
hanged.]

[Sidenote: The kyng of Aragon occupied the kyngdom of Cecile, and put
out kyng Charles.]

[Sidenote: Laur' Doket was hangen in Bowe chirche.]

[Sidenote: Gret conduyt in Chepe.]

In this yere aboughte the feste of Natyvyte of seynt John Baptiste,
David the brother of Thlewelyn was taken and holden in pryson at
Rothelan, unto the fest of seynt Mighell, and thanne lad to
Schrovesbury, and there he was dampned to be ded; and first he was
drawen thorugh the citee with hors unto the galowes, thanne hanged,
and afterward beheded; and thanne his bowels brent, and the laste his
bodye quarterd in iiij quarters, whiche were sent to be sett up in
iiij parties in Engelond; and be the kyng comaunded that his hede
schulde be seete on the tour of London. And fro that tyme forth the
kyng occupied alle the lond of Walys. And thanne he dyvyded it into
schires and hundredys, in maner as it is in Engelond; and at
Abbercouewe[15] he made a gret and a strong castell, fro whiche place
the monkes of Cisteux remeved; and in another place a mancion edified
for them. He made there a fair toun, and he lete make the castell of
Carnarvan in Snowdon, where that his sone was born: and also he lete
make the castell of Plaupautuvouc.[16] And also in this yere Petir
kyng of Aragon occupyed the kyndom of Cecilie, ant putte out kyng
Charles, whiche anon after mad an ende of hys lyf; wherfore the pope
Martyn accursed the said Petir, and the kyngdom of Aragon he yaf to
the kynges sone of Fraunce. And in this yere aroos werre betwen the
kyng of Fraunce and the kyng of Spayne; and the kyng of Fraunce with a
gret ooste wente into Spayne, whiche dede nothyng worthy to be
preysed. Also in this yere Reynold of Lanfare,[17] Robert Pynot, Poule
of Stebenhithe, Thomas Corewener, John Tholosan, Thomas Russell, and
Robert Scot, weren accused of the deth of Laur' Doket, whiche was
hongen in Bowe chirche: and they were dampned, drawe, and hanged; and
on Alyce a woman was brent for the same cause: and Rauf Crepyn, Jordan
Goodcheppe, Gilbert Clerk, and Geffrey Clerk, weren atteynt and sent
to prison into the tour of London. Also in this yere the grete conduyt
in Chepe was newe begonne to maken.

[Footnote 15: _Corrected from the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 16: "Lambatre vanc, and otherwise it is called Abrestewith"
_in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 17: "Lancastre" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1284-1287.]

Id'm maior[18] usq'   Stephanus Cornhull.   A^{o}. xiij^{o}.
  f'm ap'lor' Petri   Rob^{t}. Rokesley.
  et Pauli.

[Footnote 18: "Gregorie Rokesley p' p'te anni" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: The fraunchise of London is sesed into the kynges hond.]

[Sidenote: Edward the kynges sone was born.]

This yere upon seynt Petyr day and Poule the fraunchise of London was
sesed into the kynges hand; forasmoche as Gregory Rokesby maire yelde
up the seal at Berkynge chirche, and toke it to Rauf Asshewy; and
thanne was Rauf Sandwych mad wardeyn of the citee. And in this yere
the kyng of Fraunce wente into Aragon with a gret powere. Also in this
yere Edward the kynges son was borne.[19] And the kyng dwelled in
Walys tyl ayens Cristemasse, and he held his Cristemasse at Bristoll.

[Footnote 19: "at Carnarvon" _in the Cotton MS._]

Rauf Sandwyche, custos, drap'.   Walt' Blount.   A^{o}. xiiij^{mo}.
                                 Joh'es Wade.

[Sidenote: Additamenta Glouc'.]

This yere kyng Philipp of Fraunce com out of Aragon, where he loste
the most part of his oost, and deyde: and Philipp his sone was crowned
kyng in the feste of the Epithanie. And in this yere deyde kyng Petyr
of Aragon. Also in this yere, in the feste of the Nativite of oure
lady, S^{r}. Edmond Mortymer receyved the ordre of knyghthod of kyng
Edward at Wynchestre. Also, this seid S^{r}. Edmond wedded Margarete
the doughter of Sire William de Fowles,[20] cosyn to the quene, at
London. And in this yere were mad at London, the statutes whiche ben
seid additamenta Glouc'.

[Footnote 20: "Fenles" _in the Cotton MS._]

John Breton, wardeyn.   Thomas Cros.      A^{o}. xv^{o}.
                        Will' Hauteyne.

[Sidenote: Alle the Jewes of Ingelond were put to a gret tribute.]

[Sidenote: To hym was rendred certeyn lond.]

[Sidenote: Grete haylstones.]

In this yere, alle the Jewes of Engelond were put to a gret tribute,
to be payed to the kyng. Also this yere the kyng passed the see into
Fraunce, aboughte the Invencion of the Holy Cross; and of the kyng of
Fraunce he was worthyly resceyved, and so yorned a certeyn time with
the kyng of Fraunce at Parys, whiche yald up certeyn londes of
Gascoigne to the kyng Edward, whiche long tyme hadde wrongfully be
withholden out of his handes. Also in this yere, in the March of Walys
fel the grettest hailstones that evere were seyn in that countre,
whiche dede grete harme to beestes and to houses and to corn.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1287-1290.]

Rauf Sandwych, custos.   Will' Hereford.   A^{o}. xvj^{o}.
                         Thomas Staunes.

This yere seynt Thomas of Hereford was translatyd. Also, aboughte
Pentecost, Rys ap Geredith began partie ayeyns the kynges pees, and
werred in the kynges londes.

Id'm custos.   Will'm Beteyne.     A^{o}. xvij^{mo}.
               John Caunterbury.

[Sidenote: A q're whete at xvj _d._]

This yere was so gret plente of whete that men solden a quarter of
whete for xvj^{d}. And in this yere was a passyng hoot sommer, and
specially in hervest.

Id'm custos.   Fulco de S'c'o Ed'o.   A^{o}. xviij^{o}.
               Salamon Langford.

This yere kyng Edward cam out of Gascoigne into Engelond upon oure
lady day, the Assumpcion. And in this yere S^{r}. Thomas Weylond
justice, Adam of Skretton, and alle moost alle other justices were
convicte of false domes yevynge, and grevously punysched; some of
lesyng and forfaityng of alle there goodes, and some be redempcion of
moche money.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1290-1292.]

Id'm custos.   Thomas Romayn.   A^{o}. xix^{o}.
               Will'm Leyre.

[Sidenote: Alle the Jewes were exiled out of Engelond.]

[Sidenote: The v^{th} of ther moveable goodes.]

[Sidenote: Obiit regina Elianora.]

[Sidenote: The staple of wolles was ordeyned at Sandwych.]

In this yere alle the Jewes were exiled out of Engelond, to voyde the
reaume of Engelond be Alhawen tyme, upon peyne of lesynge of there
heedes or eny of them mighte be founden withinne the reaume; and for
to have this graunted of the kyng don and performed, the co'es of the
reaume grauntyd for to yeve the kyng the V parte of there moveable
goodes. This same yere Gilbert the erle of Gloucestre wedded dame
Johanne the kynges doughter. And in this yere forthwith the dukes sone
of Braban wedded dame Margrete the kynges other doughter. And in this
yere, on seynt Andrew even, deyde quene Elianore kyng Edward wyf. Also
in this yere aroos a grete stryf betwen the V Portus and Flaundres.
Also this yere the kyng ordeyned the newe feyre and market at
Sandewych, where alle the wolles of Engelond schal be brought, and
there sold.

Id'm custos.   Rauf Blount.   Anno xx^{mo}.
               Hamond Box.

In this yere Acres was wonne of the Sarasynes the xv day of Maii, and
utterly destroid, and alle tho that dwelden withinne that myghte be
founden were sclayn. Natheles manye escapid awey be schippes. Also
quene Elianore the kynges modyr deyde. And in this yere the kyng
prisoned his sone for mayntenaunce of diverses traitoures.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1292-1294.]

Id'm custos.   Herry Bele.          Anno xxj^{mo}.
               Ely Russel, drap'.

[Sidenote: mors.]

[Sidenote: mors.]

[Sidenote: mors.]

In this yere the kyng of Scotlond come to the kynges parlement to
London. Also that type iij men token away too prisoners fro Baskle
seriaunt of London; wherfore the ryghte handes of the same iij men
weren smyten of at the Standard in Chepe. Also in this yere, iiij
nonas April, deyde pope Nicholas. Also in this yere deyde S^{r}.
Robert Burnell bysshop of Bathe, and thanne chaunceler of Engelond.
Also in this yere frere John Pecche erchebysshop of Caunterbury deyde.
And in this same yere anon after Whitsonday, the justices of eyr saten
at Hereford. And in this yere anon after the feste of seynt Michel,
they saten at Schrowesbury.

Id'm custos.[21]   Robert Rokesley the younger.   A^{o}. xxij^{do}.
                   Martyn Ambresbury.

[Footnote 21: "Raffe Sandwich custos pro p'te anni" _in the Cotton
MS._]

[Sidenote: A gret snowe.]

In this yere fel the grettest snowe that evere was seyn before this
tyme; wherfore a vercyfyer made in metre thise vers:

[Sidenote: v's'.]

     _"C'stino tiburci s'c'or' Valariani
     Nix cadit innanis vent' vehemens Borial'
     Emulsit silvas ussit quas rep'it herbas
     Edes dampnose detexit et impetuose
     Quas clam p'stravit sic plurima dampna patravit."_

[Sidenote: A weddyng.]

And in this yere the erle of Barre wedded dame Elianore the kynges
doughter at Bristoll, aboughte the Exaltacion of the Holy Crosse.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1294-1296.]

Sire John Bryton, knyght, custos.   Ric' Glouc'.   A^{o}. xxiij^{cio}.
                                    Herry Box.

[Sidenote: A gret rysyng in Walys.]

[Sidenote: The Normanes arryved at Dovorre.]

In this yere was a gret rysyng in Walys, wherfore the kyng wente into
Walys and made pees and reeste. Also the townes of Bloy and Bayone
werre wonne be S^{r}. John Seynt John and other worschepful bachelers
of Engelond. Also the same yere the Normaunes arryved at Dovorre and
brent a gret part of the towun and martyred an holy man that was
clepyd Seynt Thomas of Dovorre: but the Normaunes were sclayn every
modir sone, ther eschapid none. Also in this yere the kyng was
defraunded of his lond in Gascoigne in this manner, sothly: the kyng
hadde yoven the forseyd lond of Gascoyne to the kynges suster of
Fraunce, for that sche schulde be yoyned to hym in fre mariage, and be
some of his counseill enfeffed here in the sayd lond of Gascoigne;
whiche lond of Gascoigne sche yaf to Charles here brother and to
other, and the matrymoigne betwen here and kyng Edward sche sette at
noughte, and wolde noughte stonden therto. Wherfore kyng Edward sente
hyse ambassatours to the kyng of Almaigne, Spayne, and of Aragon, and
to manye other dukes and erles beyonde the see, preyenge and askynge
counseill and helpe of the seid matier: of whiche some because of
affynyte and for yeftes yeven, and some for good and faire beheste of
yeftes, graunted the kyng his axynge.

Id'm custos.   John Dunstable.    A^{o}. xxiiij^{to}.
               Adam Halyngbery.

[Sidenote: Alle the wolles and felles of Engelond arested.]

[Sidenote: The clergye of Engelond graunted moche good to the kyng
for his werres.]

[Sidenote: And the lay peple graunted the x p't of there goodes.]

[Sidenote: xxv m^{l} and viii^{c} Scotts.]

[Sidenote: The kyng tok the castell of Edenburgh with alle the
regalies of Scotlond.]

In this yere the kyng lete areste alle the wolles of Engelond, wolle
felles and hydes; and he tok to hym alle the money to hym graunted of
the pope in subsidie of the holy lond, and collecto's[22] of the same
dysme thorugh Engelond, and he dede for to be born to London into his
Eschequer: also the convocacion of the clergye of alle Engelond beynge
at London the Wednesday nest after the fest of seynt Mathy, the kyng
asked a gret some of the clergye toward his werres whiche he hadde
with diverses regiones and provynces; and the clergye graunted hym
halven dele there goodes sp'uelx and temp'elx, oughtake benefices not
passynge x marc: and the said taske the kyng let gadere at iij tymes
evenly of the yere. Also in this yere[23] the kyng hadde of lay peple
of Engelond the x part of there goodes, whiche he let gadere at two
tymes of the yere be even porcions. The same yere the werre aroos
betwen the kyng and the Walssh peple, in whiche werre was sclayn greet
multitude of peple: and that werre began aboughte the feste of seynt
Cosine and Damyan. And in this yere a worthy marchaund callyd Laurence
of Lodolowe was dreynt in the see to Flaundres ward. Also in this yere
S^{r}. Thomas Turbevyle for treson was drawen and hanged. And in this
yere Sire John Seynt John discomfyted the erle of Artoys; but in the
seconde bataile the said S^{r}. John was taken and enprisoned in
Fraunce. And in this yere S^{r}. Herry Mortymer resceyved the ordre of
knyghthoode at Portesmouth. Also this same yere the kyng Edward, magre
alle the Scottes of Scotlond, he toke the toun and the castell of
Berewyk, and killed there xxv m^{l} and viij c Scottes; and there were
taken S^{r}. William Douglas, S^{r}. Symond Freshell, and the erle
Patryke. And in this yere, that is to sey the yere of oure lord a
m^{l}cclxxxxvij, the kyng tok the castell of Edenburgh, where he fond
the regalyes of Scotlond, that is to seye the kynges see, his crowne
of gold, and his ceptre, whiche regalyes the kyng offred sithens to
seynt Edward at Westm', in the morwe after seynt Bothulphes day: and
at Myssomer, John Bailhol kyng of Scotlond come to the kynges pees to
London. Also this yere Edward the kynges sone was admirall upon the
see.

[Footnote 22: "Of the collectours" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 23: _See note_ F.]

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1296-1297.]

Id'm custos.   Thomas Suffolk.       A^{o}. xxv^{to}.
               Adam Fulham, drap'.

[Sidenote: The kyng lete gadere in Engelond cm^{l} quart' of corn for
to send to Gascoigne.]

This yere the kyng lete gadere in Engelond in diverses schires an
hundred thousand quarters of corn, and sente it over the see into
Gascoigne: and the kyng passed the see in August, and with hym xx^{ti}
m^{l}[24] Walsh men and too m^{l} Englysshmen and too m^{l} Irysshmen;
and there aroos a stryf betwen the kyng and his lordes, that non of
them wolde passen with hym over the see; and the kyng arryved in
Flaundres: and there was taken trewes for too yere betwen kyng Edward
and kyng Philipp of Fraunce; and S^{r}. John Seynt John and other
prysoners were frely delyvered out of pryson.

[Footnote 24: "xxx thousand" _in the Cotton MS._]

Id'm custos.   Will'm Stortford.   Anno xxvj^{to}.
               John Stortford.

[Sidenote: Certeyn men were arested for brekyng of the toune of
Cornhull.]

In this yere, in the feste of seynt Andrew, the kyng graunted to the
lordes all there axynge of the poyntes of the olde chartre: also the
Scottes areysed werre ayeyns the kyng of Engelond: also the viij day
of Paske, Thomas Romayn, Richard Romayn,[25] Richard Gloucestre,
Nicholl Faryndon, Adam Halyngbery, Thomas Cely, John Dunstale,
Richard Asshwy, John Wade and William Storteford, weren aresteed for
brekyng of the toune in Cornhull. And in the viij day of May[26] in
this yere the kyng faught with the Scottes at Fowkyrk, in which
bataile xxiij m^{l}[27] Scottes were sclayn, and of Englysshmen but
xxviij, honoured be the highe Godes grace.

[Footnote 25: _Omitted in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 26: "The day of Marie Mawdelyne" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 27: "xxx m^{l}"--_Ibid._]

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1298-1300.]

Herry Wallys, maior.   Ric' Sop'lane.   Anno xxvij^{o}.
                       Thomas Cely.

[Sidenote: The fraunchise of London was graunted ayeyn.]

[Sidenote: A maryage betwen the kyng and Margarete the kynges sust' of
Fraunce.]

[Sidenote: He wan all Scotland.]

This same yere the fraunchise of London was graunted ayeyn for ij
m^{l} marc, whiche was sesed ayeyn into the kynges hond; and for to
make leve of that some, the servauntes bowys in the citee were sette
at the tallage as well as the maistres. Also in this yere men of
London wenten and sercheden the chirche of Seynt Martyns in the feld
for tresoure of gold, thorough the wordes of a gardyn', whiche seyde
how there was a gold hord; but they founde nought: wherfore the dene
of Poules of London, be comaundement of the erchebysshop of
Caunterbury, denounced them alle accursed openly at the Crosse of
Poules that sergeden as above seyd. Also in this yere Robert
Wynchelsee erchebysshop of Caunterbury spoused the kyng Edward and
Margarete the kynges suster of Fraunce togidere: and also pees was mad
betwen bothe kynges. And in this yere the kyng wente the thridde tyme
beyounde the see into Scotlond, and thanne wan it alle.

Ely Russell, maior.   Henry Fyngreth.    A^{o}. xxviij^{o}.
                      John Armentires.

[Sidenote: The Traylbaston.]

[Sidenote: And this yere quene Margarete com into Engelond.]

[Sidenote: The kyng enprysoned his sone Edward.]

This yere come the kyng to London and ordeyned the Trailbaston,
whiche wente thorough the reaume, and arrered therby moche tresour.
And in this yere the quene Margarete com into Engelond; and the
citeizens of London reden ageine here in good aray, abought cc
persones atte the leeste. Also this yere the kyng enprysoned his sone
Edward, because that Waulter Langeton bysshop of Chestre hadde
compleyned that the forsaid Edward, be counseill of Pers of Gavaston,
esquyer of Gascoigne, hadde broken his parkes; and forasmoche as the
said Edward the kynges sone was ladde and governed be the said Pers,
the kyng dede exile the forseid Piers for evere.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1300-1304.]

Id'm maior.           Lucas Hav'yng.    Anno xxix^{mo}.
                      Ric' Champenes.

John Blount, drap',   Rob't Gallere.    A^{o}. xxx^{mo}.
  maior.              Pet' Bosynho.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Caunterbury.]

In this yere the kyng held his parlement at Caunterbury, and the werre
aroos betwen the kyng of Fraunce and of Flemynges.

Id'm maior.   Herry Pourte.        Anno xxxj^{mo}.
              Simon Parys.

Id'm maior.   Will' Combemartyn.   A^{o}. xxxij^{do}.
              John Burford.

[Sidenote: The templers were stroid.]

This same yere, that is for to seye the yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccv,
were alle the Templers distroyd in oo day thorugh out alle
Cristendome.

REX EDWARDUS PRIMUS. [1304-1307.]

Id'm maior.   Rog' Parys.     A^{o}. xxxiij^{cio}.
              John Lyncoln.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Westm'.]

[Sidenote: R. le Bruz.]

In this yere William Waleys, that was sworne liege man to the kyng of
Engelond, presented hymselfe to be kyng of Scotlond, and rebelled
ayens kyng Edward: nevertheles he was taken and sent to London, where
he was dampned, drawen, and hanged and beheded, and his bowels brent
and the body quarterd; and his hede sette upon London brigg, and hys
foure quarters sent into the foure beste townes in Scotlond: and this
was don upon seynt Bertilmewes even. And in the fest of seynt Myghell
the kyng held his parlement at Westm'; to the whiche parlement come
ought of Scotlond the bysshop of seynt Andrew, Robert le Bruz erle of
Caryk, Simon Frysell, and John erle of Athelles, whiche weren sworne
to be trewe lieges to kyng Edward.

Id'm maior.   Reg'lus Underley.   Anno xxxiiij^{to}.
              William Cosyn.

[Sidenote: Roberte le Bruz.]

[Sidenote: Bysshoppe of Boston.]

[Sidenote: Bisshoppe of Burdeux made pope.]

This yere Robert Bruz made hym kyng of Scotlond, and S^{r}. John Comyn
was sclayn atte Grey Freres in Donfres, because he wolde not falsen
his othe that he made to kyng Edward; wherefore the kyng sente after
alle the bachellarye of Engelond that thei schulde comen to Westm' at
Whitsontyd thanne nest folwyng; and there he doubbed cclxxx knyghtes:
and the Fryday[28] nest before the assumpcion of oure lady, the kyng
mette with Robert le Bruz be syde seynt Jones towne, and killed of his
meyne vij m^{l}; and Robert le Bruz fledde: and Simond Frissell was
take, and on oure lady even the Nativite he was drawen and hanged at
London, and beheded. And in the forsaid bataille were taken the
bysshop of Boston, the bysshop of seynt Andrewes, the abbot of Stone,
alle armed, whom the kyng sente to the pope, to do with them what he
wolde. Also S^{r}. John the erle of Athelles was taken also at the
same bataille; and at the request of the quene, because he claymed
kynrede of kyng Edward, his drawynge was relesed; nevertheles he was
honged and his body brent alle to asshes. And also in this yere the
erchebysshop of Burdeux was mad pope.

[Footnote 28: "the iiij^{th} day" _in the Cotton MS._]

Id'm maior, drap'.   Simon Benet.            A^{o}. xxxv^{to}.
                     Geffray atte Conduyt.

In this yere deyde the noble and most doughted prynce kyng Edward the
firste, in the day of translacion of seynt Thomas of Caunterbury, whos
body lith worthyly entered at Westm'.

[Transcriber's Note: Edward I actually died in 1307, the 36th year of
his reign.]

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VICECOMITU' LONDON' TEMPORE REG' EDWARDI SECUNDI DE
CARNARVAN', QUI CORONATUS FUIT APUD WESTM' X^{mo} KAL' MARCII[29] ANNO
D'NI MILL'MO CCC^{mo} vij^{o}.

[Footnote 29: "xiiij Kalend' Decembris" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1307-1308.]

John Blount, maior.   Will'o Furneys.   A^{o}. p'mo.
                      Nygel Drury.

[Sidenote: Kyng Edward wedded the kynges doughter of Fraunce,
Isabell.]

This yere the kyng Edward wente into Fraunce and wedded Isabell the
kynges doughter of Fraunce, the xv day of Januer', in oure lady
chirche at Boloigne; and the xx day Fever' sche was crowned at
Westm': and there was so gret prees of peple that S^{r}. John Bakwell
was crowsed to the deth. Also in the same yere the kyng anon after the
deth of his fadir sente into Gascoigne for Pers of Gavaston; and he
yaf hym the lordschipe of Walyngford and the erledom of Cornuwayle:
and this same yere prophecyed the chanon of Bridlyngton.

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1308-1312.]

Nicholl Faryndone,   William Basyng.     A^{o}. s'c'do.
  goldsmyth, m'.     Pers Blakeney.[30]

[Footnote 30: _See note_ G.]

Thomas Romayn, m'.   Simon Merewode.[31]   A^{o}. t'cio.
                     Ric' Willeford.[32]

[Footnote 31: _See note_ G.]

[Footnote 32: _See note_ G.]

[Sidenote: Templers were distroyd.]

[Sidenote: The ordre of the Crowched Freres began.]

In this yere the schirreves of London paid for the accomptes of London
and Middlesex cccc^{li}. Also in this yere, that is to seye the yere
of oure lord a m^{l} ccc^{mo} x^{mo}, the ordre of Templers were
distroid on oo day thorugh alle Cristendome, whiche ordre began in the
yere of oure lord a m^{l} lxxxxviij. Also in the same yere began the
ordre of Paulyns, that is to say Crowched Freres.

Ric' Reff'm, m'.   Simon Crop.               A^{o}. iiij^{to}.
                   Petir Blakeney, drap'.

John Gysors, m'.   Roger Palmere.[33]        A^{o}. v^{to}.
                   Jacob Seynt Ed'ust.[34]

[Footnote 33: _See note_ H.]

[Footnote 34: _See note_ H.]

[Sidenote: Edward of Wyndesore was born.]

In this yere was borne the kynges sone Edward at Windesore.

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1312-1315.]

Id'm maior.   John Lambyn.       A^{o}. vj^{to}.
              Ric' Lucekyn.[35]

[Footnote 35: "Bitekyn" _in the Cotton MS._]

Nicholl Faryndon, m'.   Adam Burden.   A^{o}. vij^{o}.
  goldsmyth.            Hugo Garton.

This yere of oure lord a m^{l} cccxiiij the kyng Edward with a ryall
oost wente into Scotlond; and upon Missomer day faught with the
Scottes at Strywelyn; and there he was discomfited and fledde, and
moche of his peple sclayn.

John Gysors, m'.   Stephen Abyndon.     A^{o}. viij^{o}.
                   William Bedyngham.

In this yere it befell that there was a rebaude called John Tannere,
the whiche wente aboughte and seyde that he was the goode kyng Edward
sone, and called hymself kyng Edward of Carnarvan, and seide thorugh
necligence of his noryce, whil he lay in his cradel a sowe com in and
foule rente hym, and the noryce durste nought tellen it, but toke a
tannere sone[36] and kepte hym in hys stede, and so he was putt to
kepyng of another noryce, be whiche he was preved of his rewme: and
for to make this the more certeyne to be belevyd, he schewed the
places of the woundes which that he seyde the sowe hadde mad. And he
seyde that kyng Edward maners were acordyng with the maners of his
fadyr the water-berere,[37] for as moche as he loved swyche rude
werkes: and for this seyenge moche peple yaf credence to hym and leved
his wordes. Also the same John Tanner chalangyd the chirche of the
Frere Cannes at Oxenford, whiche was somtyme the kynges halle, and
kyng Edward hadde yeve it to them to make thereof there chirche. But
natheles at the last he was preved fals, and was taken and brought to
Northampton, and there he was drawen and hanged; and before that he
was put to his penaunce he confessed before the peple that the devell
be hyghte hym that he schulde be kyng of Engelond, and knowloched that
he hadde served the devell iij yere and more.

[Footnote 36: "A carter son" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 37: "The carter." _Ibid._]

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1315-1317.]

Step'us Abyndon,   Hamo Goodchepe.      A^{o}. ix^{o}.
  drap', m'.       William Golith.[38]

[Footnote 38: "William Bedyngton" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: The toune and the castell of Berewyk was lost thorugh
treson.]

[Sidenote: Too cardenals comen into Engelond to make pees.]

The same yere, that is to sey the yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccxvj,
upon Midlentyne Soneday, the toun and the castell of Berewyk was lost
thorugh treson of Piers of Spaldyng, thanne beynge kepere of the same
toun and castell. In this yere too cardenales comen into Engelond for
to make pees betwen Engelond and Scotlond, whiche weren robbed upon
the more of Wygelysdon; of whiche robbery S^{r}. Robert of Middelton
was ateynt, and jugged to be drawe an hanged and beheded at London,
and his hede sett up at Neugate; and hise quarters were sent to iiij
principale citees of Engelond. And in this yere was an orible moreyn
of beestes.

John Wyng've, m'.   William Causton.   A^{o}. x^{mo}.
                    Rauf Balmere.

[Sidenote: A gret derthe of corn and othere vitailes.]

This yere was a gret derthe of corn and other vitailes, for a busshell
of whete was worth v_s_: and the poure peple eten for hunger cattes
and hors and houndes; and too yere and an half a quarter of whete was
worth ii marc; and the poure peple stal children and eten them, and
thanne anon after there fille a gret pestilence among the peple.

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1317-1321.]

Id'm maior.   John Prions.       Anno xj^{mo}.
              William Furneux.

[Sidenote: The Scottes come into Engelond and distroyde Northumb'.]

This yere the Scottes comen into Engelond and distroyden Northumbr':
and the citee of London sente to Yorke cc men of armes; and Scotlond
was entyrdyted.

Id'm maior.   John Pulteney.   Anno xij^{o}.
              John Dallyng.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Yorke.]

This yere the kyng held his parlement at Yorke; and S^{r}. Hugh
Spencer[39] was mad chaumberleyn of Engelond. And in this yere was
Thomas the erle of Lancastre beheded.

[Footnote 39: "Sir Hugh Spencer son" _in the Cotton MS._]

Hamo Chikell, m'.[40]   Simon Abyndon.[41]   A^{o}. xiij^{mo}.
                        John Preston.[42]

[Footnote 40: _See note_ I.]

[Footnote 41: _See note_ I.]

[Footnote 42: _See note_ I.]

This yere were the Spencers bothe the fadyr and the sone exiled out of
Engelond; after they were ayeyne revoked be the kyng.

Nycholl Faryndon, m'.   William Prodhom.[44]   A^{o}. xiiij^{mo}.
  goldsmythe.[43]       Arnold Conduyt.[45]

[Footnote 43: _See note_ I.]

[Footnote 44: _See note_ I.]

[Footnote 45: _See note_ I.]

[Sidenote: The rysynge of erles and barons of this land.]

This yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccxxj was strongly the barouns werre;
and Thomas erle of Lancastre the xij kal' of Aprill was beheded. And
in this yere was the rysynge of the erles and barons of this lond; and
they token S^{r}. Piers of Gaveston, the kynges sworn brother, and
smot of his hed; for which the kyng afterward in oo day dede do
beheded xx/iiij lordes and gentyles for the deth of the seid Piers.

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1321-1323.]

Hamo Chikewell, m'.   Ric' Constantyn.   A^{o}. xv^{o}.
  drap'.              Ric' of Hakeney.

[Sidenote: The sonne was turned into blod.]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccxxij, the laste day of Octobre,
the sonne was turned into blod, and so endured fro the morwe of the
day unto xj of the belle[46] befor noon.

[Footnote 46: "of the Belle of the mydday" _in the Cotton MS._]

Id'm maior.   John Grantham.   Anno xvj^{o}.
              Rog' of Ely.

[Sidenote: The vi^{th} peny of moveables.]

[Sidenote: An ordynance what the kynges offycers schulde taken in
every degre.]

This same yere the kyng hadde the syxte peny of moebles goodes thorugh
out Engelond. Also in this yere in the monthe of Juyne, forasmoche as
the officers of the kynges houshold have ben alwey behynden, and in no
certeynte of that they ought to don, nor in no certeyn what thei
schulde taken of the kyng be resone of there offices, whereof
examination of the saide offices ne myghte not be done, ne the
officers charged as they oughte to ben, to gret damage and dishonor to
the kyng, and the governaunce of his houshold not wel disposed, the
kyng havynge reward to the state above seyd, and hise goodes in other
manner dispendid thanne they oughte, comaunded Sire Bertilmewe
Badlesmere styward of his houshold, Sire Hugh Spencer chamberleyn,
Sire Roger of Norbury tresorer, and Sire Gilbert of Wyghton
countroller, that thei schulde ordeyne thereupon remedie; whiche be
the vertu of the kynges comaundement, ordeyned alle manere officers of
houshold, and what service every officer schulde have, and what every
officer schulde take, and what servaunts every officer schulde have,
and what the servaunts schulde take: and whan alle the ordinaunce was
made and rad before the kyng in presence of the worschipfull fadres
William Milton erchebysshop of Yorke, Maistre Walter Stapilton bysshop
of Excestre, the bysshop of Ely chaunceler of Engelond, the bishopp of
Norwych, the bysshop of Salisbury, Sire Herry le Scrop, Sire Herry
Sprignell, justices, it was assentyd and contentyd perpetuelly to be
observed.

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1323-1325.]

Nicholl Faryndon, m'.   Adam Salesbury.   Anno xvij^{o}.
  goldsmyth.            John Oxenford.

This yere the quene wente into Fraunce; and after wente S^{r}. Edward
the kynges sone to his modir into Fraunce; and the kyng of Fraunce
made hym duke of Guyon: wherfore kyng Edward was wroth with quene
Isabell his wyf, and with Edward hys sone; and thorugh counseill of
the Spensers the kyng dede exile the quene his wyf and Edward his
sone, and tok into hys handes alle there landes and lordschippes that
they hadden in Engelond.

Hamo Chikewell, m'.   Benet Fulham.      Anno xviij^{o}.
  drap'.              John de Causton.

[Sidenote: A mariage betwen the kynges sone Edward and the erles
dought' of Henowde.]

In this yere quene Isabell and Edward hire sone beynge in Fraunce, and
knowyng the malyce of the kyng, thorugh entisement of the Spensers,
sente for the lordes and gentiles that were exiled out of Engelond for
Thomas cause of Lancastre, that is to sey, S^{r}. Roger Mortymer,
S^{r}. William Trussell, S^{r}. John Cromwell, and manye othere,
whiche alle togideres ordeyned to make a maryage betwen Edward the
kynges sone and the erles doughter of Henowde. And whan that maryage
was acorded to be mad, the erle of Henawde graunted to quene Isabell
and to Edward here sone, and to othere lordes of there companye, to
brynge them with strong pouere into Englond. And whanne tydynges
thereof comen to the kyng Edward, he and the Spensers made moche
sorwe, and ordeyned to kepe the see cost, and withstanden them that
they schulde nought londen. And at the fest of the decollacion of
seynt John Baptyst, the citezeins of London sente to the kyng to
Porchestre an C men of armes: and the kyng lete do crye thorugh every
good market of Engelond, that whoso myghte take S^{r}. Roger Mortymer,
he schulde have an c^{li} for his trawaile. And the Wednesday nest
before the fest of seynt Mighell, whiche was thanne the Monday, the
quene and Edward hire sone, Sire Roger Mortymer, the erles brother of
Henawde, and othere grete in there companye, arryved at Orewelle in
Essex, faste be Herewych: and whanne they were landed the contre alle
aboughte fel to them be there owne fre wylle. And the quene and S^{r}.
Edward hire sone senten a lettre to the maire and the comonalte of
London, requyryng them that they schulde be helpynge to them in the
quarell and cause that the quene and Edward hire sone, heir of the
ream of Engelond, hadde begonne; that is for to seye, for to distroye
the traytours and enemyes of the sayd reaume. But non ansuere was
sente ayeyne, for doughte of the kyng and of the too Spensers, the
fadyr and the sone, at that tyme weren in the citee of London, with
manye othere lordes with them. And forasmoche as non answere was sent
ayeyn fro the meire and the comons of London of the said lettre, the
quene and Edward here sone senten another lettre therupon, with
hangynge seall, to the citee of London, whiche lettre, in the dawnyng
of the day was takked upon the newe crosse in Chepe; and manye copies
of the same lettre were takked upon wyndous, dores, and othere open
places in the citee of London, that alle men myghte rede them that
wenten be the weye: and this was done on seynt Denys day, that is to
seye the ix day of Octobre.[47] And as the kyng was at his mete,
tydynges comen to hym therof: and anoon the kyng, the Spensers bothe
the fadir and the sone, the erle of Arundell, and maister Walter
Baldok, fledden into Walys; and the kyng lefte maister Walter
Stapilton bisshop of Excestre to have the governaunce of the citee of
London; whiche bysshop axed to have the keyes and governaunce of the
citee be vertu of the comission: where thorugh debate aroos betwen hym
and the citee, so that he was taken and lad to the standard in Chepe,
and his hede was there smyten of, and his hede sette in his right
hand: and too of hyse squyers were beheded the same tyme, that is to
sey the xiiij day of Octobre, the yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccxxvj^{ti}.

[Footnote 47: _See note_ K.]

REX EDWARDUS SECUNDUS. [1325-1326.]

Id'm maior p' p'te a'       Gilbert Moredon.   A^{o}. xix^{o}.
  Ric' Beteyn p' residuo.   John Cotton.

In this yere the kyng and bothe Spensers, Robert Baldok chaunceler,
and the erle of Arundell, were taken in the hilles of Walys, and the
kyng was put into sauf warde; but S^{r}. Hugh Spenser wolde never
after that he was taken eten mete, wherfore at Hereford he was drawen,
hanged, beheded and quartered: and then was the sone of S^{r}. Hugh
Spenser the fadyr was drawen,[48] hanged and beheded at Bristoll. Also
in this yere, be the assent of alle the lordes of Engelond spirituelx
and temperelx, and be alle the comonalte of the reaume, be fre
eleccion of them alle, and resyngnacion of kyng Edward the fadyr, Sire
Edward his sone was chosen kyng of Engelond.[49]

[Footnote 48: "and Sir Hugh Spencer the father was drawen," &c. _in
the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 49: "the yere of his age xv."--_Ibid._]

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VICECOMITU' LONDON' TEMPORE REG' EDWARDI T'TIJ, QUI
CORONATUS FUIT APUD WESTM' DIE D'NICA PRIMO DIE FEBRUAR' ANNO D'NI
MILL'MO CCC^{mo} xxvj^{to}, ET ANNO ETATIS SUE xiiij,[50] P'RE SUO AD
TUNC VIVENTE.

[Footnote 50: "et anno etatis sue xiiij" _is omitted in the Cotton
MS._]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1327-1328.]

Ric'us Betayn, maior,   Ric' Rotyng.        A^{o}. p'mo.
  goldsmyth.            Rog' Chauntecler.

[Sidenote: Too mones and too popes.]

[Sidenote: Southwerk was graunted to ferme. ]

[Sidenote: The foundacion of Garlykhithe chirch.]

In this yere were seyn in the firmament too mones, and in this yere
were too popes. Also in this yere, the vj day of March, the kyng
confermed the lettres and the fraunchises of London. Also he graunted
that the meire schulde ben on of the justices at Newgate. Also he
graunted to the schirreves of London and Midd' the ferme of the
schirrevehode for ccc^{li} be yere, as it was in old tyme. Also he
graunted that the schirreves of London ne the citezens schulde nought
be charged with men that fledden to holy chirche, ne they schulde not
be constreyned to gone out of the citee of London to eny werre. Also
the same tyme the kyng graunted that the liberties and fraunchises of
London schulde nought after that tyme for no cause be taken into the
kynges hond: and the same tyme Suthwerk was graunted to the schirreves
of London to have to ferme: also the same yere, after the fest of
Pask', the kyng ordeyned an huge oost for to feighte ayens the
Scottes; and S^{r}. John of Henaude come into Engelond with[51] men of
armes for to helpe the yonge kyng Edward. And the Scottes comen into
Engelond and deden muche harme, and distroyden the contreye tyl they
comen to the park of Stanhope in Wyrdale, where they helden them in a
busshement in the parke. And the kyng besette the park alle aboughte
that the Scottes schulde never escaped: but thorugh treson of the
Mortymer they escapid everych on, and so the kyng was disceyved. And
also in this same yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccxxvj, be treson of Sire
Roger Mortymer, kyng Edward[52] was sclayn in the castell of
Berkele.[53] Also in this yere, in the[54] conversion of seynt Poul
after Cristemesse, the kyng spoused dame Philip' the erles doughter of
Henawde at York. Et id'm Ric'us Rothyng' tunc vic' fundavit eccl'iam
de Garlykhithe s'c'i Jacobi et dotavit.

[Footnote 51: "V c." _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 52: "the fadir"--_Ibid._]

[Footnote 53: "in the xxj yere of his reigne."--_Ibid._]

[Footnote 54: "even of the"--_Ibid._]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1328-1329.]

Hamo Chikewell, m'.   Herry Darcy.    A^{o}. s'c'do.
                      John Hawteyn.

[Sidenote: Scottes wer discharged of their homage:]

[Sidenote: with the blakke crosse.]

This yere, in the feste of Pentecost, the kyng helde his parlement at
North'; at whiche parlement, thorugh counseill of the Mortymer, the
kyng of yonge age and withinne age accorded with the Scottes, and
foryaf and relesed them al the homage and feautee that they oughte to
do to the crown of Engelond be chartre ensealed and an endenture, in
whiche were conteyned alle the homages and feautes that the kyng of
Scotlond and the lordes of the same lond schulde do to the kyng of
Engelond, which was ensealed with alle the seales of alle the grete
lordes of Scotlond spirituelx and temporelx, and other chartres and
remembraunces that kyng Edward and hise barons hadde of right in the
lond of Scotlond; which alle, thorugh counseille of quene Isabell the
kynges modir, and S^{r}. Roger Mortymer, were delyvered to the Scottes
with the blak crosse of Scotlond, the whiche goode kyng Edward the
kynges ayell[55] hadde conquered in Scotlond and broughte it fro the
abbeye of Stone, whiche was a precious relyke, the whiche was also
delyvered to the Scottes: also the kyng, thorugh counseill of his
modir and of the Mortymer, relesed and foryaf alle that right that the
barons out of Engelond hadden in ony londes of Scotlond of olde
conquest.

[Footnote 55: "his grandfather" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1329-1330.]

John Grantham, m'.   Simon Fraunceys.     A^{o}. iij^{cio}.
                     Herry Combemartyn.

[Sidenote: A p'lement at Salesby. Rog' Mortemer was made erle of
Marche: S^{r}. John Eltham the k' brother erle of Cornewalle.]

[Sidenote: Dyd homage to the kyng of Fraunce.]

This same yere David Bruz the sone of Robert Bruz, be ordynaunce of
the kynges modir and of the Mortymer, spousyd at Berewyk dame Johanne
of the Tour, the kynges suster, upon Marie Magdaleyn day, in the yere
of oure lord a m^{l}cccxxviij: and whanne the maryage was done, the
Scottes called here in despyte of Engleyssh men "make pees";[56] but
the kyng bar the blame wrongfully. This yere the kyng helde his
parlement at Salesbury; and at that parlement Sire Roger Mortymer was
mad erle of the March, and S^{r}. John Eltham the kynges brother was
also mad erle of Cornwayle. Also this same yere Sire Edmond Wodestoke
erle of Kent, the kynges uncle, was beheded at Wynchestre, thorugh
procurment of the quene, the kynges modir, and of the Mortymer. Also
in this yere the kyng seyled into Fraunce, that is to seye the yere of
oure lord a m^{l}cccxxviij, and dede homage to the kyng of Fraunce for
the ducherye of Guyene and for the counte of Pountyf.

[Footnote 56: "the countes make peas" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1330-1333.]

Simon Swaynlond, m'.   Rob't of Ely.   Anno iiij^{to}.
                       Th' Harewold.

[Sidenote: Prynce Edward was born.]

This yere Edward the firste begeten sone of kyng Edward the thridde
was born at Wodstoke, the day of seynt Viti and Modest'.

John Pounteney, m'.   Rob't of Ely.     A^{o}. v^{to}.
                      Tho's Harewold.

[Sidenote: S^{r}. Rog' Mortim' was hanged.]

In this yere Edward Bailloil, the sone of John Bailloil sumtyme kyng
of Scotlond, come into Engelond chalangynge his right heritage of the
kyngdom of Scotlond, and arreyved at Dounfermelyne; where, faste be
the abbeye, ii m^{l} Englysshmen scomfited and xl m^{l} Scottes.[57]
In the same yere Sire Roger Mortymer was hanged upon a theves galowes,
on seynt Andrew even, in the yer of oure lord a m^{l}cccxxx^{ti}.

[Footnote 57: _See note_ L.]

Id'm maior.   John Mokkyng.   Anno vj^{to}.
              Andr' Aubrey.

[Sidenote: Sege of Berwyk.]

[Sidenote: The yeldyng of the castell of Berewyk and the town.]

The same yere kyng Edward beseged the town and the castell of Berewyk:
and upon seynt Margeretes even the Scottes in wondyr grete noumbre
comen for to remove the sege, with whom the kyng faughte and
discomfyted them: and there were sclayn of the Scottes viij erles and
a m^{l} and ccc knyghtes and squyers, and of footfolke mo thanne xxxv
m^{l}; and of Englysshmen there were dede a knyght and a squyere and
xij footfolke. And so upon seynt Margarete day the town and the
castell were yolde to the kyng, in the yere of oure lord a
m^{l}cccxxxj.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1333-1336.]

John Preston, m'.   Nicholl Pyk.      Anno vij^{mo}.
                    John Housbonde.

Also in the same yere the kyng Edward sclough many Scottes, and he
recovered the castell of Kilbrigge.

John Pounteney, m'.   John Hamond.     A^{o}. viij^{to}.
                      Will' Hansard.

[Sidenote: The kyng of Scotland did homage: and allso the duke of
Bretayn.]

In this yere the kyng of Scotlond come into Engelond to the newe
castell upon Tyne: and aboughte the feste of the Nativite of seynt
John baptiste, there he dede homage to kyng Edward. The same yere the
duke of Bretayne dede homage also to the kyng for the counte of
Richemond.

Reynald at the Conduyt, m'.   John Kyngeston.   A^{o}. ix^{o}.
                              Walt' Turk.

[Sidenote: A gret moreyn of men and of bestes.]

[Sidenote: xl _s._ j quart whete.]

This same yere was a gret moreyn of beestes and of men also, and gret
habundance of reyne, where thorugh there was so gret derthe of corne
that a quarter of whete was worth xl _s._

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1336-1340.]

Id'm maior.   Walt' Moordon.   Anno x^{mo}.
              Ric' Upton.

In this yere the Scottes offendeden ayeyne: and the kinge wente over
the Scottyssh see and werred upon the Scottes, and overcame them
myghtyly, at whiche tyme the erle of Morre was taken.

John Pounteneye, m'.   Will' Bikkesworth.   A^{o}. xj^{mo}.
                       John Northale.

[Sidenote: Stella comata.]

[Sidenote: j q'rt' of whete ij _s_; and a fat oxe for di' marc; and vj
pegons for a peny.]

This same yere, in the monthe of Juyne and July, in diverses parties
of hevene appered stella co'mata. Also in this yere was gret plente of
vitaile, that a quarter of whete was sold at London for ij _s_; and a
fat oxe for vj _s._ viij_d_; and vj pegons for a peny: but natheles it
was ful gret scarste of money. Also this yere deyde S^{r}. John of
Eltham.

Herry Darcy, m'.   Walt' Neel.      Anno xij^{mo}.
                   Nicholl Grave.

[Sidenote: The counte of Cornwayle was made a duche.]

[Sidenote: Sergeaunts of the maire and the schirreves of London
schulde b're maces of silv'.]

In this yere kyng Edward made of the counte of Cornwayle a duche,
which he yaf to Edward his firste begetyn sone, withe the erledom of
Chestre. Also, the kyng graunted that the seriaunts bothe of the meire
and the schirreves of London schulde beren before the maire and the
schirreves of London maces of silver and over gilte, withe the kynges
armes.

Id'm maior.   Will' Pomfreyt.    Anno xiij^{o}.
              Hugo Marleberer.

In this yere the kyng and the quene seyled to Braban; and at the town
of Andewarp the quene chylded S^{r}. Leonell. And this same yere in
Braban the kyng made first cleyme to the crowne of Fraunce.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1340-1342.]

Andr' Aubrey, m'.   Will' Thorney.   Anno xiiij^{mo}.
                    Rog' Forsham.

[Sidenote: A p'lement at London.]

[Sidenote: The kyng asked moche good for his werres.]

[Sidenote: The coyne of the noble, half noble, and ferthyng.]

This same yere the kyng held his parlement at London; and he axed to
begynne hise werres the fyfthe part of alle the moeble goodes of
Engelond, and the custume of wolles, and the ix schef of every manere
of corn, the which was graunted. And in this yere the kyng changed
hise armys: and also the kyng made the coyne of goold; that is for to
seyne the noble, the half noble, and the ferthyng. And this yere was
called the firste yere oft oure kyng of the regne of Fraunce.

Id'm maior.   Adam Lucas.        Anno xv^{o}.
              Barth'us Mareys.

[Sidenote: The bataill of Scluse.]

[Sidenote: The comaundement of the Emp'o^{r} of Tartary.]

This same yere the kyng faught with the Frensshmen at Scluse, where
there were sclayn of Frensshmen xxx m^{l}; and the kyng toke and
scomfyted at the sayd bataill of Scluse cccx schippes. And in this
yere the kyng began the bataill of Torneye, and the town of seynt
Amandys was distroied. And in the same yere, on seynt Andrewes even,
kyng Edward come fro beyonde the see be nyghte to the tour of London,
and there tok manye lordes and peres of the reaume and putte them into
preson. And in this yere of kyng Edward began the firste yere of his
regne of the kyngdom of Fraunce. Also in this yere of oure lord a m
ccc xl^{ti}, there was sente out a maundement fro the emperor of
Tartarye into alle hise londes and kyngdomes, that every man schulde
use what lawe and beleve that he wolde, be so that he schulde worschep
non idoles but only everelyvynge God.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1342-1346.]

John Oxenford maior p'      Ric' Berkyng.    A^{o}. xvj^{o}.
  p'te a^{i}. et Simon      John Rokesley.
  Fraunceys p' alia p'te.

In this yere the kyng lefte the sege of Turney.[58]

[Footnote 58: _See note_ M.]

Simon Fraunceys, m'.   John Lovekyn.     A^{o}. xvij^{o}.
                       Ric' Kelsyngby.

[Sidenote: T're motus magnus.]

In this yere was a gret turnement at Dunstaple of alle the chivalrye
and gentyles of Engelond. And in this yere was a gret erthequake.

John Hamond, m'.   John Syward.     A^{o}. xviij^{o}.
                   John Aylesham.

This same yere the noble kyng Edward held his parlement at London, in
whiche parlement he made Edward his oldest sone prynce of Walys.

Id'm maior.   Geffrey Whityngham.   A^{o}. xix^{o}.
              Thomas Legge.

[Sidenote: Knyghtes of the Garter.]

In this yere the kyng began the rounde table at Wyndesore, that is to
seye, the ordre of Knyghtes of the Garter.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1346-1348.]

Ric' Lacere, m'.   Edmond Hampenale.   A^{o}. xx^{mo}.
                   John Gloucestr'.

This yere the kyng sailed over the see into Bretayne and into Guyen,
and come ageyn this same yere.

Geffrey Whityngham, m'.   Will's Clopton.   A^{o}. xxj^{mo}.
                          John Croydon.

[Sidenote: The bataile of Cressy.]

[Sidenote: Sege of Caleys.]

This same yere kyng Edward seyled into Normandye; and in the xij day
of Juyll he arryved at Hogges; and the xvj[59] day of Juyll the kyng
faught with the Normaundes at the brigge of Cadoun, where there were
taken the erle of Ewe, the lord Tankervyle, and an hundred knyghtes,
and of men of armes vij[60] c; and moche peple of Normandye were
sclayn. Also in this same yere in the xxvj day of August, the yere of
oure lord a m^{l}cccxlvj, was the bataile of Cressy, in whiche bataill
were sclayn the kyng of Beame, the duke of Loreyne, the erle of
Alaunson, the erle of Flaundres, the erle of Bloys, the lord of
Harecourt, the lord of Awmarle, the erle of Navers, and manye othere
knyghtes and barons to the noumbre of xv^{c} xlij; and kyng Phillip
fledde. And the thridde day of Septembre folwynge the kyng began the
sege of Caleys, whiche sege he contynued unto the thridde day of
August next folwynge. Also the same yere, durynge the forsaid sege,
David kyng of Scotlond was taken at the bataille of Derham, the xvj
kal' of Novembre, whiche kyng was raunsoned at an hundred m^{l} marcs,
to be payed in x yere, that is to sey every yere x m^{l} mark.

[Footnote 59: "xxvj"--_in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 60: "vj c."--_Ibid._]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1348-1351.]

Thomas Legge, m'.   Adam Brakson.       A^{o}. xxij^{do}.
                    Ric' Basyngstoke.

[Sidenote: Caleys was yolden.]

This yere durynge the segee of Caleys the kyng Phillip of Fraunce,
purposynge to remeve the sege, cam the xxvij day of Juyll, and
proposed bataille to kyng Edward, and assigned day and place; and kyng
Edward accepted it with a glad chere: and kyng Philipp undirstondynge
of this thinge, the nyghte folowynge he brende the tentes and cowardly
fledde awey: and so the peple withinne the town, seynge no comfort of
rescues, yolden the town to the kyng with the castell the ix^{e} day
of August. And aboughte the feste of seynt Mighell kyng Edward, which
dede a glorious tryumphe, retorned ayene into Engelond.

John Lovekyn, m'.   Herry Picard.     A^{o}. xxiij^{cio}.
                    Simon Dolcelle.

[Sidenote: A gret reyn.]

In this yere began the grete pestilence among the Sarazynes, that
unethes it lefte the x man alyve. And this same yere, that is to seye
the yere of oure lord a m^{l} ccc^{mo} xlviij^{o}, it reyned
contynuelly for the moste partye fro the Nativite of seynt John
baptist unto Cristemasse next folwynge.

Walt' Turk, maior.   Adam of Bery.   A^{o}. xxiiij^{to}.
                     Rauf Lynne.

[Sidenote: Gret pestylence.]

This same yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccxlviij^{o}[61] was the grete
pestylence at London, which endured fro the feste of Myghelmesse unto
the monthe of August sewyng.

[Footnote 61: "m^{l}, iij^{c} xlix" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1351-1355.]

Ric' Kylsyngby, m'.   John Notte.        Anno xxv^{to}.
                      Will's Worcetr'.

[Sidenote: Bellu' sup' mare int' regem E. et les Spaynardes.]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}cccl the kyng faughte with the
Spaynardes on the see, besyde Wynchelse and Romeneye: and thankyd be
God the kyng hadde the victorye, and wan there manye a faire vessell.

Andr' Aubrey, m'.   John Wroth.           A^{o}. xxvj^{to}.
                    Gilb't Steynethorp,
                      goldsmythe.

[Sidenote: New moneye of grotes and half grots and pens.]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccclj the kyng made newe moneye; that
is to seye grotes, and half grotes, and penyes: natheless the weyte
was lasse be v _s._ in the pound than the olde starlyng. Also in this
yere two fysshmongers were beheded at the standard in Chepe.

Adam Fraunceys, m'.   John Pecche.    A^{o}. xxvij^{o}.
                      John Stodeye.

[Sidenote: The dere Somer.]

In this yere was a gret derthe of vitailes in somer tyme. In this yere
was a gret droughte, whiche endured fro the begynnyng of March unto
the laste ende of Juyll.

Id'm maior.   Will' Welde.   Anno xxviij^{o}.
              John Lytele.

[Sidenote: The first duk of Lancastre.]

The same yere after Estre the kyng held his parlement at Westm', in
whiche parlement Herry erle of Lancastre was mad duke of Lancastre,
whiche was the firste duke of Lancastre.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1355-1357.]

Thomas Legge, m'.   Will' Totenham.   A^{o}. xxix^{o}.
                    Ric' Smelte.

[Sidenote: The staple of wolles were ordeyned.]

In this yere kyng Edward and kyng Phillip of Fraunce were sworne to
kepe pees; and kyng Edward schulde have in pees, withoute homage
doyng, alle the londes of Guyon, Angeoy, and Normandye, and othere
that longen to hym be heritage of olde tyme. Also this yere the kyng
revoked the staple of wolles out of Flaundres, and ordeyned it to be
in diverses places of Engelond; that is to seye, at Westm',
Caunterbury, Chichestre, Bristoll, Lincoln, and at Hull.

Simon Fraunceys, m'.   Th' Forst'.      A^{o}. xxx^{o}.
                       Walt' Brandon.

[Sidenote: The custume of wollys was graunted to king E.]

This same yere deyde kyng Philip of Fraunce, and John his eldest sone
was crowned kyng of Fraunce. And the same yere kyng Edward seyled over
the see and landed at Caleys, whiche with all his oost rood forth into
Fraunce to mete with kyng John, that wykkedly hadde broken the pees.
And anon kyng John wyste of his comynge, cowardly he fledde: and he
dede all his peple 'carie awey there vitailes and goodes, that kyng
Edward and his peple'[62] in nothing schulde be refresshed. Also the
same yere the Scottes token the town of Berewyk, but the castell was
kepte stille be Englysshmen. Also the same yere was graunted to kyng
Edward the custume of wolles; that is to say, l _s._ of the sakke for
the terme of vj yere folwynge.

[Footnote 62: _Supplied from the Cotton MS._]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1357-1360.]

Herry Picard, m'.   Ric' Notyngham.   A^{o}. xxxj^{mo}.
                    Thomas Dolcell.

[Sidenote: Kyng of Scotlond gave upp the realme of Scotlond.]

[Sidenote: Kyng of Fraunce John was taken at the bataill of Peyters,
and othere lordes with hym.]

This yere S^{r}. John Bailloil kyng of Scotlond yaf up the reaume of
Scotlond and the crowne to kyng Edward at Rokesburgh. Also in this
yere the town of Berewyk was yolden up to kyng Edward. And in this
same yere, that is to seye the yere of oure lord a m^{l} ccclvj^{to},
the xix day of Septembre, kyng John of Fraunce was taken at the
bataill of Peyters be the doughty prynce Edward the firste sone of
kyng Edward. Also Sire Philip his sone was taken with hym; and the
erle of Pountys, the erle of Ewe, the erle of Longeville, the erle of
Tankervyle, with othere viij erles and thre bysshoppes: and there were
sclayn the duke of Burbon, the duke of Daceus constable of France, and
the bysshop of Chalons, and manye othere grete lordys of Fraunce; and
the dolphyn fledde.

John Stodeye, m'.   Steph'us Caundyssh.   A^{o}. xxxij^{do}.
                    Barth'us Fretlyng.

[Sidenote: Prynce Edward with kyng John, with alle the p'soners, comen
into Engelond.]

[Sidenote: Grete justes in Smythfelde, beynge there thre kynges.]

In this yere prynce Edward, with kyng John of Fraunce and with alle
hise presoners, comen into Engelond the xxiiij day of May, aboughte
iij of the belle at afternoon he rod over London brigge toward the
kynges paleys at Westm'. Also the same yere were ryall justes in
Smythfeld, there beynge present thre kynges, that is to say the kyng
of Engelond, the kyng of Fraunce, the kyng of Scotlond; and manye
othere grete lordys of diverses regyons.

John Lovekyn, fysshmong', m'.   John Bures.    A^{o}. xxxiij^{o}.
                                John Bernes.

This same yere the kyng helde ryally seynt George feste at Wyndesore,
there beynge kyng John of Fraunce; the whiche kyng John seyde in
scorn, that he sawe never so ryall a feste and so costelewe mad with
tailles of tre, withoughte payeng of gold and sylvere.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1360-1362.]

Simon Dolcelle, m'.   Simon Bedyngton.   A^{o}. xxxiiij^{to}.
                      John Chichestre,
                        goldsmythe.

This yere, in the xiiij kal' of Juyn, Sire John erle of Richmond, the
kynges sone, wedded dame Blaunche.[63] Also in this yere kyng Edward
seyled to Caleys, and rood up into Fraunce, because Charles regent of
Fraunce thanne meved werre.

[Footnote 63: _See note_ N.]

John Wroth, m'.   John Deynes.     A^{o}. xxxv^{to}.
                  Walt' Berneye.

[Sidenote: Blak Monday.]

This same yere, that is for to seye the yere of oure lord a
m^{l}ccclx, the xiiij day of Aprill thanne beynge the morwe after
Estre day, kyng Edward with hys oost lay aboughte Parys; whiche day
was a foul derk day of myst and of hayl, and so bitter cold that manye
men deyde for cold: wherfore unto this day manye men callen it the
blake Moneday. This same yere were rovers on the see, undyr the
governayle of the erle of Seynt Poule; whiche the xv day of March
distroied the townes of Rye and Hastinge and othere be the see syde,
and sclewen manye men. Also in this yere the pees was made betwen the
kyng Edward and kyng John of Fraunce, the xv day of May: and kyng
Edward sente hise ambassatours into Fraunce, and toke the othe of
Charles regent of Fraunce, whiche othe was plight undir this forme:
Charles dede lete solempnely a masse to be songen; and whanne _Agnus
Dei_ was thries seyd, Charles leyde his right hand upon the patene,
whereupon lay Godes body, and his lefte hond pressyng don upon the
masse bok, seyenge, We swern upon the holy precious Goddes body, and
upon the Evaungelies, fermely to holden anentes us pees and concord
fourmed betwen the too kynges of Fraunce and of Engelond, and in no
manere to do the contrerie. Also in this yere mennes, bestes, trees,
and housynge were alle to smyte with violent lyghtnynge, and sodeynly
peresshyd; and the devell in mannes lyknes spak to men goynge be the
weye.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1362-1364.]

John Pecche, m',   Will' Holbeche.   Anno xxxvj^{to}.
  drap'.           Jemes Tame.

[Sidenote: A blody reyne and a blody crosse.]

[Sidenote: s'c'da pestilencia.]

[Sidenote: John the erle of Richm' was made duke of Lankaster.]

Also in this yere, in the kal' of Juyn, fell a blody reyne in Burgoyn,
and a blody crosse apered in the eire fro the morwe unto myd day at
Boloyne, the whiche afterward moved hym and fel down into the see. And
in this yere prynce Edward wedded the countesse of Kent. And in this
yere was the seconde gret pestilence, in whiche good Herry of
Lancastre deyde, and S^{r}. John erle of Richemond, the kynges sone,
was mad duke of Lancastre. And in the same yere began the grete
companye.

Steph'us Caundyssh, m'.   John of Seynt Albons.   A^{o}. xxyvij^{o}.
                          Jacob Andrewe.

[Sidenote: Magnus ventus.]

[Sidenote: Lyonell the k' son duke of Clarence.]

This same yere upon seynt Maurys day, the yere of our lord a
m^{l}ccclxj, was the gret wynd whiche caste doun tres, houses,
pynacles and steplees of chirches and manye places in Engelond. Also
this yere S^{r}. Leonell the kynges sone was mad duke of Clarence,
and S^{r}. Edmond of Wodestoke was made erle of Caumbregg.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1364-1367.]

John Notte, m'.   Ric' Croydon.   Anno xxxviij^{o}.
                  John Hyktost.

[Sidenote: Thre kynges comen into Engelond.]

In this yere comen thre kynges into Engelond to vysyte and to speke
with kyng Edward; that is to seye, kyng John of Fraunce, the kyng of
Scottes, and the kyng of Cipre.

Adam of Bery, maior,   Simon Mordon.   A^{o}. xxxix.
  skynnere.            John Medford.

[Sidenote: The bataill of Orrey.]

[Sidenote: John kyng of Fraunce deide at Saveye.]

[Sidenote: A gret frost that longe dured.]

This same yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccc^{mo}lxiiij was the batell of
Orrey in Britayne, where S^{r}. Charles de Bloys chalanged to be duke
of Bretayne was sclayn, and S^{r}. Bertram Claykyn was take with manye
othere lordes and knyghtes. Also this same yere, at Saveye besyde
Westm', deyde John kyng of Fraunce. And also in the same yere was a
strong cold frost, whiche endured fro seynt Andrewes day unto the kal'
of Aprill.

Id'm maior usq' xxviiij    John Brikelesworth.   Anno xl^{mo}.
  diem Januar', quo die    John Irland.
  p' p'ceptu' reg' illo
  amoto, Joh'es Lovekyn
  el'tus fuit in maiorem
  p' residuo a^{i}.

[Sidenote: E' p'mogenit' E' princip' nat' est.]

[Sidenote: Bataile of sparwes.]

[Sidenote: Men and bestes weren enfect with pokkes.]

This same yere, the vij kal' of Feverer, Edward the firste sone of
prynce Edward was born; whiche in the age of vij yere endyd hys lyf.
Also in this yere was grete and stronge batailes of sparwes in
Engelond in diverses places, whereof the bodyes were founden in the
feldes dede withoughte noumbre. And in this yere manye men and bestes
were enfect with pokkes where thorugh they deyden. And in this yere on
seynt Barnaby day was Cornwayle hanged.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1367-1370.]

John Lovekyn, m',   John Warde.     A^{o}. xlj^{mo}.
  fysshmong'.       Th' atte Lee.

[Sidenote: Natus fuit Ric' fil' p'cipis E.]

In this yere Richard the sone of prynce Edward was born at Burdeux.

Jamys Andrew, maior,   John Thorgold.    A^{o}. xlij^{do}.
  drap'.               Will'm Dykeman.

[Sidenote: Stella comata.]

[Sidenote: The bataille of Nazers.]

This same yere, that is to say the yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccclxvij,
in the monthe of March appered stella comata. Also in this yere was
the bataille of Nazers in Spayne, where prince Edward with his
companye scomfyted the bastard of Spayne, and restored kyng Petir
ayeyn to his reaume that was put out be the forseid bastard; and there
was taken the erle of Dene, S^{r}. Olyver Claykyn, and manye othere;
thankyd be God.

Simon Mordon, m'.   Adam Wymondham.    A^{o}. xliij^{cio}.
                    Rob't Girdelere.

[Sidenote: iij pestilencia.]

In this yere Sire Leonell duke of Clarence with a fayre meyne sailled
over the see toward Melane; whiche aboughte the natyvyte of oure lady
the same yere deyde. In this yere was the thridde pestilence,[64] in
whiche deyde dame Blaunche of Lancastre. And in this yere the
Frensshmen meved ayeyn werre.

[Footnote 64: _See note_ M.]

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1370-1373.]

John Chichestr', m',   John Pyell.     A^{o}. xliiij^{to}.
  goldsmyth.           Hugh Holbech.

[Sidenote: j bus' whete xl _d._]

In this yere was so gret derthe of corne in Engelond that a busshell
of whete was worth xl _d._ And in this yere was the grete vyage into
Fraunce be S^{r}. Robert Knolles. And in this yere Mortherer of
Pembrok in Cristemasse weren at the countesse hous; and the same
Mortherer sclewen of men, women, and children in the cradell, xiij;
and this was don be a fysshmongre that the countesse hadde founde to
scole and brought up of a child. And in this yere, the day of the
assumpcion of oure lady, the yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccclxix, deyde
dame Philip quene of Engelond.

John Bernes, drap', m'.   Will' Walworth.    A^{o}. xlv^{to}.
                          Rob't of Gayton.

In this yere the houses and gardynes were drowe doun aboughte Poules.
And in this yere the duke of Lancastre seiled over the see and rood
thorugh Fraunce: and S^{r}. John Haukewod florysshed that tyme in
Lumbardie. And in this yere the prynce with hys wyf and hise meyne
comen into Engelond, levynge behynden hym the duke of Lancastre in
Gascoigne, and the erle of Cambregge.

Id'm maior.   Rob't Hatfeld.   Anno xlvj^{to}.
              Adam Stable.

[Sidenote: The tresorer, chaunceller, and pryve sell were discharged.]

In this yere the chaunceller, the tresorer of Engelond, bysshopes,
and the pryve seall were discharged of there offyces, and in there
stede were put seculere lordes.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1373-1375.]

John Pyell, m'.   John Philpot.      A^{o}. xlvij^{o}.
                  Nicholl Brembre,
                    groc'.

[Sidenote: Too cardinalx were sent fro the pope into Engelond for to
trete for pes.]

[Sidenote: A bataill upon the see betuen Englysshmen and Flemynges.]

This same yere, at Awrastelynge, John Northwold, mercer, was sclayn at
the blak heth, wherethorugh aroos a gret discencion and debate among
the craftes of London. And in the same yere the duk of Lancastre and
the erle of Cambregge come out of Gascoyne into Engelond, and wedded
the doughter of kyng Petyr. And the same yere too cardinalx were sent
fro the pope to entrete for the pees betwen the two reaumes. And in
this yere was a bataill upon the see betwen Englisshmen and Flemynges,
where there were taken of Flemynges xxv schippes lade with salt of the
bay. Also in this yere the erle of Pembroke was taken at the Rochell
be the Spaynardes, on the even of the nativite of seynt John baptiste.

Adam of Bery, skynn', m'.   John Aubray.    A^{o}. xlviij^{o}.
                            John Fyfhede.

In this yere the duke of Lancastre seiled into Flaundres, and passed
be Parys thorugh Burgoyne and alle Fraunce into Burdeux, withoughte
ony withstondyng. And in this yere Sire Alex' Neville was mad
erchebysshop of Yorke, and Thomas Arundell bysshop of Ely, maistre
Herry Wakefeld bysshop of Worcestre.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1375-1377.]

Will'm Walworth, fysshmong',   Ric' Lyons.       A^{o}. xlix^{o}.
  maior.                       Will' Wodehous.

[Sidenote: Ladyes ledde lordes bridel.]

In this yere, at the town of Bruges in Flaundres, was tretyd upon
diverses articles hangynge betwen the pope and kyng Edward. Also the
same yere was treted at Bruges for the pees betwen the too reaumes.
Also in this yere rood dame Alice Perrers, as lady of the sune,[65]
fro the tour of London thorugh Chepe; and alwey a lady ledynge a
lordys brydell. And thanne began the grete justes in Smythefeld whiche
endured vij nyght.

[Footnote 65: _See note_ N.]

John Warde, m'.   John Hadley, groc'.   Anno l^{mo}.
                  Will's Newport.

[Sidenote: iij pestilencia.]

In this yere was the thridde grete pestilence, in whiche dyed the
honorable knyght Edward lord Spenser, and lythe beryed at Tewkesbery.

REX EDWARDUS TERTIUS. [1377.]

Adam Stable maior usq' xxj^{m}   John North, drap'.   A^{o}. lj^{mo}.
  diem Marcij, quo die p'        Rob't Launde.
  p'ceptu' regis amotus fuit,
  et Nich's Brembre el'tus
  fuit p' res' a^{i}.

[Sidenote: Obit' Edwardi principis.]

In this yere, upon Trinite Soneday the viij day of Juyn, withinne the
kynges paleys of Westm' deyde the noble flour of knyghthood, that is
to seye, the goode prince Edward, whoos body lith worthily entered at
Caunterbury a for yeyns seint Thomas schryne. Also in this yere oon
Prentyng of Norfolk was enprisoned in the erles place of Northumbr',
for whiche the peple of London aroos and wolde a sclayn the erle and
cast down his place. Also in this yere Richard the sone of prynce
Edward was mad prynce of Walys.[66]

[Footnote 66: _See note_ O.]

Nicholl Brembre, groc', m'.   Andr' Pykeman.   A^{o}. lij^{do}.[67]
                              Nicoll Twyford.

[Footnote 67: _See note_ P.]

In this yere was graunted to the kyng of every persone, man and woman,
above the age of xiiij yere, iiij _d_; and of every man of holy
chirche avaunced xij _d_; and of every man nought avaunced iiij _d._
freres only except. And this same yere the cardynall of Engelond was
smyten with the palsye and loste his speche, and upon Marie Magdaleyne
day he dyde. Also in this yere, the xij day of Aprill, S^{r}. John
Mynstreworth knyght was beheded. Also in this yere, in the xij kal' of
Jull, that is for to seye on seynt Albones even, at Schene, deyde the
moost excellent and doughted prynce Edward the thridde: the whiche
Richard, the sone of goode prynce Edward the sone of the sayde kyng
Edward, at the age of xj yere began to reigne: the whiche forsaid kyng
Edward lyth ryally entered at Westm'.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMINA MAIOR' ET VICECOMITU' LONDON' TEMPORE REGIS RIC'I S'C'DI, QUI
CORONATUS FUIT APUD WESTM' xvij KAL' AUGUSTI, ANNO D'NI MILL'MO
CCC^{mo} lxxvij^{o}, ANNO ETATIS SUE xj^{o}, DURANTE T'M'IO ET ANNO
MAIORATUS NICHOLAI BREMBRE ET VICECOM' SUP' D'CO ANNO PRIMO.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1377-1380.]

John Philpot, wolman, m'.   John Boseham.    A^{o}. s'c'do.
                            Th' Cornwayle.

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccc^{mo}lxxviij, in the morwe after
seynt Laurence day, was Robert Hawle sclayn in the chirche of Westm'
be S^{r}. Aleyn Boxley, S^{r}. Rauf Fereres and Markle, whiche was
sithen a sergeaunt of armes. Also the same yere was ordeyned that
every persone undirgrowe schulde pay iiij _d._ to the kyng; and this
cause was most cause of the rysyng after, for in Kent they began to
serche first maydens and othere.

John Hadley, groc', m'.   John Heyleston.   A^{o}. t'cio.
                          Will' Baret.

This yere the parlement was at Northt'; and there was Kirkeby drawe
and hanged for the deth of a marchaunt of Jene, and a whit frere was
punysshed for wordes that they hadde seyde be the duke of Lancastre.
And in this yere were galeys in Thamyse, and brende Gravesende and
Tilbury; for which cause S^{r}. Rauf Ferrers was apeched. And in this
yere was the bataill betwen S^{r}. John of Audeslay knyght, and Thomas
Kat'ynge esquyer.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1380-1381.]

Will Walworth, m'.   Walt' Coket.        A^{o}. iiij^{to}.
  fysshmong'.        Will' Knyghtcote.

[Sidenote: The rysyng of the co'es of Essex and Kent.]

[Sidenote: They brende Saveye.]

[Sidenote: Jake Strawe was sclayn.]

This yere was the rysyng of the co'es of Essex and of Kent, for a
talaye ordeyned that every man and woman betwen the age of lx and xvj
yere schulde paye to the kyng xij _d._; the whiche comones brenden the
chirche and the houses of seynt Jones at Clerkenwelle, and at the Tour
hill they beheded maistre Simond Sudbury, than erchebysshop of
Caunterbury and chaunceller of Engelond; and frere Robert Hales priour
of seynt Jones hous, thanne tresorer of Engelond; and frere William
Appulton a grey frere, because he was phisicion to the duke of
Lancastre, and Roger Leche sergeaunt of armes; and Richard Lyons was
beheded at the standard in Chepe; and Richard Somere was beheded at
the Milende; and Legat of Holbourn was beheded at Goterlane ende in
Chepe; and manye questmongers, jorours, men of lawe, Flemynges, and
othere aliens as they comen to honde they were beheded in diverses
places. And thise said arrysers brenden the dukes place of Lancastre
called Saveye, and wolde fayn an had the duke of Lancastre, but as
grace was he myghte not be founden: and this was don on Corpus Cristi
day, thanne beynge on the xj day of Juyn the yere of oure lord a
m^{l}ccclxxxj. And on the morwe after, that is to saye Fryday, and
thanne on the Satirday after Corpus Cristi day, the kyng anon after
rood into Smythfeld, and William Walworth thanne beynge maire of
London, S^{r}. Robert Knolles and also aldermen and othere citezeins
of London with hym: and there they metten with Jake Strawe ledere of
the uprysers. And this Jake Strawe spak to the kyng heded as it hadde
be to his felawe: and John Blyton that bar the maires swerd of London
bad hym don of his hode while he spak to the kyng; wherfore Jake
Strawe wax an angred, and mynte to caste his daggere to Blyton. And
thanne William Walworth, maire of London, drewe his baselard and smot
Jake Strawe on the hed: and with that, Rauf Standyssh, that bar the
kynges swerd, roof Jake Strawe thorugh the body with a swerd; and
there he fyll doun ded. And anon his hede was smeten of and sett on a
pole. And there the kyng made knyghtes, that is to seye, William
Walworth maire of London, Rauf Standyssh, Robert Launde, Nicholl
Brembre, Nicholl Twyford, and John Philpot. And anoon they wenten into
seynt Jones feld, and there they founden alle the arrysers. And anon
they were besett aboughte with the peple of London, so that they might
non of them escape away: and thanne the kyng dede crye that no man
schulde don them bodyly harme; and they were fayne to escape awey with
there lyfves, and left there wepenys behynde them. Nevertheles
afterward manye of them weren arrested, and be the lawe don to the
deth in diverses schires of Englond, some drawen and hanged, and some
hanged, and some beheded.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1381-1382.]

John Northampton,   John Hende, drap'.   A^{o}. v^{to}.
  draper, maior.    John Roote.

[Sidenote: Kyng Richard wedded the emperours dought' of Almayne,
Anne.]

[Sidenote: T're mot'.]

This yere kyng Richard wedded quene Anne the emperours doughter of
Almaygne, that was a gracious lady. And in this yere of oure lord a
m^{l}ccclxxxij, in the xxj day of May upon Wednesday anon after noon,
was a gret erthequake in Engelond.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1382-1385.]

Id'm maior.   Adam Bamme, goldsmyth.   A^{o}. vj^{to}.
              John Cely.

[Sidenote: The bysshop of Norwych wente into Flaundres.]

This yere sire Herry Spenser bysshop of Norwich seyled into Flaundres
with a croceryd to werre on the Flemynges. In that vyage wente S^{r}.
William Elmham, S^{r}. William Faryndon, S^{r}. Thomas Trevet, and
othere; and on seynt Urbanes day the pope, there were sclayn besyde
Dunkirke xj m^{l} and v hundred Flemynges. Also in this yere fill
debate in London betwen John Northampton, William Essex, John Moore,
and Richard Norbury on that on partye, and the fysshmongers on the
othere partye.

Nicholl Brembre, m'.   John Moore, m'c'.    A^{o}. vij^{mo}.
  drap'.               Simon Wynchecombe.

In this yere John Northampton, John More and Richard Norbury were
dampned into the tour of London, to be drawe and honged for certeyn
congregacion mad ayeyns the pees in the citee of London. And in this
yere S^{r}. Nicholl Brembre was chosene maire of London be stronge
hand of certeyne craftes of London.

Id'm maior.   Nicholl Exton.        Anno viij^{o}.
              John Frossh', m'c'.

[Sidenote: S^{r}. Edmunde Langeley erle of Cambrygge made duke of
Yorke.]

[Sidenote: S^{r}. Mychel Pole was made erle of Suff'.]

[Sidenote: A gret bataill in the palys of Westm'.]

In this yere were called ayeyne to there ansuere John Northampton,
John More, and Richard Norbury in the tour of London, before S^{r}.
Robert Tresylyan justice, and before S^{r}. John Deverose thanne
styward of the kynges houshold, and before S^{r}. Nicholl Brembre
thanne maire of London. In this yere the kyng at parlement be assent
of the comounes made S^{r}. Edmond Langeley, thanne erle of
Caumbregge, duke of Yorke; Sire Thomas Wodestoke, thanne erle of
Notyngham, duke of Gloucestre; S^{r}. Robert le Veer, thanne erle of
Oxenford, duke of Irlond; and sitthe he made hym marqwys of Develyn,
and yaf hym alle the comodites of Irlond, terme of hys lyf, to
mayntene the werres of Irlond: also S^{r}. Mighell of Pole was mad
erle of Suffolke, and S^{r}. John Urmonde was mad erle of Urmond. In
this yere kyng Richard, the duke of Lancastre, with a grete powere
redyn into the north, and distroied into the Scottes see. And in this
yere was the bataille in the palys at Westm', betwen Martigo Novyle of
Naverne apeler, and John Walssh defender; the whiche Martigo apeled
the said John that he schulde have p'posyd and sold the castell of
Chirburgh: the whiche John there hadde the victorye and was mad
knyght, and the said Martigo was drawen and hanged. Also in this yere
S^{r}. Nicholl Brembre was chosen maire ayeyne, be the said craftes
and be men of the contre at Harowe and the contre there aboughte, and
not be fre eleccion of the citee of London as it owith to be: and the
oolde halle was stuffed with men of armes overe even, be ordinaunce
and assente of S^{r}. Nicholl Brembre for to chese hym maire on the
morwe; and so he was.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1385-1386.]

Id'm maior.   John Oghgon.       A^{o}. ix^{o}.
              John Chircheman.

[Sidenote: Lordes ledde ladies be the bridell.]

In this yere was a gret rydynge fro the tour of London to Westm'; and
evere a lord ledde a ladyes bridell. And on the morwe began the justes
in Smythefeld, whiche lasted too dayes. There bar hym well S^{r}.
Herry of Derby, the dukes sone of Lancastre, that othere was the lord
Beaumond, the thridde S^{r}. Simond of Beuerley, the ferthe S^{r}.
Piers Courteneye.[68]

[Footnote 68: _See note_ Q.]

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1386-1388.]

Nicholl Exton, maior,   Will' More, vynt'.       A^{o}. x^{mo}.
  fysshmong'.           Will' Staundon, groc'.

[Sidenote: A bataill on the see betwen the erle of Arundell and the
Flemynges.]

This yere the erle of Arundell admirall of Engelond faught on the see
with the Flemynges, upon oure lady day in lenten, and scomfyted them,
and tok manye schippes lade with Rochell wyn; among whiche schippes
was oo schipp called Mewes Colman,[69] and that schipp was the
admyrall of Flaundres, the whiche was taken and manye othere
prisoners. The some of schippes grete and smale, at that tyme take,
were lxxxvj schippes, in whiche were accompted xvij^{m} tounes of
wyne. Also the duke of Lancastre in this yere, with his duchesse dame
Constance, sayled over the see into Spayne with a gret peple, to
clayme his wyfves right: and he tok with hym John Northt', for doughte
elles he myghte have be sclayn whiles he hadde ben oughte of the
reaume.

[Footnote 69: "Mons^{r} Colman" _in the Cotton MS._]

Id'm maior.   Will' Venor, groc'.   Anno xj^{mo}.
              Hugo Fastolf.

[Sidenote: The rysyng of the lordes.]

[Sidenote: Diverses knyghtes were hanged, and diverses justices were
exiled for everemore.]

In this yere was the rysyng of lordes of Engelond; that is for to
seye, S^{r}. Thomas of Wodstok duke of Gloucestre, S^{r}. Herry erle
of Derby, S^{r}. Richard erle of Arundell, S^{r}. Thomas erle of
Warrewyk, Moubray the erle marchall, and S^{r}. Thomas the erle of
Notyngham, ayens othere certeyn lordes, that is to weten, S^{r}.
Robert de Veer erle of Oxenford, that was mad markys of Develyn and
after duke of Irlond, whiche fledde into Loveyne in Braban, and there
he deyde; Sire Mich' of Pole erle of Suffolk, whiche also fledde to
the same place, and there deyde; Sire Alexander Nevyll erchebysshop of
York, the whiche fledde to Scotlond, and there deyde; Robert Tresilian
the kynges justice and Nicholl Brembre knyght were drawe to Tyborne
and hanged. Also the same tyme Sire Johan Beauchamp, S^{r}. James
Berners, and Sire Simond of Beuerle, knyghtes, were beheded at the
Tour hill; but S^{r}. John of Salisbury was drawen and hanged; and
also Robert Bealknap, John Holt, Robert Cary, William Burgh, Robert
Fulthorp, and John Lokton, justices, weren exiled into Irlond, there
for to dwelle alle there lyf tyme.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1388-1390.]

Nicholl Twyford, goldsmyth,   Adam Karlyll,[70] groc'.   A^{o}. xij^{o}.
  maior.                      Th' Austyn, m'c'.

[Footnote 70: "Cachehill" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: Justes in Smythfeld betwen the erle of Not' and the erle of
More and othere.]

This yere, in the moneth of May, weren the justes in Smythfeld betwen
the erle of Notyngham and the erle of More, Scott.; also betwen the
lord Welles and S^{r}. David Lyndesey, Scott.; also betwen there
Nicholl Bemenere and John Bron, Scott.

William Venor, groc', m'.   John Loveye.           A^{o}. xiij^{mo}.
                            John Walcote, drap'.

In this yere were justes betwen S^{r}. Piers Courtenay and S^{r}.
William Danyell, Scott. And in this yere John Northampton cam home and
posseded his goodes.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1390-1392.]

Adam Bam, goldsmyth,   Th' Vyvent.       Anno xiiij^{mo}.
  m'.                  John Fraunceys,
                         goldsmyth.

[Sidenote: A gret scarcete of corn.]

This yere was scarcete of corn. Neverthelees the seide meire, be good
counseill, sente his men over the see with gold into divers contres
and broughte home corn, so that the prys was well amendyd.[71]

[Footnote 71: _See note_ R.]

John Hende, drap', m'.   John Schadworth, m'c'.   A^{o}. xv^{o}.
                         Herry Vaun'e, drap'.

[Sidenote: Edward Dalyngreg' and Baldewyn Radyngton were mad kepers of
the citee of London.]

[Sidenote: The remevyng of the court to Yorke.]

[Sidenote: For an hors loof.]

whiche John Hende occupied the office of the meire into the morwe
after the natyvyte of seynt John baptist, the whiche was put down be
the kyng and his counseill at Notyngham, and ordeyned S^{r}. Edward
Dalyngregy, knyght, kepere of the citee; and on the xxij day of Juyll
the said Edward was discharged of his office, and S^{r}. Bawdewyn
Radyngton at Wyndesore was mad kepere of the citee of London, and so
stod in office into the feste of seynt Symond and Jude; at whiche day,
be leve of the kyng, they chosen officers in the Yelde halle of London
for the yere folwyng as it folwith. And in this yere the courtes were
remeved, and withdrawe fro London to York fro the feste of the
nativite of seynt John baptist unto Cristemasse folwynge; and all this
disese above seyd was for this cause. In this yere Thomas Arundell
erchebysshop of York was thanne chaunceler of Engelond, and Waltham
bysshop of Salesbury was thanne tresorer of Engelond; the serwauntes
of whiche tresorer arrered a grete debate in Fletestrete ayens men of
the towne for an hors loof, for whiche the tresorer pleyned upon the
citee to the kyng, and wykkedly enformed the kyng; thorugh whiche
enformacion and procurment of the chaunceler, the kyng sesed the
fraunchise and the liberte of London into hys hond: and the kyng hadde
of London x m^{l} lib' or he wolde be plesyd.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1392-1396.]

Will'm Staundon,   Gilb't Maunfeld.   A^{o}. xvj^{mo}.
  groc', maior.    Th' Newenton.

In this yere was the pley of seynt Katerine.[72]

[Footnote 72: _See note_ S.]

John Hadley, groc',   Ric' Whityngton, m'c'.       A^{o}. xvij^{mo}.
  m'.                 Grugo Barentyn, goldsmyth.

[Sidenote: Anna reg'^{na} Angl' obiit.]

In this yere, that is to seye in the xij day of Juyn the yere of oure
lord a m^{l}ccclxxxxiiij, the goode lady quene deyde at Shene, and
lith entered worthyly at Westm'.

John Frossh, m'c', m'.   Th' Knolles, groc'.       A^{o}. xviij^{o}.
                         Will' Brampton,
                           fysshmongre, with the
                           longe berd.

In this yere kyng Richard wente first into Irlond.[73]

[Footnote 73: _See note_ T.]

Will's More, vynt', m'.   Rog' Elys.           A^{o}. xix^{o}.
                          Will' Scheryngham.

[Sidenote: Kyng Richard wedded the kynges doughtre of Fraunce,
Isabell.]

In this yere, aboughte the feste of Al Halwen, Isabell the kynges
doughter of Fraunce was spoused to kyng Richard at Caleys, whiche
afterward, on the viij day of Januer, was crowned quene at Westm'; at
whos comynge to London the priour of Typtre in Essex, with othere
viij persones, upon London bregge in the gret prees weren crowsed to
the deth.

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1396-1397.]

Adam Bamme, goldsmyth,   Th' Welford, drap'.    A^{o}. xx^{mo}.
  m'.                    Will' Parkere, m'c'.

[Sidenote: The makynge of lordes.]

[Sidenote: The erle of Arundell was condempned.]

The whiche Adam Bamme deyde the vj day of Juyn; and Richard Whityngton
occupyed the office of the mairalte the remenaunt of the yere be
patent of the kyng; and thanne after, on seynt Edwardes day, he was
chose maire for the yere folwynge. Also in this yere the xxj day of
Juyll, the regne of the kyng xxj^{ti} yere begynnynge, S^{r}. Thomas
of Wodestoke duke of Gloucestre was arested at Paske;[74] and S^{r}.
Richard erle of Arundell, and S^{r}. Thomas erle of Warrewyk, the lord
Cobham, and S^{r}. John Cheyne weren also arested. And in the monthe
of Septembre nest folwynge the kyng helde hys parlement at Westm', at
whiche parlement Edward erle of Roteland was made duke of Awmarle,
Herry erle of Derby was mad duke of Hereford, Thomas earl Marchall was
mad duke of Norfolk, S^{r}. John erle of Huntyngdon was mad duke of
Excetre, the erle of Kent was mad duke of Surry, the erle of Somerset
was mad marquys of Dorset, S^{r}. Thomas Percy was mad erle of
Worcestre, the lord Spenser was made lord[75] of Gloucestre, the lord
Nevyle was mad erle of Westmerland. Also the parlement was enyourned
to Schrovesbury into the xv day of seynt Hillar. And in the forsaid
parlement was mad a gret hale in the paleys of Westm', in whiche
Richard the erle of Arundell was dampned to the deth, and he was
beheded at the Tour hill.[76]

[Footnote 74: "Plass'he" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 75: "Earl" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 76: _See note_ U.]

REX RICARDUS SECUNDUS. [1397-1399.]

Richard Whytyngton,   Will' Askham, fysshmong'.   A^{o}. xxj^{mo}.
  m'c', m'.           John Wodecok, m'c'.

[Sidenote: The mordryng of the duke of Glouc' at Caleys.]

[Sidenote: There schulde a ben a bataill at Coventre betuen the duk of
Hereford and the duk of Norf', and anon in the same place they were
exiled.]

[Sidenote: Thomas Arundell erchebisshop of Caunterbury was exiled.
Rog' Walden made erchebysshop.]

[Sidenote: The kyng hadde the citee of London and othere schires in
grete hate.]

[Sidenote: Blank chartres were seled, &c. whiche coste London a m^{l}
li'.]

In this monthe of Feverer was the parlement at Schrovesbury, at whiche
parlement was ordeyned the deth of the duke of Gloucestre the kynges
uncle, whiche was foule mordred at Caleys, in the prynces inne, with
two towayles made in snare wyse, and put aboughte his nekke; and so
was that worthy knyght strangled to the deth. Also the lord Cobham was
jugged to perpetuel prison: and forasmoche as the erle of Derby thanne
mad duke of Hereford was of counseill and assent of the deth of lordes
and knyghtes don to dethe in the xj yere of the kyng, he was also
exiled. Also in this yere schulde a ben a bataile at Coventre betwen
the duke of Hereford and the duke of Norfolke, withinne lystes: and
whanne they were assembled in the place, the kyng toke up there
quarell into his hand: and anoon in the same place they were bothe
exiled; that is to seye, the duke of Hereford for x yere, and Thomas
duke of Norfolk for an hundred yere, whiche debate was for wordes of
treson whiche schulde have ben spokyn be these too lordes of the kyng.
Also in this yere Thomas Arundell erchebysshop of Caunterbury was also
exiled and translated to another bysshoperiche, and S^{r}. Roger
Walden was made erchebysshop of Caunterbury; and thanne the kyng
thorugh wykked counseill disherited the heirs of the lordes that were
put to dethe, as it is above seyd, and dampned to perpetual prison.
And he sente to Rome, to have the statutes and the ordinaunces mad in
the parlement begonnen at Westm' and ended at Schrovesbury, confermed
of the pope; the whiche was doun and graunted be the pope and be hym
confermed, which confirmacion was proclamed at the crosse in Powles
and at seynt Marie Spitele in Estre woke before alle the peple. Also
the kyng thorugh his counseill hadde the citee of London and othere
diverses shires of Engelond in grete hate and grete indignacion, and
lete enditen them as for rebelles: and he toke to hym Chestreschire
men whiche were most famulier with hym, wherfore the citizeins of
London and the peple of the said schires so endited as before is seid,
were full hevy and sorwefull; and thanne the citizeins of London for
plesaunce of the kyng thorugh counseill and helpe of Roger Walden the
erchebysshop of Caunterbury, and of Braybroke, &c.[77] Moreover in
this yere, for alle that, Chestreschire men maden a grete fray in
Fryday strete on a nyght in there innes; the whiche weren well beten
and hurte with arowes and brought thanne to the countor. Also this
yere, be selyng of blank chartres,[78] the citee of London paied to
the kyng a m^{l} li', and othere schires as they myghte beren.

[Footnote 77: _See note_ X.]

[Footnote 78: _See note_ Y.]

Drugo Barentyn,    John Wade.    Anno xxij^{do}.
  goldsmyth, m'.   John Warv'.

[Sidenote: Obiit Joh'es duk Lancastr'.]

[Sidenote: Kyng Richard seyled the seconde tyme into Irlond.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Hereford with othere lordes exiled landed at
Ravenspore in Yorkschire.]

[Sidenote: The kynges mene turned ayens hym.]

[Sidenote: Kyng Richard was put into the tour of London, and anon
after he resigned his dignyte.]

Ye schull wete that Thomas the son and heyre of Richard the erle of
Arundell, whiche Thomas after the deth of his fadir was duellynge in
houshold with S^{r}. John Holand duke of Excetre, and holden at no
reputacion but alwey in gret repref and dispite, in moche disese and
sorwe of herte, thorugh helpe of William Scot mercer of London privyly
in a gromys clothynge, sailed over the see and cam to his uncle the
erchebysshop of Caunterbury, that tyme beynge at Coloigne. Ferthermore
in this yere deyde the duke of Lancastre, and lith entered at seynt
Poules at London. Also in this yere after Estren, in the lattere ende
of the yere of the conquest of kyng Richard, the same kyng Richard
sailed the secounde tyme into Irlond; and he hadde with hym amonges
othere Herry the eldeste sone of the duke of Hereford, whom he made
knyght[79] in Irlond; and the saide kyng Richard was there too monthes
and sumwhat more. And in the mene tyme cam in Herry duke of Hereford,
for his fadir the duke of Lancastre was ded, for whiche he cam to
cleyme his heritage, and broughte with hym Thomas of Arundell the
erchebysshop of Caunterbury whiche was exiled; and also he broughte
with hym hys sone Thomas, and also Thomas the erles son of Arundell to
cleyme his herytage; and they landed in the north contre, at a place
that is clepyd Ravenspore besyde Bedlyngton. And anon as they were
landed there comen to hym hastyly the erle of Northumberlond and
S^{r}. Herry his sone, and the erle of Westmerland, Robert of Watton,
and manye othere lordes and gentiles of the north contre. And thanne
the seid duke of Hereford with alle tho above seid reden to Chestre
with gret strenkthe. And anon as the kyng herde telle that duke Herry
was come, he hied hym out of Irlond into Engelond, in hope to be
strong ayens hys enemys: and as sone as the peple of the kynges herde
telle that the duke was landed, alle the kynges meyne into lytell
turned ayens the kyng, and wenten ayeyns his adversaryes, that seynge
the kyng withdrowe hym to the castell of Flynt. And the duke with his
lordes and gentiles comen to the castell of Bristoll, and there they
token S^{r}. William Scrop thanne erle of Wyltshire and tresorer of
Engelond, S^{r}. Herry Grene, S^{r}. John Busshy, and Perkyn of Lee:
and on the xxx^{ti} day of Juyll they were beheded as for traytours.
And whanne they hadde so don they reden ayeyne to Chestre, and thider
to them cam kyng Richard in pees. And thanne the kyng and the duke and
the othere seid lordes reden in fere to Londonward: and in the firste
day of Septembre they comen to London everych on: and in the morwe
suynge kyng Richard was put into the tour of London tyl tyme that the
parlement, whiche began at Westm' on seynt Jeromys day the laste day
of Septembre;[80] whiche day, in the tour of London, kyng Richard
resigned his dignyte in this yere of his regne xxiij; and duke Herry
was be generall accorded in parlement chosyn kyng, his regne thanne
begynnynge, and sithen crowned. Thanne was S^{r}. John Slake at
Westm', dene of the kynges chapell, arested and put in prison in
Ludgate, and othere certeyn monkes of Westm'. Also S^{r}. William
Bagot, knyght, was arested besyde Develyn in Irlond, and brought to
London.

[Footnote 79: "whiche was kyng after his fa'ir Henry of Derby" _in the
Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 80: "xxiij of September" _in the Cotton MS._]

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VICECOMITU' LONDON' TEMPORE REGIS HENR' QUARTI, QUI
CORONATUS FUIT APUD WESTM' IN DIE T'NSLAC'O'IS S'C'I EDWARDI REG' ET
CONFESSORIS, ANNO D'NI MILL'MO CCC^{mo} NONOGESIMO NONO.

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1399-1400.]

Thomas Knolles, groc', m'.   Will' Waldern, m'c'.   A^{o}. p^{o}.
                             Will' Hyde.

[Sidenote: Lordes purposed to a sclayn the kyng.]

[Sidenote: Decapitacio d'nor'.]

This yere, on the twelfthe day after Cristemasse, the erle of Kent,
the erle of Hunt', the lord Spenser, S^{r}. Rauf Lumley, and manye
othere knyghtes and squyres were purposyd to have sclayn the kyng and
hise children at Wyndesore, and thoo that helde with them be a
mommynge; but, as it fortuned, the kyng hadde warnynge; and anon he
rood to London in gret haste, and made hym strong to ryde on hise
adversaries afore said; the whiche lordes were assembled at Redynge,
purposyng for to do as they hadde ment; and fro thens they come to
Wyndesore, and deden moche harme thereaboughte. And whanne they hadde
aspied that the kyng was forth to London, they token there wey to
Surcetre, and made cryes be the weye, and at Surcetre also, seyenge
that kyng Richard was up with alle Walys and Chestyrschire; and kyng
Herry fledde to the tour of London: but for all that the toun aroos
and toke them with grete strenkthe; and there they beheded the erle of
Kent and the erle of Salesbury; also the erle of Huntyngton was
beheded at Plasshe in Essex, the whiche was fled and wolde a passed
the see to have brought in Frensshmen for to distroye Engelond; and he
myghte have no wynd to brynge hym over, and he was take and beheded as
it ys above seid. Also at Sucetre the same tyme was beheded S^{r}.
Rauf Lumley; and at Oxenford were beheded S^{r}. Thomas Blount, S^{r}.
Benet Cely, Thomas Wyntreshull squyer, and othere aboughte xxvij
persones, and the hedes of the lordes sent to London. At Bristowe was
beheded the lord Spenser, and there his hed sett up: afterward was
taken S^{r}. Bernard Brocas, S^{r}. Thomas Schelley, Maudeleyn parson,
S^{r}. William Fereby prest; and there were drawen, hanged, and
beheded, at Tyborne. And anon after deyde kyng Richard in the castell
of Ponfreyt, whos body was beryed at Langeley. Also in this yere of
oure lord a m^{l}cccc, the kyng rood into Scotlond. And in this yere
began the werre in Walys be Oweyn of Glendore.

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1400-1402.]

John Fraunceys,    Will' Cnote, drap'.   A^{o}. s'c'do.
  goldsmyth, m'.   John Wakeley,
                     vynt'.

In this yere a quarter of whete was worth xvj _s._ Also this yere kyng
Herry rood into Wales be the excitacion of the lord Grey Ruthyn, for
to distroye Owan of Glondere. In this yere was here the emperor of
Constantynnoble: and the kyng helde his Cristemasse at Eltham; and men
of London maden a gret mommyng to hym of xij aldermen and there sones,
for whiche they hadde gret thanke. And the same yere S^{r}. William
Sautre prest was degraded of his presthood, and brent in Smythefeld
for an heretyk.[81]

[Footnote 81: "a lollard and an eritik approved afore alle the
clergye" _in the Cotton MS._]

John Schadworth,   William Veno', groc'.   A^{o}. t'cio.
  m'c', maior.     John Fremyngham,
                     skynn'.

[Sidenote: Stella comata.]

[Sidenote: The bataill of Humbelton hill.]

[Sidenote: The conduyt in Cornhill.]

This same yere was dame Johanne duchesse of Breteyne spoused to kyng
Herry with moche solempnyte at Westm'. Also in Lenten this yere
schewed in the west in the sky a sterre called Stalla Comata, whiche
endured v wokes. Also in this yere the prior of Launde, S^{r}. Roger
Claryndon knyght, and viij frere Menours weren drawen and hanged at
Tyburne. Also this yere, the xiiij day of Septembre, was the bataill
with the Scottes at Humbledon hill, where there were taken and sclayn
wol ny alle the gentyles of Scotlond. Also this same yere was mad the
conduyt in Cornhull.

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1402-1403.]

John Walcote,   Rob't Chichelegh, groc'.    A^{o}. iiij^{to}.
  drap', m'.    Ric' Merlawe, fysshmong'.

[Sidenote: The bataill of Schrovesbury.]

This same yere, on Maudelyn even, betwen Englysshmen and Englysshmen
was the sory bataill of Schrovesbury, that is to seye betwen kyng
Herry and S^{r}. Herry Percy sone of the erle of Northumberland; the
whiche S^{r}. Henry Percy was there sclayn and there beryed; and on
hys syde manye another man also sclayn; and on his syde the erle
Douglas of Scotland lost his on eye; and S^{r}. Thomas Percy brother
to the said S^{r}. Herry Percy was there taken and kept too dayes
after on lyve; and for he was embassator before the batall betwen the
kyng and S^{r}. Herry Percy, manye a good man loste there hys lyf,
wherfore they seyde S^{r}. Thomas was drawen, hanged and beheded, and
his hede[82] sett upon London brigge: also in the said bataille the
prynce was schot in the heed wyth an arowe; and the erle of Stafford
sclayn undyr the kynges banere, and S^{r}. William Graunsell, with
manye othere knyghtes and squyers:[83] and forasmoche as som peple
seyde that S^{r}. Herry Percy was alyve, he was taken up ayen out of
his grave, and bounden upright betwen to mille stones, that alle men
myghte se that he was ded.

[Footnote 82: "with a quart' of S^{r}. Herry Percie's hedde" _in the
Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 83: "worthie lordes, knyghts, and squyers, gentilles, and
good yomen" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1403-1405.]

Will'm Askam, fysshmong',   Thomas Faucon', m'c'.   A^{o}. v^{to}.
  maior.                    Th' Polle, goldsmyth.

[Sidenote: The takyng of William Cerle.]

This William Askam was prentys to William Walworth, sume tyme maire,
that was prentys sum tyme with John Lovekyn; and alle schirreves and
meires ech after other in on house. In this yere William Cerle yoman
of the robys with kyng Richard, whiche was on of them that mordred the
goode duke of Gloucestre at Caleys, was taken in the march of Scotlond
and brought to London, where that he was drawen, and hanged, boweld,
and his bowels brente before hym, and thanne beheded and quartered at
Tyburne. In this yere the lord Castell, with gret peple of Bretouns
and Normaundes, londed at the Blake Pole, too mile fro Dertmouth, and
there he was sclayn; and the peple fledde.

John Hende, drap',   Will' Louthe, goldsmyth.   A^{o}. vj^{to}.
  maior.             Stephan Spylman, m'c'.

[Sidenote: Richard Scrop the erchebysshop of York and the lord Moubray
were beheded.]

[Sidenote: The children of the erles of March were stole out of the
castell of Wyndesore.]

In this yere Thomas the kynges sone was admirall of the see and seiled
into Flaundres, and he landed at Scluse and yaf theretoo a grete
sawte, and he brente bothe in Cahaunt and in Flaundres. Also he toke
the carykes of Jene, whiche he broughte to Wynchelsey; and there,
thorugh mysgovernaunce, the carikes[84] with alle the good therinne
was brent. Also in this yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccccv, Richard Scrop
erchebysshop of York, and the lord Moubray[85] were beheded a lytel
out of York, upon Whitson Moneday. Also the same yere were the
children of the erle of Marche stolen out of the castell of Wyndesore,
aboughte mydnyght as it was seid, and were led into Walys to Owayn of
Glendore, for he was a rebell to oure kyng that tyme, and alle Walys
for the more partye be v yere before. Also the forseid children were
brought ayene to the kyng; and the lady Spenser was accused, and here
brother, that was called duk of York, of gret treson for the forseid
children; and the cause was, for they seyden that the eldere chyld was
trewe kyng. Also the forseyd duke was in kepynge of S^{r}. John Pelham
at Pevensey, in the castell, unto the parlement nest folwynge.

[Footnote 84: "one of the saide carikes" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 85: "the lord Moubray erle marchal" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1405-1407.]

John Wodecok,   Will' Crowm'e, drap'.   A^{o}. vij.
  m'c', m'.     Herry Barton, skynn'.

[Sidenote: The weres were stroyd.]

[Sidenote: Travers yoman of the kynges chaumbre was hanged, poysonyng
his wyffe.]

This same yere, be the comaundement of the kvng, alle the weres betwen
London and Midweye were pulled up and distroyed be the meire of London
and the comonalte. Also in this yere was Travars, yoman of the kynges
chaumbre, arestyd for poysonyng of hys wyf in Northamptonschire; and
on Jonet Legge was also arested for the consentynge of poysonynge of
the same woman: and the said Travars was hongen, and his bowels brent,
and thanne quarterd; and the said Jonet hadde here lyf.

Ric' Whytyngton,   Nicholl Wotton, drap'.   A^{o}. viij^{o}.
  m'c', m'.        Geffrey Brook, groc'.

[Sidenote: Rempston was dreynt.]

In this yere, the xvij day[86] of Juyll, the erle of Kent wedded the
dukes doughter of Melane, at seynt Marie Overey: and in this yere
deyde the good S^{r}. Robert Knolles. In this yere S^{r}. Thomas
Rempston, knyght, was dreynt faste be London bregge: and in this yere
was the bataille in Smythfeld betwen John Walssh clerk, and Percyval
Sondon.

[Footnote 86: "xxiiij day" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1407-1409.]

Will'm Staundon,   Herry Pounfreyt, sadeler.   A^{o}. ix^{mo}.
  groc', m'.       Herry Halton, groc'.

[Sidenote: The erle of Northumberland and the lord Bardolf were taken
in the North.]

In this yere the erle of Northumberland and the lord Bardolf, whiche
arysyn ayeyns the kyng, were taken in the north cuntre and beheded;
and the hed of the forsaid erle and a quarter of the lord Bardolf were
sent to London, and sett upon London brigge. Also in this yere was a
strong wynter whiche endured xiiij wokes. Also this yere the erle of
Kent was sclayn, thorugh his owne folye, at Bryak in Bretayne, for he
rood withoughte basnet, and was marked with a quarell. In this yere
greyn was suych plente that smal greyn was at xij _d._, xiiij _d._,
and xvj _d._ the beste civile greyn.

Drew Barantyn,     Will' Norton, drap'.   Anno x^{mo}.
  goldsmyth, m'.   Th' Duke, skynnere.

[Sidenote: The pley at the Skynnere well.]

[Sidenote: Grete justes in Smythefeld.]

This yere was the pleye at Skynners Welle,[87] whiche endured
Wednesday, Thorsday, Fryday, and on Soneday it was ended; and thanne
began the fetees of werre in Smythfeld for diverses chalanges. First
it began be the seneschall of Henawde and the erle of Somerset, for
the Henawde soughte hyder to seke awntures, the whiche fight lasted
iij dayes; and on the Moneday, S^{r}. John and another Henawde; and on
the Tuwesday, S^{r}. John Philipp with another; and on the Wednesday,
John Grey and his adversarie: and on the Fryday the kyng wolde suffre
nothing to be don. On the Satyrday, Standyssh and his adversarie: on
the Moneday suynge, Styward and his adversarie: on the Tuesday, Souche
and his adversarie. On the Moneday after, S^{r}. John Grene,
Cornewayle, and his felawes;[88] and on the Satirday, tho too
broughten hise brethren and there adversaries: and, as God wolde,
evere the Englyssh partye hadde the victorie.

[Footnote 87: "Clerkenwelle" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 88: _See note_ Z.]

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1409-1410.]

Richard Merlawe,    John Lane, m'c'.         A^{o}. xj^{mo}.
  Irmong', maior.   Will' Chichele, groc'.

[Sidenote: An heretyk was brent.]

This same yere there was a clerk that beleved nought on the sacrament
of the auter, that is to seye Godes body,[89] which was dampned and
brought into Smythfeld to be brent, and was bounde to a stake where as
he schulde be brent. And Herry prynce of Walys, thanne the kynges
eldest sone, consailed hym for to forsake his heresye, and holde the
righte wey of holy chirche.[90] And the prior of seynt Bertelmewes in
Smythfeld broughte the holy sacrament of Godys body, with xij torches
lyght before, and in this wyse cam to this cursed heretyk: and it was
asked hym how he beleved; and he ansuerde, that he belevyd well that
it was halowed bred and nought Godes body; and thanne was the toune
put over hym, and fyre kyndled thereinne: and whanne the wrecche felte
the fyre he cryed mercy; and anon the prynce comanded to take awey the
toune and to quenche the fyre, the whiche was don anon at his
comaundement: and thanne the prynce asked hym if he wolde forsake his
heresye and taken hym to the feith of holy chirche, which if he wolde
don, he schulde have hys lyf and good ynowe to lyven by: and the
cursed schrewe wold nought, but contynued forth in his heresye;
wherfore he was brent, and a versyfyer made of hym, in metre, thise
too verses:

     _Hereticus credat ve p'ustus ab orbe recedat
     Ne fidos ledat satel hunc baratro sibi p'dat._

[Footnote 89: "in forme of brede" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 90: _See note_ AA.]

[Sidenote: The newe stokkes were begonne to make.]

Also in this yere the stokkes betwen the Cornhull and the Pultrye was
begonne to make, and in the yere nest folwynge it was ful complet and
made. In this yere was a fray mad in Estchepe, be the kynges sones
Thomas and John, with men of the town. Also this same yere there went
the duke of Clarence, the duke of Yorke, the erl of Dorset, to the
duke of Orlions, ageyn the duke of Burgoyne, and landed at Hogges.

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1410-1411.]

Thomas Knolles, groc',   Thom's Pyke, drap'.    A^{o}. xij^{mo}.
  maior.                 John Penne, skynn'e.

[Sidenote: A gret feight in Smythfelde betuen Glouc' and Arthur.]

[Sidenote: The Yeldhalle was begone to make newe.]

This yere was the fight in Smythefeld betuen Gloucestre and Artour,
for wordes that Gloucestre hadde appeled Arthur of: and whanne they
hadde well foughten, the kyng tok the bataille into his hond, and
wolde lete them feighte no more. Also this yere, on seynt Petres even,
was gret debate in Brigge street betuen the lord Thomas men and men of
London. Also in this yere comen ambassatours to the kyng fro the duke
of Burgoyne, for to have men out of Engelond to helpe hym in werre
ayeyns the duke of Orlyons: but the kyng wolde no men grauntte, for
which the ambassatores spaken therof to the prynce: and he sente to
the duke of Burgoyne the erle of Arundell and the lord Cobbeham, with
othere lordes and gentyles, with a faire retenewe and well arrayed
peple. Also this yere the Yeldhalle of London was begonne to make
newe. Also in this yere the duke of Burgoyne, with help of
Englysshmen, sclewe moche peple of the dukes of Orlyons at the brigge
of Seyntclowe. Also in this same yere was Rys Dye, squyer, of Walys,
drawen, hanged, and beheded, and quartred, and the quarters salted.

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1411-1412.]

Rob't Chicheley,   Will'[91] Reynwell, fysshmong'.   A^{o}. xiij^{o}.
  groc', maior.    Walt' Cotton, m'c'.

[Footnote 91: "John" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: iij flodes were sen in Tempse upon o day.]

[Sidenote: The newe coyn for nobles.]

This yere the xij day of Octobre, the yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccccxj,
there weren in Themyse iij flodes upon a day. Also the same yere the
lord Thomas, the kynges sone, was mad duke of Clarence. Also in this
yere comen into Engelond ambassatores out of Fraunce fro the duke of
Orlyons, to have men over in helpynge hym ayens the duke of
Burgoyne[92] before seid in that other yere. And in the comemoracion
of seynt Poul, the laste day of Juyn, come prynce Herry, the sone of
kyng Herry the forthe, to London, with moche peple of lordes and
gentyles: and the kyng lay thanne at seynt Jones hous til the Soneday
nest folwynge; and thanne he remeved to the bysshopes paleys of
London, and lay there fro Satirday tyl Friday after; and thanne he
remeved to Rotherhithe. And prynce Herry lay at the bysshoppes inne of
Dorham, fro the seid day of his comynge to towne unto the Moneday nest
after the feste of Septem fratrum. And thanne rood Thomas the kynges
sone duke of Clarence, and with hym the duke of York, and Beauford
thanne erle of Dorset, toward Hampton with a gret retenewe of peple:
and on the Tuesday rood the erles brother of Oxenford, and on the
Wednesday rood the erle of Oxonford; and they alle lay at Hampton, and
aboden the wynde tyl on the Thorsday the firste day of August; the
whiche Thorsday, Fryday, and Satyrday, they passed out of the haven
the noumbre of xiiij schippes: and on the Soneday they were dreven
inne ayeyne with the wynd: and after, on seynt Laurence even and seynt
Laurens day, they arreved at Seynt Fasters, faste be Hogges in
Normandye. And on the xxiij day of Septembre prynce Herry come to
London to the counseyll, with an huge peple. Also in this yere the
kyng lete coynen newe nobles; and they were lesse of weyghte than the
olde noble be the peys of an half peny weighte; so that[93] be juste
weyghte liij nobles, j _d_, and an halpeny weighte, schulde maken a
pound weighte of Troye.

[Footnote 92: _See note_ BB.]

[Footnote 93: "so that a noble shuld weye but iiij _d._ and an ob.
weight: so that liij nobles, &c." _in the Cotton MS._]

REX HENRICUS QUARTUS. [1412-1413.]

Will'm Waldern,   Rauf Lobenham, drap'.   A^{o}. xiiij^{o}.
  m'c', maior.    Will' Sevenok, groc'.

[Sidenote: Obit' Henr' nup' Regis Angl' iiij^{ti}.]

[Sidenote: Coronac'o H. quinti.]

[Sidenote: S^{r}. John Oldcastle was arested, put into the Tour of
London, and after brak out.]

In this yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccccxij, the xxj[94] day of March, on
a Moneday, deyde kyng Herry the forthe, at Westm'. And lyghth entered
at Caunterbury, on the north syde of seynt Thomas schryne the martyr.
Thanne Herry, the sone and heire of the sayd kyng Herry the forthe,
began to reigne, and com to London; and ayens hym was a gret rydynge
of men of London, and broughte hym to the tour of London upon the
Fryday; and on the morwe he rood thorugh Chepe with a gret roughte of
lordes and knyghtes, the whiche he hadde newe made in the Toure on the
nyght before, unto Westm'. And on the morwe, that is to say Passion
Soneday, the whiche was a ful trobly wet day, he was crowned at Westm'
with michel ryalte. And in this yere, the firste day of Septembr', it
hayled strongly. In this yere my lord of Dorset lay at the sege of the
castell of Mount Andre in Gyan; and Blounte was capitayn of the
castell of Sobyre. Also another companye of Englysshmen lay in the
town of Barbesey; and there was don a jorney betwen Englysshmen and
Frensshmen be syde Mount Andre, in the monthe of August: and thorugh
the grace of God iij c Englysshmen xvij lesse, toke and sclewe viij m
of Frensshmen: and there were take the lord Hayle, the lord Morlet,
the bastard of Clynton, the lord en le Sale de Mary, the maire of
Rochell, the capytayn of Tholomonde, the capitayn of Ryons, the
capitayne of seynt John the Evangelist, the capitayn of Racheford, the
capitayn of Urlound, and manye othere capitaynes and gentiles whiche
were to longe to telle. In this yere was the lord Cobbeham, called
S^{r}. John Oldcastell, arested and put into the Tour of London, for
certeyn poyntes of heresye whiche he held ayens the beleve of holy
chirche: and after he brak prison and wente away.

[Footnote 94: "xx day" _in the Cotton MS._]

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VICECOMITU' LONDON' TEMPORE REG' HENR' QUINTI, QUI
CORONATUS FUIT APUD WESTM' NONO DIE MENSIS APRIL ANNO D'NI MILL'MO
CCCCxiij.

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1413-1414.]

Will' Crowm'e,[95]   John Nicholl, vynt'.   Anno primo.
  drap', maior.      John Sutton, groc'.

[Footnote 95: _See note_ CC.]

[Sidenote: Kyng Richard boones were feet fro Langeley and beried at
Westm'.]

[Sidenote: Obiit Thomas Arundell arch'ep'us Cantuar'.]

[Sidenote: A parlement at Leycestr'.]

[Sidenote: John the K. brother duke of Bedforthe.]

[Sidenote: Humferey the K. brother duke of Glowcester.]

[Sidenote: Chicheley B. of seynt De' mad archebissh' of Canterbury.]

[Sidenote: Nyauncer took seynt Anne chirch for scleyng of S^{r}. John
Tybbay.]

In this yere, on seynt Edmondes day the kyng, there was a gret
convocacion of clergye at Poules in London, whiche contenued tyl the
iiij day of Decembre; and thanne was the kyng and his counseill
accorded to fette the bones of kyng Richard fro Langele to London, and
to berye them at Westm';[96] and there was don a dirige ryally; and on
the morwe the masse was solempny songon. And on the Soneday sewyng,
Thomas Arundell erchebysshop of Caunterbury and manye othere
bysshoppes, at the crosse of Poules accursed S^{r}. John Oldcastell
lord of Cobbeham and alle hise mayntenours. And in the xix day of
Decembre cam the Frensshe ambassatours to London, fro the kyng of
Fraunce to the kyng of Engelond. Morover in the twelfthe day in
Cristemasse it was certefied the kyng, that S^{r}. John Oldcastell was
up with a stronge peple ayeyns hym. Wherfore the kyng be hys counseill
cam to London the viij day of Januar'; and with hym cam hise brethren,
and the erchebysshop of Caunterbury, and Courtenaye the bysshop of
Norwych, and manye othere lordes and bachelers. And the nexte nyght
the kyng with hyse brethren and the bysshopes token the feld ayeyns
Sire John Oldcastell, beyonde seynt Gyles in Holborne, betwen Westm'
and the highe weye toward Tyborne; and there the kynges peple token
diverses men as they comen be the weye, of whiche on was a squyere of
S^{r}. John Oldcastell, and othere diverses men also: and there was
muche folk arested and put into the Tour of London, of whiche folk
there were xij men drawen fro the Thoure of London as a Fryday at
nyghte thorughe the town to Neugate, and there they were tyl on the
morwe; and they with othere xxv men, that is to seye xxxvij persones,
were drawen, hanged, and brent; and tho that were drawe were said
arrysers ayeyns the kyng: and certaynly the said S^{r}. John
Oldcastell with gret multitude of Lollers and heretykes were purposyd
with ful wyll and myght for to have distroyed the kyng and hyse
brethern, whiche ben protectours and defendours of Holy Chirche, and
them also that ben in degre of holy ordre in the service of God and of
his chirche, the which will and purpos, as God wolde, was lette; and
S^{r}. John Oldcastell fledde and escaped. Forthermore in this yere
the xix day of Feverer, deyde Thomas Arundell the erchebysshop of
Caunterbury. Also in this yere was a parlement at Leycestre, and there
was the lord John the kynges brother mad duke of Bedeford and erle of
Kendale, and the lord Humfrey hys brother was mad duke of Gloucestre
and erle of Pembroke, and S^{r}. Richard the dukes brother of York was
mad erle of Caumbregge. And in this yere in the monthe of Juyll wente
oure ambassatours into Fraunce, and some of the ambassatours wenten
into Constaunce to chesen the pope: and some wenten to the emperor;
that is to seye, to the emperor wente the erle of Warwyk, the lord
Fitz Hugh, Sire Walter Hungerford, S^{r}. Rauf Rocheford, Maistre
Philipp Morgan, Maistre John Henyngham, with comission. And to the
cytee of Constantyne wente the bysshop of Bathe, the bysshop of
Salesbury, the bysshop of Chestre, the abbot of Westm', the abbot of
York, the abbot of Gerseye, with othere doctours. Also into Fraunce
wente the bysshop of Dorham, the bysshop of Norwych, the erle of
Salysbury, the lord Grey Codonore, S^{r}. John Pelham, Robert of
Waterton, and othere. Forthemore on the Monday the xxiij day of
Septembre began a grete counseill at Westm'; and on the neste Monday
after, that is to seye the firste day of Octobre anno d'ni mill'mo
cccc^{mo}xv. Also the same yere was S^{r}. Herry Chicheley bysshop of
seynt Davyes mad erchebisshop of Caunterbury, and S^{r}. Richard
Courtenay mad bysshop of Norwych. And in the same yere on seynt Marie
Maudeleyn day, John Neauser squyer, and his men, sclowen Maistre John
Tybbay clerk, as he passed thorugh Ladlane; for the whiche deth the
same John Nyauncer and iiij of his men fledden into seynt Annes
chirche withinne Aldrichgate; and withinne the same chirche they were
mured up, and men of diverses wardes watched them nyght and day. And
the forsaid John Nyauncer and his men forsuoren the kynges lond, and
passyd thorugh the citee of London toward Caleys in there schertes and
breches, and ich of them a crosse in there hand.

[Footnote 96: _See note_ DD.]

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1414-1415.]

Thomas Faucon',   John Michell, fysshmong'.   A^{o}. s'c'do.
  drap', maior.   Thomas Aleyn, m'c'.

[Sidenote: The grete werk of Shene was begonne.]

[Sidenote: Newe gates in London.]

[Sidenote: The deth of lordes at Hampton.]

[Sidenote: Sege of Harfleu.]

[Sidenote: The yeldyng of the toun of Harfleu.]

[Sidenote: The lord Beauford capitayn.]

[Sidenote: The bataill of Aigincourt this day.]

[Sidenote: Mort.]

[Sidenote: Mort.]

[Sidenote: Alle the bellys of London were ronge for yoye.]

In this yere was Sperepoynt drawe and hanged for counterfetynge of the
kynges seall. Also in this yere John Claydon skynner, and Richard
Turmyne bakere, were brent in Smythfeld for heresye. And on the iiij
day of March after, was the pardon of the lord Cobbeham, that is to
seye S^{r}. John Oldcastell, proclamed. On Palme Soneday the xvj day
of March was William Elys sone brought out of the Tour of London be
comaundement of the kyng, and delivered to the said maire for to kepe
hym in warde, and specyally in yrens, for tales that he hadde told of
the kyng; and also for the peple seyde that they myghte non yren
fetres no lokkes holden hym; and there he was cheyned to an yren post
at the counter gate in Chepe, ayens the Standard. Also the same yere
was the kynges grete werk begonne at Shene; and in hys tyme was mad
newe g'tes at London wall, and a newe gate, and the prevy that stod
withinne the more was drawe doun and set on this syde of the wall over
the comown dych that comyth out of the more. And in his tyme[97] the
kyng made his vyage toward the costes of Normandye; and he rood
thiderward thorughout the citee of London toward the town of Hampton,
that is to weten the xviij day of Juyn, the yere of his regne the
thridde begynnyng; and at Hampton he lay stille for to abiden his
retenue and his stuff that longith for werre: and in his lyenge there,
the Moneday the v day of August next after were put to dethe there
Sire Richard of Yorke erle of Caumbregge, the lord Scrop that tyme
tresorer of Engelond, and S^{r}. Thomas Gray knyght, for treturye and
ymagynyng of the kynges deth. And in the same yere on the morwe after
seynt Laurence day, the xj day of August the Sonday, the kyng and alle
his retenue schipped iij houres after noon at Portesmouth, toward the
town of Harefleu in Normandye; and he landed at Kedecaux iij myle out
of the town of Harefleu on oure lady even the assumpcion, the xiiij
day of August. And the kyng began to leye his sege to the town of
Harfleu the xvij day of August: and the kyng lay there at the sege fro
the same xvij day of August unto the xxij day of Septembre or the town
were yolden up; and his lyenge there aboughte the town there dyed many
on of his retenue, that is to weten, the erle of Suffolk, the bysshop
of Norwych, Courtenay, S^{r}. John Philip, and manye othere knyghtes
and squyers, and othere comoun peple whiche were nought nombred. And
the same xxij day of Septembre the toun of Harfleu was yolden up to
the kyng, and alle the keyes of the toun brought to hym: and the kyng
abode tyl the laste day of Septembre, til that he hadde mad
governaunce withinne the town: and he made his Em[98] the lorde
Beauford the erle of Dorset, captayn of Harfleu. And the Tuesday the
firste day of Octobre the kyng toke his weye fro Harfleu toward his
town of Caleys, with the noumbre of viij^{l} fytyng men: and the
Frensshmen of Fraunce broken there brigges and pyled the forthes of
the water of Some and othere diverses wateres, that the kyng myghte
nought passe but with moche disese til he com to the water of Swerdes;
and there the kyng and his oost passyd over. And on the xxv day of
Octobre was Fryday, and seynt Crispyn and Crispianiani day the lordes
and the chyveteynes of Fraunce lay with a gret oost enbatailed to the
noumbre of vi^{xx} m^{l}, and wolde a stopped the kynges weye that he
schulde nought a passed to his town of Caleys. And the kyng with his
oost batailed hym ayens the Frensshmen, and manfully he faught ayens
them in a feld that is called Aigincourt, and sclowe and toke of them
of dukes, erles, barons, knyghtes, and cheveteyns to the noumbre of
xij m^{l}; and of the comown peple mo thanne the noumbre of iij m^{l},
that is for to weten, the duke of Orlyons and the duke of Burbon, the
erle of Vendon, the erle of Ewe and the erle of Richemond, with S^{r}.
Bursegaunt; and there sclayn the duke of Launson, the duke of Braban
and the duke of Bare, and the erle of Navers, the lord de la Brytte
constable of Fraunce, and the seneschall of Henaude, with manye othere
lordes, knyghtes, and squyers, and worthy men v m^{l} and mo. And on
oure syde were sclayn the duke of York, the erle of Suffolk, and
S^{r}. Richard of Kyghle, and David Gamme squyer, with a fewe mo
othere persones to the noumbre of xviij. And the xxix day of Octobre,
the morwe after seynt Simondes day and Jude, the same day the newe
meire schulde ryde and taken his charge at Westm', the same day erly
in the morwe comen tydynges to London while that men weren in there
beddes, that the kyng hadde foughton and hadde the bataille and the
feld aforseid. And anoon as they hadde tydynges therof, they wente to
alle the chirches in the citee of London and rongon alle the belles of
every chirche; and solempnely alle the prestes of every chirche, and
othere men that were lettered songen _Te deum Laudamus, &c._ And ayens
ix of the belle were warned alle the ordres of relygeous men of the
citee of London, for to go a procession fro seynt Poules unto seynt
Edward schryne at Westm'. And the newe maire and hise aldermen with
alle the craftes of London, and the quen with alle here lordes also
wente from seynt Poules unto Westm', and offred at seynt Edwardes
schryne aforeseid, or the meire tok his charge; and whanne the meire
hadde taken his charge, every man come rydyng hom fro Westm' on
horsbak, and were ioyful and glad for the goode tydynges that they
hadde of the kyng, and thankyd oure lord J'hu Crist, his modir seynt
Marye, and seynt George, and alle the holy company of hevene, and
seyde _Hec est dies quam fecit d'n's_.

[Footnote 97: _i.e. the third year of his reign. See note_ EE.]

[Footnote 98: _Sic, query_ "uncle."]

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1415-1416.]

Nicholl Wotton,   Alan' Ev'ard, m'c'.          A^{o}. iij^{o}.
  drap', maior.   Will' Caumbregg, iremong'.

[Sidenote: The comynge of oure kyng to Caleys.]

[Sidenote: The landyng of oure kyng at Dovorr.]

[Sidenote: The comyng of oure kyng to London.]

[Sidenote: The maire and the aldermen presentyd the kyng with a m^{l}
li in too basyns of gold worth v^{c} li.]

[Sidenote: Sigismund the emperor of Almayne com to London.]

[Sidenote: The metyng of the kyng and the emperor.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Holand com to London.]

[Sidenote: The removyng of the emperor.]

[Sidenote: The kyng wente to Caleys for trete with adversaries of
Fraunce.]

[Sidenote: The galy halfpence were stroyd.]

[Sidenote: Bellu' sup' mare int' I. ducem Bed' et adv'sar' reg'.]

In this yere began the generall counseill at Constaunce. Also in this
yere, that is to say the xxviij day of Octobre, the kyng com to his
town of Caleys, and was there til the xvj day of Novembre: and that
same day the kyng schipped fro his town of Caleys toward Engelond, and
he landed the same day at nyght at Dovorr, and com forth alle the woke
after toward London: and the Fryday at nyght the kyng come to Eltham,
and there he lay al that nyght; and on the morwe was Satyrday, the
xxiij day of Novembre, the maire of London and alle the aldermen, with
alle the craftes of London, reden every man in reed, with hodes reed
and white, and mette with the kyng on the Blakeheth comyng from
Elthamward toward his citee of London; and ayens his comynge was
ordeyned moche ryalte in London, that is to weten at London bregge, at
the conduyt in Cornhill, at the gret conduyt in Chepe, and at the
crosse in Chepe was mad a ryall castell, with angels and virgynes
syngynge therinne; and so the kyng and hise presoners of Frensshmen
reden thorugh London unto Westm' to mete, and there the kyng abod
stille. And on the morwe after, it was Soneday and the xxiiij day of
Novembre, the maire and alle the aldermen, with too hundred of the
beste comoners of London, wente to Westm' to the kyng, and present hym
with a m^{l} pound, in too basynes of gold worth v^{c} li. And in this
tyme the emperor of Almayne com into Engelond with viij^{c} hors to
seynt George feste; that is to wete, the firste day of Maij, at nyght,
he landed at Dovorr; and on the Satyrday, the seconde day of Maij, he
cam to Caunterbury and bod stylle there unto the v day of Maij: and
the Thorsday, the vij day of May,[99] the maire and alle the aldermen,
with alle the craftes of the citee, reden alle in rede gownes, and
hodes white and reed, and mette with the emperor on the Blakehethe;
and the kyng and alle hise lordes mette with hym at seynt Thomas
Wateryng, and there the kyng put hym on the right hond, and the
erchebysshop on the left hond, and so they come rydynge thorugh the
citee of London and forth to Westm': and the xxix day of Maij the
duke of Holand come to London, and he lay at the bysshopes place of
Ely in Holbourne; and he abod stylle there unto the xxj day of Juyn.
And the xxvj day of Juyn the emperor remeved fro Westm' toward the
castell of Ledes in Kanc', and from the castell of Ledes unto Eltham,
and from Eltham forth to Caunterbury; and he schipped out of Engelond
the xvj day of August. And the same yere the kyng wente to Caleys for
to trete wyth his adversarije of Fraunce: and the same yere the duke
of Bedford, the kynges brother, was mad capitayn of the see for a
quarter of a yere; and the same tyme he and his retenue took iij
carykes and drowned the forthe, and a gret hulke was drowned also: and
anon after, in the same yere, was taken a gret carryke at Dertemouth.
And in this same yere, that is to weton on the Mighelmesse day, was
Benet Wolman drawen and hanged, and his heed smyten of and set on
London bregge for tretory: and in the same yere, the viij day of
Octobre, was a p'chemyn' of Trille melle strete drawen and hanged, and
his heed smyten of and set upon London brigge for tretory: and in the
same yere weren alle the Galy half pens fordon at a parlement holden
at Westm', the whiche parlement began the xv day of March. Also in the
same yere, that is for to seye in the begynnyng of the forthe yere of
the reigne of kyng Herry the fyfthe, the duke of Bedford and the erle
of March, with othere certeyne lordes and there retenue, foughton with
vij carykes of Jene, and with aboughte l othere vesselles, some
hulkes, some barges, some galys, and some galyottes; of whom, blessyd
be God, he toke iij carykes with there patrons, and drowned a gret
hulke that was called the Blake hulke of Flaundres, and the remenant
fledden there wey: and this was don upon oure lady day the assumpcion,
the iiij yere above seid.

[Footnote 99: _See note_ FF.]

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1416-1417.]

Herry Barton, skynn',   Rob't Wydyngton, groc'.   A^{o}. iiij^{o}.
  maior.                John Coventr', drap'.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Westm'.]

[Sidenote: A begger was drawen for disfiguryng of children.]

[Sidenote: Thomas Pedwardyn kepere of Sprottes keye was sclayn on
Estreday.]

[Sidenote: The bataill on the see betuen the erl of Hunt' and the
kynges adversaries.]

[Sidenote: The castell of Touk with the toun was yolden.]

[Sidenote: Cane was goten and manye othere townes and castelles.]

And in this same yere was a parlement at Westm' holden, and it began
the xix day of Octobre; and at that parlement was the erle of Dorset
mad duke of Excestre: and in this same yere, on seynt Katerine even,
was a begger drawen and hanged for dysmembrynge of yonge children, and
he was drawen in his owne carre from the Leden halle unto Tyborne: and
in this same yere was a theff sclayn, withoughte seynt Marie Spytell,
that highte Robert Somerford: and the same yere held his Cristemasse
at Wyndesore: and the same yere were too women hanged at Tybourne;
that oon was a spycer wyf of Seynt Albons, and that other was the
baillyf wyf of Vynesbury; and the same yere was the same bally hanged:
and the same yere was Thomas Petwardyn, kepere of Sprottes keye,
sclayn in seynt Dunston chirche in the Est, in the hyghe chancell, on
the Esterday at evesong tyme, with the lord Straunge and his men, and
there was S^{r}. John Trussell and hise sone, and othere men of his,
sore wounded; and that fray began betwen the lord Strange wyf and Sire
John Trussell wyf: and the same yere, upon seynt Petyr day and Poule,
the erle of Huntyngdon, with othere certeyn lordes and there retenue,
foughten with ix carykes of Jene, the grettest that evere were seyn in
this coostes, and scomfited them; of whiche, thanked be God, he toke
iiij grete with there patrons, and the admirall of them alle was
called the bastard of Burbon, with alle the tresoure that they alle
schulde aben waged with for a quarter of a yere; and the othere
carykes fledden awey. Also the same yere, the xxx day of Juyll, the
kyng with alle his oost seyled into Fraunce, and londed in Normandye,
upon Lammes day, a litell besyde the castell of Touke; the whiche
castell he toke first after he was landed, and yaf it to his brother
the duke of Clarence, with alle that longith thertoo.[100] Also the
same yere, that is to say anno quinto, the kyng gat Cane Beyeux, and
manye othere townes and castelles and riche abbeys, longe before seynt
Edward day.

[Footnote 100: _See note_ GG.]

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1417-1418.]

Ric' Merlawe, irmong',   Herry Rede, armerer.   A^{o}. v^{to}.
  maior.                 John Gedeney, drap'.

[Sidenote: S^{r}. John Oldcastell was taken in Walys.]

In this yere the generall counseill was ended at Constaunce, and an
unyte mad in Holy Chirche; and a pope chosen on seynt Martyn day, be
fre eleccion and comowne assent of alle the generall counseill
cristen, whiche pope was called Martinus quintus. Also in this yere,
on the feste of seynt Lucie the virgyne, the yere of oure lord a
m^{l}ccccxvij, S^{r}. John Oldcastell lord of Cobbeham was taken in
the march of Walys, and brought to Westm', where he was forjugged; and
he was drawe thorugh the citee of London, which in his dayes was heed
of heretykes and Lollers; and he was hanged be a cheyne of iren, and
was brent up the galawes and alle.[101]

[Footnote 101: _See note_ HH.]

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1418-1419.]

Will's Sevenok, groc',   John Bryan.            A^{o}. vj^{to}.
  maior.                 Rauf Barton, skynn'.

[Sidenote: The sege of Roen.]

[Sidenote: Sacr'm ducis de Burgoyne.]

[Sidenote: The duk of Burgoyn was sclayn.]

[Sidenote: Frere Randolf.]

The whiche John Bryan, schirreve of London,[102] fell in the water of
Thamyse, the whiche was cause of his deth, and dyed on the x day of
Octobre; and in his stede John Perneys was chosen for the remenaunt of
the yere. Also the same yere the kyng of Engelond with his lordes
beseged the citee of Roen,[103] the whiche sege dured half a yere and
more; but at the laste, thorugh the grace of God, it was yolden to hym
upon the day of seynt Wolstan, alle ayens there will, God wot, for
nede compelled them therto for defaute of vitaill; for as it was seid
there deyde withinne the town for defaute of vitaille, mo thanne xxx
m^{l} durynge the same sege. Also in the same yere the dolphyn of
Fraunce sente after the duke of Burgoyn, to whom, as men seyn, nought
fully vij nyght before he was sworn un on Godes body sacred to ben
good and trewe for to come and speke with hym be syde Parys, at the
town of Monstreux, with certeyn persones undir sauf conduyt; and
whanne he cam thedir, notwithstondyng the gret othe that was mad
betuen them bothe, nother his sauf conduyt, the viscount of Burbon, as
the duke kneled before the dolphyn, smot hym with an ax in the heed;
and so that the forseid dolphyn and hise complices falsly and
untrewly, and ayens alle manere lawe of armes, morthered the forseid
duke and made an ende of hym. Also this same yere frere Randolf, a
mayster of dyvynyte, that sumtyme was the quene Johanne confessor, at
the excitynge of the forseid quene, be sorcerye and be nygramancie
wrought for to astroyd the kyng: but, as God wolde, his falsnesse at
the laste was aspyed; wherefore be comown parlement the quene
forfetyd here landes.

[Footnote 102: "was mischevously drowned at Seint Katerines mille as
he went to eas hym" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 103: _See note_ II.]

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1419-1421.]

Ric' Whytyngton,   John Boteler, m'c'.        A^{o}. vij.
  m'cer, maior.    Rob't Whytyngton, drap'.

[Sidenote: The weddyng of the kyng and quene Kateryne in Fraunce.]

[Sidenote: The sege of Melau and of manye mo citees, townes and
castell.]

This same yere was the kyng Herry the fyfthe mad heir and regent of
Fraunce, and wedded to dame Katerine the kynges doughter of Fraunce,
at Troys[104] in Champayn, upon Trynyte Soneday; and anoon after he
hymselfe and hise lordes, with the duke of Burgoyne and manye othere
ryalles of Fraunce, wenten and leyd sege to manye diverses citees,
townes and castellys, whiche weren holden with the dolphyns men and
Armenakes, and wan them; but Melau sur Seyne was on of the werste that
evere he leyde sege to, for ther was inne a schrewd meyne of rebelles.

[Footnote 104: _See note_ KK.]

Will's Cambregge,   John Boteller, drap'.   A^{o}. viij^{o}.
  groc', maior.     John Welles, groc'.

[Sidenote: The coronacion of the quene at Westm'.]

[Sidenote: A parlement at Westm'.]

[Sidenote: The kyng ordeyned certeyn weyghtes for gold.]

[Sidenote: The deth of the duke of Clarence.]

[Sidenote: The town of Mileu was yolden.]

This yere on Candelmasse day be the morwe the kyng come into Engelond
with hys quene, and landed at Dovorr; and on the xiiij day of Fever,
upon seynt Valentynes day, the kyng come to London; and the xxj day of
the same monthe the quene come to London; and on the xxiij day of the
same monthe sche was crowned at Westm'.[105] Also this same yere,
anoon after Estren, the kyng helde his parlement at Westm'; in whiche
parlement was ordeyned, that no man after Cristemasse thanne nest
folwynge schulde putten forth no proffre no gold in payment but yf it
held the weyte, wherfore the most part of the peple ordeyned them
balaunces and weytes. And anoon after Pentecost the kyng seiled over
the see to Caleys, and passyd forth into Fraunce. This same yere upon
Estre even afore noon, that is for to say the xxij day of March, the
yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccccxxj, the duke of Clarence with manye
other lordes were sclayn beyounde the water of Leyre in Fraunce; and
manye lordes were taken prisoners the same tyme, of the whiche the
erle of Hunt', and the erle of Somerset with hys brother, were
principales. Also the same yere, betuen Cristemasse and Candelmasse,
the town of Mileu' was yolden to the kyng, and alle cheveteyns with
the sowdyours were ledd to Parys in the croke of the mone they myght
seyn, for of them there skaped thens but fewe on lyve.

[Footnote 105: _See note_ LL.]

REX HENRICUS QUINTUS. [1421-1422.]

Rob't Chycheley,   John Weston, drap'.       Anno ix^{o}.
  groc', maior.    Ric' Gosselyn, irmong'.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Westm', and a xv^{me} and a dyme graunted.]

[Sidenote: The birthe of kyng Herry the vj^{te}.]

[Sidenote: Mewes in Bry' was yolden.]

[Sidenote: The newe wedercock of Poules was set up.]

This yere, on the thridde day of December, began the parlement at
Westm', whiche was holden be the duke of Bedforde, thanne lyftenaunte
of Engelond; in whiche parlement was graunted a quynzyme and a dyme,
the kyng hymself thanne lyenge at the sege of Mieux in Bry', in
Fraunce, the half of whiche xv^{e} and x^{me} to be payd at the
purification of oure lady nest folwynge, and that the kynges deputes
schulde resceyve in payement swyche gold as wente; that is to seye,
zif a noble were worth v _s._ viij _d._, the kyng schulde taken it to
the value of vj _s._ viij _d._; and if it were lesse than v _s._ viij
_d._, thanne the persone so payenge that money schulde make good the
surplus to the value of v _s._ viij _d._ to the kyng, in contentyng
the kyng of the hol noble of vj _s._ viij _d._; and in cas the noble
so paied were better of value thanne v _s._ viij _d._, it was accorded
that the kyng schulde paye to the awnere therof the overplus above v
_s._ viij _d._: also thanne was gret scarcete of whit moneye in
Engelond, that is to seye of sylver, for every man, because of the
said newe eschange, outred gold and kept sylver in as moche as they
myghte. Also in the forseid monthe of Decembre, on seynt Nicholl day,
the yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccccxxj, Herry the kynges sone was born
at Wyndesore, whos goodfadres at the font were Herry bysshop of
Wynchestre, sithe Cardynall, and John duke of Bedford, and Jacomyn
duchesse of Holand was hys goodmodyr; and his goodfadir at his
confirmacion was Herry Chicheley erchebysshop of Caunterbury. Also in
the monthe of May,[106] the yere of oure lord a m^{l}ccccxxij, and of
the kyng the x yere, the citee of Mewes in Bry', whiche longe tyme
hadde be seged, was yolde to the kyng. Also the same yere, the xiij
day of August, the newe wedircock was set upon Seynt Poules stepill of
London: and the laste day of the same monthe of August deyde the most
excellent, and most graciouse, and most doutyd prynce of Cristen
chivalrye, Herry of Engelond the fyfthe, after the conquest the x^{e},
whos boones, in the begynnyng of Novembre folwynge, were brought into
Engelond, and after to London; and on the vij day of Novembre he was
ryally entered at Westm'.

[Footnote 106: _See note_ MM.]

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VICECOMITU' LONDON' TEMPORE REG' H' SEXTI PU' NON
UNI' ANNI QUI REGNARE CEPIT PRIMO DIE SEPTE'BR' ANNO D'N'I MILL'MO
CCCC^{mo} xxij^{do}.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1422-1423.]

Will's Waldern,   Will' Estfeld, m'c'.      A^{o}. p^{o}.
  m'c', maior.    Rob't Tatersale, drap'.

[Sidenote: A parlement at Westm'.]

[Sidenote: The governaunce of the K. was ordeyned by parlemente.]

[Sidenote: W^{m}. Tailor an heretyk was brent.]

This same yere upon a Wednesday the xxj day of Octobre, on the morwe
be vj[107] and vij on the belle, deyde kyng Charles kyng of Fraunce
the kynges aiel of Engelond, in his ostell of seynt Poule withinne
Parys, whos body was worthyly entered in seynt Denys. Also the vij
daye of Novembre the same yere, oure kyng Herry the fyfthe nobely was
entered at Westm'. Also in this yere the kynges parlement was holden
at Westm', which parlement began the Moneday nest before the feste of
seynt Martyn, that is to seye the ix day of Novembre, in whiche
parlement was ordeyned the governaunce of the kyng, how and in what
manere he schulde be governed in his tender age.[108] Also in this
yere on the firste day of March Maistr' William Taillor prest, was
disgraded of his ordre of presthood; and in the morwe after he was
brent in Smythefeld for certeyn poyntes of heresye.

[Footnote 107: "in the morning between," &c. _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 108: _See note_ NN.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1423-1424.]

Will's Crowm'e,   Th' Wandesford, m'c'.   A^{o}. s'c'do.
  drap', maior.   Nicholl Jamys, groc'.

[Sidenote: The weddyng of the kyng of Scottes.]

[Sidenote: The bataill of Vermill.]

This yere upon Satyrday, that is to sey the xiij day of Novembre, the
kyng and the quene his modir remeved from Wyndesore toward the
parlement at London, the whiche began at Westm' on the xxj day of
Octobre before; and on the forsaid xiij day of Novembre at nyght, the
kyng and the quene were logged at Stanes; and upon the morwe thanne
beynge Soneday the kyng was born toward his modir chare, and he
schriked and cryed and sprang, and wolde nought be caryed forthere;
wherefore he was born ayeyne into the inne, and there he bood the
Soneday al day; and on the Moneday he was born to the chare, and he
beynge thanne gladde and merye chered; and at even come to Kyngeston,
and there rested the nyght; and on the Tuesday he come to Kenyngton;
and upon Wednesday he cam to London[109] with a glad sembland and mery
chere, in his modyr barm in the chare rood thorugh London to Westm';
and on the morwe brought into the parlement. Also this same yere in
the monthe of Feverer, Sire Jamys Styward kyng of Scottes spoused dame
Johanne the duchesses doughter of Clarence, of hir first housbonde the
erle of Somerset, at seynt Mary Overe. And this same yere the xvij day
of August was the bataill of Vermill in Perche, betuen the duke of
Bedford regent of Fraunce, and the Armynakes, with the Scottes: but
thankyd be God the victorye fell to the Englyssh partye; for there
were sclayn of oure adversaryes the erle of Bougham, the erle Douglas,
the erle of Almar, the erle of Tonnar, the erle of Vauntedore, and the
viscount Nerbon that traytourly sclewe the duke of Burgoyne knelyng
before the dolphyn at Moterell, and manye mo to the noumbre of x m^{l}
and mo: but the moste vengeaunce fell upon the proude Scottes; for
there wente to schep wassh of them the same day mo thanne xvij^{c} of
cote armes be a countynge of herowdes.

[Footnote 109: _See note_ OO.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1424-1425.]

John Michell, fysshmong',   Simon Seman, vynt'.            A^{o}. t'cio.
  maior.                    John be the Wat', goldsmyth.

[Sidenote: The duk of Glouc' and his wyf the duchesse of Holond wente
over the see for take possesscion in hise landes.]

[Sidenote: The sege of Mauns.]

This same yere[110] the duke of Gloucestre with his wyf the duchesse
of Holand wenten over the see into Henauude, for to taken possession
of hys wyfves herytage, where he was worschipfully receyved and taken
for chif lord of the lond: but not longe after it happed so that he
was fayn to retorne hom ageyn, and lefte hys lady behynde hym with all
the tresour that he broughte thedyr, in a town that men callen Mouns
in Henauude, the whiche was swore to hym to ben good and trewe, and to
kepe the lady in sauf warde tyl he come ageyn: but at the laste they
that weren in the forseid town becomen fals, and delyvered that worthy
lady to the duke of Burgoyn; and he sent here to Gaunt there to ben
kept, but as God wolde for here, withinne a schort tyme thens sche
ascaped awey in a mannes wede, and com to a town of hire owne in
Seland that is clepyd Sirixe, and fro thens into Holand that is called
Tirgowe, where with helpe of here frendes that were there, sche
withstood the duke of Burgoyne and al his malyce. Also the same yere
the erle of Salysbury, the erle of Suffolk, the lord of Wylughby, and
the lord Scales, with there meyne leyden a sege to the citee of Mauns,
the whiche citee was yolden up to them withinne schort tyme, with
manye othere stronge townes and castells to the nowmbre of xxxvj^{ti}.

[Footnote 110: _See note_ PP.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1425-1426.]

John Coventr', m'c',   Will'm Milred, m'c'.   A^{o}. iiij^{to}.
  maior.               John Brokle, drap'.

[Sidenote: An hevynesse roos betuen the bysshop of Wynchestre and the
duke of Gloucestre.]

[Sidenote: The kyng was mad knyght.]

[Sidenote: Kyng Herry made manye knyghtes with his owne handes.]

[Sidenote: Segewyk was hanged [_in another hand_.]]

This same yere, that is for to seye the morwe after seynt Symon day
and Jude, the meire rood to Westm', and took his charge as the custume
is of the meires of London. And the same day at even and alle the
nyght folwynge was strong and grete wacche: and the morwe nest
folwynge moche peple of the citee of London in savynge and kepynge the
kynges pees, arraied in sufficient harnes to stonde with the duke of
Gloucestre protector of Engelond, and be the maire of London, and in
defens of the citee ageyn the bysshop of Wynchestre;[111] and the
peple that to hym was withholden of the countes of Lancastre and
Chestre, and of othere cuntres; but thankyd be God there was non harme
don on neythir partye. Also the same yere John duke of Bedford made
kyng Herry the vj^{te}, his goodsone, knyght at Leyc', upon
Witsoneday. And anoon forthwith the kyng Herry dobbed alle the
knyghtes whos names here folwen, that is for to sey, first, the duke
of York, the sone and heire of the duke of Norfolk, the erle of
Oxenford, the erle of Westmerland, the sone and heire of the erle of
Northumberland, the sone and heire of the erle of Ormond, the lord
Roos, Sire James Boteller, the lord Mautravers, S^{r}. Herry Gray of
Tankervyle, S^{r}. William Nevyle lord of Faucomberge, S^{r}. George
Nevyle lord of Latymer, the lord of Welles, the lord of Berkeley, the
sone and heir of the lord Talbot, Sire Raf Grey of Werke, Sire Robert
Veer, Sire Richard de Gray, Sire Edmond of Hungerford, Sire Robert of
Wyngefeld, Sire John Botiller, Sire Reynald Cobham, Sire John
Passhelewe, Sire Thomas Tunstall, Sire John Chidiok, Sire Rauf
Langeford, Sire William Drury, Sire William ap Thomas, Sire Richard
Carbonell, Sire Richard Wodevyll, Sire John Shardelowe, Sire Nicholl
Blouket, Sire Rauf Radclyff, Sire Edmond Trafford, Sire William
Cheyne, Sire William Babyngton, Sire John Juyn, and Sire Gilbert
Beauchamp.

[Footnote 111: _See note_ QQ.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1426-1427.]

John[112] Reynwell.   Rob't Arnold, haburdash'.   A^{o}. v^{to}.
                      John Heigham, drap'.

[Footnote 112: "William" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: The bysshop of Wynchestre was mad cardynall.]

[Sidenote: The cardynall haat.]

[Sidenote: Wille Wawe was hanged: the hedes of buttes of suete wyn
were smeton out [_in another hand_.]]

[Sidenote: How the hat was seet on his heed.]

This same yere aboughte Schroftyd the duke of Bedford wyth his lady
passed the see to Caleys: and a litel before passyd the see to Caleys
Herry bysshop of Wynchestre; and upon oure lady day the Annunciacion
anno d'n'i mill'mo cccc^{mo} xxvij, the bysshop of Wynchestre was made
cardynall in seynt Marye chirche of Caleys ful solempnely, where were
the same time the duke of Bedford regent of Fraunce and his duchesse;
and before or the masse was begonne whiche the bysshop schulde don,
the popes cosyn broughte the cardinall hat and with gret reverence
sette it upon the heyghe auter, and there it stood alle the masse
tyme; and whanne the bysshop hadde don the masse and was unreversed,
thanne was don on hym an abyte in manere of a freres cope of fyn
scarlet furred with pured; and thanne he there knelynge upon his knees
before the heighe auter the popes bulles were reed to hym; and the
firste bulle was his charge; and the seconde bulle was that he schulde
have and reioyssen alle the benefices sp'uelx ant temperellx that he
hath in Engelond; and whanne this was don the regent of Fraunce duke
of Bedford, wente up to the heighe auter and tok the cardinall haat
and sette it upon the bysshopes heed of Wynchestre, and bowed and
obbeyed to the bysshop and tok hym before hym.

John Gedeney, drap',   Rob't Ottele, groc'.   A^{o}. vj^{to}.
  maior.               Herr' Frowyk, m'c'.

[Sidenote: A gret reyn and a long duryng.]

This same yere[113] fro the begynnyng of April into Halwemasse was so
gret abundance of reyn, where thorugh nought only hey was distroied,
but also moche corn, for it reyned almost every other day more or
lasse.

[Footnote 113: _See note_ RR.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1428-1429.]

Herry Barton, skynn',   John Abbot.       A^{o}. vij^{o}.
  maior.                Thomas Dufhous.

[Sidenote: The erle of Sar', S^{r}. Th' Mountagu, at the sege of
Orlyons was sclayn with schot of a gonne.]

[Sidenote: The mordryng of a widewe be a fals Breton.]

[Sidenote: Here women maden an ende of the Breton.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Norfolk was in perille at London bregge.]

This same yere,[114] the iij day of Novembre, deyde the worshipfull
Sire Thomas de Mountagu erle of Salisbury before Orlyons, thorugh
schetyng of a gonne as he lay at the sege before the forseid cite; God
have mercy on his sowle. Forthermore duryng that sege, at the
begynnyng of Lenten neste folwynge, vii m^{l} of Frensshmen and mo
with many a Scot fel upon oure men as they wente thiderward with
vitailes be sydes a town that is called Yamvyll, where S^{r}. John
Styward and his brother with mo than vij^{c} Scottes that thei were
governours of, lighten a fote, and were sclayn every modir sone be
S^{r}. John Fastolf, S^{r}. Thomas Rempston, and othere capitayns of
oure syde, the whiche hadde nought passyng v^{c} fytynge men with them
at all withoughte chartres; but Charles of Burbon and the bastard of
Orlions, with alle the Frensshmen sittynge on horsbak seynge the
governaunce, trussed them and wente away. Also a lytel before
Witsonday nest folwynge, was the forsayd sege broken up be the duke of
Launson and his power; and alle oure lordes and capitayns of the same
sege disparpled, that is to say the erle of Suffolk and his brother,
the lord Talbot, and the lord Scales with many mo, the whiche sone
after were taken everych on at myschief. Furthermore, this same yere
betwen Estren and Witsontyd a fals Breton mordred a wydewe in here
bed, the whiche fond hym for almasse withoughte Algate in the
subbarbes of London, and bar awey alle that sche hadde, and afterward
he toke socour of Holy Chirche at seynt Georges in Suthwerk; but at
the laste he tok the crosse and forswore the kynges land; and as he
wente hys way it happyd hym to come be the same place where he had don
that cursed dede, and women of the same paryssh comen out with stones
and canell dong, and there maden an ende of hym in the hyghe strete,
so that he wente no ferthere notwithstondynge the constables and
othere men also, whiche hadde hym undir governaunce to conduyt hym
forward, for there was a gret companye of them, and hadde no mercy, no
pyte. Also this same yere, the viij day of Novembre, the duke of
Norfolk with many a gentilman squyer and yoman, tok his barge at seynt
Marye Overeye betwen iiij and v of the belle ayens nyght, and purposyd
to passe thorugh London bregge, where the forseid barge thorugh
mysgovernaunce of steeryng, fill upon the pyles and overwhelvyd, the
whiche was cause of spyllyng of many a gentilman and othere, the more
ruthe was, but as God wolde, the duke hymself and too or iij othere
gentylmen seenge that myschief, leped upon the pyles, and so were
saved thorugh helpe of them that weren above the brigge, with castyng
down of ropes.

[Footnote 114: _See note_ SS.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1429-1431.]

Will'm Estfeld, m'c', m^{or}.   Rauf Holand, drap'.     A^{o}. viij^{o}.
                                Will' Russe, jueller.

[Sidenote: The coronacion of oure kyng.]

[Sidenote: The pucell de Dieu was take.]

[Sidenote: A wolle pakker a heretike.]

The same yere, upon seynt Leonardes day, the kyng Herry the vj^{te},
noughfully viij yere old, was crowned at Westm';[115] at whos
coronacion was mad xxxv knyghtes; and on Seynt Georges day nest
folwynge, afore noon, he passyd over the see to Caleys: also the xxiij
day of May, after noon ayens nyght, before the town of Compigne, there
was a woman taken armed in the feld, with many othere capitayns, the
whiche was called _la pucelle de Dieu_, a fals wyche, for thorugh here
power the dolphyn and alle oure adversaries trusted holy to have
conquered ayen alle Fraunce, and nevere to an had the wers in place
that sche hadde ben inne, for they helden here amonges them as for a
prophetesse and a worthy goddesse. Also the same yere, aboughte
Candelmasse, Richard Hunden, a wolle packer, was dampned as a fals
heretyk and a lollard, and brent at the Tour hill, the whiche was of
so large consciens that he wolde eten fleysh on Frydays.[116]

[Footnote 115: _See note_ TT.]

[Footnote 116: _See note_ UU.]

Nicholl Wotton.   Rob't Large, m'c'.   A^{o}. ix^{o}.
                  Walt' Chertesey.

[Sidenote: Lollard.]

[Sidenote: Lollardes.]

[Sidenote: Jakke Sharp a lollerd was behedyd at Abyndon.]

This same yere aboughte Mydlenten was S^{r}. Thomas Baggeley, prest
and vyker of Mabenden in Essex, besyde Walden, dysgraded of his
presthod and dampned as for an heretyk, and afterward brent in
Smythfeld. Also the same yere, in somer, the kyng beynge in Fraunce
with alle hise temperall lordes for the most partye, the lollardes,
with manye mo othere that weren enclyned to there secte, casted
billes aboughte in every good town in Engelond, and purposed for to
have made a rysyng and distroyed Holy Chirche and the reaume; but,
thanked be Almyghty God, there falsnesse and there treson was sone
aspyed and distroyed; for on William Maundevyll, sum tyme a wever of
Abendon, and bailly of the town, that called hymself Jakke Sharp of
Wygemoresland in Walys, and schulde a ben chief mayster of them alle,
was taken at Oxenford, and hedyd at the seid toun of Abyndon, on
Tuesday in Whitson wyke, with many mo of his felas, and in many mo
othere places of the reaume also.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1431-1433.]

John Welles, groc', maior.   John Atherley.   A^{o}. x^{mo}.
                             Stephan Broun.

[Sidenote: Kyng Herry was crowned kyng of Fraunce.]

This same yere, the xvj day of Decembre, G beynge the dominical
lettre, kyng Herry the vj^{te} was crowned kyng of Fraunce at Parys,
in the chirche of Notre Dame, with gret solempnyte and rialte; and
anoon after he turned ayen into Engelond, and landed at Dovorr the ix
day of Feverer', and come to London the xxj day of the same month,
where he was ryally resceyved, alle the craftes rydynge ayens hym all
in white.

John P'ueys, drap'.   John Olneye, m'c'.             A^{o}. xj^{mo}.
                      John[117] Pattesley, jueler.

[Footnote 117: "Robert" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: Soudeors were arest.]

[Sidenote: The regent of Fraunce was wedd.]

[Sidenote: Sowdeors of Caleys were banschyd and some ded.]

This same yere the duke of Bedford regent of Fraunce com to Caleys the
Tuesday before Estre day;[118] and in the morwe after the sowdeours
were arested and put into warde: and in the Estre woke the forsaid
regent rood into Picardie to Tyrywe, and there the bysshop of Tyrewyn
dede wedde the regent to the erles doughter of Seynt Poule; and whanne
they were weddyd he com to Caleys ageyn: and the xj day of Jun, on
seynt Barnabe day, were foure sowdeours of Caleys beheded; that is for
to sey, John Maddeley, John Lunday, Thomas Palmere, and Thomas Talbot;
and v score and x banshyd that same tyme, and before that tyme were
banshyd vj score; and so on Midsomer-even after com the regent and his
lady to London, that faire citee.

[Footnote 118: _See note_ XX.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1433-1435.]

John Brokle, drap',   Thom's Chalton, m'c'.   A^{o}. xij^{mo}.
  m'.                 John Lynge, drap'.

[Sidenote: The Lollardes of Prake were distroyed.]

[Sidenote: A gret frost durynge xj wokes.]

This same yere,[119] aboughte Whitsondtyd, the lollardes of Prage were
distroyd, for at too jorneys there were sclayn of them mo thanne
xx^{ti} m^{l} with there cheveteynes; that is for to sey, P'copins,
Shaphoo, and Lupus, P'sbit; and there also was taken onlyve Maister
Piers clerk of Engelond, and an Englyssh heretyk and enemye to all
Holy Chirche. Also this same yere was a gret frost and a strong,
lastynge more than xj wokes, for it dured fro seynt Kateryne even unto
seynt Scolastyce day the virgyne, in Feverer.

[Footnote 119: _See note_ YY.]

Rob't Otle, groc',   Th' Bernewell, fysshmong'.   A^{o}. xiij^{o}.
  m'.                Simon Eyre.

[Sidenote: A trete for pees betuen Engelond and Fraunce.]

[Sidenote: The duk of Burgoyn was sworn]

[Sidenote: of whiche oth he was assoyled of a cardynall.]

This same yere[120] in hervest tyme, at the citee of Aras, there was a
gret counseill and a strong, to trete for the pees betwen Engelond and
Fraunce, of manye a gret lord both sp'uelx and temperelx, but as it
is seyn ofte tyme that undir tretys is treson, so was it there; for
the duke of Burgoyne that was sworn upon Godes by sacred, to be good
and trewe to the kyng of Engelond and hise successores, there, of a
cardinall that was callyd cardinall of Crouche, unwetynge the holy
fadyr the pope, was asoyled of that othe to holde with oure adversarye
the dolphyn, that hadde mordred his owne fadyr before tyme. Also this
same yere the kyng of Aragon, the kyng of Navare, and the Maister of
seynt James, with iij c knyghtes and squyers and mo, were taken in the
see of Jauneys, upon seynt Domynyk day.

[Footnote 120: _See note_ ZZ.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1435-1436.]

Herry Frowyk,   Thom's Catworth.   A^{o}. xiiij^{mo}.
  m'c', m'.     Rob't Clopton.

[Sidenote: Depe and Harfleu were lost thorugh defaute.]

[Sidenote: The duke of Burgoyne with a ryall power leyde sege to
Caleys:]

[Sidenote: and there they sette there tentes a fyre, and wenten there
way, and loste there stuff.]

[Sidenote: Oure lordes wenten into Flaundres and distroyed the town of
Poperyng, and manye othere townes.]

[Sidenote: The kyng of Scottes leyde sege to the castell of
Rokysburgh, and shamfully brak up the sege and wenten away.]

This same yere[121] upon Alle Halwe nyght, was the toun of Depe stole
and take with Armynakes: and on newe yeres tyd nest folwynge the toun
of Harflieu also, for defaute of good kepynge, the whiche kyng Herry
the fyfthe gette before the bataill of Agincourt, with a strong sege
and a ryall, first of alle the townes of Normandye. Also this same
yere the ix day of Jule, the duke of Burgoyn with a ryal power leyde a
sege to the town of Calys, and contynued unto the xxix day of the same
monthe; and that day, blessyd be Almighty God, his male writhed, for a
strong bastyll that he hadde mad upon the water syde was taken and
distroied, and alle that were withinne sclayn unto the noumbre of
v^{c} men oughttake iij persones, that is for to sey, a knyght, a
prest, a frere, the whiche knyght seyde that the duke of Burgoyn was
nought thre men from hym in the same bastill that tyme that he was
taken; and thanne a morwe erly also the oost sette there tentes a
fyre, and wente there wey with sorwe, levynge gret stuff behynden them
bothe of vitailes and of other thynges also. And the seconde day of
August nest folwynge, the duke of Gloucestre, with the duke of
Norfolk, the erle of Warrewyk, the erle of Stafford, the erle of
Hunt', the erle of Oxonford, the erle of Devenschire, the erle of
Morteyn, and the erle of Uwe, with manye othere lordes, barons, and
knyghtes, squyers, and yemen, unto the noumbre of l m^{l} and mo,
passyd over the see with v hundred seyles and mo, and londed at the
forseid toun of Caleys; and the iiij day after, they passyd forth over
the water of Gravelynge and comen into Flaundres, where they brenden
and sclewe all that they myghte come to xj dayes durynge, in to gret
harm of that cuntre, and pryncypally to the toun of Poperynge and of
Belle, where Haukyns drank be note withoughte cuppe; and thanne they
turned ageyn and comen hom sauf and sounde, blessyd be God of his
soude. Also this same yere, the xiij day of August, the kyng of
Scottes and hys wyf lyenge at the sege of the castell of Rokysburgh,
with a gret power of Scottes and a gret ordinaunce brak up the sege
and wente his way shamfully, and lefte his ordinaunce and his stuff
behynden hym as a coward, and mo thanne vij score of his galyentires
sclayn and taken at the same sege: and so myghte he wel sey, that in
the crook of the mone com he thedirward, and in the wylde wanyande
wente homward:

     _With reste and pees,
     A man schal best encrees._

[Footnote 121: _See note_ AAA.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1436-1438.]

John Michell, fysshmong',   Will'm Gregory, skynn'e.   A^{o}. xv^{o}.
  maior.                    Th' Morstede, drap'.[122]

[Footnote 122: "sergman" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Sidenote: Obit' Katerine Re' Angl'.]

[Sidenote: A tour with too arches of London bregge fel don.]

[Sidenote: Obit' Joh'ne regine Angl'.]

[Sidenote: the deth of the lyons.]

This yere, the secunde day of Januar, deyde quene Katerine, the whiche
was kyng Herry wyf the fyfthe. Also this yere, the xiiij day of
Januar, fyl doun a tour of London bregge toward Suthwerk, with too
arches and al that stood therupon.[123] Also this same yere, the ix
day of Jull, deyde quen Jane kyng Herry the forthe wyf, that before
was duchesse of Bretayne. Also this same yere deyde alle the lyons
that weren in the Tour of London, the whiche was nought sen in no
mannys tyme before out of mynde.

[Footnote 123: _See note_ BBB.]

Will'm Estfeld, m'c',   Will'm Hales, m'c'.     A^{o}. xvj^{o}.
  maior.                Will' Chapman, drap'.

[Sidenote: Oweyn brak prison prevyly, which hadde wedded quen
Katerine.]

[Sidenote: Will'm Goodgrom was hangen.]

This same yere on Oweyn, no man of birthe nother of lyflode, brak out
of Neugate ayens nyght at serchynge tyme, thorugh helpe of his prest,
and wente his wey hurtynge foule his kepere; but at the laste, blessyd
be God, he was taken ayeyn; the whiche Oweyn hadde prevyly wedded the
quene Katerine, and hadde iij or iiij^{or} chyldren be here, unwetyng
the comoun peple tyl that sche were ded and beryed. Also the same yere
on William Goodgrom of London, corsour, for scleynge of a man of court
in Hosyere lane be syde Smythfeld, was hangen at Tybourne.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1438-1439.]

Steph'us Broun, maior.   Nicholl Yeo, drap'.   A^{o}. xvij^{o}.
                         Hugo Dyke, ser'.

[Sidenote: A gret myschief fell at Baynard castell.]

[Sidenote: Another myschief fell at Bedford.]

[Sidenote: Obit' comit' Warr'.]

[Sidenote: Knyghtes of the bath.]

[Sidenote: A gret derthe of corn.]

[Sidenote: The erle of Hunt' with a faire meyne wente over the see
into Gascoigne.]

[Sidenote: Robert Chicheley citezein of London deyde.]

[Sidenote: Bawdes were sett on the pillory, and strompettes were led
to Neugate.]

This same yere,[124] upon newe yere day after mete, at Baynard castell
fyl a down sodeynly a stak of wode and killed iij or iiij men
myschevesly, withoughten othere mo that were there sore hurt. Also
anon after at Bedford, on the schire day, weren xviij men at onys
murdred myschevously withoughte any strok, in fallynge doun hedlynge
at the stayre of there Shire-hous, and manye mo foule hurt. Also the
laste day of Aprill, at Roane in Normandye died S^{r}. Richard
Beauchamp erle of Warwyk, there beynge lieutenaunt undir the kyng, on
whos soule God have mercy! Also the same yere anon after Estre, W.
Estfeld of London, mercere, and Lowys John were made knyghtes of the
bathe. Also the same yere was the newe cunduyt in Fletstret begonnen
to make. Also this yere was so gret derthe of corn that men were fayn
to ete rye bred and barly, the whiche nevere ett non before; and
rather thanne fayle, bred mad of benes, peses, and fecches, and wel
were hym that might hav ynowe therof; for a bushel of whete was worth
iii _s._ at London, and in sum cuntre derrere; and that mad bakers
lordes: but y prey God nevere let us see that day no more yf his wille
be. Also in this same yere wente over the see the erle of Huntyngdon
with a faire mene into Gascoigne and Gyan, for to defende that land
fro the kynges enemyes. Also the same yere wente the duke of Norfolke,
the erle of Stafford, the erchebysshop of York, and othere lordes and
bysshoppes over the see to Caleys, for to trete for the pees betwen
Engelond and Fraunce and betwen Engelond and Flaundres. Also the same
yere deyde a worthy citezein of London, Robert Chicheley, grocer, that
yaf to xxiiij hundred men a gret dyner. Also the same yere in hervest
tyme weren too baudes sett on the pillory, and iij strompettes were
led to Neugate, and there were put on there hedes ray hodees, and
with roddes of a cubitt of lengthe in there handes, and so they were
leed be the schirreves officers to the pillory in Cornhull, and there
was there charge reed, how they schulde be put out of the franchise of
London citee, and no more comyn withinne the walles of the citee, but
they comen in with there raye hodees on there hedes upon certeyn
peyne. Also the same yere in hervest tyme were brent at the standard
in Chepe diverses nettes, cappes, sadelys, and othere chaffare, for
they were falsly mad and deseyvably to the peple.

[Footnote 124: _See note_ CCC.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1439-1440.]

Rob't Large, m'c',   Robt. Marchall, groc'.   Anno xviij^{o}.
  meir.              Philip Malpas, drap'.

[Sidenote: Obit' comitisse Arundell and Huntyngdon.]

[Sidenote: Maist' Richard was brent as a heretike.]

[Sidenote: Lowlars.]

[Sidenote: Ignis.]

[Sidenote: Ignis.]

[Sidenote: Merchaunts straungers to be oosted with Englisshmen.]

This same yere[125] deyde the countesse of Arundell and of Huntyngdon,
in Gascoigne. Also this yere were too bargemen hanged in Tempse
beyownde seynt Katerines, for scleying of iij Flemynges and a child,
beynge in a schip in Tempse of there contre, and weren homward; and
there they hengen til the water hadde wasted them be ebbyng and
flowyd, so the water bett upon them. Also the same yere upon a Fryday,
that is for to sey the ij^{de} day of August, was on Maister Richard
Wyche, sum tyme vicary of Depforde in the schire of Kent, brent for
lollery at the Tour hill; and there manye of his secte and of his lord
wenten and offred at the same place where he was brent, tyl manye of
them were aspyed and put in prison; and for doughte that there schulde
a ben a maner of arysyng of suyche mysbelevers, the maire, the
schirreves, with alle the aldermen, be comown counseill and comown
assent, dede ordeyne diverses wacches of diverses wardes of the citee,
that a certeyn schulde wacchen a day and as manye a nyght at the same
place, unto the tyme that the maire with his counseill wolde sende
them discharge. Also this same yere on a Fryday, that is for to seye
the xij day of August, aboughte iij of the belle at afternoon, there
fill a sodeyn thondyr clap with a gret reyn and a lyghtnynge, the
whiche lyghtnynge entred in at a wynde and distroyd moche hey which
was stuffed in a gret hous at the Sterre in Bredstrete; and the
remenaunt of the hey was cast out and had in to Chepe, the quantyte of
l cart full: and so, worschepyd be God, there was not moche more harme
do, but palbrakyd sore therein and lost the hey. Also on Fryday xiiij
nyght after that, in the nyghtes tyme was a goldsmyth hous be syde the
crosse in Chepe althernest the Egle brent, and al that was therinne;
but it were the lesse and a part of the tannere at the Egle, and the
good man of the Egle hadde moche harm as it was seyd. Also in this
same yere began the parlement at Westm' at Mighelmesse ant lasted to
Cristemasse, and enyorned til after the feste to Redyng in Berkschire,
and so it lasted there til Schroftyd, and there endyd; and at the
whiche parlement was ordeyned that all marchauntes strangers schulde
gon to oost with Englysshmen withinne too dayes after they be comen
into the lond, in what partie of the lond soevery thei be, to selle
there marchaundyse, and bye ayen withinne viij monthes after there
comynge, and gon ageyn withinne the same terme; and in cas that eny of
there marchaundyse leve unsold at there partynge, they to have it with
them withoughten eny custom payenge; and the goodes that thei bye and
selle shall yeven to there hoost for every xx _s._, worth, ij _d._,
except the Estirlynges. Also at the same parlement was graunted that
the kynges vitaill schulde be payed; and the town of Caleys for to be
made ageyn; and the see for to be kept with the V portus of Engelond;
and that every houshold of Duche peple shall paye to the kyng be yere
xvj _d._, and every servaunt of them shall paye vj be yere. And in
this yere come pardon into Engelond fro the pope of Rome, undir his
lettre and seall of leed, of as moche power as he has, to every prest
to assoilen every Cristeman that yevyth a part of his goodes to the
sustentacion of the popes werres in strengthynge of the Cristen feith.
Also in this yere was cried pees betwen Engelond and Zelond, Holond
ant Freselond perpetuell. Also in this same yere was a man drawen and
hanged, hedid, and quarterd, and sett up at diverses places, for he
tok up bestes and all maner vitaill in the cuntre in the kynges name,
and was but a thef, and so robbyd the cuntre with treson.

[Footnote 125: _See note_ DDD.]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1440-1441.]

Joh'is Paddisle, goldsmyth,   Will' Whetenale, groc'.   Anno xix^{o}.
  m'^{or}.                    John Sutton, goldsmyth.

[Sidenote: The lady of Gloucestre.]

In this same yere wente the duke of York into Normandye, with the erle
of Oxenford, the erle of Ewe, Sire Richard Wodevyle, S^{r}. Jamys of
Ormond, the lord Clynton, and many othere gentiles, with a faire
retenewe of peple, and was mad regent of Fraunce for v yere, and he
shippyd at Portesmouth in Hamptonshire. In this same yere, the morwe
after seynt Katerine day, was a chalange in armes provyd afore the
kyng, withinne lystes mad in Smythfeld, betwen S^{r}. Richard
Wodevill, knyght of Engelond, and a knyght of Spayn, whiche knyght for
his lady love shulde fyghten in certeyn poynts of armes, that is to
seye, with ax, swerd, and daggere; and or thei hadde do with the polax
the kyng cried, hoo.[126] Also moreover in the same yere was a
fightyng at the Tothill betwen too thefes, a pelour and a defendant,
and the pelour hadde the feld and victory of the defendant withinne
thre strokes. Also in this yere was the duke of Orlyons delyvered out
of preson, and sworn to the kyng and othere certeyn lordes that that
tyme were there present, that he shulde nevere beren armes ageyn the
corowne of Engelond; and also that he schulde trete for pees betwen
bothe reaumes Engelond and Fraunce, and ellys he to comen ayen into
Engelond and yelden hym to the kynges grace. And in this yere was wyn,
salt, and whete, gret chepe in the parties of Engelond. Also in this
same yere the duchesse of Gloucetre was arested and put in Holt, for
she was suspecte of treson; and a clerk that was longyng to here,
whiche was clepyd Roger Whiche, was taken for werchynge of sorcery
ayens the kyng, and he was put into the Tour; and after, he was
brought into Poules, and there he stood up on high on a scaffold ageyn
Poulys crosse on a Sonday, and there he was arraied like as he schulde
never the in his garnementys, and there was honged rounde aboughte hym
alle hise intrumentis whiche were taken with hym, and so shewyd among
all the peple; and after, he was broughte to fore the lordys, and
there he was examyned; and after broughte to the Yeldehalle, and there
he was regned aforen the lordes of the kynges counseill and to fore
alle the juges of this land; and anon after, the lady of Gloucestre
afornseid was mad to apere thre sondry dayes afore the kyng and alle
hise lordes spiruell and temperell; and there she was examyned of
diverses poyntes of wicchecraft, of the whiche she knowleched that she
hadde used thorugh the counseill of the Wicche of Eye; the whiche was
brent on the even of Symond and Jude in Smythefeld.

[Footnote 126: "and there the kyng toke the bataile into his hand
withynne iiij strokes, and so was ended" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1441-1442.]

Rob't Clopton,     Will'm Combe, fysshmong'.   A^{o}. xx^{mo}.
  drap', m^{or}.   Ric'us Riche, merc'.

[Sidenote: Talbot was made erle of Shrewesbery.]

[Sidenote: Gascoyn and Gyan loste.]

In this yere[127] my lady of Gloucestre hadde confessyd here
wichecraft, as it is afornseid she was yoyned be alle the spriualte
assent to penaunce; to comen to London fro Westm' on the Moneday next
suynge and londe at the Temple brigge out of here barge, and
there[128] she tok a taper of wax of ij^{lb} in here hond, and wente
so thorugh Fletstrete on here foot and hoodles unto Poules, and there
she offred up here taper at the high auter; and on the Wednesday nest
suenge she com fro Westm', be barge, unto the Swan in Tempse strete,
and there she londyd, and wente forthe on here feet thorugh Brigge
strete, Groschirche strete, to the Ledenhalle, and so to Crichirche in
the wyse afornseyd; and on Fryday she londed at Quen hithe, and so
forth she wente into Chepe, and so to seynt Mighell in Cornhull, in
the forme afornseid; and at iche of the tymes the mair with the
schirreves and the craftes of London were redy at the places there she
sholde londe: and after, Roger the clerk afornseyd on the Satirday,
that is to sey the xviij day of Novembre, was brought to the
Yeldehalle, with Sire John Hom prest, and William Wodham squyer, the
whiche S^{r}. John and William hadden there chartres at that tyme;
and the clerk was dampned, and the same day was drawe fro the Tour of
London to Tiborn, and there hanged, hedyd, and quartered, and the heed
sett upon London bregge; and his oo quarter at Hereford, another at
Oxenford, another at York, and the fourthe at Cambregge; and the lady
put in prison, and after sent to Chestre, there to byde whill she
lyvyth. Also the same yere was a parlement, and it began at Cristemas
and lasted til Estre; at the whiche parlement was ordeyned that the
see schulde ben kept half a yere at the kynges coost, and therfore to
paye an holl fyftene, and London to lene hym iij m^{l} lib'. And that
yere, the laste day of ---- save on, there was a batayle in Smythfeld,
withinne lystes, aforn the kyng, betwen the lord Beaufe a Arrogonere,
and John Ashele squyer of the kynges hous, a chalange for spere to
caste pollex and dagger at the lord aforeseyd in brekynge of his
gauntelette and reysyng of his umbrary, and hadde hym at myschief redy
to a popped hym in the face with his dagger, tyl the kyng cried hoo:
and there the seid Asshle was mad knyght in the feld.[129] Also in
this same yere come the lord Talbot out of Fraunce and was mad erle of
Schrovesbury, and wente over into Fraunce ayen with iij m^{l} men. And
in this yere come tidynges unto the kyng that Gascoigne and Gyan was
lost, save Burdeux and Bayon, be the Armynakes take: in the mene tyme
ambassatours of the same partye of Armynackes were come unto the kyng
to entrete for a mariage of the erle of Armynakes doughter to be
weddyd to the kyng; but because of the same treson the seid mariage
was daisshyd. Also this same yere wente a werre in foure parties of
Engelond, of every coost xxiiij schippes a werre. And in that same
yere com hom out of Fraunce the erle of Ewe and S^{r}. James of Urmond
into Engelond.

[Footnote 127: "Alianor Cobham" _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 128: "openly barehede with a keverchef on hir hede beryng,
&c." _in the Cotton MS._]

[Footnote 129: "be the kyngs hande for his wel doyng, and afterwarde
the lord offered up his harness at Wyndesore" _in the Cotton MS._]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1442-1443.]

John Hatherle, irmong',   Th' Beaumond, salt'.         A^{o}. xxj^{mo}.
  maior.                  Ric'us Nordon, taillo^{r}.

[Sidenote: S^{r}. William Bonevylle went to Burdeux.]

In this same yere the erle of Schrovesbery leide a sege bothe be water
and be lande to Depe, and kepte it awhile til he ferde so foule with
hys men that they wolde no lenger abyde with hym; and so he was fayn
to hye hym thens to Roane, and so brake sege. Also in this yere the
citezeins of the citee of Norwich aresyn ayens the priour of
Crichyrche of the same citee, for certeyn newe customes and
bondschipes that he wolde have begonne to have reysyd of the seid
citee of alle the comons therinne: wherfore the comons aroos, and
wolde a fryred and sautyd the priory and have distroid the prior of
the place into the tyme they hadde the fals contryved evidens that
weren sealed be old tyme with the comoun seall unwetynge of them, but
thorugh a priour of old, and certeyn false aldermen of the same citee,
that now arn dede; and the comowns kepte with strong hond the town
ayens the duke of Norfolk and alle his pissounz, that wolde a comen
thider for the cause afornseid. Wherfore the kyng sente thider the
chief juste John Fortescu, the erle of Stafford, and the erle of
Huntyngdon, and seten there in sessyons, at the whiche were manye of
the citee endyted, and the priour also; and also the citee loste there
libertes and fraunchises and fredoms that they hadde afore, and all
the citee cesed into the kynges hand; and a knyght callyd S^{r}. John
Clyfton mad capytayn therof: and manye of the worthy men there of the
citee ben fled into othere cuntres over the see, for drede, with as
moche of there goodes as they myghte have with them, and lefte there
faire places stonde stille. Also in this yere wente S^{r}. William
Bonevylle, knyght, to Burdeux with viij c of goode fytynge men, to
kepe the town unto the tvme a grett retenewe myght be mad and sent
thider. Also in this yere deide Henry Chicheley erchebisshop of
Caunterbury, in the Passion weke, and is beryed in Caunterbury; and
for hym was the bisshop of Bathe, magister John Stafford chaunceler of
Engelond, stalled erchebisshop of Caunterbury. And in this yere wente
over the see the erle of Somerset with x m^{l} of goode men; and he
hadde over with hym gret ordinance of gonnes, brigges, scalyng
laddres, and manye mo othere thinges whom J'hu spede for his mercy.
And in this yere com over from Normandye the cardinall erchebisshop of
Roon, chaunceler of Normandye and bysshop of Ely into Engelond, with
the erle of Schrovesbury that was the lord Talbot, and my lord
Facombregg, with the Tresore of Normandye and manye othere. And in
this yere was lost a good town in Normandye of the lord Scales, that
is called there Graundevyle, in the coost of Baas Normandye, toward
the coost of Bretaigne, wyth his bastard sone therinne; and the
substaunce of alle the good that the lord Scales hadde in that land
was thereinne, the whiche was falsly sold be a man that he trusted
most too whiles he was at Roon. Also in this yere was gret losse of
shippes in the narwe see on oure party, be enemyes of Depe, Boloigne,
and Bretayne. Also in this same yere was cryed that alle men that
wolde aventur ony corn or vitaill to Burdeux or to Bayon, or to ony
othere place of that cost on oure party, schulde gon custom fre;
whiche caused moche corn and vitaill to be shipped thider. Also in
this yere was a mad woman pressyd to the deth, for sche hadde spoken
ungoodly and to presomptuosly unto oure liege lord the kyng at the
Blak heth; and whanne she was brought aforn the juge she wolde not
speke a word, for the which obstinacye she was put to the deth as y
have rehersyd beforn. Also this same yere deide the bisshop Tirvyn
bisshop of Ely, the ---- day of Septembre, and lyth....

     [_Here the Chronicle in the Harleian MS. terminates: the
     following continuation is copied from the Cottonian MS.
     Julius B. I._]

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1443-1444.]

Th' Catworth.   Nich'as Wifelde. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxij.
                John Norman.

[Sidenote: Creacion A^{o}. xxij R' H. vj^{ti}.]

This yere came the duke of Somerset out of Fraunce into Engelond, that
had lost many of his men: and that yere the erle of Suffolk, the
privey seall, Sir Robert Rose, and the kyngs secretarie went in
ambassade into Fraunce to trete for peas; an peas was made for xviij
monethes; and the suerte hadde of the maiden for mariage afore record
of alle the rial of Fraunce, in presence of our ambassades: and so
comen ageyne into England presentyng unto the kyng thes tithings, for
the which in alle England and Fraunce was made grete solempnite and
ioie. And this yere deide the duke of Somerset, on whose soule God
have mercy. And that yere was ordeyned thurgh England that no market
shuld be more upon the Sonday. And in that yere the erle of Stafford
was made duke of Bukkyngham, the erle of Dorset markes of Dorset, the
erle of Suffolk markes of Suffolke, and the erle of Warwike duke of
Warwike.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1444-1446.]

Herry Frowik, maior.   Stephen Forster. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxiij.
                       Hugh Wich.

This yere came quene Margret into England with grete roialte of the
kyngs oost, and was receyved at London the xxviij day of May in the
moost goodly wise, with alle the citezeins on horsebak ridyng ayenst
hir to the Blak heth in blew gownes and rede hodes; and in the cite in
diverse places goodly sights ayenst hir comyng: and on the xxx day of
May, that was Sonday, sche was crowned at Westm', and iij daies after
open justs for alle that wolde come. And this yere the priour of
Kilmayne in Irland appeelid the erle of Ormond. And this yere came
certen ambassadours out of Fraunce, undre saf condit, to treat for
peas general to be hadde, which accordid not but for xij monthes after
the xviij monthes afore writen, and so went home ayen. And this yere
was the translacion of Seint Edwarde made holy day in alle London.
Also in this yere Paulis steple was set a fire with lyghtnyng.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1445-1449.]

Symon Gyr', maior.   John Derby. Vic'.    A^{o}. xxiv.
                     Geffrey Feldyng.

John Olney, maior.   Rob't Horne. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxv.
                     Geffrey Boleyne.

This yere was the parliament of Bury set, for the good duk of
Gloucestre, with grete treason prively wrought ayenst his comyng
thider, and was logid in the hospitale, for whom was reised iij^{xx}
m^{l} men; and as he sate at his souper, lordes of diverse degrees
came to hym in the kings name, dischargyng hym of the kyngs presence
and of alle other maner answeres; and so thei arestid hym of high
treason, which he mekely obeied; and his men were voided from him ful
hevyly departyng; and after he deceased, the certente howe God knowes:
and than was the parliament fynisshed and done. Also this yere was the
bataile betwene the Armurer and his man.

John Gidney,   Thomas Scot. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxvj.
  maior.       Will'm Habraham.

In this yere was an heretike brent at the Tour Hill upon Hokmonday.
Also this yere were grete flodes, which drowned Stebenhith marshe,
Rayneham, and other lowe places. And this yere a quarter of whete fil
fro the price of ix _s._ to iiij _s._

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1448-1450.]

Steph' Broune,        Will'm Calowe. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxvij.
  maior.              Will'm Marowe.

Th' Chalton, maior.   Thomas Canyng. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxviij.
                      Will'm Hewlyn.

[Sidenote: A^{o}. xxviij R. H. vj^{ti}.]

[Sidenote: Rebelles Jak Cade.]

In this yere was Normandy lost, and the duke of Suffolk bihedid in a
ship called Nicholas of the Tour. Also the comoens of Kent arose, and
Jak Cade was their capitayne, callyng hymself Mortymer, by whome were
ij knyghts slayne at Sevenok in Kent, that is to sey S^{r}. Humfrey
Stafford and S^{r}. William Stafford, brethren, and many of theire
men. Than the kyng and his hoste went to Barkhamsted; and after seint
Petres day, the capitayne came ageyn to Blakheth, and so over London
brige into London on Friday at after none, and bigan to riful and
robbe: and on Saturday he came over the brigge ageyne, and than were
the men of Essex embatailid at the Mile ende, and there was Crowmer
shiref of Kent bihedid; also at the standard in Chepe was S^{r}. Jamys
Fynes lord Saye bihedid, and the body drawen into Suthwerk; and there
was bihedid Hawardyne a theef and a man queller. And on the Sonday at
nyght, the lord Scalis and Mathewe Gough with theire mayny, and with
men of London, wenten over the brigge to the Stulpes in Suthwerke, and
faught with the capitayne and his host al that nyght til on the
Moneday ix of the clok, and that was seint Thomas even, and than the
capitayne fired the drawbrigge; and there was slayne Mathewe Gough and
Sutton the alderman: and after that the capitayne fledde into Sussex,
and thider was pursued and slayne. And after, in the same yere,
Richard Plantagenet duke of Yorke came out of Irland unto Westm', with
roial people, lowely bisechyng the kyng that justice and execucion of
his lawes myght be hadde upon alle such persones about him and in al
his realme, frome the highest degree unto the lowist, as were long
tyme noisid and detectid of high treason ageinst his persone and the
wele of his realme, offring hymself therto, and his service at the
kings comaundement, to spend bothe his body and goodes: and yet it
might not be perfourmed. Than sone after was callid a set a
parliament, wherynne alle the comoens were aggreed, and rightfully
electe hym as heire apparent of England, nought to procede in any
other matiers till that were graunted by the lordes, whereto the kyng
and lordes wold not consent nor graunte, but anon brake up the
parliamente.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1450-1452.]

Rich' Wifold, maior.   Will'm Dere. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxix.
                       John Middilton.

This yere was Burdeux lost. And this yere was S^{r}. Pieres de Brasil,
and the bastard of Orliaunce, and Manypeny taken. And this yere was
the duke of Somerset robbid at Blak freris. And this yere was the
parliament at Westmynster. And this yere the stokkes was dividid
bitwene fisshmongers and bochers.

Wil' G^{e}gory, maior.   Mathewe Philip. Vic.   A^{o}. xxx.
                         Christofre Water.

In this yere came Richard Plantagenet duke of Yorke out of Walis, over
Kyngston brige to the Blak heth, withe grete power, to clere hymself
ageynst kyng Herry of such things as his adversaries had shewed
ageynst hym. And the kyng with his lordes came ridyng thurgh London
with a roial power toward the Blak heth; and there the lordes spiruel
and temperell toke the matier in hand, to trete bitwixt them, to make
rest and peas; wherto the seid duke at last graunted and aggreed, on
the condicion that his peticions bifore askd for the wele of the kyng
and of al his realme myght be graunted and hadde, and his enymys to be
comytted to the Tour to abide the lawe; and so the lordes were aggreed
and graunted that it shuld be, and were sworne ech to other. And
furthwith the duke sent his men home ageyne, and he mekely came and
submitted hymself at the Blak heth to the kyng, his adversaries there
standyng present, contrary to thappointment and there othes; and so
thei brought ungirt thurgh London bitwene ij bisshoppes ridyng unto
his place; and after that made hym to swere at Paulis after theire
entent, and put him frome his good peticions which were for the comoen
wele of the realme, contrary to theire othes and aggreements made
bifore in the felde.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1452-1454.]

Geffr' Feldyng, maior.   Ric' Alley. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxj.
                         Ric Lee.

This yere was the parliament at Redyng. And this yere was therle of
Shrowisbure and the lord Lile his sone slayne: prynce Edward the kyngs
sone was borne: and upon seint Barthilues day was a man of seint
Johnys arrestid, wherfore was moch to doo at the Wrastlyne.

John Norman, maior.   John Waldeyne. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxij.
                      Thomas Coke.

This yere came the duke of Yorke to London to the parliament; and
there the duke of Somerset was arrestid and ladde to the Tour, and the
duke of Yorke made protectour of England. And this yere the riding to
Westm' was fordone, and goyng thider bi barge bigonne.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1454-1458.]

Steph' Forster, maior.   John Felde. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxiij.
                         Will'm Tailor.

[Sidenote: First battle of S^{t}. Albons.]

In this yere the xxij day of Maij was the first bataile at Seint
Albanes; and was there slayne the duke of Somerset, therle of
Northumberland, the lord Clifford, and a knyght callid S^{r}.
Barthilmeu Nantwesil, and xxv squyers, with other people, which were
buried there. Also this yere Scotts leide sege to Berwik.

Will' Marche, maior.   John Yong. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxiv.
                       Thomas Holgrave.

This yere was a strife betwene yong men of the Mercery and Lumbardes.
And this yere was seen the blasyng sterre.

Th' Canynge, maior.   John Steward. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxv.
                      Raffe Verney.

In this yere the lord Egremond brake out of Newegate; and anon after
brake out upon the ledes diverse other prisoners. And this yere came
the duke of Yorke to his place at Baynardes castel in London.

Geffrey Boleyne,   Will'm Edward. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxvj.
  maior.           Thomas Reyner.

In this yere Sandwich was robbid and dispoilid by Frensshemen. And
this yere was a grete watch in London, and al the gates kepte every
nyght, and ij aldermen watchyng: and withynne a while after the kyng
and lordes were accorded, and went a procession in Paulis. And this
yere was bisshop Pecock abiurid, and his bokes brent at Paulis.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1458-1459.]

Tho' Scot, maior.   Raffe Joslyn. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxvij.
                    Ric' Nedeham.

[Sidenote: Comes Sar'.]

In this yere was affrey bitwene gentilmen of Court and men of
Fletestrete; and the gentilmen were driven with archers fro the
standard in Fletestrete into theire Innes, and some were slayne and
some taken the xiij day of Aprile: wherfore William Tailour alderman
of Fletestrete ward, with other mo, were afterward sent to Wyndisore
castel, and there kepte as prisoners. And sone after, kyng Henry, the
quene and lords, lete make a grete gaderyng of people northward,
wherof was grete noise: than therle of Warwike came frome Caleise
thurgh London, and his fader therle of Salisbury came fro Middilham
toward the duke of Yorke with iij m^{l} men; and the quene Margrete
lay by the way as he come with xiiij m^{l} of the floure of
Chestreshire, Lancastreshire and Derbyshire, which set upon the seid
erle of Salisbury and his compeigny at Blore heth, the xxiij day of
Septembre; and there were slayne of the quenes partie the lord Awdley,
with many knyghts, squiers, and other people, the seid erle holdyng
his wey to Ludlowe, where he mette with the duke of Yorke and his
sones therles of the Marche and Ruthland, and therle of Warwik
aforseid; and toward them came kyng Henry with l m^{l} men. And in the
nyght the duke of Yorke and his sones, and therle of Salisbury with
his sone, voidid into Walis; and there departid the duke of Yorke with
his seconde sone therle of Ruthland into Irland; and therles of
Marche, Warwik and Salisbury, bought a ship, and so gete to Caleise
and there were received.

REX HENRICUS SEXTUS. [1459-1460.]

Wil' Hewlyn, maior.   John Stokker. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxxviij.
                      John Plumer.

[Sidenote: Mydsomer Northampton felde.]

[Sidenote: Titulus E. reg' iiij^{ti}.]

[Sidenote: Mortymer crosse.]

[Sidenote: Saint Albans.]

[Sidenote: Palme Sonday felde.]

In this yere, about Midsomer, therles of March, Warwik and Salisbury,
landed at Sandwich, gadred people in Kent, and went thurgh London to
Northampton; and the kyng had taken a felde, and was slayne on his
partie the duke of Bukyngham, therle of Shrowisbury, the lord Beaumont
and the lord Egremond, mych peple drowned in the river, the kyng taken
and brought to London, and callid a parliament; and the duke of Yorke
came out of Irland, and to Westm' the x^{th} day of Octobre, and there
made clayme to the crowne; aggrement was made bitwene the kyng and
him, and he was made protectour, his title allowid to be kyng after
the kyngs deceas; and ayenst Cristmas went northward and was slayne at
Wakefelde with other; and at Candilmas therle of Marche discomfeited
therle of Wiltshire and other at Mortymers crosse; and at Shroftide
came the lordes of the North to seint Albonys, and there discomfeited
therle of Warwik and his compeigny, and toke the kyng with them into
the North. Therle of Warwik fledde thens Westward to therle of March:
than came therle of March and therle of Warwik with moch people to
London, and there the people callid him kyng; and he toke it upon him,
and went Northwardes and faught with the lords of the North beside
Sherborne, where were moch people slayne upon Palme Sonday: and he
bigan to reigne the iiij^{th} day of March.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOMI'A MAIOR' ET VIC' TEMP'E R' EDWARDI iiij^{ti}.

REX EDWARDUS QUARTUS. [1461-1465.]

[Sidenote: A^{o}. Dn'i 1461.]

Ric' le ---- maior.   John Lumbard. Vic'.   A^{o}. i.
                      Ric' Flemyng.

In this yere the kyng Edward the iiij^{th} was crowned at Westm', on
Sonday the xxviij day of Juyn.

Hugh Wich, maior.   George Irland. Vic'.   A^{o}. ij^{do}.
                    John Lok.

In this yere therle of Oxonford, and the lord Awbrey his sone, with
other knyghts, were bihedid upon a new scaffold on the Tour hille.

Th' Coke, maior.   Will'm Hampton. Vic'.   A^{o}. iij^{o}.
                   Barthilmeus Jamys.

This yere quene Margret toke the castell of Bamburgh.

Mathewe Philip,   Thomas Muschamp. Vic.   A^{o}. iv^{to}.
  maior.          Rob't Basset.

In this yere was the sergeaunts fest, and the maire of London shuld
have dyned there; and bicause the chief place was not kepte for him
while the kyng was not there nor of his blode, he came awey with alle
his compeigny of this cite, and dyned at home in his owne place.

REX EDWARDUS QUARTUS. [1465-1469.]

Raffe Joslyn, maior.   John Tate. Vic.   A^{o}. v^{to}.
                       John Stone.

This yere quene Elizabeth was crowned at Westm' the Sonday bifore
Witsonday. And this yere was first the roial, half roial, and quartern
aungel, and aungellet of golde. Also this yere kyng Herry was taken in
the North, and brought into the Tour of London.

Raff V'ney, maior.   Herry Waver. Vic'.   A^{o}. vj^{to}.
                     Will'm Costantyne.

This yere the xj day of Feverer was the prynces borne, the kyngs first
childe, at Westm', and named Elizabeth, [after qwene, and maried to
kyng Henry the vij.][130]

[Footnote 130: _This line has been subsequently added._]

John Yong, maior.   John Brom'. Vic.   A^{o}. vij^{to}.
                    Thomas Brice.
                    John Stokton.

This yere the lord Scalis, S^{r}. Anthony Widvile, faught with the
bastard of Burgoyne in Smethfeld.

Tho's Holg've, maior.   Humfrey Hayford. Vic.    A^{o}. viij.
                        Thomas Stalbroke.

This yere was the lady Margret the kyngs suster maried to the duke of
Burgoyne.

Wil' Tailor, maior.   Symkyn Smyth. Vic.   A^{o}. ix.
                      Will'm Hariot.

[Sidenote: Hegcote felde.]

This yere the duke of Clarence weddid therle of Warwiks doughter at
Caleis: and the same yere was the lord Herbert and diverse other
slayne at Hedgecote felde.

REX EDWARDUS QUARTUS. [1470-1472.]

Ric' Lee, maior   Ric' Garden'. Vic'.   A^{o}. x^{o}.
  ij tyme.        Rob't Drope.

[Sidenote: Comes Wigoon.]

This yere the kyng discounfeited the comoens of Lyncolneshire biside
Staunford; and the duke of Clarence and therle of Warwike fled into
Fraunce at Eastre, and came ageyne at Mighelmas; and than king Edward
fledde into Flaundres to the duke of Burgoyne; and therle of Worcestre
was biheded at Tour Hille.

John Stokton, maior.   John Crosby. Vic'.   A^{o}. xj.
                       John Warde.

This yere kyng Edward landid in the North with fewe people, and came
to London on Sher Thursday, and toke his journey furth ageyne on
Eastre even; and upon Eastre day met with therle of Warwik and marquys
Mountague his brother at Barnet, and there slewe them with moch other
people: and than was quene Margret and prynce Edward hir sone with
theare compeigny, landid in the West; and kyng Edward met them at
Tewkesbury; and there was the prynce slayne with many others: and
while the kyng was there, came the bastard Faconbrige with shipmen and
moche other people to London, and firid at London brige biside seint
Katerynes and without Algate: and afterward the kyng rode into Kent
with moch people, and assid the contrey at moch money for theire
risyng.

REX EDWARDUS QUARTUS. [1472-1476.]

Wil' Edward, maior.   John Aleyne. Vic'.   A^{o}. xij^{o}.
                      John Shelley.

This yere after Cristmas apperid a blasyng sterre, and contynnued v
weke and more.

Will' Hapton,       Thomas Bledlowe. Vic'.    A^{o}. xiij^{o}.
  maior.            John Browne.

John Tate, maior.   Robert Billisdon. Vic'.   A^{o}. xiiij^{o}.
                    Will'm Stokker.

This yere was a grete watche upon seint Petres nyght, the kyng beyng
in the Chepe; and there fill affrey bitwixt men of his household and
the constablis; wherfore the kyng was gretely displeasid with the
cunstablis.

Robert Drape, maior.   Thomas Hille. Vic'.   A^{o}. xv^{o}.
                       Edmond Shaa.

This yere the kyng askid of the people grete goodes of theire
benevolence, to gone over the see and so passid to Caleis, and so
furth into Picardie; and there upon a brige, kyng Lewes of Fraunce and
he spake togider, and toke appointment bitwixt them upon certen
mariages and certen money in hand, and l m^{l} crownes of sterling
money yerely to be sent to the kyng out of Fraunce, duryng theire
lives and a year after, so to be paide: and the kyng retourned ageyne
over into England.

REX EDWARDUS QUARTUS. [1476-1481.]

Rob't Basset, maior.   Hugh Brice. Vic.   A^{o}. xvj^{o}.
                       Rob't Colwich.

This yere an heretike callid Habraham was taken, which accusid
diverse persones of the cite and other places, of which some were
abjurid at, and did theire penaunce at Paulis.

S^{r}. Raff Joslyn,   Will'm Horne. Vic'.   A^{o}. xvij^{o}.
  maior.              Ric' Rason.

This yere the abbot of Abyndon a pardon of pleyne remission,[131] and
the wallis of London were bigonne to be newe repaired.

[Footnote 131: _Sic_ in the MS.]

Humfrey Hayford,   John Stokkes. Vic.   A^{o}. xviij^{o}.
  maior.           ---- Colet.

This yere the parliament was at Westm'; and the duke of Clarence was
atteyntid of high treason, and afterward put to deth in the Tour of
London.

Ric' Garden', maior.   Rob't Hardyng. Vic'.   A^{o}. xix.
                       Rob't Bifeld.

This yere a wex chaundler in Flete strete had bi crafte, perced a pipe
of the condit withynne the grounde, and so conveied the water into his
selar; wherfore he was jugid to ride thurgh the citee with a condit
upon his hedde. And this yere was grete deth of people; wherfore the
kynges courts were not kepte at Westm' frome Easter to Midsomer nor in
the Guyldhall from Easter to Midsomer.

Barth' Jamys,   Thomas Ilam. Vic'.   A^{o}. xx^{o}.
  maior.        John Warde.

This yere were the diches about the Tour newe cast, and the Tour newe
repeired: and certen merchaunts of Bristowe were accusid of money
makyng; and the kyng examyned them and there accuser, and there
accuser forsoke that he hadde done; wherfore he sent them home, and
also sent theire accuser to Bristowe, there to have his jugement. Also
this yere the duches of Burgoyne came into England to see the kyng hir
brother, which shewid to hir great pleasure, and so she departid
ageyne. And this yere the duke of Gloucestre, and therle of
Northumberland reisid grete people agein the Scottes, which fledde and
wold not bide.

REX EDWARDUS QUARTUS. [1481-1483.]

John Browne,        Thomas Danyel. Vic.   A^{o}. xxj.
  maior.            Will'm Bacon.

W. Hariet, maior.   Rob't Tate. Vic.      A^{o}. xxij.
                    Will'm Wikyng.
                    Ric' Chaury.

This yere a quarter of whete was worth xij _s._ and more. Also the
duke of Gloucestre, and therle of Northumberlond, with many other
lordes and moch people went into Scotland unto Edenburgh, and there
made proclamacons in the kyngs name of England; and in their comyng
homeward the sege contynued at Berwike, unto the towne and castell
were geten with grete assauts. Also about seint Laurence tide was
grete enquery at Caleis, for counterfeityng of the keies of Cales.

Edmond Shaa,   Will'm White. Vic'.   A^{o}. xxiij.
  maior.       John Mathewe.

This yere the viij day of Aprile died kyng Edward.




NOTES;

CONTAINING

THE MATERIAL VARIATIONS

BETWEEN

THE PRECEDING COPY OF THE CHRONICLE,

AND

THE TRANSCRIPT IN THE COTTONIAN MS. JULIUS B. I.




NOTES.


NOTE A. (erroneously printed Note _D_.) page 9.

This event is stated to have occurred in the _third_ year of Henry
III.


NOTE B. page 16.

A^{o}. xxx. Hen. III.--"This yere was seint Edmond of Pountney
translated, et ven' sanguis depositus fuit in hospic' s'c'i Thome apud
conductu' usq' ad festu' s'c'i Edwardi, quo die d'n's rex cu'
honorabili p'cessione ven'al' apud Westm' deposuit."


NOTE C. page 16.

A^{o}. xxxj. Hen. III.--"In this yere there was an erthquake thurghout
England."


NOTE C. page 21.

Thomas fili' Thome.   Ph'us Walbroke.   A^{o}. xlvj^{o} Hen. III.
                      Ric'us Tailour.


NOTE D. page 23.

To the account given in the text is added "and London lost theire
fraunchise."


NOTE E. page 28.

"And there were forjuged, drawen and hanged, iij Englisshe christen
men, and ij^{c} iiij^{xx} and xiij Englisshe Jues."


NOTE F. page 37.

"Also the same yere the kyng had his counseile there with erlis,
barons, and other of his counseile; and the kyng toke of the lay
people" &c.


NOTE G. page 43.

Nicholl Faryndon.   Will'm Basyng. Vic'.    A^{o}. ij. [Edw. II.]
                    John Butler.

Thomas Romayne.     Roger Palmer. Vic'.     A^{o}. iij^{tio}.
                    Janyn' de S'c'o Ed'o.


NOTE H. page 43.

John Gesors.   Simon Merewodde. Vic'.   A^{o}. v^{to}. [Edw. II.]
               Ric' Wilforde.


NOTE I. page 46.

Nicholas Faryndon.   Will'm Prodome. Vic'.   A^{o}. xiij^{o}. [Edw. II.]
                     Reynolde at Condite.

Hamond Chikwell.     Symon Abyndon. Vic'.    A^{o}. xiiij^{o}.
                     John Preston.


NOTE K. page 50.

In the Cottonian MS. is the following copy of the letter from queen
Isabel and prince Edward:

"Isabel, by the grace of God quene of England, ladie of Ireland and
countes of Pountif, and we Edward, the eldist son of the kyng of
England, duke of Guyen, erle of Chestre, of Pontif and of
Mounstroille, to alle the comonialte of London senden gretyng.
Forasmoch as we have bifore this tyme sent to you by oure lettres how
we ben comen into this lande with good arreie and in good manere, for
the honor and profite of Holy Chirch, and of oure dere lord the kyng
and alle the realme, with alle oure myght and power to kepe and
mayntene, as we and alle the good folke of the seid realme are holden
to done, and upon that we praied you that ye wolde be helping to us in
as moche as ye shulde mowe in this quarell that is for the comon
profite of alle the realme, and we have had in thys time non answere
of the seid lettres, ne knowe not your wille in that partie: wherfore
we send to you ageyne, and charge you and praie that ye bere you so
ageins us that we have no cause to greve you, but that ye ben to us
helping by alle the weres that ye may or shalle conne and mowe. For
weteth wele in certein that we, and alle thoo that ben comen with us
into this realme, think not to doo, ne we shulle not done if it like
God, eny thing but that shal be for the comon profite of the realme,
but onely to distroie Hugh Spencer our enymy, and enymy to alle the
seid realme, as ye well knowe; wherfore we praie you, and charge you
in the feith that ye owe to oure lord the kyng and to us, and up alle
that ye shalle mowe forfeit ayens us, that if the said Hugh Spencer
oure enemy come withynne your power, that ye do hym oure wille, and
that ye leve not in no manner, as ye desire honour and profite of us
alle, and of alle the realme; and weteth of that ye done oure praier
and mandement, we shalle the more be holden to you, and also ye shalle
gete you worship and profite if ye send us hastely alle your wille.
Yeven at Baldok the vj^{te} day of Octobre."


NOTE L. page 54.

"In this yere Edward Bailolle, the son of John Bailolle sometyme kyng
of Scotland, came into England chalengyng his right heritage, that is
to sey, the kingdome of Scotland; with whome many grete lordes of
England went into Scotland, and at Domfrevelyn arrividden, where fast
by an abbeie ij m^{l} of Englisshemen discomfited xij m^{l} of
Scottes." &c.


NOTE M. page 58.

In the copy in the Cottonian MS. this event is said to have occurred
in the _fifteenth_ year of Edw. III.--"Also this same yere, that is to
seye the xv yere of his reigne of England, was the first yere of his
reigne of France, and he came fro Tourney."


NOTE N. page 64.

"This yere [A^{o}. xxxiiij. Edw. III.] the blode all fresshe flowid
out of the tombe of Thomas sometyme erle of Lancastre. Also this yere
the kyng chose his sepulture at Westmynstre. Also this yere, the yere
of oure lord m^{l} iij^{c} lx, the xiiij day of Aprile and the morn
after day, the kyng Edward with his hoste lay about Paris," &c. as is
related in the text to have occurred in the _thirty-fifth_ year of
Edward III., though the king's expedition to Calais against the regent
of France is stated to have occurred in the _thirty-fourth_ year.


NOTE M. page 67.

The sheriff called in the text Adam Wymondham, stands as Adam
Wymbyngham in the Cottonian MS.; and though the death of dame Blaunch
duchess of Lancaster is there mentioned, no notice occurs of the
pestilence.


NOTE N. page 70.

The following is the account of the events in this year [A^{o}. xlix.
Edw. III.], in the copy in the Cottonian MS.--"In this yere, at the
towne of Brugges in Flaundres, was tretid upon diverse articles
hangynge atwixt the pope and kyng Edward. Also the same tyme at
Brugges was tretid for a peas bitwixt the ij realmes Fraunce and
England. Also this yere deide William Witlesey archebisshop of
Caunterburye, and the monkes chose the cardinall of England; and the
kyng was wroth therwith, and wolde not consent therto, ne the pope nor
cardinall; and so Maister Symon succedid."


NOTE O. page 71.

The only event noticed in the copy in the Cottonian MS. in the 51st
Edw. III. is the death of Edward prince of Wales, and his burial at
Canterbury.


NOTE P. page 71.

It is singular that in both MSS. the events mentioned in the text, as
well as the death of Edward the Third, are said to have occurred in
the _fifty-second_ year of that monarch's reign, for he died in the
_fifty-first_ year, namely on the 21st of June 1377. The commencement
of his reign is always calculated from the 25th of January 1327, when
his father resigned the crown.


NOTE Q. page 77.

A^{o}. ix. Richard II.--The copy in the Cottonian MS. only states
under this year, that "This yere, the yere of oure lord m^{l} iij^{c}
and iiij^{xx} and vj, kyng Richard went into Scotland with a roial
power."


NOTE R. page 79.

A^{o}. xiv. Richard II.--No other circumstance is mentioned under this
year in the Cottonian MS., than the following,

"In this yere was the good man at the litle Condit mordred."


NOTE S. page 80.

The occurrences mentioned in the text as having taken place in the
15th of Richard II. are in the Cottonian MS. assigned to the following
year; but no notice is taken under either year of "the pley of S^{t}.
Katerine."


NOTE T. page 80.

King Richard's expedition into Ireland in the 18th year of his reign,
is not noticed in the copy in the Cottonian MS.


NOTE U. page 81.

The Cottonian MS. adds, that the earl of Arundel was beheaded at Tower
hill, "in the same place where S^{r}. Symon of Burelle was bihedid.
And the duke of Gloucestre the kyngs uncle was foule murdred at
Caleis, in the Princes inne, with ij towailis made snarewise, and put
about his necke. And therle of Warwik and lord Cobham were dampned to
perpetuall prison;" which is stated in the text to have occurred in
the 21st of Ric. II. "And the parliament was enjourned to Shrowesbury,
unto the xv day of seint Hillarie, where it was endid, and where moch
people were disheritid."


NOTE X. page 83.

Instead of the words "and of Braybroke &c." the following occur in the
copy in the Cottonian MS.

"and of the bisshop of London, Braybroke, putten a supplicacion to the
kyng, the tenor wherof foloweth in this fourme;

"To our full excellent right doutful sovereigne and ful graciouse lord
the kyng.

"Ful mekely bisechen your humble lieges spirituell and temperell,
tharchbisshop of Caunterburye, the bisshop of London, the maire,
shireves, and aldermen, and alle other spirituell and temperell
gentills and comons of your cite of London; that forasmoch as full
grete and sorowefull malices, trespases, and wikkid commecturacions of
some men, and of many evil doers of the seid cite, have been procured,
done, and evil done to your roial maieste, to grete and perpetuell
confusion and repreef of the evil doers, and grete velany and shame to
alle dwellyng withynne the same cite, as wele innocent as unknowyng
therof, as other; which malfaisours or evil doers, for there trespases
have deserved harde and lither chastisement and punysshement, ne were
that the high benignite of you oure doutful lord fulfilled, of al
grace wol not procede ayens them after there deserts, which if ye
shulde ayenst them procede, shulde be distrucion, and nought withouten
cause of grete multitude of your people without nombre. Pleese it to
your full excellent and doutful roial maieste, graciously to considere
the grete repentaunce of your seid misdoers, and there brennyng desire
that thei have to aske mercy, and to redresse in al manere, and
refourme after there power as moche as it shalle mowe bene any wise
possible, there excesses, folies, and defauts aboveseid, and of
thabundaunt welle of grace; wherof the Almyghty Kyng, exempler of al
mercy and grace, hath endued you to receyve them to your mercie and
grace, and holly to foryeve alle that malfaisours or evil doers, or
they dwellyng in the same cite, by cause of them have trespasid to
your roial excellent maieste biforeseid; and your seid humble lieges
wol submitte them, and submitten them in dede to doo, bere, and obeie
almanere thing that shal in eny manere please the same your roial
maieste, and evermore that your seid humble lieges bisechen that thei
may be receyved to grace by Roger Walden archbisshop of Caunterbury,
Braybroke bisshop of London, Richard Whityngton maire of London, &c.
sufficiantly enformyd, and havyng ful and sufficiaunt auctorite and
power for al your humble lieges of the seid cite, and in there name to
swere and truely to holde, kepe, and observe, lowen and mayntene with
al there power, withouten fraude or malengyne, alle the statuts,
stablisshements, and jugements done or yolden or yeven in your high
parliament bigonnen at Westminster the Monday next after the
exaltacion of the Holy Cros, the yere of your graciouse reigne xxj,
and fro thens aiourned to Shrowesbury unto the quinizime of seint
Hillarie than next suyng, and there termined and endid: and alle other
statuts and ordinunces and stablisshmentis, sithen hiderto done and
made withouten ever to comon done, or procuren anything ther ageyne in
any maner to that ende, that thei shal mowen be put thurgh your
habundaunt grace out of al suspecion, and to ben holden as thei
desiren above al thing your true lieges, for the love of God, and in
the werke of charite. In witness of the which thing, and for the
things aboveseid, wele and truely to holde, kepe and observe, and
mayntene for al daies with al ther power, in manere as it is aboveseid
without ende to done or procure the contrarie, and to live and deie
your seid humble lieges, of whom ther names severally ben underwriton,
as wele for themself, as in the name of the residue of the same cite
to this supplicacion have set there sealis, that is to wite, we by the
grace of God archbisshop of Caunterbury primate of England, Robert
Braybroke bisshop of London, Richard Whityngton, William of Askeham,
John Wodcok, and many other."


NOTE Y. page 83.

"And than after the presentacion of the seid supplicacion, there were
made many blank chartres; and alle the men of every crafte of the cite
as wele allowes and servaunts as the maisters, were charged to come to
the Yeldhalle, to set there sealis to the seid blank chartres." But
the disturbance "by Chestreschire men in Fryday strete," mentioned in
the text, is not noticed.


NOTE Z. page 91.

"And also Sir John Cornewaile, Sir Richard of Arundell, the son of Sir
John Cheyne and other Frensshemen."


NOTE AA. page 92.

"And holde the righte wey of Holy Chirche, and hym shulde want no
goode. Also Courtney, that tyme chaunceller of Oxonford, prichid and
enfourmed hym the feith of Holy Chirche, and the prior of seynt
Barthemew" &c.


NOTE BB. page 94.

The copy in the Cottonian MS. adds, "And about the fest of seint
Laurence the duke of Clarence seilid into Fraunce, to help the duke of
Orliaunce," but it takes no notice of the arrival of the prince and
his attendants in London, or of the departure of the duke of Clarence,
the duke of York, &c. to Southampton.


NOTE CC. page 96.

The mayor and sheriffs mentioned in the text and in the copy in the
Cottonian MS., as having served those offices in the 14th Hen. IV.,
are in the latter also assigned to the 1st Hen. V.; whilst the mayor
and sheriffs stated in the text to have served in the 1st Hen. V., are
in the latter attributed to the 2nd year of that monarch's reign. But
there is manifestly much confusion respecting the year of the king's
reign in which the events occurred, in the copy from which the text
has been taken, and which will again be alluded to in a future note.


NOTE DD. page 96.

The copy in the Cottonian MS. adds, "And were put in his owne
sepulture that he made himself, with quene Anne his wiffe." This is
the only circumstance mentioned under the 1st Hen. V. in that MS.: and
under the 2nd Hen. V., the transactions concerning Sir John Oldcastle
&c., which in the text are stated to have occurred in the preceding
year, are related.


NOTE EE. page 99.

In the Cottonian MS. under the _third_ year of Hen. V., and when the
mayor and sheriffs mentioned in the text as serving in the 2nd Hen. V.
are stated to have held those offices, the king's expedition is
properly noticed. This error cannot be explained in any other manner
than by attributing it to the transcriber; for it is notorious that
Henry quitted England, besieged and captured Harfleur, and fought the
battle of Agincourt, in the _third_ year of his reign. The account of
that expedition is so differently related from that in the text, that
it is here given at length.

"The kyng with alle his hoste seiled over the see with ij m^{l}
shippis and mo; and the xvj day of August a litle from Harflete he
landid: and the Saturday next after thassumpcion of oure lady he leide
siege about Harflete, and contynued the sege unto the Sonday next
before the fest of seint Michel, upon which Sonday the towne of
Harflete was delyvered to the king, that was the xxij day of
Septembre. But it is to wite, that on Tuesday bifore, that was the
xvij day of Septembre, at xij of the belle wythynne nyght, the lordes
that were capteynes and governours of the towne, that is to sey the
lord Gaucourt, the lord Tutvill, and mo other lordes, senten out an
haraude of armes unto the duke of Clarence, praiyng him at the
reverence of God that he wolde send to the kyng, bisechyng hym that he
wolde of his high and gracious lordship, graunt them leve to trete
with what persones that the kyng wolde assigne to them. And the kyng
at the reverence of God, and at there request, assigned therle of
Dorset, the lord Fitz Hugh, and S^{r}. Thomas of Erpyngham, to here
what thei wolde desire. And thei desired that the kyng wold not werre
upon them fro that houre at mydnyght, unto the Sonday next after the
fest of seint Michel; and but it were so that thei were rescued by
bataile of the Frensshe kyng or with the dolphyn by that day, thei to
yelde the towne to the kyng, and thei to have theire lives and goodes.
And the kyng sent them worde that if thei wolde delyver the towne on
the morwe next after the houre of mydnyght aforseid, without any
condicion, he wolde accepte it, and in any other wise he bad them seke
no trete. And yet the Frensshe lordes praied oure lordes to biseke the
kyng at the reverence of God and of oure lady, that he wolde graunte
them that same Tuesday nyght, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday,
and the Sonday til an houre after none: and in that meane tyme the
lordes that were capitayns of the towne, to come to the kyng with xxij
knyghts and squyers with them, of the moost sufficient men withyn the
towne, and thei to be sworen openly afore alle the people upon Goddis
body. But it so were that the Frensshe kyng or the dolphyn rescued
them by that Sonday, by the houre of none or anon after none, thei to
delyver the towne to the kyng, and alle there bodies and goodes to
done with them whatsoever him list, without eny condicion, with that
the kyng wolde suffre them to send to the Frensshe kyng viij persones
out of the towne, lettyng him wite in what plite thei stond: and they
graunted them. And upon the Wednesday by the morowe these lordes comen
out of the towne, and xxij knyghts with them; and come the procession
solempnely and stately, with xxiiij copis of a sute before Goddis
body, with many worshipful lordes, knyghts, and squyers, and other
moch multitude of people fro the kings tent, as solempnely done and as
stately as any man saugh ever such a thing done bifore that time; but
the kyng was not there present. And the Frenssh lordes there made
there othes upon the holy sacrament. And the othes thus done, the
Frensshe lordes with theire felauship were brought to the kyngs tents,
and there thei eten in the kyngs halle: but in all this tyme thei sawe
not the kyng. And when thei had eten, they were departid and delyvered
to certen lordes for to in hostage unto the Sonday at the houre after
none, as it was accordid whan thei received. And at the houre on
Sonday after none, the kyng had a tent pight on an hille bifore the
towne, and there he sate in his estate roial, and al his lordis about
hym; and than came the Frensshe lordes with iij^{xx} and iiij with
them, of the moost sufficient men that were withynne the towne, and to
the kyng in his propre persone yelded up the keies of the towne, and
there bodies and goodes to the kyngs grace without eny condicion: and
this was done the xxij day of Septembre, the yere of oure lord m^{l}
iiij^{c} xv. And anon after that, the kyng ostered from thens xxj
daies thurgh the realme of Fraunce, fro Harflete toward Caleys; and
the Friday, that is to sey the day of the holy seints Crispyn and
Crispinian, alle the roial power of Fraunce, excepte the Frenssh kyng,
the dolphyn, the duke of Bourgoyne, and the duke of Barre were bifore
the kyng in his heigh weie, as he shulde passe to Caleis, faire
embatailed in iij batailes, to the nombre of lx m^{l} men of armes,
and the fairist armed men that eny man saugh ever in any place. And
the kyng seyng wele that thei wolde not suffre hym to passe withouten
bataile, seid to his title mayny, 'Sires and felawes, the yonder men
letten us of oure wey; and if thei wol com to us, let every man preve
hymself a good man this day, and avaunt banere in the best tyme of the
yere.' And he rode furth with his basnet upon his hedde, and all other
men of armes went upon theire fete a fast paas in holle arraie, an
Englisshe myle er thei assemblid. And thrugh the grace of God the kyng
made his heigh wey thrugh the thikkest prees of alle the bataile. And
there was slayne the duke of Launson, the duke of Braban, the duke of
Bare, vj erles, the constable of Fraunce, the seneschall of Henaude,
the maister Arblaster, and of other lordes grete plente. And there was
take the duke of Orliaunce, the duke of Burbon, the counte of
Richmond, the counte Ewe, the marschal Sir Bursequant, and many other
lordes and knyghts. And there were slayne of Frensshemen v m^{l}, and
of al estats of Englisshemen passid not xxviij persones. And of estats
of thenglisshe, the duke of Yorke, therle of Suffolke, ij knyghts, and
Davy Game; and of gentilmen no moo. And the xxiiij day of Novembre the
kyng with all his prisoners came to London in good prosparite. Also
this same yere bigan the general counsell at Custance."


NOTE FF. page 103.

The arrival of the emperor is differently noticed in the copy in the
Cottonian MS.

"This yere [A^{o}. iv. Hen. V.] the vij day of Maij came themperour of
Almayne, Segismundus, to London; and the fest of seint George was
deferrid til his comyng, and than solempnely holden at Wyndisore: and
at the procession the kyng went on the upper side of themperour, and
so alle the masse tyme stode in the higher place, and at mete he sate
on the right side of themperour; and the duke of Bedford, and the
chaunceller of England, and the bisshop of Develyn, sate on the lefte
side of themperour: and the duke of Briga and another duke of
themperours compeigny sate upon the kings side; and all these saten on
that oon side of the table. And the first sotelte was oure lady armyng
seint George, and an angel doyng on his spores; the ij^{de} sotelte
was seint George ridyng and fightyng with the dragon, with his spere
in his hand; the iij^{de} sotelte was a castel, and seint George, and
the kynges doughter ledynge the lambe in at the castel gates. And all
these sotelties were served to the emperor and to the kyng, and no
ferther: and other lordes were served with other sotelties after
theire degrees. And the same tyme duke William of Holand came into
England; but he was not at that fest. Also the emperour laye at
Westminster the tyme that he abode in England; and the duke of Holand
laie at the bisshop of Elies place. And after Midsomer the duke of
Holand seilid home ageyne. And after that themperour and the kyng went
to Caleys: and than the duke of Burgoyne and the counte Charles his
son came to Gravenyng; and the sent thider his brother the duke of
Gloucestre, and therle of the March, to abide there in hostage while
the duke of Burgoyne come to Caleys. And in the myddis of the river
the lordes metten togider; and the dukes son of Burgoyne receyved
there oure lords, and led them furth with hym into Flaundres: and the
erle of Warwik receyved the duke of Burgoyne and brought him to
Caleys, where he spake with the kyng of diverse matiers atwixt them
ij. And he toke his leve of the kyng: and the erle of Warwik brought
hym agayne to Grevenyng Water; at which tyme also the counte Charlis
brought our lordes to the same place, where either of these lordes
token live of other. And than the kyng retorned ageyne into England;
and themperour seiled into Holand, and so passid furth into
Custaunce."


NOTE GG. page 106.

"with all the lordships longyng thereto. And than the duke of Clarence
with other lordes rode furth to Cane: and upon our Lady even the
Assumpcion, he mustred hym bifore the towne of Cane; and the Tuesday
next after our Lady day, that was the xxvij day of August, the kyng
with all his host came to Cane, and ther leide his sege, and contynued
til our Ladies even the Nativite, upon which even by strong assaute
the towne was wonne. And than the kyng leide strong sege to the
castel, which was yolden to hym. And while he was abidyng at Cane, he
sent the duke of Clarence with other lordes to Baieux, and bisegid and
wan it. And the same yere the kyng bisegid Argentyne, bothe towne and
castell, which were yolden to hym. Also the kyng wan many castelles
and townes, and strong abbeis long before seint Edwardis day."


NOTE HH. page 106.

"upon the moru after the fest of seint Lucie the virgyn and martir,
the yere of our lord m^{l} iiij^{c} xvij. Also the same yere, about
Alhalowen tide, the kyng leide a sege to Falowes, and contynued it to
the xx day of Decembre: and than thei of the towne desired to trete
with the kyng. And the kyng committid the trete unto Thomas erle of
Salisbury, to Herry lord Fitz Hugh, to S^{r}. John Cornewaille, and
S^{r}. William Harington knight, as commissioners for his partie: and
as for the partie of the towne, S^{r}. John Meultone, S^{r}. Gilbert
Mousteins, lordes of Faiete, capitaynes of men of armes and of shot
withynne the towne of Faloys, and with them upon the same entrete, the
lord of Gamulle; which parties entreted and accorded upon the articles
and appointments folowyng."

[Then follows the treaty alluded to, which extends to eleven folios,
but it is not of sufficient interest to require insertion.]

"Which castel was delyvered up and yolden to the kyng in manner and
fourme as it is bifore seid. And than the kyng lete parten his hoste
to journey diverse weys; that is to say, oone partie the duke of
Clarence with many ful worthis with hym: and he gate many townes,
castells and strong abbeis. And the duke of Gloucestre another partie
of the oste; and with hym therle of the March, the lord Grey, the lord
Clifford, Sir Water Hungerford steward of the kyngs house, with ful
many other knyghts and squiers: and he gate er he leide his sege to
Chirburgh, xxiiij townes and castells. And after Eastrene he leide
sege to Chirburgh, and contynued it unto Michelmas, at whiche tyme
bothe towne and castel of Chirburgh was yolden to hym. And the
iij^{de} parte of the hoste the kyng delyvered to therle of Warwik and
other lordes with hym, which gate many strong townes, castells and
abbeis. And after Eastern the kyng leide a sege to Lovers, and wan it:
and afterward he leide a sege and wanne Pount Large. And than he leide
a sege to the cite of Rone and contynued; and duryng the sege the
maire of London was chosen upon seint Edwardes day."


NOTE II. page 107.

A^{o}. vij. Hen. V.--"Also the kyng contynued his sege from seint
Edwardes day unto the xiij day of Janeuary, at which day thei of the
cite desired to trete: and the kyng comytted with hym for to trete,
therles of Warwik and Salisburie, the lord Fitz Hugh, Sir Water
Hungerford, Gilbert Humfrevile, John de Vasques de Almada, and
Robesard, knyghts: and for the parte of Rone these followyng."

[Then follows a copy of the agreement in six folio pages.]

"And the forseid cite was yolden to oure sovereigne lord the kyng upon
seint Wolstanes day: and after that the kyng gate many strong castells
and townes."


NOTE KK. page 108.

A^{o}. viij. Hen. V.--"And the xx day of Maij the yere of oure lord
m^{l} cccc xx^{ti} the kyng come to Troys in Champayne, where he was
worthely receyved of al the lordes spiritual and temperal that were
with the kyng of Fraunce. And upon the morue the kyng and quene of
Fraunce, and dame Katerine his sustre, the duke of Burgoyne metten
togiders in seint Petres chirche of Troys, in the body of the same
chirch; and after went thei up to the high auter, and there tharticles
of the peas redde, and the othes made on either partie: and than was
the kyng and dame Katerine sured togiders. And upon the morue after
Trinity Sonday, that was than the iij^{d} day of Juyn, the yere of our
lord m iiij^{c} and xx, in the chirch of seint Petre of Troys the kyng
weddid dame Katerine, kyng doughter of Fraunce, and was made regent
of Fraunce. The convencions of which accord followen here after, that
is to say."

[Then follows the agreement, which extends to nearly eleven folios.]

"And thanne after that the fest and solempnetie of the mariage was
done, the kyng conquerid many townes and castells. Also the kyng leid
his sege to Milon sur Seyne, duryng which sege the maire and shireves
of London were chosen."


NOTE LL. page 108.

A^{o}. viij. Hen. V.--"And whanne the solempnite was done in the
chirch, she was brought ful worthely into the greet halle.

     Of the sittyng of the astates at the coronacion of Quene
     Kateryne hereafter foloweth: that is to say;

First Quene Kateryne sate in hire astate.

The archebisshop of Caunterbury.

The bisshop of Wynchestre.

Thei saten upon the right side of the Quene, and served next the
Quene, and covered at every course.

The kyng of Scotland sate in his astate upon the lefte side of the
Quene, which was served at every course, the ij bisshops aforseid.

The duches of Yorke, the countes of Huntyngdon; they saten on the same
side that the kyng of Scotlande sate.

The duke of Gloucestre supervisour.

Therle of March knelyng upon the deys on the right side of the Quene,
held a sceptre upright of the Quenes.

Therle Marchall knelyng on the same deys upon the left side of the
Quene, held another sceptre of the Quenes upright.

The countes of Kent was sittyng at the right fote of the Quene undre
the table.

The countes Marchall sate at the lefte fote of the Quene undre the
table.

Sir Richard Nevile, Carver, bifore the Quene.

Therles brother of Suffolk, Cup berer.

Sir John Steward, Sewer to the Quene.

The lorde Clifford, Panter, instede of therle of Warwik.

The lord Willoughby, Butler, instede of therle of Arundel.

The lord Grey of Ruthyn, Naperer.

The lord Awdley, Avener, instede of therle of Cambrige.

The duke of Bedford, Constable of England.

Therle of Warwik, Steward of England, instede of the duke of Clarence.

Therle of Worcestre, Marchal of England, instede of therle Marchal.

     Of the maner of sittyng of the astates at the other tables
     in the Halle.

First the Barons of the Five Poortes biganne the table of astate in
the halle upon the right hand of the Quene.

And byneth them at the same table seten the Bouchers of the Chancery.

The Maire of London and his brethren thaldermen biganne the table of
astate in the halle on the lefte hand of the Quene, with other
comoners of the cite, and other men byneth them at the same table.

The Bisshoppes biganne the table in the myddis of the halle; that is
to say, the table next to the table of the Five Poortes on the right
hand.

The bisshop of London withynne the table.

The bisshop of Durham withynne the table.

The bisshop of Bath bifore them.

The bisshop of Excestre bifore them.

The bisshop of Norwich.

The bisshop of Salisbury.

The bisshop of Seint David.

The bisshop of Bangor.

The bisshop of Lincoln.

The abbot of Waltham.

The bisshop of Carlehill.

And than after saten the Justices, and after them worshipful Knyghts
and Squiers.

And the Ladies biganne the table in the myddes of the halle afore
ayenst the table of the Maire and Aldermen.

First the countes of Stafford.

The countes of the March hire doughter.

The countes of Arundel.

The countes of Westmoreland.

The countes of Northumberland hir doughter.

The countes of Oxenford.

The lady Nevile, wiffe to the sone and heire of the erle of
Westmoreland and doughter of the erle of Somerset. [or rather erle of
Kent.[132]]

[Footnote 132: _These words have been subsequently added._]

Dame Margarete sustre to therle Marchal.

The yonger doughter of therle of Somerset.

The lady Roos.

The lady Clifford to the erle of Northumberland.[133]

[Footnote 133: _Sic._]

The lady Burgaveny.

The lady Talbot.

The lady Willoughby.

The lady of Mauley.

The wiffe of S^{r}. Richard Nevile.

And this table was ocupied with Ladies and Damesells.

These Lordes suyng were assigned to done the seinc' roiall bifore the
Quene.

Therle of Northumberland, therle of Westmoreland, the lord Fitz Hugh.

The lord Furnyvale, the lord Grey of Wilton.

The lord Ferers of Groby, the lord Pownyngs.

The lord Haryngton, the lord Darcy.

The lord Dacre, the lord Delaware.

     Here bigynneth the servyce at the first Course.

Brawne with mustarde. Dedel in Borneux. Furmente with baleyne. Pike.
Laumprey powdred. Great Elis poudred. Trought. Codlyng. Plaies and
merlyne fried. Crabbes great. Lech lumbarde florisshid with colars of
esses and brome coddes of gold in a Target with the armes of the kyng
and the quene departid. Tarves. A Sotelte, callid a pellican on hire
nest with briddis and an ymage of Seint Katerine with a whele in hire
hande disputyng with the Hethen clerks, having this Reason in hir
hande, _Madame la Roigne_; the Pellican answeryng _Cest enseigne_; the
briddes answeryng _Est du roy pur tenir joie. A tout gent il met
sentent._

     The ii^{d} Course is this folewyng.

Gely florisshed with columbyne floures of white potages. Blaundesore.
Breme. Congre. Soles with mulet. Cheveyne. Barbel with Roch. Samon
fressh. Halibut. Gurnarde rostid. Roches boilet. Smelt fried. Losters.
Lech damaske with the kyngs worde _Une sanz pluz_ writon of white
lettre. Lamprey in paste suyng. Flampan florisshed with a scochyn
roial, theryn three crownes of golde and plantid with floure de lice
of golde and floures of camomil wrought of confections. A Sotelte, a
panter with an ymage of Seint Katerine in the same tariage and a whele
in hire hand, and a Reason in hire other hand. The Reason was this: _La
Roigne ma file_. The panter answeryng _In cest Ile_: another best
answeryng with this Reason, _Of Albion_: another best saiyng, _Aves
Renowne_.

     This is the iij^{d} Course folowyng.

Dates in compost. Creme motley. Carpe. Dorrey. Turbut. Tench. Peerch
with gogyns. Sturgeon fresshe. Welkes. Porpes rostid. Memise fried.
Creves de ewe douce. Shrympes grosse. Elis with laumprons rostid. A
Lessh callid the White Lessh, with hauthorne leves grene and redd
hawes. A mete in paste with iiij aungels in fourme of Sent Katerine
whele in the myddes with a Reason--

     _Il est escrite_        _Par mariage pure_
     _Pur voir et dir._      _Ce guerre ne dure._

A Sotelte, A Tigre lokyng in a mirour and a man ridyng on horsebak
armed with a tigre whelp in his barme, and throwyng mirours for his
defence; and a Reason writon, _Par force saunz Droit Jay pris ce best_.
Another Reason for thanswere of the tigre

     _Cile de mirrour
     Ma fait discour._"


NOTE MM. page 110.

A^{o}. ix. Hen. V.--"Also in the moneth of Maii, the quene at Hampton
toke hir viage into Fraunce the yere of our lord m^{l} iiij^{c} and
xxij, and of the kyng the x^{th} yere, the cite of Mewes in Bry',
which long tyme had ben bisegid, was yolden in maner as folowith
after."

[Then follows the treaty, which extends to nearly seven pages.]


NOTE NN. page 111.

A^{o}. i. Hen. VI.--"Also there was graunted to the kyng V nobles of
every sakke of wolle to custume duryng iij yere." "And the forseid
first day of March was the trete of the delyveraunce of Pount Melank,
which was taken and long holden by the partie called Armynakkes, and
delivered in maner as after folowith."

[A copy of the treaty then occurs, consisting of eight pages.]

"Also this same yere Newegat was bigonne to make newe by thexecutors
of Richard Whityngton. Also the same yere in somer tide was great
plente of al maner cornes and fruytes: but a litle before Midsomer
there bigan to falle moch reyne, which contynued lasse or more every
day as for the moost partie; howsoever the wynde stode unto viij daies
bifore Cristmas, so that men myght not gadre ynne there, and namely
the codde corne, and yet was there plente of corne ynough."


NOTE OO. page 112.

A^{o}. ii. Hen. VI.--"And upon the Wednesday with a glad chere sate in
his modres lappe in the chare, and rode thurgh the cite to Westm' the
xvij day of Novembre, the yere of our lord m^{l} cccc xxiij, and there
was brought into the parliament; where the Speker of the parliament,
in the name and for al the comons of England, spake to the kyngs
persone these wordes after folowyng."

The speech assigned to the Speaker is then given; after which it is
stated that on "The xxvj day of Novembre the kyng with his modir
remoeved from Westminster to Waltham, and a certen tyme there were
abidyng; and fro thens he remoevid to Hertford, where he helde his
Cristmas, and the kyng of Scotts with him." An account of the
proceedings in Parliament in this year, especially of the impeachment
of Sir John Mortymer, knight, and of the statutes enacted therein
then follows at some length, and is succeeded by a minute account of
the French towns and castles taken by the duke of Bedford, the earl of
Salisbury, Sir John Radcliff seneschal of Guyenne, and Sir John
Beauchamp. It is also noticed, that in that year "therle of the March
with many other lordes and great retinue went into Irland, and there
deide." After stating the loss of the Scots at the battle of Vermuil,
it is added, "Wherfore it may be seid of them the worde of olde tyme,

     'That in the croke of the mone came thei thiderwarde,
     And in the wilde wanyng went thei homewarde.'"


NOTE PP. page 113.

"Also this yere after Eastre the king helde his parliament at Westm',
which bigan the laste day of Aprile; and the kyng come to London the
xxvij day of Aprile, which was Saturday, with his moder in his chare
from Wyndisore unto Seint Paulis; and at the west dore he was taken
out of his chare by his uncle the duke of Gloucestre, and by his bele
uncle the duke of Excestre: and he went upon his fete fro the west
dore to the steires, and so up into the quere; and than he was borne
up and offred: and than was set upon a courser and so rood thrugh the
Chepe and London to Kenyngton. And the kyng held his see diverse daies
in the parliament." Then follows an account of the grants made by that
parliament to the king, and of some statutes enacted therein. The
success of the English army under the earl of Salisbury is related in
a most minute manner, and the agreement for the surrender of Mauns is
given at length: but nothing is stated of sufficient interest to
justify so long a note as a copy of the narrative and treaty in
question would require.


NOTE QQ. page 114.

"defense of the cite. And anon after the bisshop of Wynchestre sent a
lettre over the see into France unto the duke of Bedford, the tenor
wherof after foloweth:

'To the most high and myghty prynce and my right noble lord the regent
of Fraunce and duke of Bedford.

'Right high and myghty prynce and my right noble and after oon, levist
lord, I recommand me unto you with al myn hert and affinite: and as ye
desire the welfare of the kyng our sovereign lord and of his realmes
of England and Fraunce, and your owne wele and our alle, so haste you
hider; for by my trouth if ye tarie we shal put this land in a venture
with a felde; such a brother ye have here, God make him a good man,
for your wisedom knoweth wele that the prosperite of Fraunce stant in
the welfare of England. High and myghtie prince, I bisech you holdeth
Maister John Estcourt, your counseilour, escusid of his tarrying, for
it is moch ayenst his wille, but the counsell here hath made hym; and
ye hist to give credence to your chamberleyne S^{r}. William Boteller.
The blessid Trinite kepe you. Writon in grete haste on Alhalowen even,

  by your true servaunt to my lives ende,

    HENRY WYNCHESTRE.'

"And ageyn Cristmas the duke of Bedford came out of Fraunce into
England. And the kyng helde his Cristmas at Eltham; and the bisshop of
Wynchestre helde his Cristmas at Marton: and bicause that he wolde not
come in the cite of London, for evil wille that he hadde therto, the
counsel was holden at Seint Albones after Cristmas: but there wolde
not the duke of Gloucestre come. At which counsel was ordeyned that
the parliament shulde ben at Leicestre, which parliament bigan in the
bigynnyng of Lenton; where, by good trete and arbitracion of the lords
spiriele and temperel, was made a good unite and accorde atwixt the
duke of Gloucestre and the bisshop of Wynchestre, in fourme as after
folowith."

[Then follows the "Arbitirament", which extends to six folios.]

"And thus was the accord made atwixt these ij lordes of Gloucestre and
Wynchestre; and the parliament was ajourned til after Easter. Also the
same yere of the kyng, and of our lord m^{l} iiij^{c} xxv, Arthur erle
of Richemont, and Richard his brother, and the baron of Columbe, with
great multitude of Britons, leien at the sege of Seint Jaquys de
Ber'on to the some of xx m^{l} of Britons, which gaven assaute to the
towne, and were beten and myghtely put of, rebukid and slayne of them
iiij^{c}: and in the towne were cheveteynes Sir Thomas Remston, Sir
Philip Braunch, Sir Nichol Burdet, and Sir Richard Stafford, and with
them ix^{c} persones, Englisshe and Normaunes. And the nyght folowyng,
fast by the towne, in ij milles, were iij^{c} Britons loggid; and the
seid knyghts with a certeyn mayny went out and brent the milles, and
slough of the Britons bitwene iij and iiij score. And afterward Arthur
and his men maden another assaute, and there losten vij^{xx} and oon
standardes and getens, and viij^{xx} men of cote armes and legge
harneis; and Arthur was sore hurt in the thigh nygh the body: and so
thei withdrowen them homeward to Breteigne. But Thomas de Burgh with
people of the garison folowid after them, and slough of them xxv^{c}.
And the Britons lefte byhynde them there gonnes and there wyne, the
some of vj^{c} pipes of wyne, with flour, brede, figges, reisins, and
grete plente of egges and butter, with moch fisshe, and so fled with
mischief."


NOTE RR. page 116.

A^{o}. vj. Hen. VI.--"This yere the kyng held his parliament at
Westminster, and was ajourned til after Cristmas: and in this
parliament the kyng helde his see diverse daies." Then follows an
account of the grants made to the king, and of other proceedings
therein. "Also this yere the erle of Salisbury sailid over the see
with a feire compeigny; and the Carde come to London upon seint Gilis
day: and the maire of London, and aldermen, with the craftes, roden
ayenst him, and receyved him worthely. Also the same yere therle of
Sarum was slayne at the sege of Orliaunce: but yet was the sege holden
by other lordes and contynued, but not long after."


NOTE SS. page 116.

The death of the earl of Salisbury is, as has just been noticed,
stated in the Cottonian MS. to have taken place in the preceding year.
"This yere [A^{o}. vij. Hen. VI.] about Midsommer, the Cardenal seilid
over the see with a feire compeigny wagid for to have, and werred upon
the Lollards in Prage: but a litel before the departyng of the
Cardenal out of England, therle of Suffolk, the lord Talbot, the lord
Scalis, and many other lordes, knyghts, and squyers, were taken and
slayne at the sege of Orliaunce, and the sege broken."


NOTES TT and UU. page 118.

"This was the first Cours at his coronacion; that is to say, first

Furmentie, with venyson. Viande Roial planted with losenges of golde.
Bore-hedes in castells of earmed with golde.[134] Beef. Moton. Signet.
Capon stued. Heron. Grete Pike. A redd Lech with lions corvyn theryn
of white. Custarde Roial with a leparde of golde sittyng theryn.
Fritour like a sonne with a flour de lice therynne. A Sotelte, Seint
Edward and seint Lowes armed in cote armours bryngyng yn bitwene them
the kyng in his cote armour with this scripture suyng:

     _Loo here twoo kyngs right profite and right good,
     Holy seint Edwarde and seint Lowes:
     And see the braunch borne of there blessid blode,
     Live among Cristen moost sovereigne of price,
     Enheretour of the floure de Lice;
     God graunte he may thurgh help of Crist J'hu
     This sixt Henry to reigne and be as wise,
     And them resemble in knighthod and vertue._

[Footnote 134: _Sic_ in the MS.]

     Here foloweth the second Course; that is to wite,

Viand blank, barrid of golde. Gely partid writen and notid _Te Deum
Laudamus_. Pigge endored. Crane. Bitore. Conyes. Chikyns endored.
Partrich. Pecok enhakill. Great breame. Leches white with an antelope
of redde corven theryn, a crowne about his neck with a cheyne of
golde. Flampayne poudred with lepardis and flours de lice of golde.
Fritour, a lepardis hedde with ij Ostrich fethers. A Sotelte,
themperour and the kyng that ded is, armed, and there mantells of the
garters; and the kyng that nowe is, knelyng before them with this
Reason.

     _Ageinst miscreaunts themperour Sigismond
     Hath shewid his myght which is Imperial:
     Sithen Henry the Vth so noble a knyght was founde
     For Crists cause in actis martial
     Cherisshyng the chirch Lollardes had a falle
     To give example to kyngs that suitede
     And to this branche in especiall
     While he dothe regne to love God and drede._

     The iij^{d} Course sueth; that is to say,

Blaunde Surrey poudrid with quatrefoilis gilt. Venyson rostid.
Egrettes. Curlewe. Cokkes. Plover. Quailis. Snytes. Grete birdes.
Larkes. Carpe. Crabbe. Lech of iij colours. A colde bakemete like a
shelde quarterly redde and white, set with losengs and gilt, and
flours of borage. Fritour crispes. A Sotelte of our lady sittyng and
hir childe in hir lappe, and she holdyng in hir hand a crowne and
seint George knelyng on that oo side and seint Denyse on that other
side, presentyng the kyng, knelyng to our lady, with this Reason
folowyng;

     _O blessid lady, Cristes moder dere,
     And thou seint George, that callid art hir knyght,
     Holy seint Denyse, O martir moost entier,
     The sixt Henry here present in your sight,
     Shewith of grace on hym your hevenly light
     His tender yougth with vertue both avaunce
     Bore by discent and by title of right
     Justly to reigne in England and in Fraunce._"

"This same yere, the xxij day of Janeuere, there was an heretik brent
at the Tour hille: and on the morue next after there was a batayle
done in Smythfelde, withynne listes, bifore the kyng, bitwene John
Upton appellaunt, and John Downe defendaunt; and whan thei hadde long
foughton, the kyng toke it up into his handes and fargaff bothe
partes. Also this yere the kyng passid the see to Caleis upon seint
Georges day, and many grete lordes with hym; that is to say, First,
the Cardenall bisshop of Wynchestre, and than other bisshops folowyng;
that is to say, the bisshop of Bath, the bisshop of Ely, the bisshop
of Rochestre. Dukes; the duke of Yorke and the duke of Norfolk. Erles;
therle of Stafford, therle of Huntyngdon, therle of Warwik, therle of
Oxonford, therle of Devonshire, therle of Morteyn, therle of Ewe,
therle of Ormond. Barons; the lord Beaumont, the lord Bourghchier,
the lord Tiptofte, the lord FitzWater, the lord Roos, the lord
Audeley, the lord Faconbrigge, the lord Grey Codnore, the lord
Welles."

[The capture of the Maid of Orleans is then noticed in nearly the same
words as those in the text; and is followed by a copy of the letter
which the duke of Burgoyne "wrote unto the kyng at Caleis."]

"Superscripcion: To my moost doubtid lord the kyng.

"My moost doubtid lord, I recomaunde unto you asmoch and as mykely as
I may. And please it you to wete my moost doubtid lorde, that this
day, the xxiij day of Maij, about vj at after none, your adversaries
and myn, that were with grete power in the towne of Compeigne, afore
which towne I am loggid with my folke, and with those that ye senten
undre governaunce of S^{r}. John Mountgomery and S^{r}. John Steward,
came out with grete puyssaunce upon the van warde which was next them;
and with them came she that thei calle the Pucelle, with many of there
chief chiefteynes: and ageine them anone came my cosyn S^{r}. John
Luxenburgh, and other of your folkes and of myn, which made right
grete and sharp resistence: and I came thider in myn owne persone, and
founde that the seid adversaries were put abak, and by the pleasaunce
of our blessid Creatour it fil so; and God yaf me such grace, that she
that thei calle the Pucelle was taken, and with many hire capitaynes,
knyghts, and squyers, and other taken, and drowned, and dedde, whose
names I knowe not yet."

This letter is succeeded by an account of the "Journeis that were done
after the kyng was landid at Caleis."

"The first Journey was at Pountnake: the Pucelle with a grete power
was put to flight.

"The second Journey was in a wodde biside Compeigne: the Pucelles
mayny ij^{c} were discounfeited of xxx Englisshemen, and there were
xij Armynaks prisoners.

"The iij^{d} Journey the Pucelle was taken at Compeigne, and many of
her mayny slayne and drowned.

"The iiij^{th} Journey the lord was, the lord Wilby brent a chirch and
vj^{xx} men and boies therynne.

"The v^{th} Journey the lorde Scales toke and slough of the dukes men
of Launson, iij^{c}.

"The vj^{th} Journey the kyngs householde mayny, biside Parys, an
Englisshe mile out of Boys, seint Vyncent token a strong abbeie with
tretis.

"The vij^{th} Journey the lord Chamberleyne distressid La Here, and
slough and toke of his meyny into iij^{c}: and at the same Journey was
slayne S^{r}. Symon Filbrigges sone and his heire.

"The viij^{th} Journey therle of Huntyngdon toke gonnes, quarrells,
and crosbowes, comyng toward Compeigne the nombre of an c and xx men
of armes, and vileyns many.

"The ix^{th} Journey the seid erle of Huntyngdon and his compeigny
token vj strengthes and chirches, and brent many; and he gate a grete
towne callid Crepynaloys. And thei praied hym that thei myght stand in
the same forme that thei of Compeigne shulde, and therto thei sent hym
ij m^{l} salves of golde for expenses.

"The x^{th} Journey the seid erle of Huntyngdon made a rode frome the
duke of Burgoyne, and met with a compeigny of Scotts, distressid them,
and toke there capitayne.

"The xj^{th} Journey ij^{c} Englisshemen of the kyngs house were
bifore seint Lis, and token bestes and lx prisoners, whose capitayne
was called Arnold Gilias of Alafeert Baynarde, the whiche as men wende
myght paie a m^{l} marc of golde, and another was La Heres brother.

"The xij^{th} Journey the duke of Norfolk met with Lumbards vj^{xx}
speres, distressid them and toke their capiteyne, and many moo
chirches, abbeis, and castells that were strong viij or ix, and hangid
them that were therynne, and breke downe castells and chirches that
were right strong.

"The xiij^{th} Journey Castel Gailard was wonne.

"The xiiij^{th} Journey therle of Stafford gate Arlmarle, and therynne
vj^{xx} and vj men; of the which v^{xx} were hangid, and the remenaunt
in the kings wille.

"The xv^{th} Journey Sir Raffe Butler gate a pile and brake it downe.

"The xvj^{th} Journey the first day of July, there were comyng towards
Compeigny of Scotts and of Armynakes to the nombre of iiij m^{l}. and
in theire comyng thiderward therle of Huntyngdon met them, and there
toke the capiteyne of the Scotts and iiij^{xx} other gret capiteyns:
and there were slayne and taken xv^{c} of Scottis and Armynakes.

"The xvij^{th} Journey the duke of Norfolk gate Dammartyn and twoo
other grete townes: and the dolphyn was that tyme at Jargowe, v leges
biyonde Orliaunce."


NOTE XX. page 119.

A^{o}. xj. Hen VI.--The only event noticed under this year in the
Cottonian MS. is "that the meyre, aldermen, and shireves in scarlet,
with comoens of London in grene, rodde to the Blak heth to receyve my
lord of Bedford."


NOTE YY. page 120.

A^{o}. xij. Hen. VI.--No other circumstance is mentioned in the
Cottonian MS. than that "this yere was a Text writer brent at the Tour
hille for heresie."


NOTE ZZ. page 120.

A^{o}. xiij. Hen. VI.--"In this yere was a grete frost that enduryd
from seint Katerines day unto seint Valentynes day after, wherfore
the vyntage myght not come to London but by carte over Shoters hille
frome Gravesende, Northflete, Greneheth, and other places both on Kent
side and Essex."


NOTE AAA. page 121.

A^{o}. xv. Hen. VI.--"This yere was another grete frost enduryng xj
weks. Also this yere was openly knowen that the duke of Burgoyne was
falsely forsworne to the crowne of England; for he laied sege to
Caleis, and did make a strong bastelle; to the which bastel
Englisshemen made strong assaute ij tymes, and the iij^{d} tyme thei
gate it, and token certeyn persons, and slough alle the remenaunt, and
brent the bastelle; and than my lordes the dukes of Gloucestre, and of
Northfolke, therle of Huntyngdon, therle of Stafford, and therle of
Warwik, with many other lordes and barons, knyghts, and squiers, were
apointed for to gone over and fight with the seid duke of Burgoyne;
but the sege was broken er thei came there; for at that time alle the
shyppes of England were arrestid, and went a werr fare half a yere, to
for er these lordes went over the see: and thei did moche harme to our
enymys; for thei toke Spaynardes, Britons, Flemyngs, Scotts, and other
nacions of diverse contreis, and a galey chargid with diverse
merchaundise. And than thei were countermandid to diverse havons of
England for to have over the seid lordes; and at that tyme every lord
found a certen of men of theire owne cost, and every feed man went
with his lord: and every abbeie and house of religion founde certen
men to gone over the see. Also at that tyme London found a certen of
sowdiers to Caleis; and also gave unto the werres m^{l} li: and many
other townes of this land found men to gone over the see: and my lord
of Gloucestre toke his ship at Wynchelsee, and many other lordes with
hym, and went furth to Caleis with alle his hoste, and the shippes
aweytyng upon the hoste by the costes of Flaundres, the Munday next
after seint Laurence day, in the yere of our lord m^{l} iiij^{c}
xxxvij, and lay that night in the felde at a place callid Sparkes
place, bisides Oye: and upon the morowe he passid the water of
Gravenyng, at x of the belle, with l men nombrid a myle byneth the
towne; and there he made knyghts, and passid to a village callid
Meerdike; and that thei brent, and alle the townes as thei went. And
also thei brent a good open towne callid Popryng, and many other
villages; and a towne was callid Belle and so furth, West Flaundres;
and our shippes brent an ile callid Cagent."


NOTE BBB. page 123.

A^{o}. xv. Hen. VI.--"In this yere the toure at the gate on London
brigge, and ij arches with alle the housyng therupon fil downe into
Thamyse, which no man cowde let to grete hurt. And this yere died
quene Kateryne at Bermonsey, and was buried at Westminster in seint
Marie chapel withynne thabbeie. And in this yere the kyng of Scotts
was slayne in Scotland, of a knyght of the same land callid Sir Robert
Grame."


NOTE CCC. page 123.

A^{o}. xvij. Hen. VI.--"In this yere the duke of Orliaunce went over
the see to Caleis with certein lordes of this land, and so was
delyvered by composicion made. And in this yere therle of Huntyngdon
was sent into Gascoyne and Guyen. And wheat was at xvj^{d} a busshell
alle that yere: and yet there was moch wheat brought out of Pruyte.
And that yere was ordeyned that strumpettes shuld were rede hoddes and
white roddes in there handes."


NOTE DDD. page 125.

A^{o}. xviij. Hen. VI.--"In this yere was ordeyned by parliament that
al strangers shuld goo to oost. And this yere ij men were hangid in
Thamys, at the last hille beyond seint Katerynes; for thei had robbid
and murdred vitailers in the water. And in this yere Sir Richard Wiche
sometyme vicarie of Depford, and another secular man were dampned for
heretiks, and brent at Tour hille, in a mornyng at vij of the belle."

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The following article is prefixed to the copy of the preceding
Chronicle, in the Harleian MS._ 565.]

COPIA TABULE PENDENTIS AD COLUMPNAM IUXTA TUMULUM DUCIS LANCASTR' IN
ECCLESIA SANCTI PAULI LONDON'.

Ecclesia sancti Pauli London' continet infra limites suos tres acras
terre et dimidiam. unam rodam et dimidiam et sex virgas constratas.
Longitudo eiusdem ecclesie continet dclxxxx pedes. Latitudo eiusdem
ecclesie continet cxxx pedes. Altitudo occidentalis testudinis
continet ab ara cij pedes. Altitudo testudinis nove fabrice continet
ab ara lxxxviij pedes. Cumulus ecclesie continet in Altitudine cl
pedes cum cruce. Altitudo fabrice lapidie campanilis eiusdem ecclesie
continet a plana terra cclx pedes. Altitudo fabrice lignee eiusdem
campanilis continet cclxxiiij pedes. Attamen in toto non excedit
quingentos et xx^{ti} pedes. Item pomellum eiusdem campanilis potest
continere in sua concauitate si fuerit vacuum decem bussell' bladi
cuius rotunditas dyametri continet xxxvj vncias. que faciunt tres
pedes cuius circumferencia continet cxiij vncias que faciunt nouem
pedes et dimid. cuius superficies si sit circumrotunda debet continere
quatuor milia lxviij vncias que faciunt xxviij pedes quadratas et
quartam partem vnius pedis quadrati. Hasta crucis eiusdem campanilis
continet in altitudine xv pedes cuius transversorium continet sex
pedes. In qua Cruce Anno Domini Millesimo ccc^{mo} xxxix^{o} xj^{mo}
kl. Augusti videlicet in festo sancte Marie Magdalene multe preciose
reliquie plurimorum sanctorum ad Salvacionem eiusdem et tocius
edificii sibi subiecti cum magna processionis Solempnitate collate
fuerunt vt Deus omnipotens per merita gloriosa omnium sanctorum quorum
reliquie in illa Cruce continentur ab tempestate et periculo in sua
proteccione conservare dignetur. De cuius misericordia omnibus fabrice
huius ecclesie auxilium procurantibus xxvij Anni Cl. dies omni tempore
anni conceduntur preter Staciones Romane que sunt xliiij^{or} anni et
quam plura alia beneficia.

       *       *       *       *       *

COPIA ALTERIUS TABULE PENDENTIS AD MEDIAM COLUMPNAM. IBIDEM INTER
DICTUM TUMULUM DICTI DUCIS ET TUMULUM SANCTI ROGERI NUPER EPISCOPI
LONDON'.

[Sidenote: Inuencio imaginis crusifixi.]

Anno Domini C^{mo} xl^{o}. Invencio ymaginis crucifixi ad hostium
Boriale sancti Pauli London'. in magno fluuio Thamisie. per Lucium
primum Regem Anglie Christianum. Anno Domini Millesimo lxxxvij^{o}
[Sidenote: Ecclesia sancti Pauli combusta.]
mensis Julii die septimo Ecclesia sancti Pauli London' et omnia que in
ea erant cum magna parte Civitatis igne erant consumpta. tempore
Mauricii Episcopi London' regnante primo Rege Normannorum Willielmo
Conquestore qui fundavit Monasteria de Bello in Sussex ubi ipse
pugnaverat et Bermondesey iuxta London'. Anno Domini Millesimo C^{mo}
[Sidenote: Londini maxima pars combusta.]
xxxij^{do} Idus Aprilis combusta erat Civitas London in maxima parte
ex igne Gilberti Beget. Anno Domini Millesimo C^{mo} xxxvij^{o}
[Sidenote: Templum Pauli iterum combustum.]
combusta erat ecclesia sancti Pauli London' per ignem ad pontem
London' accensum et inde processit ad ecclesiam extra Barras noui
[Sidenote: Nota.]
templi London'. Anno Millesimo C^{mo} l^{mo} tam valida erat glacies
quod Thamisia potuit per equestres pertransiri. Anno Millesimo
[Sidenote: Anno iiij^{to} Regis Johannis.]
ccij^{do} tante pluuie tonitrua et grandines ceciderunt ut lapides
quadranguli ad quantitatem ovorum mixti cum pluuia de celo
descenderunt ex quibus arbores vinee et segetes multum erant destructe
homines erant contriti et aves per aiera volantes Visi sunt carbones
ignitos in rostris deferre et domos incendere. Anno Domini Millesimo
[Sidenote: Eodem Anno.]
[Sidenote: Anno vj^{to} regis Johannis.]
CC^{mo} iiij^{to} Incepit ordo fratrum predicatorum in Tholosanis
[Sidenote: Eodem anno.]
partibus sub Duce Dominico. Eodem anno yemps asperima a circumcisione
domini vsque ad Annunciacionem perduravit. Anno Domini Millesimo
[Sidenote: Anno vij^{o} regis H. iij^{cii}.]
cc^{mo} xiiij^{o} Sanctus Franciscus incepit ordinem fratrum Minorum
iuxta assisum. Et Anno Millesimo cc^{mo} xxiiij^{to} venerunt primo in
Angliam per biennium ante obitum sancti Francisci. Anno Millesimo
[Sidenote: Anno v^{to} regis H. tertij.]
cc^{mo} xxj^{o} In festo sancte Luce Euangeliste irruit ventus
vehemens a septentrione quaciens domos et pomeria nemora et turres
ecclesiarum. Visi que sunt dracones ignei et maligni spiritus in
[Sidenote: Anno xliij^{o} regis H. iij.]
turbine volitare. Anno Millesimo cc^{mo} lviij^{o} apud Teukysbury
quidam Judeus perdiem Sabbati cecidit in latrinam nec permisit se
extrahi die Sabbati propter reuerenciam sui Sabbati. Set Ricardus de
Clare Comes Glouernie non permisit eum extrahi die dominica sequente
propter reuerenciam sui Sabbati. et sic mortuus est. Anno M^{o}
[Sidenote: Anno ix^{o} regis E. sec'di.]
ccc^{mo} xvj^{o} Magna lues animalium et hominum maxima que inundacio
ymbrium fuit ex qua prouenit tanta bladi cariscia quod quarterium
[Sidenote: Anno xxiiij^{to} regis E. tercij.]
tritici pro xl. _s'._ vendebatur. Anno domini M^{o} ccc^{mo}
xlviij^{o} Incepit magna pestilencia London' circa festum sancti
Michaelis et duravit usque ad festum sancti Petri ad uincula proxime
[Sidenote: A^{o}. xxxv^{to} et xxxvj^{to} regis E. tercij.]
sequens. Anno Domini Millesimo ccc^{mo} lxj^{o} xviij kl. Februar. in
festo sancti Mauri abbatis accidit ventus vehemens et terribilis per
totam Angliam. Eodem anno fuit secunda pestilencia in qua obiit vir
nobilis et Strenuus Henricus Dux Lancastrie. Anno Domini Millesimo
[Sidenote: Anno xliij^{o} regis E. iij^{cii}.]
ccc^{mo} lxviij^{o} erat tercia pestilencia in qua obiit nobilis
domina Blanchia Lancastrie ducissa. que in ecclesia sancti Pauli
[Sidenote: Anno v^{to} regis Ricardi secundi.]
London' honorifice iacet tumulata. Anno Domini Millesimo ccc^{mo}
lxxxij^{do} xij^{o} kl. Junii videlicet feria iiij^{ta} ante
pentecosten inmediate post nonam erat terre motus magnus per totam
Angliam.

       *       *       *       *       *

COPIA MAGNE TABULE IBIDEM PENDENTIS PER DICTAM TUMBAM DICTI ROGERI
NUPER EPISCOPI LONDON'.

[Sidenote: Etates mundi.]

In principio creavit Deus celum et terram et omnia que in eis sunt.
Sexto autem die a creacione mundi factus fuit prothoplasmus Adam.
[Sidenote: 1.]
Prima etas mundi ab Adam usque ad Noe secundum Ebreos continet Mille
sexcentos quinquaginta sex annos. secundum Septuaginta interpretes duo
Milia ducentos xl^{ta} iiij^{or} annos. Secundum vero Jeronimum non
plene duo Milia. Secundum Metodum duo Milia. cuius diuersitatis causa
est quia isti non computant secundum morem sacre scripture minucias
temporum vel annorum que super sunt Millenis atque Centenis annis. A
principio mundi vsque ad diluuium Noe duo Milia ducentos quinquaginta
[Sidenote: 2.]
sex annos. Secunda etas a Noe vsque ad Abraham continet secundum
septuaginta Interpretes Mille septuaginta duos annos. Secundum Ebreos
[Sidenote: 3.]
Mille Ducentos viginti duos annos. Tercia etas ab Abraham vsque ad
David continet secundum Ebreos octo centenos xl^{ta} duos annos.
Secundum autem septuaginta Interpretes multo minus quoniam deficiunt
[Sidenote: 4.]
in duobus annis. Quarta etas a David usque ad transmigracionem
Babilonis continet secundum Ebreos quatuor Centenos septuaginta tres
annos. Secundum septuaginta interpretes parum minus quia deficiunt in
[Sidenote: 5.]
vno anno. Quinta etas a transmigracione Babilonis vsque ad Christum
continet quinque Centenos octoginta quinque annos. Secundum alios
[Sidenote: 6.]
quinque Centenos nonaginta nouem annos. Sexta etas a Christo vsque ad
finem mundi. Anni ab Origine mundi vsque ad incarnacionem domini
nostri Jesu Christi quinque Milia nonaginta novem. Anni ab
incarnacione eiusdem vsque ad passionem suam triginta tres imperfecti.
Anni a creacione mundi vsque ad destruccionem Troie iiij m^{l} xxx
anni. A destruccione Troie vsque ad construccionem noue Troie que nunc
Londonia vocatur lxiiij^{or} anni. A construccione noue Troie ad
construccionem Romane vrbis ccclxxxx anni. Ab vrbe condita vsque
adventum Christi dccxv anni. Ab origine mundi iiij m^{l} lxxxxiiij
post destruccionem Troie videlicet anno M^{l} C^{mo} quinto ante
incarnacionem Christi. Brutus quidam nobilis de genere Troiano ortus
cum magna multitudine Troianorum per responsum dee Diane in insulam a
Gigantibus olim Albion vocatam et inhabitatam intravit et Gigantes
omnes destruxit. inter quos erat quidam fortissimus nomine Gogmagog et
terram illam nomine suo Britanniam vocauit. Deinde a Saxonibus sive ab
Anglis eam conquerentibus vocata est Anglia. Et idem Brutus primus Rex
Britonum construxit primam Britannie vrbem que nunc Londonia vocatur
in memoriam Troie prius destructe vocans eam trinouantum id est Troiam
nouam que per tempus longum Trinouans vocabatur. Regnante tunc Ely
sacerdote in Judea et archa testamenti a Philisteis capta fuit. Post
mortem Bruti regnarunt in Britannia lviij Reges. Deinde regnavit rex
Lud qui muros vrbis Trinouantum fortiter edificauit que per ipsum
Caerlud vocabatur. Anglice _Loudesdon'_ et innumeris turribus
circumcinxit quam pre omnibus Ciuitatibus regni amauit. Et ideo
precepit vt domos et edificia edificarent que aliarum vrbium edificiis
prepollerent. eo defuncto corpus eius in predicta vrbe iuxta Januam
quam ipsemet construxit et a nomine suo _Ludesgate_ vocata fuit
nobilissime reconditum est. Demum Anglici vocauerunt eam _Londene_.
Postmodum Normanni vocauerunt eam _Loundres_ que Latine dicitur
Londonia. Post mortem Lud regnauit Cassibellanus frater eius videlicet
anno. lviij^{o}. ante incarnacionem Christi. tempore cuius venit
Julius Cesar in Britanniam cum multitudine copiosa et bis deuictus et
fugatus et expulsus. Tercio per auxilium Androgei ducis Kanc'.
reuocatus in Britanniam eam Romane potestati tributariam fecit.

VERSUS.

     Te quicunque reges. bene si vis noscere Reges
     Anglos vel leges. hec iterando leges.
     Reges maiores referam seu nobiliores
     Quando regnarunt et vbi gens hos timularunt.
     Mille quater deca. bis fit Adam Bruto prior annis.

Brutus etatis sue anno xv^{o}. egressus ab Italia ad Insulam Leogeciam
nauigio perueniens. Dianam inibi consuluit dicens.

VERBA BRUTI: VERSUS.

     Diua potens nemorum terror siluestribus apris
     Cui licet amfractus ire per ethereos
     Infernasque domos terrestria iura reuolue
     Et dic quas terras nos habitare velis
     Dic etiam sedem. qua te venerabor in euum
     Qua tibi virgineis. templa dicabo choris.

RESPONSIO DIANE.

     Brute sub occasu solis. trans Gallica regna
     Insula in Oceano est vndique clausa mari
     Insula in Oceano est habitata gigantibus olim
     Nunc deserta quidem gentibus apta tuis.
     Hanc pete namque tibi sedes erit illa perhennis
     Hinc fiet natis altera Troia tuis.
     Hic de prole tua Reges nascentur et ipsis
     Totius terre subditus orbis erit.

Brutus tali responso confortatus classe parata. in Insulam Albion que
nunc Anglia dicitur cum suis applicuit et in ea regnare cepit etatis
sue anno xxxv^{to}. qui regni sui xxiiij^{to}. London' sepelitur.
Anno Milleno. ducenteno. quadrageno quinto post mortem Bruti Rex
Lucius extat. Anno gracie c^{mo}. xxiiij^{to}. Coronacio Lucii primi
Regis Christiani. regnantis lxxvij annis London' sepultus est. A morte
Bruti vsque ad regnum Arthuri regnarunt in Anglia diuisim C. Reges.
quorum sexdecim erant Christiani. Anno d.xvj^{o}. Coronacio Arthuri
Regis qui regnauit annis xxvj. de cuius obitu vel sepultura. certum
non referunt historie. Anno diiij^{xx}vi^{to}. ab Anglis dicitur
Anglia diuisa per octo regna id est Kanciam. Su'htsexiam. Westsexiam.
Merciam. Estsexiam. Estangliam. Derram. et Berviciam. Anno dc^{mo}.
primo. cepit regnare. Rex Sebertus. renouator ecclesie Westm'. quam
beatus Petrus tunc dedicauit. in qua Rex ipse regni sui anno xv^{o}.
timulatur. Anno dc^{mo} xxxv^{to}. Coronacio Oswaldi Regis regnantis
novem Annis martirio coronatur. Anno dc^{mo}. xxxvj^{to}. Coronacio
Oswyny Regis qui imperii sui anno ix^{o}. martirizatus iacet apud
Tynmouth. Anno dcc^{mo}. lxxvj^{to}. Coronacio Ethelbristi Regis. qui
regni sui anno viij^{o}. martir effectus Herefordie sepultus est. Anno
dccc^{mo}. xxj^{o}: Coronacio et martirium Kenelmi Regis qui
Wynchecombie conditus est. Anno dccc^{mo}. lv^{to}. Coronacio Edwardi
Regis apud Bures qui post annos xv. martirio laureatus ibidem
requiescit. Anno dccc^{mo}. lxxvj^{mo}. Coronacio Alfredi Regis primi
Monarche Anglie. qui sui regiminis anno xxix^{o}. Wynton': humatus
est. Anno dcccc^{mo}. primo. Coronacio Edwardi primi filii Alfredi
apud Kingeston' hic annis xxiiij^{or}. imperauit London' sepelitur.
Anno dcccc^{mo}. xxiiij^{to}. Coronacio Athelstani Regis apud
Kyngeston'. qui post annos xvj Malmesbury sepultus est. Anno
dcccc^{mo} xl^{o}. Coronacio Edwardi secundi Regis filii Athelstani
apud Kyngeston'. hic anno regni sui sexto. Glaston' sepelitur. Anno
dcccc^{mo}. xlvj^{to}. Coronacio Edredi Regis apud Kyngeston' qui
regni sui anno ix^{o}. Wynton'. sepultus est. Anno dcccc^{mo}.
lv^{to}. Coronacio Edwyni Regis apud Kyngeston hic annis quatuor
regnauit Wynton' sepultus est. Anno dcccc^{mo} lix^{o}. Coronacio
Edgari. Regis. qui regnauit xvj. annis iacet Glaston'. Anno dcccc^{mo}
lxxv^{o}. Coronacio Edwardi secundi. filii Edgari apud Westm' qui
regni sui anno iiij^{to}. martirio insignitus Septonie tumulatur. Anno
dcccc^{mo} lxxix^{o}. Coronacio Ethelredi Regis apud Kyngeston' et
anno xxxviij^{o}. regni sui London' sepelitur. Anno Millesimo xvj^{o}.
Coronacio Edwardi tercii ferri lateris apud Kyngeston' et humatio apud
Glaston'. Anno Millesimo xvij^{o}. Coronacio Knutonis Regis apud
Westm' et regni sui anno xix^{o}. Wynton' sepultura. Anno Millesimo.
xxxv^{to}. Coronacio Haroldi primi Regis. hic regni sui anno quinto
London' humatus est. Anno Millesimo xl^{o}. Coronacio Hardeknuti Regis
et anno secundo regni sui humatio. Wynton'. A natiuitate Jesu Christi
vsque ad regnum secundi Edwardi Regis et confessoris fluxerunt diuisim
in Anglia Centum Reges et lx^{ta} et quinque Reges. de quibus Oswynus
Oswaldus. Ethelbertus Kenelmus Edwardus Edwardus Martirizati. et
Constans Cedwallus Sebertus Wynfridus Ethelredus. Edbertus. Offa. et
Kynredus in Monachatu sepulti sunt. Anno gracie Millesimo xlij^{do}.
Coronacio sancti Edwardi Regis et confessoris apud Wynton' qui regni
sui anno xxv^{to}. in ecclesia Westm' quam ipse constitui fecerat
honorifice collocatur. Anno Millesimo lxvj^{to}. Coronacio Haraldi
Ducis apud Westm' et sepultura illius apud Waltham. Anno Millesimo
lxvij^{o}. Coronacio Willielmi primi Ducis Normannie apud Westm' qui
regni sui anno xlvij^{o}. Angliam describi fecit in vno volumine dicto
Domusday et Anno iiij^{o}. post cadamu' sepelitur. Anno Millesimo
lxxx^{o}. Coronacio Willielmi Rufi. apud Westm'. et regni sui anno
xiij^{o}. Wynton' tumulatur. Anno Millesimo C^{mo}. Coronacio Henrici
primi Regis fratris Willielmi Rufi. apud Westm' regnantis xxxv. annis.
apud Redyng sepultus est. Anno M^{o}. C^{mo} xxxv^{to}. Coronacio
Stephani Regis apud Westm'. hic regni sui anno xix^{o}. Feuersham
humatus est. Anno Millesimo C^{mo} liiij^{to}. Coronacio Henrici
secundi imperatoris apud Westm' et anno regni sui xxxv^{to}. apud
Fontem Ebraldi sepultura. Anno C^{mo} lxiiij^{to}. Translacio sancti
Edwardi Regis et confessoris apud Westm' tertio Jdus. Octobr'. per
beatum Thomam Archiepiscopum Cantuar'. Anno Millesimo C^{mo}.
lxxxix^{o}. Coronacio Ricardi Regis apud Westm' qui cum regnasset
annis xj^{im}. apud Fontem Ebraldi tumulatur. Anno Millesimo C^{mo}.
lxxxxix^{o}. Coronacio Johannis Regis apud Westm' et sui regiminis
Anno xviij^{o}. Wygorn' sepelitur. Anno Millesimo. CC^{mo}. xvj.
Coronacio Henrici filii Regis Johannis apud Glouerniam qui Anno quarto
sequente iterum coronatus est apud Westm'. regni sui lvij^{o}. ibidem
tumulatur. Anno Millesimo CC^{mo}. lxxiiij^{io}. xiiij. kl. Septembr.
Coronacio Edwardi primi post conquestum apud Westm' qui regni sui anno
xxxv^{to}. ibidem sepelitur. Anno Millesimo ccc^{mo}. vij^{o}. x. kl.
Marcij. Coronacio. Edwardi secundi. apud Westm'. qui regni sui Anno
xx^{o}. Gloucestr. timulatur. Anno Millesimo ccc^{mo}. xxvj^{to}.
Coronatur Edwardus tercius flos Milicie Christiane apud Westm' etatis
sue anno xiiij^{o}. Anno Millesimo ccc^{mo}. xlvj^{to}. tercio die
[Sidenote: Edwardus tercius subjugauit imperio suo villam de Caleys.]
Septembr'. Idem dominus Rex Edwardus incepit obsidere villam de Caleys
cum Castro et suam obsidionem continuauit vsque tercium diem Augusti
anno reuoluto. quo die dicta villa cum Castro suo imperio subjugauit.
Anno Millesimo ccc^{mo}. xl^{o}. viij^{o}. kl. Julij. Illustris Rex
Anglie Edwardus tercius apud le Sclus Francigenas vicit in nauali
bello. Anno Millesimo ccc^{mo}. xlvj^{to}. vij^{o}. kl. Octobr. per
Anglicos debellantur Franci apud Cressy. Et Rex Boenie punitur. Eodem
anno xvj^{o}. kl. Nouembr'. Scoti vincuntur ab Anglis apud Durham. et
[Sidenote: David rex Scotie captus est.]
capitur David Rex Scocie. Anno M^{o}. ccc^{mo}. l.vj^{to}. xiij^{o}.
[Sidenote: Capcio Johannis Regis Francie.]
kl. Octobr'. Capcio Johannis Regis Francie apud Peyters per principum
Egregium Edwardum primogenitum Edwardi tercij Regis graciosi. Anno
Millesimo ccc^{mo}. lxxvj^{to}. vj^{to}. Idus Junij obijt idem
Princeps Edwardus quo die festum Trinitatis contingebat. Anno
Millesimo ccc^{mo}. lxxvij^{o}. xj^{o}. kl. Julij. obijt Rex Edwardus
tercius flos Milicie. Christiane. et tercio Nonas eiusdem. apud Westm'
est sepultus. Anno regni sui l.j^{o}. Anno Millesimo ccc^{mo}.
[Sidenote: Ric' filius Edwardi.]
lxxvij^{o}. xvij^{o}. kl. Augusti apud Westm'. Coronacio Ricardi
secundi filij Edwardi Principis Wallie anno etatis sue xj^{mo}. Anno
Millesimo ccc^{mo}. lxxxxix^{o}. tercio Idus Octobr. apud Westm'.
[Sidenote: Henricus iiij^{tus}.]
Coronacio Illustris Regis Henrici quarti. Anno Millesimo. cccc^{mo}.
xiij^{o}. nono die Aprilis apud Westm'. Coronacio Illustris Regis
[Sidenote: Henricus quintus vitam obijt in Francia.]
Henrici quinti qui apud _Boys seynt Vyncent_ iuxta Parisiam in Francia
vitam suam finiuit. vltimo die Augusti anno regni sui. x^{o}.
incipiente. Et postea ossa sua apud Westm' sepulta fuerunt. Anno
domini Millesimo cccc^{mo}. xxij^{do}. Henricus Rex Anglie Sextus.
tunc puer non etatis vnius anni Coronatus fuit die sancti Leonardi
Episcopi et confessoris apud Westm' anno regni sui viij^{o}.
incipiente. Et postea. idem Rex coronatus fuit Rex Francie apud
Parisiam. in ecclesia beate Marie ibidem. xvj^{o}. die Decembr'. anno
regni sui x^{mo}. incipiente.

       *       *       *       *       *

A COPY OF THE TABLET HANGING AT THE COLUMN NEAR THE TOMB OF THE DUKE
OF LANCASTER, IN THE CHURCH OF SAINT PAUL'S, LONDON.

The church of St. Paul, London, contains within its limits three acres
of land and a half; one rood and a half, and six perches covered. The
length of the same church contains dclxxxx feet. The breadth of the
same church contains cxxx feet. The height of the western dome
contains from the altar cij feet. The height of the dome of the new
building contains from the altar lxxxviij feet. The whole pile of the
church contains in height cl. feet with the cross. The height of the
stone fabric of the belfry of the same church contains, from the level
ground, cclx feet. The height of the wooden fabric of the same belfry
contains cclxxiiij feet. But altogether it does not exceed five
hundred and xx^{ty} feet. Also the ball of the same belfry is capable
of containing, if it were vacant, ten bushels of corn; the rotundity
of which contains xxxvj inches of diameter, which make three feet; the
surface of which, if it were perfectly round, ought to contain four
thousand lxviij inches, which make xxviij square feet, and the fourth
part of one square foot. The staff of the cross of the same belfry
contains in height xv feet. The cross beam of which contains six feet.
In which cross, in the year of our Lord one thousand cccxxxix, on the
xi^{th} of the kalends of August, namely on the feast of saint Mary
Magdalene, many precious reliques of several saints were deposited
with great solemnity of procession, for the preservation of the same
cross and the whole building beneath them; that the Almighty God,
through the glorious merits of all the saints whose reliques are
contained in that cross, might deign to preserve them from tempest and
peril under his protection. Of whose mercy to all the xxvij procuring
succour to the fabric of this church, cl days are set apart at every
time of the year, besides the Roman ordinances which are xliiij^{or}
in the year, and very many other benefits.

       *       *       *       *       *

A COPY OF THE OTHER TABLET HANGING AT THE MIDDLE COLUMN AT THE SAME
PLACE, BETWEEN THE SAID TOMB OF THE SAID DUKE AND THE TOMB OF SAINT
ROGER LATELY BISHOP OF LONDON.

[Sidenote: The Invention of the image of the Crucifix.]

In the year of our Lord cxl, the Invention of the image of the
Crucifix, at the northern door of saint Paul, London, in the great
river of Thames, by Lucius the first Christian king of England. In
the year of our Lord one thousand lxxxvij, on the seventh day of the
[Sidenote: The church of St. Paul burnt.]
month of July. The church of St. Paul, London, and all things which
were in it, with great part of the city, were consumed by fire; in the
time of Maurice bishop of London, and in the reign of the first king
of the Normans, William the Conqueror who founded the Monasteries of
Battle in Sussex, where himself had fought, and Bermondsey near
London. In the year of our Lord one thousand cxxxij, the ides of
[Sidenote: Most part of London burnt.]
April, the city of London was burnt in chief part, from the fire of
Gilbert Beget. In the year of our Lord one thousand cxxxvij the church
[Sidenote: The church of Paul again burnt.]
of saint Paul, London, was burnt by a fire kindled at London bridge,
and which advanced thence to the church without the bars of the new
temple, London. In the year one thousand cl, so strong was the ice,
that the Thames could be crossed over by people on horseback. In the
[Sidenote: The iiij^{th} year of king John.]
year one thousand ccij such great rains, thunder and hail fell, that
quadrangular stones, to the bigness of eggs descended from the sky
mixt with rain; by which trees, vines, and cornfields were much
destroyed; men were bruised, and birds flying through the air seemed
[Sidenote: The same year.]
to bear lighted coals in their beaks, and to set the houses on fire.
[Sidenote: The vj^{th} year of king John.]
In the year of our Lord one thousand cciiij, began the order of
preaching freres in the parts of Tholouse under their founder Dominic.
[Sidenote: The same year.]
The same year a most bitter winter endured from the circumcision of
[Sidenote: In the vij^{th} year of K. H. iij^{rd}.]
our Lord until the annunciation. In the year of our Lord one thousand
ccxiiij, St. Francis began the order of minor freres near Assise. And
in the year one thousand ccxxiiij, they first came into England, two
[Sidenote: In the v^{th} year of K. H. the third.]
years before the decease of saint Francis. In the year one thousand
ccxxj, at the festival of saint Luke the Evangelist a violent wind
rushed from the north, shattering houses and orchards, and the towers
of churches; and there were seen fiery dragons and evil spirits
[Sidenote: In the xliij^{rd} of king H. iij.]
fluttering in the tempest. In the year one thousand cclviij, at
Teukysbury, a certain Jew on Saturday fell into a cesspool, and would
not allow himself to be drawn out on the Saturday, on account of his
reverence of his sabbath; but Richard de Clare earl of Gloucester
would not allow him to be drawn out on the following Sunday because of
[Sidenote: In the ix^{th} year of king Edw. second.]
his reverence of his own sabbath; and so he died. In the year M.
cccxvj, a very great pestilence of animals and men, and inundation of
rains took place, whence was produced so great a dearness of corn,
[Sidenote: In the xxiiij^{th} year of K. Edw. the third.]
that a quarter of wheat was sold for xl _s'._ In the year of our Lord
M. cccxlviij, there began a great plague at London, about the festival
of saint Michael, and it endured until the festival of saint Peter ad
[Sidenote: In the xxxv^{th} and xxxvj^{th} year of king Ed. third.]
vincula next following. In the year of our Lord one thousand ccclxj,
the xviij^{th} kl. of February, on the festival of saint Maurus abbot,
happened a violent and terrible gale throughout all England. In the
same year was a second plague, in which died that noble and brave man,
[Sidenote: In the xliij^{rd} year of king Edw. third.]
Henry duke of Lancaster. In the year of our Lord one thousand
ccclxviij, was a third plague, in which died the noble lady Blanche,
duchess of Lancaster; who lies honorably entombed in the church of
[Sidenote: In the v^{th} year of king Richard second.]
saint Paul, London. In the year of our Lord one thousand ccclxxxij,
the xij^{th} kl. of June, namely, the iiij^{th} day before pentecost,
immediately before noon, there was a great earthquake throughout all
England.

       *       *       *       *       *

A COPY OF THE GREAT TABLET HANGING IN THE SAME PLACE, BY THE SAID TOMB
OF THE SAID ROGER LATELY BISHOP OF LONDON.

[Sidenote: The ages of the world.]

In the beginning God created the heaven and earth and all things which
are in them. But on the sixth day from the creation of the world, was
[Sidenote: 1.]
made the first-formed Adam. The first age of the world, from Adam to
Noeh according to the Hebrews, contains a thousand, six hundred and
fifty six years; according to the Seventy Interpreters, two thousand
two hundred xliiij years. But according to Jerome not completely two
thousand; according to Metodus two thousand. The cause of which
diversity is, that these do not compute according to the manner of
sacred Scripture the minutiæ of times, or of years, which are over and
above the thousands and hundreds of years. From the beginning of the
world until Noeh's flood, are two thousand two hundred fifty six
[Sidenote: 2.]
years. The second age from Noeh until Abraham, contains according to
the Seventy Interpreters, a thousand and seventy two years: according
[Sidenote: 3.]
to the Hebrews, a thousand two hundred and twenty two years. The third
age from Abraham until David, contains according to the Hebrews, eight
hundred and xl two years; but according to the Seventy Interpreters
[Sidenote: 4.]
much less, since they are deficient by two years. The fourth age from
David until the carrying away captive into Babylon, contains according
to the Hebrews, four hundred and seventy three years; according to the
Seventy Interpreters little less, for they are deficient in one year.
[Sidenote: 5.]
The fifth age, from the carrying away captive into Babylon, until
Christ, contains five hundred and eighty five years. According to
[Sidenote: 6.]
others, five hundred and ninety years. The sixth age is from Christ
until the end of the world. The years from the beginning of the world
until the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, are five thousand
ninety nine. The years from the incarnation of the same until his
passion, thirty three incomplete. The years from the creation of the
world until the destruction of Troy, iiij m^{l} xxx years. From the
destruction of Troy until the erection of new Troy, which is now
called London, lxiiij years. From the erection of new Troy to the
erection of the Roman city, ccclxxxx years. From the building of the
city until the coming of Christ, dcc.xv years. From the beginning of
the world iiij m^{l} lxxxxiiij years, after the destruction of Troy,
namely, in the mc and fifth year before the incarnation of Christ;
Brutus, a certain noble person sprung of the Trojan race, with a great
multitude of Trojans, through the response of the goddess Diana,
entered into the island formerly called Albion and inhabited by
giants; and destroyed all the giants, amongst whom was one very
mighty, by name Gogmagog; and he called that land after his own name
Britain. Afterwards by the Saxons or Angles that conquered it, it was
called England. And the same Brutus the first king of the Britons
constructed the first city of Britain, which is now called London, in
remembrance of the Troy before destroyed, calling it Trinovantum, that
is new Troy, which for a long time was called Trinovans. Ely the
priest was then reigning in Judea, and the ark of the testimony
captured by the Philistines. After the death of Brutus there reigned
in Britain lviij kings. Afterwards reigned king Lud, who strongly
built the walls of the city of the Trinovantes, which was by him
called Caerlud, in English LOUDESDON, and surrounded it with
innumerable towers; which he loved above all the cities of the realm,
and therefore directed that they should build houses and edifices,
which should surpass the buildings of other cities. At his death his
corpse was most nobly laid up in the aforesaid city near the gate
which he himself built, and was called from his name LUDESGATE. At
length the English called it LONDENE: afterwards the Normans called it
LOUNDRES which in Latin is called Londonia. After the death of Lud
reigned Cassibellanus his brother, namely, in the lviij^{th} year
before Christ's incarnation; in whose time came Julius Cesar into
Britain with a copious multitude, and being twice overcome and routed
and driven off, the third time being recalled into Britain, he, by the
aid of Androgeus duke of Kent, made it tributary to the Roman power.

VERSES.

"Whosoever thou art: if thou wishest to know the English kings or
laws, thou wilt read by perusing these. I will record the greater or
nobler kings; when they reigned, and where the people buried them.
Four thousand and a score years was Adam made before Brutus."

Brutus in the xv^{th} year of his age departing from Italy, arriving
at the island Leogecia in his ship, consulted there Diana, saying:

THE WORDS OF BRUTUS: VERSES.

"O mighty Goddess of the woods, terror of the wild boars, who hast
power to pass through ethereal space and the infernal abodes: unfold
earthly fate; and say what lands thou wishest us to inhabit; Tell also
the dwelling in which I shall venerate thee for ever; in which I shall
consecrate temples to thee with virgin dances."

THE REPLY OF DIANA.

"Brutus, under the setting sun, beyond the Gallic realms, there is an
island in the ocean all inclosed by sea; there is an island in the
ocean, once inhabited by giants, now indeed desert, fit for thy
tribes. This seek, for it shall be to thee a perpetual abode; Hence
shall arise another Troy to thy sons; Here from thine offspring shall
Kings be born, and to them shall all the earth be subject."

Brutus, comforted with such a reply, and having prepared a fleet,
steered with his people into the Island Albion which is now called
England, and began to reign therein, in the xxxv^{th} year of his age;
who in the xxiiij^{th} of his reign is buried at London. In the year
one thousand two hundred and forty five, after the death of Brutus,
king Lucius flourishes. In the year of grace cxxiiij was the
coronation of Lucius the first Christian king, who after reigning
lxvij years, was buried at London. From the death of Brutus until the
reign of Arthur, there reigned in England separately C kings, of whom
sixteen were Christians. In the year dxvj, was the coronation of king
Arthur, who reigned xxvj years; concerning whose death or burial,
histories do not relate anything certain. In the year diiij^{xx}vj
from the Angles, Albion is called Anglia, divided into eight kingdoms;
that is, Kent, Suthsex, Westsex, Mercia, Estsex, Estanglia, Derram,
and Bervic. In the year dc and one, began to reign king Sebert the
renovator of the church of Westminster, which he then dedicated to the
blessed Peter, in which the king himself in the xv^{th} year of his
reign is entombed. In the year dcxxxv, the coronation of king Oswald,
who after reigning nine years is crowned with martyrdom. In the year
dcxxxvj the coronation of king Oswyny, who in the ix^{th} year of his
reign being martyred, lies at Tynmouth. In the year dcclxxvj the
coronation of king Ethelbrist, who in the viij^{th} year of his reign
being made a martyr, was buried at Hereford. In the year dcccxxj the
coronation and martyrdom of king Kenelm, who was buried at
Wynchecombe. In the year dccclv the coronation of king Edward at
Bures, who after xv years obtaining the laurels of martyrdom, rests in
the same place. In the year dccclxxj the coronation of king Alfred,
the first monarch of England; who in the xxix^{th} year of his
government was buried at Wynton. In the year dcccc and one, the
coronation of Edward the first, son of Alfred, at Kyngeston; he
governed xxiiij^{or} years, and is buried at London. In the year
dccccxxiiij, the coronation of king Athelstan at Kyngeston; he after
xvj years was buried at Malmesbury. In the year dccccxl, the
coronation of king Edward the second, son of Athelstan, at Kyngeston;
he in the sixth year of his reign is buried at Glastonbury. In the
year dccccxlvj, the coronation of king Edred at Kyngeston, who in the
ix^{th} year of his reign was buried at Wynton. In the year dcccclv,
the coronation of king Edwyn at Kyngeston; he reigned four years; and
was buried at Wynton. In the year dcccclix, the coronation of king
Edgar, who reigned xvj years; he lies at Glastonbury. In the year
dcccclxxv, the coronation of Edward the second, son of Edgar, at
Westminster, who in the iiij^{th} year of his reign adorned with
martyrdom, is buried at Septon. In the year dcccclxxix, the coronation
of king Ethelred at Kyngeston, and in the xxxviij^{th} year of his
reign he is buried at London. In the year one thousand xvj, the
coronation of Edward the third iron-side, at Kyngeston, and his burial
at Glastonbury. In the year one thousand xvij, the coronation of king
Knute at Westminster, and in the xix^{th} year of his reign, his
burial at Wynton. In the year one thousand xxxv, the coronation of
king Harold the first; he in the fifth year of his reign was buried at
London. In the year one thousand xl, the coronation of king
Hardeknute, and in the second year of his reign, his burial at Wynton.
From the nativity of Jesus Christ until the reign of Edward the
second, king and confessor, there passed separately in England a
hundred kings, and lx^{ty} and five kings; of whom Oswyn, Oswald,
Ethelbert, Kenelm, Edward, Edward, were martyred; and Constans,
Cedwall, Sebert, Wynfrid, Ethelred, Edbert, Offa, and Kynred were
buried in monks' orders. In the year of grace one thousand xlij, the
coronation of saint Edward king and confessor, at Wynton; who in the
xxv^{th} year of his reign is honorably inshrined in the church of
Westminster, which he himself had made to be erected. In the year one
thousand lxvj, the coronation of duke Harald at Westminster, and his
burial at Waltham. In the year one thousand lxvij, the coronation of
William the first, duke of Normandy, at Westminster; who in the
xlvij^{th} year of his reign caused England to be described in a
volume called DOMUSDAY; and in the iiij^{th} year after, is buried at
Caen. In the year one thousand lxxx, the coronation of William Rufus
at Westminster, and in the xiij^{th} year of his reign, he is buried
at Wynton. In the year one thousand C the coronation of king Henry the
first, brother of William Rufus, at Westminster, who after reigning
xxxv years, was buried at Redyng. In the year Mcxxxv, the coronation
of king Stephen at Westminster, he in the xix^{th} year of his reign
was buried at Feversham. In the year one thousand cliiij, the
coronation of the emperor Henry the second at Westminster, and in the
xxxv^{th} year of his reign, his burial at Fontevrault. In the year
one thousand clxiiij, was the translation of saint Edward king and
confessor, at Westminster, on the third of the Ides of October, by the
blessed Thomas archbishop of Canterbury. In the year one thousand
clxxxix, the coronation of king Richard at Westminster, who when he
had reigned xj^{en} years, was buried at Fontevrault. In the year one
thousand clxxxxix, the coronation of king John at Westminster; and in
the xviij^{th} year of his government he is buried at Wygorn. In the
year one thousand ccxvj, the coronation of Henry, son of king John at
Gloucester; who in the fourth year following was again crowned at
Westminster; in the lvij^{th} of his reign is interred at the same
place. In the year one thousand cclxxiiij, the xiiij. kl. of
September, the coronation of Edward the first after the Conquest, at
Westminster, who in the xxxv^{th} year of his reign is buried at the
same place. In the year one thousand cccvij, the x kl. of March, the
coronation of Edward the second at Westminster; who in the xx^{th}
year of his reign is buried at Gloucester. In the year one thousand
cccxxvj, is crowned Edward the third, the flower of the Christian
knighthood, at Westminster, in the xiiij^{th} year of his age. In the
year one thousand cccxlvj, on the third day of September, the same
[Sidenote: Edward the third subjugated to his dominion the city of
Caleys.]
lord king Edward began to besiege the town of Caleys with the castle,
and continued his siege until the third day of August, the succeeding
year, on which day he subjugated the said town with the castle to his
dominion. In the year one thousand cccxl, the viij kl. of July, the
illustrious king of England Edward the third conquered the French at
le Sclus in a naval engagement. In the year one thousand cccxlvj the
vij^{th} kl. of October, the French are vanquished by the English at
Cressy, and the king of Bohemia is punished. In the same year, the
xvj^{th} kl. of November, the Scots are overcome by the English at
[Sidenote: David king of Scotland is taken.]
Durham, and David king of Scotland is taken. In the year M^{l}. ccclvj
[Sidenote: The capture of John, king of France.]
the xiij^{th} kl. of October, was the capture of John king of France
at Peyters, by the excellent prince Edward the first-born of the
gracious king Edward the third. In the year one thousand ccc lxxvj,
the vj^{th} of the Ides of June, died the same prince Edward, on which
day fell the festival of the Trinity. In the year one thousand
ccclxxvij, the xj^{th} kl. of July, died king Edward the third, the
flower of the Christian knighthood; and on the third of the nones of
the same month, he was buried at Westminster, in the lj^{st} year of
his reign. In the year one thousand ccclxxvij, the xvij^{th} kl. of
[Sidenote: Richard, son of Edward.]
August, at Westminster, was the coronation of Richard the second, son
of Edward prince of Wales, in the xj^{th} year of his age. In the year
one thousand ccclxxxxix, the third of the Ides of October, at
[Sidenote: Henry iiij^{th}.]
Westminster, was the coronation of the illustrious king Henry the
fourth. In the year one thousand ccccxiij, the ninth day of April, at
[Sidenote: Henry the fifth died in France.]
Westminster, was the coronation of the illustrious king Henry the
fifth; who, at Boys Seynt Vyncent near Paris in France, ended his life
on the last day of August, in the x^{th} year of his reign,
commencing. And afterwards his bones were interred at Westminster. In
the year of our Lord one thousand cccc xxij, Henry the sixth king of
England, then a child of not the age of one year, was crowned on the
day of saint Leonard bishop and confessor, at Westminster, in the
viij^{th} year of his reign, commencing. And afterwards, the same king
was crowned king of France at Paris, in the church of the blessed Mary
there, on the xvj^{th} day of December, in the commencement of the
x^{th} year of his reign.




ILLUSTRATIONS.


In the 36th page of the preceding Chronicle it is stated that "In this
yere (1295) the kyng [Edward the first] was defraunded of his lond in
Gascoigne in this manner, sothly: the kyng hadde yoven the forseyd
lond of Gascoyne to the kynges suster of Fraunce, for that she schulde
be yoyned to hym in fre mariage: and be some of his counseill enfeffed
here in the sayd lond of Gascoigne, whiche lond of Gascoigne sche yaf
to Charles here brother, and to other; and the matrymoigne betwen here
and kyng Edward sche sette at noughte, and wolde noughte stonden
therto."--That circumstance is the subject of the following Fragment
of a curious Poem preserved in the archives of the Corporation of the
City of London, in the MS. entitled _Liber Custumarium_, fol. 84; from
which it has been extracted by the obliging permission of Henry
Woodthorpe, Esq. the Town Clerk. The leaf which contained the
concluding stanzas has been lost; but judging from the number of those
which remain, it originally consisted of about nine more verses. It is
written in the hand of the period in which the events to which it
alludes took place, and as the documents in the volume from which it
is copied end in the succeeding reign, there is every reason to
presume that it was entered in the Records of the City of London
within a short period after it was composed. Every line of each verse
contains the same letter in the middle of the line, and every line
ends with the same letter: these two letters are placed in the middle
and at the end of each verse, separated from the words to which they
belong, but connected with them by lines in the manner in which the
first verse of the Poem is here printed, and which has been considered
sufficient to show the singular manner in which it was originally
written.


HIC INCIPIT QUIDA' RISMUS F'TUS DE P'DIC'ONE VASCON' ET DE RIUSD'
CONQUESTU P' R' E' FILIU' REG' H'.

Satis novit seculu______       ____De lingua Galloru_____
                        \_   _/                          \_
Qualiter fit speculu___   \ /   ___Patens traditoru_____   \
                       \===m===/                        \===m
Quia p' p'fidia________/ _/ \_ \___Pessimam ip'oru______/ _/
                       _/     \_                        _/
Jam p'dit Vasconia____/         \__Princeps Anglicoru__/

Rex fidem adhibuit                 Dictus Gallicorum
Egit quod non debuit               Nam fraus miserorum
Seriem composuit                   Quorumdam verborum
Que Regi transposuit               Cetus nunciorum

Per verba credencie                Nuncii dixerunt
Q'd magnates Francie               Simul tractaverunt
Qdq; Regi Anglie                   Dare voluerunt
Natam Regis Gallie                 Heu q'd hic venerunt

Ad hec dux Burgundie               Quidam nunciorum
Ait q'd in flumine                 Multi Northmannorum
Perierunt pridie                   Per nautas Anglorum
Additis hastucie                   Causis Bayonorum

Ut ergo concordia                  Pacis jam addatur
Et omnis discordia                 Prorsus repallatur
Celsitudo regia                    Francie precatur
Q'd sibi vasconia                  Totalis reddatur

Proponit brevissime                Vos tunc reseisire
De terra vasconie                  Nec quid deperire
Ius v'r'm certissime               Potestis hoc scire
Si q'd petit p'pere                Placet exaudire

Si seisinam habeat                 Per sex septimanas
Tunc mandare placeat               Q'd transire lanas
Gens anglor' faciat                Et sic causas vanas
Pars utraq; deleat                 Res collando sanas

Ait vir considera                  Rex que petierunt
Nova sunt non vetera               Hec que tibi ferunt
Pulcram inter cetera               Tibi promiserunt
Prout dicit littera                Quam Galli miserunt

Hoc audito Langetum                Statim prosilivit
Ad regem consilium                 Dedit sicut scivit
Et Lacy p' sompnium                Certe non dormivit
Quin eiusdem devium                Seisine nutrivit

Puellam rex diligens               Vinculis amorum
Penitus consensiens                Dictis consultorum
Fieri precipiens                   Litteras servorum
Pro dolor nam nesciens             Erat futurorum

Demum in Vasconia                  J. Lacy p'rexit
Litteras ab Anglia                 Secumq; devexit
Ac sub manu Gallia                 Vascones contexit
Anglis inutilia                    Heu' q'd tot aspexit

Gallici Vasconiam                  Sibi subjugarunt
Et in manum Anglicam               Dare recusarunt
Neq; regis filiam                  In spousam pararunt
Regi dare quoniam                  Ip'm subsannarunt

Exp'tem Vasconie                   Foris judicarunt
Magni pares Francie                Et exheredarunt
Regem n'r'm Anglie                 Parum hunc amarunt
Nam causam malicie                 Sibi demonstrarunt

Audiens p'fidiam                   Rex exheredatus
Quam habet p' F'nciam              Satis est iratus
Jurat p' ecc'iam                   Non erit letatus
Quousq; Vasconiam                  Fuerit lucratus

Rex vocat Pontifices               Ad parliamentum
Et Anglorum Comites                Flores sapientum
Quinq; Portus fomites              Barones p' centum
Volant ut irundines                In mari p' ventum

Clerus et milicia                  Gentis Anglicane
Vovent cum leticia                 Q'd seroq; mane
Parantur ad omnia                  Que genti p'phane
Francie sunt noxia                 Nam sup'bit vane

Rex Anglor' nobilis                Vocatus Edwardus
Ferox est et stabilis              Tanq'm leopardus
Fortis et non debilis              Velox et non tardus[135]
Senciet id flebilis                Pomposus Picardus.

[Footnote 135: A similar description of Edward the First, which was
suggested by his arms, occurs in the "Roll of Carlaverock," a poem
composed in the year 1300.

     "En sa baniere trois luparte
     De or fin estoint mis en rouge
     Courant felloun fier et harouge
     Par tel signifiance mis
     Ke ausi est vers ses enemis
     Le Rois fiers felouns et hastans
     Car sa morsure n'est tastans
     Nuls ki ne en soit envenimez."]

       *       *       *       *       *

P. 37. Anno 24 Edward I, 1296. "Also in this yere S^{r}. Thomas
Turbevyle for treson was drawen and hanged."

Of the conduct which caused Sir Thomas Turbeville's execution, the
following fragment of a curious contemporary poem in the Cottonian MS.
_Caligula_ A. xviij, presents perhaps the most accurate information
which is extant. It immediately precedes, and is written in the same
hand as, the only _contemporary_ copy of the Roll of Carlaverock which
is known to exist, and hence it is highly probable that it was
composed by the same person. Under any circumstances, however, it
cannot fail to be deemed to possess sufficient interest to render it a
valuable illustration to the passage in the text.

Seignurs e dames estutez
De un fort tretur orrez
Ke aveit pur veu une treson
Thomas Turbelvile ot a non
A Charlys aveit p'mis
E jure par seint Denys
Ke il li freit tute Englet'e
Par quentise e treson conquere
E Charles li premist grant don
Teres e bon garison
Li treitre a Charlis dit
Ke il aparillast sanz respit
De bone nefs grande navie
E de gent forte co'paignie
E il le freit par tens garner
Ou il dussent ariver
En Engleter sodeinement
Li traiture sanz targement en Englet'e tot se mit
Au rei sire Edewars vint e dist
Ke si apres li vodera fere
Tutes ses choses deust co'quer
Ki sire Charlis li aveit
A force e a tort tollet
Issi ke' li losengur de ambe part fu t'tur
Sire Edeward nentendi mie
Del treitre sa tricherie
Ke il aveit issi purveu
A grant honur le ad receu
E en sa curt fut grant mestre
Q'nt ot espie tut son estre
E le conseil de Engleter
Li treitre feseit un bref fere
A sire Charlis priveme't
On ariver devisse't sa gent
En Engletere e li pais prendre
A sire Edeward fu fet entendre
Cum den le ont destine
E le bref ly fut mustre
E tout ensemble la treson
Li rei fit prendir cel felon
Thomas le treitur deva't dit
Ke fist fere cel estrit
A Lundres par mie la citee
Treigner le fist en une coree
De une tor envolupe
Nul autreme't ne fut arme
Haume nont ne habergun
Cillante pierres a g'nt fusui'
Aveit il entur son flanc
Ke li raerent le sanc
Apres fu li traiture pendu
E le alme a la Belzebub rendu
Je aveit autre gareson
Issi deit len servir felon
En furches peut li malurez
Des chenes e de fer liez
Nul home nel deit enterrer
Tant cu' son cors porra durer
Iloec pendra cel trichur
Ten garison ad pur son labour
Ore puira Charles pur ver
Apres li longem't garder
Einz kil venge pur sa treison
Demander de li garison
Sire Edeward pur la g'nt navye
De France ne dona une aylle
De vaillante gent fist la mer
De tut part mut ben garder
De Engleter sunt failliz
Ly Franceys e sunt honiz
En la mer grant tens flote'nt
Li cors plusurs de eus tuere't
A Dovere firent sodoineme't
Une assaut e de lur gent
Plus de v sent y perdirent
Unkes plus de prou ne firent
Ore sunt tuz ieo quide neez
Ou en lur teris retornez
E penduz pur lur servise
Ke Engleter naveyent prise
E ceo Charles lour p'mist
Si nul de ens revenist
Sire Charles bon chevaler
Lessez ester ton guerrer
Acordez a ton cosin
E pur pensez de la fin
Si Engleter guerirez
James ben nes pleyterez
Je ne firent voz ancestres
Ke se tindrent si grant mestres
Ly ducs Lowys ton parent
E stace le moyne enseme't
E autres Franceys assez
Ke ne sunt pas ici nomez
Damne deu omnipotent
Vo' doynt bon acordement avié.

       *       *       *       *       *

P. 57. "This same yere [anno 14th Edw. III. 1340] the kyng faught with
the Frensshmen at Scluse, where there were sclayn of Frensshmen xxx
m^{l}; and the kyng toke and scomfyted at the sayd bataill of Scluse
cccx schippes." Of this passage, the following letter from king Edward
the Third to Edward the Black Prince, giving an account of his victory
over the French fleet at Sclyse, on Saturday the 24th of June
1340,--which, with the permission of Henry Woodthorpe, Esq., the Town
Clerk, has also been extracted from the City Archives, letter F. fol.
39,--is an interesting illustration. This document, which has escaped
the attention of Historians, presents an authentic detail of that
memorable event; and it is evident from it that Robert de Avesbury,
the contemporary writer upon whom the greatest reliance has hitherto
been placed, has fallen into some errors in his narrative of the
transaction. He informs us that on the day after the battle a rumour
of it reached London, but that it was discredited until the ensuing
Wednesday, namely the 28th of June, when the Prince of Wales received
a letter from the king informing him of his success, of which letter
that writer asserts that the annexed was a copy:

"Edwardus Dei Gracia Rex Angliæ et Franciæ et Dominus Hiberniæ, &c.
Effusam circa nos hiis diebus propiciacionis divinæ clemenciam, ad
vestri contemplacionem et læticiam, vobis ducimus intimandam. Scitis
autem, immo vos et alios[136] fideles nostri quadam participacione
sensitis, quantis fuimus et sumus guerrarum lacessiti turbinibus, et
velut in mari magno procellosis fluctibus agitati. Sed licet sint
mirabiles elaciones maris, mirabilior tamen in altis Dominus, qui
procellam convertens in auram, jam inter tot adversa clementissime nos
respexit. Nam cum pridem ordinassemus passagium nostrum necessarium
versus partes Flandriæ, Dominus Philippus de Valesio, persecutor
noster infestissimus, hoc prævidens, classem maximam navium armatarum
quam in expugnacionem nostram nostrorumque fidelium misit, ut vel sic
nos caperet, vel nostrum transitum impediret. qui transitus si, quod
absit, fuisset impeditus, ardua negocia, quæ prosequimur, fuissent
penitus in ruina: quinimmo nos et nostri fuissemus verisimiliter
confusionis[137] magnæ subjecti. Sed Deus misericordiarum, videns nos
in tantis periculis constitutos, graciosius et cicius, quam humana
racio judicare poterat, misit nobis magnum navale subsidium, et
insperatum numerum armatorum, ac semper ventum prosperum juxta votum,
et sic, sub spe coelestis auxilii, et justiciæ nostræ fiducia,
dictum portum navigio venientes, invenimus dictam classem et hostes
nostros ibidem paratissimos ad prælium in multitudine copiosa; quibus,
in festo Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistæ proximo præterito, ipse
spes nostra Christus deus per conflictum fortem et validum nos
prævalere concessit, facta strage non modica dictorum hostium, capta
eciam quodammodo tota dicta classe, cum læsione gentis nostræ modica
respective, sicque tucior de cetero patebit transitus nostris
fidelibus supra mare, et alia bona plurima sunt ex hoc nobis et
nostris fidelibus verisimiliter proventura, de quo spes pulcherima jam
arridet. Nos autem, tantam coelestem graciam devotissime
contemplantes, ipsi Salvatori nostro laudes et gracias humiliter
exsolvimus, deprecantes, ut, qui jam et semper in oportunitatibus
copiosis graciis[138] nos prævenit continuatis, nos auxiliis
prosequatur, et nobis regere temporaliter sic concedat in terris, ut
in eo lætemur æternaliter in excelsis. Dileccionem vestram attente
rogamus et per Dei misericordiam obsecramus, quatinus soli Deo vivo,
qui tantum signum nobiscum fecit in bonum, in devotæ laudis præconium
assurgentes, nos, jam in remotis agentes, et nedum jura nostra
recuperare, sed sanctam ecclesiam catholicam attollere, et in justicia
populum regere cupientes, sibi devotis oracionum instanciis
recomendare curetis, facientes pro nobis missas, et alia piæ
placacionis officia misericorditer exerceri, et ad hoc clerum et
populum vestræ diocesis salutaribus monitis inducatis, ut Deus ipse,
miseratus nobis, progressum felicem et exitum annuat graciosum, detque
servo suo cor docile, ut recte judicare possimus et regere et sic
facere quod præcipit, ut mereamur assequi quod promittit. Teste
Edwardo duce Cornubiæ et Comite Cestriæ filio nostro carissimo Custode
Angliæ apud Waltham Sanctæ Crucis xxviii^{vo}. die Junii, anno Regni
nostri Angliæ xiiii^{to}. Regni vero Franciæ primo."

[Footnote 136: _Sic._]

[Footnote 137: _Sic._]

[Footnote 138: _Sic._]

It is however manifest from that document having been tested by the
Prince of Wales, that it was rather a proclamation issued in
consequence of the dispatch from the king to the prince, than the
dispatch itself, of which the letter now for the first time printed
may be deemed the only copy which is extant. Nor must it be forgotten
that the date affixed to the article given by Avesbury tends to excite
a suspicion of its authenticity; for it is tested by the prince at
Waltham Holy Cross upon the precise day, the 28th of June, on which
the king's letter was written, and which could not therefore possibly
have arrived on the day in question at Waltham. It is somewhat
singular that as the battle was concluded on the 25th of June, the
king should not have written until the 28th; but this may perhaps be
accounted for by those arrangements which his success would
necessarily have required, and which may be supposed to have engaged
the monarch's whole attention for some days. The letter in Avesbury's
Annals gives no particulars of the battle, though that writer relates
that the enemy were beaten; that more than thirty thousand of them
were slain; that many leapt into the sea from fear and were drowned;
and that their fleet consisted of two hundred large ships, on board of
one of which four hundred dead bodies were found. The Royal dispatch,
however, affords much more minute information, and corrects the
statements both in Avesbury and in the preceding Chronicle. It asserts
that the French fleet amounted to one hundred and eighty sail; that
they were nobly defended the whole of a day and a night; that they
were all captured in the engagement excepting twenty-four which took
to flight, and part of them were subsequently taken at sea; that the
number of the men at arms and other armed persons amounted to
thirty-five thousand, of whom five thousand escaped; that the English
ships captured by the French at Middleburgh were then retaken; and
that among the prizes were three or four as large as 'the
Christopher,' which we may infer was then the largest ship of the
English navy.

It is unquestionable from what has been said, that this document
supplies some important facts in the history of the times, whilst its
entry among the Records of the City of London tends to establish that
the Mayor of the city was accustomed at that early period to receive
an official account of every public transaction, and of which another
example will be found in a subsequent page.

The events which led to the battle of the Swyne, or as it is more
generally termed of the Scluse, are too familiar to require
repetition.

"NOTA DE BELLO AQUATICO:--
               L'RA D'NI E' DIRETT'
               FILIO SUO DUCI CORNUB'
               DE BELLO SUP' MARE
               P'CUSSO DIE NATIVIT'
               S'C'I JOH'IS BAPT'

"Tresch' fitz no' pensoms bien q' vo' estes desirons assavoir bones
novelles de no' et coment il no' est avenuz puys n're aler Denglet're
si vo' fesom savoir q' le Joedi'[139] ap's ceo q' no' dep'times du
Port Dorewe[-ll-],[140] no' siglames tut le iou ret la nuyt suaunte,
et le vendredi[141] en tour hour de noune no' venismes s' la costere
de fflaundres devant Blankebergh ou no' avioms la vewe de la fflote de
nos enemys qi estoyent tut amassez ensemble en port del Swyne et p'
ceo q' la Tyde nestoit mis adonges p' assembler a eux no'
yherbergeasmes tut cel noet le samady le iour de seint Johan[142] bien
ap's houre de noune a la Tyde nous en noun de Dieu et en espoire de
n're droite querele entrames en dit port s' nos ditz enemys qi avoyent
assemble lours niefs en moult fort array et lesqu'x fesoient ml't
noble defens tut cel iour et la noet ap's, mes dieu p' sa puissaunce
et miracle no' ottroia la victorie de mesmes no[z/] enemys de qai no'
m'cioms si devoutement come no' poems. Et si vo' fesoms savoir q' le
nombre des niefs galeyes et g'nt barges de nos enemys amounta a
ix^{xx} et ditz, lessqueles estoient toutz pris sauve xxiiij. en tut
lesqueles senfuirent et les uns sont puye pris s' mier et le nombre
des gentz darmes et autres gentz armez amounta a xxxv Mi[-ll-] de
quele nombre p' esme cink' M^{l} sont eschapees, et la remenaunt ensi
come no' est donc a entendre p' ascuns gentz q' sont pris en vie, si
gissent les corps mortz et tut pleyn de lieux s^{r} la costere de
fflaundres. Dautre p't totes nos niefs, cest assavoir Cristofre et les
autres qi estoient p'dues a Middelburgh, sont ore regaignez, et il
yount gaignez en ceste navie trois ou quatre auxi graundes come la
Cristofre: les fflemengs estoient de bone volente davoir venuz a no'
ala bataille du commencement tanqe ala fin issint dieu n're seign^{r}
ad assez de grace monstre de qei' no' et toutz nos amys sumes tut ditz
tenutz de lui rendre grace et m'ciz. N're entent est a demorer en pees
en le ewe taunt qe no' eoms pris c'teyn point ove no' alliez et autres
nos amys de fflandres de ceo q' soit affaire. Trescher fitz dieu soit
gardeyn de vo'. Don' souz n're secree seal en n're nief Cogg[143]
Thom', le Mescredy en la veille seint Piere et seint Paoul.[144]

14^{o} R. Edw. 3^{ii}."

[Footnote 139: June 22, 1340.]

[Footnote 140: Dover.]

[Footnote 141: June 23.]

[Footnote 142: June 24.]

[Footnote 143: The Navy at the period consisted of ships, galleys,
barges, _batelli_ or boats, _snakæ_ or cutters, and _cogee_ or
COGS.--See the Observations prefixed to the _Liber Quotidianus
Contrarotulatoris Garderobæ Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Primi vicesimo
octavo_, p. liv.]

[Footnote 144: June 28.]

       *       *       *       *       *

P. 63. "And in this yere, that is to seye the yere of oure lord a
m^{l} ccclvj^{to}, the xix day of Septembre, kyng John of Fraunce was
taken at the bataill of Peyters be the doughty prynce Edward, the
firste sone of kyng Edward." &c.

It would be difficult to name a more interesting document connected
with English History than that by which, through the courtesy of Henry
Woodthorpe, Esq., Town Clerk of the City of London, the passage in the
text will be illustrated; namely, a copy of the letter from Edward the
Black Prince to the Mayor, Aldermen and Comonalty of London,
acquainting them with the achievement of the battle of Poictiers. This
important record, which has never before been printed, occurs among
the archives of the city, in a contemporary MS. entitled Letter G.
fol. 53^{b}. and was, there can be little doubt, entered into that
volume soon after the receipt of the original.

The greater part of the Prince's letter is occupied by the detail of
the proceedings of the army for some days previous to the battle, and
in describing the efforts of the Cardinal Peregort to produce a peace
or truce between the kings of France and England; whilst the conflict
itself is mentioned in a few words. Independently of the particulars
of the English forces and their rencontres with the enemy which this
letter so minutely relates, its most important statement is that of
the precise day when the battle took place, for historians have
differed materially upon the point. The Prince, however, expressly
says that it occurred on the eve of the feast of St. Matthew, i.e. the
20th of September. His letter was dated at Bordeaux on the 22nd of the
following month, and was sent to the Mayor of London by the Prince's
chamberlain Sir Neel Loring; and the manner in which he refers the
Mayor and Citizens to that distinguished knight for further
information, cannot fail to be noticed, from its great similarity to
the conclusion of a modern military dispatch. Another feature of this
and other documents of the same nature in early periods, is the great
simplicity and modesty with which they are written. An expression of
gratitude to God alone interrupts the unadorned narrative; and the
defeat of an army infinitely superior in numbers, and the capture of
one of the most powerful sovereigns of the times together with his
eldest son, are thus laconically related: "The battle took place on
the eve of St. Matthew; and, praise be to God, the enemy were
discomfited, and the king and his son were taken, and great numbers of
other people taken and slain." To present as many contemporary
documents as could be collected relative to this memorable event, two
other letters are introduced, as well as the affidavit of an
individual who claimed to have been the person to whom king John of
France surrendered himself.

One of the letters alluded to, which is printed in the _Archæologia_,
vol. i. p. 213, is also from the Black Prince, to Reginald Bryan
bishop of Worcester, dated at Bordeaux on the 20th of November,
briefly informing him of his success, which he attributes in a great
measure to the efficacy of that prelate's prayers.

The other letter is from Robert Prite to some English nobleman, dated
on the 8th of December 1356, whose clerk, or probably priest, he
styles himself, and is taken from the original on vellum in the
Cottonian MS. Caligula D. III. f. 33. After mentioning the battle of
Poictiers, the particulars of which he says he will learn from a
knight whom the duke of Lancaster had sent into England to the king,
the writer acquaints him with some other news of the time, as well as
with what had occurred in some of his towns; and entreats him to come
over as soon as possible. This letter, which is now for the first time
printed, though not so important as the others, is nevertheless of
interest, as connected with the battle of Poictiers, and with other
public and private transactions of the period.

The third document on the subject is the solemn declaration of Bernard
du Troy, a Gascon gentleman, made on his death-bed the 1st of July
1361, that he was the person who took the king of France prisoner at
the battle of Poictiers; which point it is evident from this
instrument, as well as from historians, had been much disputed. This
very curious article, which also occurs in the Cottonian MS. just
mentioned, is highly interesting; for it not only shows who were the
claimants to the honour of having captured the king, but the ardour
with which that claim was supported. It is however doubtful whether
the love of fame or pecuniary interest prompted this declaration at so
awful a moment; but his motive, like those of most other human
actions, was probably of a mixed nature; for whatever might be the
renown which was attached to the exploit, the ransom to which the true
claimant would be entitled must have been an object of great
consideration to him or to his heirs. Du Troy carefully provides, that
those who would support his pretensions with their swords should
partake of the benefits which might arise from their valour; and this
circumstance presents a curious picture of the manners of the age. Sir
Denys de Morbeque of whom he speaks, is thus noticed by Froissart.
"There was much pressing at this time through eagerness of taking the
king: and those that were nearest to him, and knew him, cried out
'Surrender yourself, surrender yourself, or you are a dead man.' In
that part of the field was a young knight from St. Omer, who was
engaged by a salary in the service of the king of England: his name
was Denis de Morbeque, who for five years had attached himself to the
English, on account of having been banished in his younger days from
France for a murder committed in an affray at St. Omer. It
fortunately happened for this knight, that he was at the time near to
the king of France when he was so much pulled about. He by dint of
force, for he was very strong and robust, pushed through the crowd and
said to the king in good French, 'Sire, sire, surrender yourself.' The
king, who found himself very disagreeably situated, turning to him,
asked 'To whom shall I surrender myself; to whom? Where is my cousin
the Prince of Wales? if I could see him I would speak to him.' 'Sire,'
replied Sir Denys, 'he is not here; but surrender yourself to me, and
I will lead you to him.' 'Who are you?' said the king. 'Sire, I am
Denys de Morbeque, a knight from Artois, but I serve the king of
England because I cannot belong to France, having forfeited all I
possessed there.' The king then gave him his right-hand glove, and
said 'I surrender myself to you.' There was much crowding and pushing
about, for every one was eager to cry out 'I have taken him.'"

Most of the witnesses to Du Troy's declaration were celebrated peers
and knights both of England and France.


L'RA D'NI EDWARDI PRINCIPIS GALL' MAIOR ALDR'S ET COM'ITATI CIVITATIS
LONDON' DIRECTA DE NOV' BAT'I IUX^{ta} POYTERS.

Tresch'e et tres bien ameez endroit des novelles es p'ties ou nous
sumes voillitz savoir qe puis l'eure qe nous certifiasmes a n're
tresredoute S^{r} et piere le Roi qe no' estoions en p'pos de
chivaucher env's les enemis es p'ties de Fraunce no' p'smes n're
chemyn p' le pais de Peregort et de Lymosyn et tout droit v's Burges
en Were ou no' entendismes davoir troues le fitz le Roi le counte de
Peytiers et la sov'aigne cause de n're aler v's celles p'ties estoit
qe nous entendismes davoir eu noveles de n're dit S^{r} et piere le
Roi come de son passage et puis q' no' ne trovasmes le dit counte ne
nul autre g'unt poair illeosqes nous no' treismes dev's leyre et
maundasmes noz gentz au chivaucher a conoistre si no' p'uons nulle p't
avoir trovez passage lesqueles gentz encontrerent les enemis et
avoient faire assemble si qe les uns des ditz enemys estoient mortz et
pris les queuz p'soners disoient qe le Roi de France avoient envoiee
Grismoton q'estoit encelle compaignie p' lui faire asavoir c'teines
novelles de no' et de n're poair et si avoit le dit Roi p' mesmes le
cause envoie en autre p'tie le S^{r} de Creon Mons^{r} Busigaut le
Mareschal de Clermount et aut's et disoient les ditz p'soners qe le
dit Roi avoit p's certe in p'pos de combatre ovesq' nous a quele heure
nous estoioms s^{r} le chymyn env's Tours et encostoavit dev's Orliens
et lendemein la ou nous estoions loggiez aviens novelles qe les ditz
Sire de Creon et Busigaut estoient en un chastel bien p's de n're
loggiz et p'ismes p'pos de y aller et venismes loggier entour eux et
acordasmes d'assailler le dit lieu lequel estoit gayne p' force ou
estoient tout plein de lo'r gentz p's et mortz auxint les uns des
n'res y furent mortz mes les ditz Sires de Creon et Busigaut se
treerent en une fort Tour qil y avoit la quele se tenoit cynk jours
avant qelle feust gaignee et la se rendirent ils et illeosqes estoions
c'tifiez qe touz les pontz s^{r} leyre estoient debruses et qe nulle
p't purriens avoir passage s^{r} qei nous p'ismes n're chemyn tout
droit a Tours et la demourasmes devant la ville quatre iours deins
quelle estoient le Counte Dangeo et le Mareschal de Clermount od g'nt
poair des gentz. Et a n're dep'tir d'illeoqs no' p'ismes le chemyn p'
passer ascuns daung' des eawes et en entente davoir encountree ovesqe
n're tres ch' cosyn le ducs de Lancastre de qi no' aviens certeins
novelles qil se voillent afforcier de trere dev's nous a quelle heure
le Cardenal de Peregort vynt a nous a Monbezon a troiz lieues de Tours
ou il no' p'la tout plein des choses touchauntes trewes et pees s^{r}
quele p'lance no' lui fesoiens respounse qe la pees ne avient poair a
ffaire ne qe nous ent voloiens meller saunz le comaundement et le
volunte de n're tresch' S^{r} et piere le Roi ne de trewe nestoiens al
heure avisez qe se eust estee le meillo' p' no^{q} de y avoir acordee
car illeosqes estoiens non plus plenement c'tifiez qe le Roi se tailla
p' toutes voies de combatre ove nous si q' nous no' treismes dilleoqes
v's chastel Heraud sur le passage del eawe de la Vivane ou no'
desmourasmes quatre iors ettendauntz de savoir plus la c'tein de lui
le quel Roi vint od son poair a chaveny a cynk lues de nous p' passer
mesme lewe v's Poyters et s^{r} ceo p'ismes p'pos de hastier dev's lui
s^{r} le chemyn qil devereit passer p' estre combatuz ove lui mes ses
batailles estoient passeez devant qe no' estoions venuz au lieu ou
nous entendismes de lui avoir encountree hors pris p'tie des gentz de
lour entour sept centz homes darmes qe se combatirent od les n'tres ou
estoient p's le countes de Soussoire et de Junhy le S^{r} de
Chastillion et tout plein dautres pris et mortz p'ties de lour et des
n'res et puis les p'suievrent noz gentz tanq' a Chaveny bien a treis
lieus loyns p'quoi il nous convienoit logger cel jour a plus pres de
celle place qe nous poiens p' recoiller noz gentz et lendemeyn p'ismes
n're chemyn tout droit dev's le Roi et mandasmes noz descov'res qe
troverent lui od son poair p'st bataille es champs a une lue de
Peiters et alasmes a plus p's de lui qe nos poiams p'ndre n're places
et nous mesmes a pie et en arraie de bataille et p'st de combatre ove
lui ou vynt le dit Cardinal requerraunt molt entierment p' une pettit
suff'nce issint qe home purroit faire parler dasemble c'teins gentz
des p'ties en atente d'acord et de bone pees quelle chose il emp'st
qil amereit a bon fey sur quoi nous p'ismes avis et lui otreiasmes sa
requeste sur quoi furent ordeyner c'teins gentz dune p't e d'autre a
tretir sur celle matirs lequel trete ne p'st nul exploit Et adonqes
volleit le dit Cardinal avoir purchace une trewe en destourbaunce de
la bataille a son gree a quel treve ne voilloit assentir Et
demaunderent les Fraunceys c'teins chivalers d'une p't et d'autre p'
prendre owelle place issint qe la bataille ne se purroit en nulle
man'e failler et en tieu man'e estoit cel jour delaiee et demourerent
les batailles d'une p't et d'autre tote noet chescun en lour place et
tanqe le demein entour un prime et p' ascuns forces qe estoient p'
entre les ditz batailles nul ne voloit a autre taunte davauntage
demp'ndre a venir l'un sur l'autre Et p' defaute des vitailles si bien
p' aut's enchessons acorde estoit qe nous deveriens prendre n're
chemyn encosteant p' devant eux en tieu man'e q' s'ils voilont la
bataille ou trere dev's nous en lieu q' nestoit mye tres graundment a
n're desavauntage qe nous le preindreins et ensint estoit fait s^{r}
quoi le bataille se prist la surveile de seint Matheu et loiez ent
soit dieux les enemys estoient desconfitz et pris le Roi et son fitz
et tot plein des aut's g'ntz pris et mortz si come n're Tresch' ame
bach'r Mons^{r} Neel Loereng n're chaumberlein port^{r} de cestes qu
ent ad assetz pleine conisance vous sav'a plus pleinement dire a
monstre come nous ne vous purroins escrire A qi voilletz pleine foi et
credence doner Et n're seign^{r} vuis voille garder Donnez souz n're
secre seal a Burdeux le xxij jour d'Octobr'.


LETTER FROM THE BLACK PRINCE TO THE BISHOP OF WORCESTER, DATED 20TH
OCTOBER 1356, RELATING TO THE BATTLE OF POITIERS, WHEREIN THE FRENCH
KING WAS MADE PRISONER, &C. EX REGISTRO REGINALDI BRIEN WIGORN.
EPISCOPI. FOL. 113. COMMUNICATED TO THE SOCIETY OF ANTIQUARIES BY DR.
LYTTELTON, DEAN OF EXETER.

[_Archæologia, Vol._ I. _No._ XLIV. _p._ 213.]

L'RA D'NI PRINCIPIS WALL' DE CAPCIONE R. FRANCIÆ PAR LE PRINCE DE
GALES.

Reve'nt piere en Dieu, et tresch' ami. Nous vous mercions entierement
de ce que nous avons entendu q' vous estes si bien et si naturelment
porte dev's nous, en p'ant Dieux p'r nous et p'r n're exploit; et
sumes tout certiens q' p'r cause de vous devoutes p'eres et dautres,
Dieu nous a en toutes nos besoignes be' vueliz aide; de quoi nous
sumes a touz jo's tenuz de lui grazier, en p'ant que v're part ancy
vieullietz faire en continuant dev's nous come devant ces heures avetz
fait, de quoi nous nous tenons g'n'ment tenuz a vous. Et, rev'ent
piere, endroit de n're estat, dont nous penceons bien q' vous desirez
la v're merci doier bones nouvelles, vuellietz entendre q' a la
faisance de cestes estions sains et heures et tout en bon point, loiez
en soit Dieux q' nous donit y ces mesmes de vous toutes soitz oir et
saver, et de ce nous vueilletz certifier p'r vos l'res et p' les
entrevenantz a plus souvent q' vous p'res bonement en droit de
nouvelles ceandroitz. Vueilletz savoir q' la veille de la translation
Saint Thomas de Canterbire, nouz commenceasmes a chivauch' ove n're
povar v's les parties de France et souvraignement p' cause q' nous
entendismes la venue de n're treshonn'e seign'r et piere le Roy la
endroit, et si neismes dev's les parties de Burges en Berye, Orlions,
et Tours, et avions nouvelles q' le Roy de France ove g'nt povar bien
pres de celles marches venoit p' combattre ove no's, et approcheasmes
tant q' la battaille se prist entre nous en tiele maniere q' les
ennemis estoient disconfitez, grace en soit Dieux, et le dit Roi et
son fils et plusiers autres g'ntz pris et mortz, les noms de queaux
nous vous envions p' n're tresch' bachiler Mons' Roger de Cottesford
portoir de cestes. Rev'ent piere en Dieux, et n're tresch' ami, le
Saint Esprit vous ait toute jours en sa guarde. Donne souz n're seal a
Birdeaux, le xx^{e} jour d' Octob'r.

[Tradita fuit ista l'ra Domino Reginaldo de Briene, Ep'o Wygorn, apud
Alvech', pr'mo die Decemb', an' Dom' M^{o}. ccc. quinquagesimo sexto,
cum cedula nomina continente capt' et mortuorum in bello praedicto,
cujus cedulae tenor insequitur p' o'ia ---- parte folii istius
suprascriptus]

     A Rev'ent Piere en Dieux Evesqe de Worcester, ces sont les
     noms de ceaux q' estoient pris a la battaile de Poyters p'
     le Prince de Gales fitz a noble Roi de Engleterre Edward
     Tierts.

     John de Valoys, Roy de France.
     Mons. Philip son fitz.
     Arcevesque de Leyens.

           { Mons. Jakes de Bourbonn, Counte de Pountois.
           { Mons. John d'Artoys, Counte d'Eu.
           { Mons. Charles de Artoys, Counte de Souggevil.
           { Le Counte de Tankervill.
           { Le Counte de Ventadour.
Countes    { Le Counte de Saussier.
           { Le Counte de Salesberg.
           { Le Counte de Vendome.
           { Le Counte de Wademont.
           { Le Counte de Dammartyn.
           { Le Counte de John de Nasso.
           { Le Counte de Salerplok.
           { Le Chatelaine de Composta.

           { Le Visconte de Narbone.
Viscontes  { Le Visconte de Vychichoart.
           { Le Visconte de Walemont.
           { Le Visconte de Beaumont.

             Le S. de Sully.

           { Mess. Arnold Doudinham.
           { Mess. Rauf de Coussy.
           { Le S. de Danbeney.
Bannerets  { Le S. de Denyn.
           { Le S. de Saint Dyser.
           { Le S. de la Tour.
           { Le S. Damboisa.
           { Le S. de Derval.
           { Le S. de Manhales.
           { Le S. de Planuche.
           { Le S. de Montagu.
           { Le S. de Beaufremont.
           { Le S. de Plamory.

             Mons. Giscard D'Angle Seneschal de Sentonge.
             Mons. Moris Mauvinct Sen. de Tours en Toreyne.
             Mons. Renaud de Guilhon Sen. de Peyton.

           { Mons. Pierres de Creon.
           { Mons. Giscard de Arx.
           { Mons. Gauter de Castellion.
           { Mons. Giscard de Beanyon.
           { Le S. de Basentin.

Ceaux furent ceaux dessoutz p's devant la battaile à Remoartin.

           { Le S. de Acon.
Bannerets  { Mons. Busignaut.
           { Mons. Guy Turpin.

           { Mons. Guilliaume de Lorak.
Bachelers  { Mons. Folles de Forsela.
           { Mons. Jakelyn de Ponsey.

Et sont pris outre les noms dessus escptz des gentz d'armes. M.
ix^{e}. xxxiii. Gaudete in Domino semper.

Les nomes de ceaux q'furent mortz a la dite battaile sont ceux.

           { Le Duc de Bourbon.
Ducs.      { Le Duc Datermes.
           { Le Evesque de Chalons.

             Mons. Rob de Duras.
             Le Marischal de Clermont.
             Le Visconte de Vrons.
             Mons. Geffrei de Charsey.
             Mons. Renaud de Pointz.
             Le S. de Landas.
             Le S. de Chastel Vileyn.
             Le S. de Argenton.
             Le S. de Mountgay.
             Le S. de Malevrer.
             Mons. John de Sausar.
             Mons. Lewis de Broyse.
             Mons. Guilliem de Viele.
             Mons. John de Jole.
             Mons. Andrew de Chaveny.
             Mons. Eustas de Kirpemont.

Et outre le noms surnometz sont mortz des gentz d'armes M.M. ccccxxvi.
Iterum dico gaudete.


A LETTER FROM ROBERT PRITE, CLERK, TO SOME ENGLISH NOBLEMAN, DATED
8^{th} DECEMBER 1356, GIVING HIM INFORMATION OF THE BATTLE OF
POICTIERS, AND OTHER INTELLIGENCE.

[_Original on vellum in the Cottonian MS. Caligula_ D. III. f. 33.]

Mon t'sg'nt et t'sredoute seign'. Nous tenons com'unement p'decea et
p' c'tein q' le Roi de Fr'nce le duc d'Orliens deux filz du roi les
deux mareschalx de [F'ance] et plusours autres g'ntz seign's ont este
mortz en la bataille q'ad este entre le P'nce de Gales et eux et dit
ho'me q' Mons^{r} Loys v're frere Mons^{r} Martin [le] Roi les
Navarrois ont en la p'm'e bataille et ceux descomfirent la busoigne
et tua Mons^{r} Martin le Roi et ce purrez vous savoir plus au plein
p' un Chivaler qi le duc de Lancastr' ad envoie nadgaires en Englet're
dev's le Roi. Et se p'ti de la busoigne le duc de Normandie qi sicome
home dit est venuz a Paris et ad signifie ces novelles a Mons^{r}
Rob't de Cleremont son lieutenant es p'ties de seint Loo. Des autres
novelles de p'decea, plese vous savoir mon t'sredoute seignur q' le
poeple de ce paiis est molt esbay de la longe demoer q' vous faites
p'dela moemens les gentils genz; a qui Mons^{r} Godefrey de Harecourt
p'lemente touz les iours et les enhorte estre oveges lui et de lui
faire hom[age] come a lieutenant le Roi d'Englet're et especialement a
ceux qi tenent p'decea fort'estes et fait pullier p'my voz villes q'
qicunqes voudra estre a lui obeissant il ne serra greve de taillee ne
aut's subsides p' qeconqz affaire q' ce soit et q' ceux il gardera et
defendera contre vous et aut's dont plusours gentilz homes et autres
bones villes lui ont entierement accordez sa volonte p' sa petite
puissance q'ils veient q' vous avez et en outre ad fait le dit
Godefrey mettre la main en la t're qe feust vassailles Honriot de
Pemot J de Chesnos et en plusours aut's lieux et fait iniunccion q'
nul ne obbeisse a vous s^{r} peine de la teste et tant d'autres choses
plus g'nt q'si vous accordez a venir p'decea vous trouviez petit de
voz gent qi p^{r}' vous face riens car de iour en iour. Il fait
conu'tir le paiis et tiegne q' a son poair. Il lev'a de voz gentes de
la seint Michel la greigunure p'tie et navez ja p'sent officer a qi la
people voille ore obeir p' la doute de Godefrey, si vous voillez
avancer sicome vous poez veer q' busugne est et p'dela mettez tiel
remede come vouz verrez q' bon s'ra, car les Engleis p'decea tiennent
sa p'tie, et si ne feust l'esp'ance, q' iai de v're brieve venue Je
vous envoiasse p'chemement aucune finance. Mon t'sredoute S^{r} n're
Seign^{r} vous doint bone vie et longe, et vous ait en sa seincte
garde, t'stre a seint benet les viij^{ne} iour docenb'r.

V're Clerc

ROB^{T}. PRITE.


A DECLARATION OF BERNARD DU TROY, A GASCON GENTLEMAN, THAT HE WAS THE
PERSON WHO TOOK KING JOHN OF FRANCE AT THE BATTLE OF POICTIERS.

[_Lat. on vellum. Cottonian MSS. Caligula_ D. III. f. 74.]

In Dei Nomine Amen. Uniu'si nouerint p' p'n'tes q' Anno d'ni mill'imo
ccc^{mo}. sexsagesimo primo die p^{i}ma mens' Julij Indict'one
xiiij^{a} pontificat' s'cissimi in xp'o p'ris et dni. d'ni Innocentij
pp^{e}. sexti anno nono inpresentia not' et testiu' subsc'ptor'
p'sonal'r constitut'. discretus vir Bernardus deu Troy scutifer de
vasconia. licet infirm' corpore mente t'n sanus et intellectu. Corpus
sac^{a}tissimu' ih'u x'p'i. q'd ut fidel' xp'ian' Recip'e volebat p'
ei' Ai'e saluat'one in manu sacerdotis habens p'oc'lis in domo
habitato'is sue London' in Carreria et Rop'ia verba dixit et p'tulit
que sequntur. Carissimi d'ni. q' nil certius morte nec incertius hora
mortis. Et quia tempus p'ic'losum est vt nulli lat'e possit Jus meu'.
et cu'ctis notu' fiat. Dico Ego Bernardus deu troy p'd'cs cor' vob'
om'ib'. q' in p'ic'lo Ai'e mee et p' sac^{m} corpus ih'u x'p'i q'd hic
cor' om'ib' est sac^{a}tum et intendo Recip'e p' saluato'e mee Ai'e
pecat^{i}cis. q' die belli de poitiers Ego cepi Rege' francie. et se
m^{i} Reddidit Rex p'd'cs et meus ver' p^{i}sionarius est et null'
ali' ius habet in eo p'ter me de Jure u'l Rato'ne. Et querelam q^{a}m
cora' d'no n'ro Rege Anglie. Et ei' consilio a d'co bello cit^{a}
p'sequt' sum sup' d'to Rege francie p^{i}sionario meo est bona et in
ea ut Attemptaui et p'sequt' sum volo mori tanq^{a}m bona et iust'
querela. Al' corpus ih'u xp'i sac^{a}tissimu' quod ut sup^{a} dixi ut
fidel' xp'ian' p' salute Ai'e mee volo Recip'e sit ad dampnato'em mea'
q'd deus euertat. Et Rogo d'nm Geraldum de tartasia d'nm de poyana
milite' hic p'ntem Eo casu quo de hac infirmitate decederem q'
querela' mea' aucdacter Recipiat tanq^{a}' bona' cont^{a} d'nm
denisium de morbek milite' et q'mcu'que aliu' Jus meum sup' d'co Rege
francie vero p^{i}sionario meo vsurpar' nitente'. qui cont^{a} deu' et
Justicia'. me et Jus meu' absorbet. et p' falsas suggestiones. et
cautelas vsq' inp'ntem die' impediuit et impedit mi' iuste et d'cam
q'relam p'seq^{a}tur ad fine' et bellu' faciat si Judicet' sup' hoc
sub p'ic'lo Ai'e mee qua' quide' q'rela' d'c's d'ns de poyana ibi p'ns
p'seq'ndam et finiendam ac bellu' si Indicetur aut Indicaret' in se
suscipiendum et faciend' p'misit et fide sua media stipulauit. Eo
Aute' casu quo dict' d'ns de poyana nollet d'cam querelam p'sequi aut
no' posset morte aut impedimento aliquo impedit'. volo Ego Bernardus
deu troy p'd'cs q' peleg^{i}n' deu cause socius me' in Armis d'cam
q'relam p'seqatur et finiat Ac bellu' Recipiat et faciat p' d'ca
q'rela si iudicatu' fuit sub p'ic'lo Anime mee ut p'dixi de comodo
aute' et finantia qd' p'ue'iat ex d'co Rege francie vero p^{i}sionar'
meo sup' quo d'n'm n'r'm Rege' eius Ai'am et conscientia' onero, volo
q' deductis expen' illi' qui p'seq't' si bellu' subseq^{a}tur exinde
bellu' faciens Ecia' p'te, habeat duas alias p'tes inter hered' meos,
peleg^{i}nu' deu canse, et socios qui in Armis erant socij mei d'ca
die, Rat'onab'l'r diuidant' sicut ordinaret' Rat'onab'l'r et
Reperiretur ip'os Jus habere. si aute' bellu' non subseq^{a}tur ex
querela p'd'ca qd' absit. volo q' de comodo qd' p'ue'iat deductis
expen' p'seq'ut' Recipiat ip'e p'sequens iuxta ei' conscientia'.
Residu' ut sup^{a} dc'm est diuidat'. Sup' d'co tamen p'ficus et
emolume'to conscienta' d'ci d'ni n'ri Regis onero ut p'dixi. Rogans et
Req^{i}rens magr^{m} guill'm. de Wolneston'. et magr'm philipu' de
London'. et alios notarios hic p'ntes q' sup' hiis om'ibus faciant et
Recipiant. Vnu' duo v'l pl'a publica instr'a que concessim' agenda in
f---- et testimoniu' p'missor'. Acta sunt hec sub anno indict'one
pontificat' mense die ... sup^{a}d'cis. Test' Nobiles viri d'ni
Oliueri' de Clisson. Guill'm' de mont agut Bartholomeus de borearhs
---- Rob'rt' de holand' thomas de Ros. Joh'n's de br---- Joh'n's ----
ccl' de london' Ber^{dus} de Brotas. ger^{dus} de menta R'ndus se
---- ---- p---- a---- a---- Ber^{dus} de la quinnada petrus de brassas
Ar^{dus} de ----

       *       *       *       *       *

P. 73. "And at the Tour hill they beheded maistre Simond Sudbury, than
erchebisshop of Caunterbury and chaunceler of Englond; and frere
Robert Hales priour of seynt Jones house, than tresorer of Engelond,"
&c.

The rebellion noticed in the text is so important an event in the
history of England as well as of the Metropolis, that no apology can
be required for the insertion of an inedited document in any degree
connected with it. In the _Foedera_, tom. vii. are several
proclamations on the same subject, and among them one tested at London
on the 15^{th} June 1381, directed to the sheriff of Kent; but the
following, dated at Chelmsford on the 5^{th} of July in that year, has
never, it is believed, been printed. It appears from it that the
rebels had asserted that they were supported by the king's authority;
and His Majesty therefore, not merely denies the fact, but commands
the earl of Warwick and the other persons in that county to whom the
instrument is addressed, to use every possible effort to suppress the
disturbance of the public peace, in places under their jurisdiction.


COPIA PROCLAMATIONIS R. RICARDI II^{di} SUPER INSURRECTIONE JACK STRAW
ET WAT TYLER.

[_Cottonian MS. Caligula_ D. III. _super Membr._ f. 100.]

Ricardus dei gr'a Rex Angl' et Franc' et Dominus Hib'n' dil'cis et
fidelib' suis Thome Comiti Warr' Joh'i Buttourt Joh'i de Bermyngeham
Henr' de Arden' Will'o de Clynton Militib' Rob'to Burgilon' et Joh'i
Catesby: sal't'm Satis vob' et aliis ligeis n'r'is credimus esse
cognitum qualit' q^{a}mplures malef'c'ores iam nouit' cont^{a} pacem
n'ra' in diu'sis Com' regni n'ri Angl' in maximam turbaco'em fideliu'
ligeor' n'ror' in diu'sis congregac'o'ib' et conuenticulis illicitis
quasi hostilit' insurrexerunt ven'abilem p'rem Simonem nup' Archiep'm
Cantuar' tocius Angl' Primatem Cancellar' n'r'm et fr'em Rob'tum de
Hales nup' Priorem Hospitalis s'ci Joh'is Jer'l'm in Angl' Thes' n'r'm
Joh'em Cauendish nup' Capitalem Justic' n'r'm et q^{a}mplures alios
ligeos et s'uientes et fideles n'ros absq' culpa crudelit' occidendo
arsuras incendia p'straco'es et varias alias destrucco'es eccl'iar'
Man'ior' domor' rer' et aliar' possessionu' fideliu' ligeor' n'ror'
enormit' et p'peram p'petrando Quia v'o malef'c'ores p'd'ci falso et
mendacit' asseruerunt et affirmarunt ip'os mala homicidia et dampna
p'd'ca ex n'ris auctoritate et voluntate fecisse et p'petrasse vt ip'i
sic maliciam suam continuare valeant et de p'missis licet indigni
cicius excusent' ad v'ram et alior fideliu' ligeor' n'ror' quor'cumq'
volum' p'uenire noticiam quod p'missa mala homicidia et dampna
quecunq' ex auctoritate et voluntate n'ris minime p'cesserunt neq'
fiunt set exinde vehemencius contristati ea in n'r'm maximu' vitup'iu'
et Corone n're p'iudiciu' et tocius regni n'ri dampnu' et turbac'o'em
non modica redundare sentimus. Et ideo vob' sup' fide et ligeancia
quib' nob' tenemini firmit' munigendo mandamus qd' p'sens mandatum
n'r'm in singulis locis infra Com' Warr' tam infra lib'tates q^{a}m
ext^{a} ubi melius expedire videritis ex p'te n'ra publice p'clamari
et vlt'ius inhiberi fac' ne qui cuiuscumq' status seu condico'is
fu'int infra Com' p'd'c'm seu alibi insurg'e seu congregaco'es vel
conuenticula huiusmodi fac'e vel levare seu quicq^{a}m aliud
attemptare seu p'curare p'sumant seu p'sumat aliquis eor' p' quod pax
n'ra ibidem infringi aut populus n'r inquietari aut turbari pot'it sub
forisf'cura vite et membror' et o'i'm alior' que nob' forisfac'e
pot'unt in futur' Damus eciam vob' et cuil't v'r'm et quibuscumq'
aliis fidelib' n'ris tenore p'senciu' potestatem et mandatum sp'ale
quibuscumq' malef'corib' cont^{a} pacem n'ram et quietem p'p'li n'ri
insurg'e seu huiusmodi congraco'es et conuenticula illicita fac'e
volentib' modis om'ib' quib' melius pot'itis vel sciu'itis eciam si
oporteat manu forti tanq^{a}m rebellib' et inimicis n'ris et tocius
regni n'ri resistendi et que'l't ip'or' iuxta eor' dem'ita et
discreco'es v'ras castigandi et puniendi et insurrecc'o'es et
turbac'o'es quascumq'. si que ibidem quod absit fiant pacificandi et
sedandi et om'ia alia faciendi et exequendi que conseruaco'em pacis
n're et quietem p'p'li n'ri conc'nere pot'unt in Com' p'd'co et p'tib'
eiusdem quibuscumq'. In cuius rei testimoniu' has l'ras n'ras fieri
fecim' patentes T' me ip'o apud Chelmersford' quinto die Julij Anno R'
n' quinto.

p' ip'm Regem.

       *       *       *       *       *

In pp. 99-102, as well as in pp. 157-159, an account is given of Henry
the Fifth's expedition into France in the year 1415, and of the battle
of Agincourt. In the Harleian MS. N^{o} 565, from which the preceding
Chronicle was transcribed, the following Poem occurs on the same
subject, a correct copy of which has never been published, though at
the end of Hearne's edition of Elmham's Life of Henry the Fifth, a
poem is inserted so very similar to the annexed that it may be
presumed to have been taken from another copy of the same. It is said
to have been transcribed from the Cottonian MS. Vitellius D. XII.,
which is not now extant: but upon collating this piece with the one
printed by Hearne, it appears, after allowing for the various readings
which frequently occur in different copies of an early poem, that many
words were erroneously given by that zealous antiquary.
Notwithstanding that it possesses but little claim to poetical merit,
it is highly curious, from its being nearly if not quite contemporary
with the events which it relates; for there can be no doubt of its
having been a production of the prolific pen of that "drivelling
monk," as he has been severely termed, the monk of Bury, John Lydgate,
several of whose other pieces, from their presenting a faithful but
rude picture of the manners and transactions of the times, are also
inserted in this volume. The garrulous monk, in the article which is
the subject of these remarks, particularly notices every circumstance
in which the Mayor and Citizens of the Metropolis were concerned, and
hence it is an appropriate illustration of a "CHRONICLE OF LONDON." It
is worthy of observation, that the story of the tennis-balls having
been sent as a satirical present from the Dauphin to Henry the Fifth,
and to which Shakspeare alludes, is frequently mentioned in the poem,
and furnishes the writer with several metaphors.

     "_Ambass._ He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,
                This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this,
                Desires you, let the dukedoms that you claim,
                Hear no more of you--This the Dauphin speaks.

     _K. Hen._  What treasure, uncle?

     _Exeter._  Tennis-balls, my liege.

     _K. Hen._  We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us;
                His present, and your pains, we thank you for:
                When we have match'd our rackets to these balls,
                We will in France, by God's grace, play a set,
                Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard:
                Tell him, he hath made a match with such a wrangler,
                That all the courts of France will be disturb'd
                With chaces....

                And tell the pleasant prince,--this mock of his
                Hath turn'd his balls to gun stones;[145] and his soul
                Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance
                That shall fly with them:"

     _Henry the Fifth_, Act I. Scene II.

[Footnote 145: Thus Lydgate, _infra_,

     "For they shall play with Harflete,
     A game at tynes, as y wene,
     Mine engynes that bethe so kene
     They shall be sett besyde this hill,
     Over all Harflew that they may sene
     For to loke if they play well;
     Go we to game be Godys grace,
     Myne children ben redy everych on
     Every greet gonne that there was,
     In his mouth he hadde a ston."

But Shakspeare's expressions are still more similar to those of an
inedited Chronicler of the period: "And whan the kyng had hard ther
wordis and the answere of the dolphynne, he was wondre sore agreved
and right evell assayd towarde the Frensshmen, and toward the kyng and
the Dolphynne, and thought to avenge hym upon them as sone as Good
wold send hym grace and myght, and anon lette make tenys ballis for
the Dolpynne in all the hast that they myght be made; _and they were
grete gonne stones for the Dolpynne to play wythall_." _Cottonian
MSS._ _Claudius_ A. viii.]

But besides the historical information with which the poem abounds,
and which is corroborated by the best authorities, it cannot fail to
be considered of much interest, from the description of the
magnificent reception of the king into London, after his return from
France.


A POEM BY JOHN LYDGATE, MONK OF BURY, DESCRIBING THE EXPEDITION OF
HENRY THE FIFTH INTO FRANCE IN 1415, THE BATTLE OF AGINCOURT, AND THE
KING'S RECEPTION INTO LONDON ON HIS RETURN.

[_Harl. MSS._ 565.]

God that all this world gan make
And dyed for us on a tre,
Save Ingelond for Mary sake,
Sothfast God in Trinyte;
And kepe oure kyng that is so free,
That is gracious and good with all,
And graunt hym evermore the gree,
Curteys Crist oure kynge ryall.

Oure kyng sente into France ful rathe,
Hys bassatours bothe faire and free;
His owne right for to have,
That is, Gyan and Normande;
He bad delyvre that his schulde be,
All that oughte kyng Edward,
Or ellys tell hym certeynle,
He itt gette with dynt of swerd.
_Wot ye right well that thus it was,
Gloria tibi Trinitas._

And than answerde the dolfyn bold
To oure bassatours sone ageyn,
Me thinke youre kyng he is nought old,
No werrys for to maynteyn;
Grete well youre kyng, he seyde, so yonge
That is bothe gentill and small;
A tonne of tenys ballys I shall hym sende,
For to pleye hym with all.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

A dien Sire, seide oure lordis alle,
For there they wolde no longer lende:
They token there leve, bothe grete and smalle,
And hom to Ingelond they gum wende;
And thanne they sette the tale on ende,
All that the Dolfyn to them gon say;
I schal hym thanke thanne, seyde our kynge,
Be the grace of God if that y may.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The kyng of Fraunce that is so old,
Onto oure kyng he sente on hy,
And prayde trews that he wolde hold
For the love of seynt Mary.
Oure Cherlys of Fraunce gret well, or ye wende,
The Dolfyn prowed withinne his wall,
Swyche tenys ballys I schal hym sende
As schall tere the roof all of his all.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Oure kyng ordeyned with all his myght,
For to amende that is amys,
And that is all for Engelond ryght,
To geten agen that scholde ben his;
That is, al Normandie forsothe y wys,
Be right of eritage he scholde it have,
Therof he seith he wyll nought mys,
Crist kepe his body sounde and save.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Oure kyng at Westmenster he lay,
And his bretheren everych on;
And other many lordes that is no nay,
The kyng to them seyde anon,
To Fraunce y thenke to take the way,
Sires, he seyde, be swete seynt John;
Of good counsaill y will yow pray,
Wat is youre will what y shall don?
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The duk of Clarence, thanne seyd he,
My lord it is my right full will,
And other lordys right manye,
We hold it right reson and skyll,
To Fraunce we wolde yow redy bryng,
With gladder will than we kon say.
Gramercy, sires, seide our kyng,
I schall yow qwyte if that y may.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

I warne yow he seyde bothe olde and yonge,
Make yow redy withoughte delay;
At Southampton to mete youre kynge,
At Lammas on seynt Petrys day;
Be the grace of God ant swete Mary
Over the see y thenke to passe:
The kyng let ordeyn sone in hy,
What y mene ye knowe the casse.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

After anon, with right good chere,
Hyse gret gonnys and engynes stronge,
At London he schipped them alle in fere,
And sone fro Westmenster then sprongye,
With alle hyse lordys, sothe to saye:
The mair was redy and mette hym there,
With all the craftes in good araye,
It is ful soth what nede to swere.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Heyl, comely kyng, the mair gan say,
The grace of God now be with the,
And speed the well in thy jornay,
Almyghti God in Trinite,
And graunt the evermore the degre,
To felle thin enemys bothe nyght and day;
Amen, seyde alle the comunalte,
Graunt mercy, sire, oure kyng gan say.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

To seynt Poulys he held the way;
He offred there full worthyly:
Fro thens to the quen that same day,
And tok his leve ful hendely;
And thorugh out London thanne gan he ryde;
To seynt George he com in hye,
And there he offred that iche tyde,
And other lordys that weren hym bye.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

And fro thens to Suhthampton, unto that strond,
For sothe he wold no longer there dwell:
XV hundryd shippys redy there he fond,
With riche sayles and heye topcastell.
Lordys of this lond, oure kyng gan there sell,
For a milion of gold as y herd say,
Therfore there truayle was quyte them full well,
For they wolde a mad a queynte aray.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Therfore song it was wailaway;
There lyvys they lost anon right in hast:
And oure kyng with riall aray,
To the se he past.
And landyd in Normandye, at the water of Sayn,
At the pyle of Ketecaus, the sothe y yow say,
On oure lady even, the assumpcion, the thirdde yer of hys rayn,
And boldely hys baner there he gan display.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

And to the town of Harflew there he tok the way,
And mustred his meyne faire before the town,
And many other lordys I dar well say,
With baners brighte and many penoun:
And there they pyght there tentys a down,
That were embroudyd with armys gay;
First, the kynges tente with the crown,
And all othere lordes in good aray.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

My brother Clarence, oure kyng gan say,
The tother syde shull ye kepe,
With my doughter and hire maydyns gay,
To wake the Frensshmen of there slepe.
London he seyde shall with here mete,
My gonnys shall lyn upon this grene,
For they shall play with Harflete,
A game at tynes as y wene.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Mine engynes that bethe so kene,
They shull be sett be syde this hill,
Over all Harflewe that they may sene,
For to loke if they play well.
Go we to game be Godys grace,
Myne children ben redy everych on,
Every greet gonne that there was,
In his mouth he hadde a ston.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The Capteyn of Harflewe sone anon
To oure kyne he sente on hy,
To wyte what was his wille to don
That he was come with his navy;
Delivere me this toune, oure kyng gan say;
Nay sire, he seyde, be seynt Denys;
Thanne shall y it gete, if y may,
Be the grace of God and myn devys.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Myne pleyers that y have hedyr brought,
Their ballys beth of stonys round,
Be the helpe of hym that me dere bought,
They shall youre wall have to ground.
The Frensshmen cried 'Amound,' 'Amound;'
This toun, they seyde, us moste kepe.
The kyng, seith he, will nought fro this ground
Or he have yolde this toun Harflete.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Tenys seyde the grete gonne,
How felawes go we to game,
Among the houses of Harflewe roune,
It dide the Frensshmen right gret grame;
Fyftene before, seyd London, tho
His ball wol faire he gan it throwe,
That the stepyll of Harflete and bellys also,
With his breth he dide down blowe.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

XXX^{ti} is myn, seyd Messagere,
And smartly went his way;
Ther wallys that were mad right sure,
He brast them down the sothe to say.
The kynges doughter, seyde here, how thei play,
Herkenyth myne maydenys in this tyde;
Fyve and forty that is no nay,
The wallys wente doun on every syde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The engynes seide, to longe we abyde,
Let us gon to ben on assent;
Wherevere that the ball gan glyde,
The houses of Harflew they all to rent.
An Englyssh man the bulwerk brent,
Women cryed alas! that they were bore,
The Frensshmen seide now be we shent,
From us this toun now it is lore.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

It is best now that we therfore,
That we beseche the kyng of grace,
That he asayle us now no more,
For to dystroye us in this place;
For but the Dolfyn us reskewe,
This toun to delivere wyl we sikerly,
Messagers thei let make newe,
And to the kyng they come in hy.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The lord Gaucourt certeynly,
For he was capteyn in that place,
And Gilliam Bocher com hym by,
And othere also bothe more and lasse;
To fore the kyng whan they com was,
I wot they sette them on there kne;
Heil comely kyng, thei seyde, in this plas,
The grace of God now is with the.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Of trews we wolde beseche the,
Unto it be Sounday atte non,
And but it thanne reskewyd be,
We shall to yow delyvere this toun:
The kyng thanne seyde to them ful son
I graunte you grace al this tyde,
Somme of yow go forth anon,
The remenaunt with me shall abyde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The capteyn hied hym with al his myght,
Unto Roon for to ryde,
He wende the Dolfyn have founde there right
But he was goon, durst he nought abyde.
Of helpe the capteyn besowte that tyde,
Harflew from us is lost for ay,
The wallys ben doun on every syde,
We may no longere it kepe, be God verray.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Of good counsaill I wolde yow pray,
What is youre will what shall y don,
Bataill us moste thene be Soneday,
Or ellys delivere hym the toun.
The lordys of Roon togydere gon rown,
And bad he sholde the town up yelde,
The kyng of Ingelond is fers as lyon,
We wil noughte mete hym in the felde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The capteyn went agen withoute lettyng,
Before the kyng on kneys gan fall,
Heyl, he seyde, comely kyng,
Most worthy prynce in this world riall,
Here y have brought yow the keyes alle,
Of Harflew that faire toun,
All is youre owne both towr and halle,
At your will Lord and at your croun.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

I thanke God, thann eseyde oure kyng,
And Mary his modir that is so fre;
Myn uncle Dorset withoute lettyng,
Capteyn of Harflewe schall ye be.
And al that is in that toun,
Wot stille shall abyde,
To maken up that is adoun,
That hath ben fellyd on every syde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Meyne, I now shall with yow ride,
To se the toun there overall,
Wyff no child lett non abyde,
But have them ought bothe grete and small;
And let stuffe the toun overall,
With Englysshmen thereinne to be.
They left no Frenssh blod withinne the wall,
But hadde all oute the comunalte.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Four hundred women and children men myght se,
Whanne they wenten out sore gon they wepe;
The grete gonnes engynes to the trewle,
They were brought into Harflete,
Oure kyng unto the castell yede,
And restyd hym there as his will was
Sire, he seyde, so God me spede
To Caleys warde I thenke to pas
_Wot ye right well that thus it was,
Gloria tibi Trinitas._

PASSUS SECUNDUS.

Whanne Harflete was getyn, that ryall toun,
Through the grace of God omnipotent;
Oure kyng he made hym redy bown,
And to Caleys ward full faire he went,
My brother Clarence verament,
Ye shall ryde al be my syde,
My cosyn York ye take entent,
For ye shall also this tyde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

My cosyn Huntyngdon shall with me ryde,
The erl of Suffolk that is so fre,
The erl of Oxenford shall not abyde,
He shall comen forth with his meyne,
Sire Thomas Erpyngham, that nevere dide faille,
And yit another so mote y thee,
Sire John the knyght of Cornewaille,
He dar abyde and that know yee.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Sire Gilbert Umfreville wil us avayle,
The lord Clyfford so God me spede,
Sire William Boucer that will not faille,
They will us helpe when we hav nede.
Toward Caleys full faire they yede,
In the cuntrey of Picardie,
And out of Normandie they gan ryde,
Now Crist save all the cumpanye.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Our kyng rood forth, blessed he be,
He sparid neither dale ne doun,
Be townes grete, and castell hyghe,
Til he com to the water of Som;
The brigge the Frensshemen hadde drawe a doun,
That over the water he myght nought ryde;
Oure kyng made hym redy bown,
And to the water of Turwyn he com that tyde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Oure kyng rood forth thanne full good sped,
Into the countrey of Turvyle,
To Agyncourt now as he is ride,
There as oure kyng dyd his bataile;
Be the water of Swerdys withoute faile,
The Frensshemen oure kyng thei did aspye,
And there they thought him to asaile,
All in that feld certeynlye.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The Frensshemen hadde oure kynge umbast
With bataill strong on every syde;
The duke of Orlions seyde in hast,
The kyng of Ingelond with us shall byde;
He gaf hym leve this way to ryde,
Be God, me thenke, he was not wys,
Therefore shall y now be hys gyde,
Or that he come to strong Caleys.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The duke of Braban answerd then,
And seyde, be God in Trinite
Ther be so fewe of thise Inglysshmen
I have no deynte them to se;
Alas! he seyde, what nedith us alle
To day so many for to comen here,
XX^{ti} of us it will befalle
Of them on prisonere.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The duk of Burbon sware be seynt Denys,
And other lordes many on,
We will goo pleye them at dys,
The lordys of Ingelond everych on,
Ther gentilmen seide, be swete seynt John.
Ther archers be sold full fayr plente,
And alle the beste bowemen ich on,
All for a blank of oure mone.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

And thanne answerde the duke of Barrye,
With wordes that were full mochell of pryde,
Be God, he seyde, y wil not sparye,
Over the Englysshmen y thenke to ryde;
And if that they dar us abyde
We shall overthrowe them alle in fere,
Goo we and slee them in this tyde,
And come hom agen to oure dynere.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Oure gracious kyng, that is so good,
He batailyd hym ful rially;
Stakes he hewe doun in a wood,
Beforn our archers pyght them on hy;
Oure ordynaunce the Frensshemen gan aspy,
They that were ordeynyd for to ryde,
They lighted doun with sorwe and cry,
And on their feet their gon abyde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The duke of York thanne full son
Before oure kyng he fell on kne,
My liege lord, graunt me a bon,
For his love that on croys gan die,
The fore ward this day that ye graunt me,
To be before yow in this feld;
Be myn baner sleyn wil y be,
Or y will turne my backe, or me yelde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Gramercy, cosyn, seyde our kyng,
Thenk on the right of mery Ingelond;
And thanne he gaff hym his blessyng,
And bad the duke he sholde up stond;
Crist, he seyde, that shop bothe sone and sonde,
And art lord and kyng of myght,
This day hold over me thin holy hond,
And spede me well in al my right.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Help seynt George oure lady knyght,
Seynt Edward that is so fre,
Oure lady that art Godys modyr bright,
And seynt Thomas of Caunterbure;
He bad alle men blithe to be,
And seyde, Felas, well shall we spede,
Every man in his degre,
I shall yow quyte full well youre mede.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Oure kyng seyde, Felas, what tyme of day?
Sire, thei seyde, it is ner pryme:
Go we anon to this jornay,
Be the grace of God it is good tyme,
For alle the seyntes that lyn in shryne,
To God for us they be praieng;
The religious of Ingelond all benynge,
'Ora pro nobis' for us they syng.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The kyng knelyd doun in that stounde,
And Englysshmen on every syde,
And thries there kyssyd the grounde,
And on there feet gon glyde:
Crist, seyde the kyng, as y am thi knyght,
This day me save for Ingelond sake,
And lat nevere that good Reme for me be fright,
Ne me on lyve this day be take.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Avaunt baner, withoute lettyng.
Seynt George before avowe we hyme,
The baner of the Trynyte forth ye bryng,
And seynte Edward baner at this tyme;
Over, he seyde, Lady Hevene Quene,
Myn own baner with hire shall be;
The Frensshman seyde al be dene,
Seynt George all over oure kyng they se.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

They triumpyd up full meryly,
The grete bataille togyder yede;
Oure archiers shotte full hertyly,
And made Frensshmen faste to blede;
There arwes wente full good sped,
Oure enemyes therwith doun gon falle,
Thorugh bresplate, habirion, and bassonet yede,
Slayn there were xj thousand on a rowe alle.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

Oure gracious kyng men myghte knowe,
That day he faught withe his owne hond,
He sparyd nother heigh no lowe,
There was no man his dynt myght stond;
There was nevere no kyng yit in this lond,
That evere dyd better in a day,
Therfore all Ingelond may synge oo song,
'Laus Deo' we may well say.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The duk of Gloucestre, that is no nay,
That day full worthyly he wroughte,
On every syde he made good way,
The Frensshemen faste to grounde he brought.
The erl of Huntyngdon sparyd nought;
The erl of Oxenford layd on all soo;
The yonge erl of Devenshire he ne rought;
The Frensshmen faste to grounde gan goo.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The duk of Orlions thanne was woo,
That day was taken prisonere;
The erl of Ewe he was also;
The duke of Braband slayn was there;
The duke of Barre fast hym by;
The duke of Launson wente nevere away;
Ne the erle Neverse certeynly,
Ne many other lordes that y cannot say.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The erl of Rychemond certeynly,
That day was taken in the feld;
The erl of Vendue was right sory;
And Sir Bursegaunt he gan hym yeld.
And thus oure kyng conqueryd the feld,
Through the grace of God omnipotent;
He toke his prisoners yonge and olde,
And faire to Caleys ward thanne he went:
The yere of his regne the thridde this was.
_Gloria tibi Trinitas._

PASSUS TERCIUS.

And there he restyd verrament,
At his owne will whilys that it was,
And shipped thanne in good entent,
And at Dovorr landyd y ges;
To Caunterbury full fair he past,
And offered at Seynt Thomas shryne;
Fro thens sone he rod in hast,
To Eltham he cam in good tyme.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The Mayr of London was redy bown,
With alle the craftes of that cite,
Alle clothyd in red thorugh out the town,
A semely sight it was to se:
To the Blak heth thanne rod he,
And spredde the way on every syde;
XX^{ti} M^{l} men myght well se,
Our comely kyng for to abyde.
_Wot ye right well, &c._

The kyng from Eltham sone he cam,
Hyse presenors with hym dede brynge,
And to the Blak heth ful sone he cam,
He saw London withoughte lesynge;
Heil, ryall London, seyde oure kyng,
Crist the kepe evere from care;
And thanne gaf it his blessyng,
And praied to Crist that it well fare.

The Mair hym mette with moche honour,
With all the aldermen without lesyng;
Heil, seyde the mair, the conquerour,
The grace of God with the doth spryng;
Heil duk, heil prynce, heil comely kyng,
Most worthiest Lord undir Crist ryall,
Heil rulere of Remes withoute lettyng,
Heil flour of knyghts now over all.

Here is come youre citee all,
Yow to worchepe and to magnyfye,
To welcome yow, bothe gret and small,
With yow everemore to lyve and dye.
Grauntmercy, Sires, oure kyng gan say;
And toward London he gan ride;
This was upon seynt Clementys day,
They wolcomed hym on every syde.

The lordes of Fraunce, thei gan say then,
Ingelond is nought as we wen,
It farith be these Englisshmen,
As it doth be a swarm of ben;
Ingland is like an hive withinne,
There fleeres makith us full evell to wryng,
Tho ben there arrowes sharpe and kene,
Thorugh oure harneys they do us styng.

To London brigge thanne rood oure kyng,
The processions there they mette hym ryght,
'Ave Rex Anglor,' their gan syng,
'Flos mundi,' thei seyde, Goddys knyght.
To London brigge whan he com ryght,
Upon the gate ther stode on hy,
A gyaunt that was full grym of syght,
To teche the Frensshmen curtesye.

And at the drawe brigge, that is faste by,
To toures there were upright;
An antelope and a lyon stondyng hym by,
Above them seynt George oure lady knyght,
Besyde hym many an angell bright,
'Benedictus' thei gan synge,
'Qui venit in nomine domin.' goddes knyght,
'Gracia Dei' with yow doth sprynge.

Into London thanne rood oure kyng,
Full goodly there thei gonnen hym grete;
Thorugh out the town thanne gonne they syng,
For joy and merthe y yow behete;
Men and women for joye they alle,
Of his comyn thei weren so fayn,
That the Condyd bothe grete and smalle,
Ran wyn ich on as y herde sayn.

The tour of Cornhill that is so shene,
I may well say now as y knowe,
It was full of Patriarkes alle be dene,
'Cantate' thei songe upon a rowe;
There bryddes thei gon down throwe,
An hundred there flewe aboughte oure kyng,
'Laus ejus' bothe hyghe and lowe
'In ecclesia sanctorum' thei dyd syng.

Unto the Chepe thanne rood oure kyng;
To the Condyt whanne he com tho,
The XII apostelys thei gon syng,
'Benedict. anima domino'
XII kynges there were on a rowe,
They knelyd doun be on asent,
And obles aboughte oure kyng gan throwe,
And wolcomyd hym with good entent.

The Cros in Chepe verrament,
It was gret joy it for to beholde;
It was araied full reverent,
With a castell right as God wolde,
With baners brighte beten with gold.
And angelys senssyd hym that tyde;
With besaunts riche many a fold,
They strowed oure kyng on every syde.

Virgynes out of the castell gon glyde,
For joye of hym they were daunsyng,
They knelyd a doun alle in that tyde,
'Nowell,' 'Nowell,' alle thei gon syng.
Unto Poules thanne rood oure kyng,
XIIII bysshopes hym mette there right,
The grete bellys thanne did they ryng,
Upon his feet full faire he light.

And to the heighe auter he went right,
'Te Deum' for joye thanne thei gon syng;
And there he offred to God almyght:
And thanne to Westminster he wente withoute dwellyng.
In xv wokes forsothe, he wroughte al this,
Conquered Harfleu and Agincourt;
Crist brynge there soules all to blys,
That in that day were mort.

Crist that is oure hevene kyng,
His body and soule save and se;
Now all Ingelond may say and syng,
'Blyssyd mote be the Trinite,'
This jornay have ye herd now alle be dene,
The date of Crist I wot is was,
A thousand foure hundred and fyftene.
_Gloria tibi Trinitas._

  Harflu fert Mauric Augincourt p'lia Crispin.

       *       *       *       *       *

P. 119. [A^{o} 10 Hen. VI.]--"John Welles, grocer, maior. This same
yere, the xvj day of Decembre, G beynge the dominical lettre, kyng
Herry the vj^{te} was crowned kyng of Fraunce at Parys, in the chirche
of Notre Dame, with gret solempnite and rialte; and anoon after he
turned ayen into Engelond, and landed at Dovorr the ix day of
Feverer', and come to London the xxj day of the same month, where he
was ryally resceyved, alle the craftes rydynge ayens hym, all in
white."

The following poem by Lydgate presents a very minute account of the
manner in which the young monarch was received into London after his
coronation as king of France, and of the pageant upon the occasion.
Two copies exist in MS. in the British Museum; one in the Harleian MS.
565, which has been literally transcribed; the other in the Cottonian
MS. Julius B. II; and the variations between them will be found in the
notes. About one third of this article, taken from the former of those
MSS., is printed in Malcolm's London, vol. ii. p. 89, but it conveys a
very imperfect idea of the whole composition; for not only has the
orthography of the extract been modernized, but the most interesting
descriptions do not occur. The annexed is therefore, it is presumed,
the only correct copy which has ever been published, and it cannot
fail to be deemed an exceedingly curious illustration of the passage
in "The Chronicle," as well as of the manners of the period. Lydgate
does not mention upon what day of the month the circumstance took
place, but says that it was "upon a Thorsday" "toward the ende of
wyndy Februarie:" and as the 21st of February in 1431 fell on a
Thursday, there is little doubt that it was on that day that Henry
entered London.


"THE COMYNGE OF THE KYNG OUT OF FRAUNCE TO LONDON." BY JOHN LYDGATE
"THE MONK OF BURY."

[_Harleian MS._ 565, _and Cottonian MS. Julius_ B. II.]

Toward the ende of wyndy Februarie,
Whanne Phebus was in the fysshe roune,[146]
Out of the signe which callyd is Aquarie,
Newe kalendas were entred and begonne,
Of Marches comyng, and the mery sonne,
Upon a Thorsday shed[147] hys bemys bright
Upon London, to make them glad and light.

[Footnote 146: croune _in Cotton MS. Julius_ B. II.]

[Footnote 147: shewed.]

The stormy reynes[148] of alle there hevynesse,
Were passyd away, and alle there[149] grevaunce,
For the sixte Henry, rote of there gladnesse,
Ther hertys joye, ther worldis suffissaunce,
Be trewe assent[150] crownyd kyng of Fraunce;
The even[151] rejoysyng the day of his repaire,
Made at his comynge the wedir to be so faire.

[Footnote 148: reyne.]

[Footnote 149: there old.]

[Footnote 150: dissent.]

[Footnote 151: hevene.]

A tyme, y trowe of God, for hym provydyd,
In alle the hevenes there was no clowde sayne;
From other daies that day was so devydyd,
And fraunchisyd from mystys and from rayn;
The erthe[152] attempred, the wyndes smothe and playne,
The Citezeines thorugh out the Citee,
Halwyd that day with gret solempnyte.

[Footnote 152: eyre.]

And lyk for David after his victorie,
Rejoysyd was al Jerusalem,
So this Cite with laude, pris, and glorie,
For joye mustred lik the sonne bem,
To geve ensample thorugh out this Reem;
Al of assent who so can conceyve,
There noble kyng were glad to resceyve.

There clothyng was of colour ful covenable;
The noble Mair clad in red velwet,
The Shireves, the Aldermen, ful notable,
In furryd clokes, the colour of scarlet;
In statly wyse whanne they were met,
Ich on were wel horsyd, and mad no delay,[153]
But with there Maire rood forth in there way.

[Footnote 153: Eche oon well horsed made no delay.]

The Citezeyns ich on of the Citee,
In there entent that they were pure and clene;
Ches them of whit a ful faire lyvere,
In evry craft as it was wel sene;
To shewe the trowthe that they dede mene,
Toward the kyng hadde mad them feithfully,
In sundry devyses embrowdyd richely.

And for to remembre of other alyens,
First Geneweys, thorugh thei were strangers,
Florantynys, and Venyciens,
And Esterlyngs, clad[154] in there manere,
Conveyd with seriaunts and othere officers,
Statly horsyd, after the Mair ridyng,
Passyd the subbarbes to mete with the kyng.

[Footnote 154: gladde.]

To the Blake heth whanne they dyd atteyne,
The Mair of prudence in especialle,
Made them hove in renges tweyne,
A strete betwen ech party lik a walle,
Alle clad in whit, and the most principalle,
A fore in red, with the[155] Mair rydyng,
Til tyme that he saw the kyng comyng;

[Footnote 155: theire.]

Thanne with his sporys, he tok his hors anone,
That to beholde it was a noble sight,
How lyk a man he to the kyng is gone,
Right well cheryd of herte, glad, and light;
Obeienge to hym, as hym ought of right:
And after that he cunningly abraid,
And to the kyng even thus he sayd;

"Sovereigne lord and noble kyng, ye be wolcome out of youre rem of
Fraunce, into this youre blessyd rem of Ingelond, and in especial unto
youre most notable Citee of London, otherwise callyd youre chambre, we
thankynge Almyghty[156] God of the good and gracious athenyng of youre
crowne of Fraunce, besechynge of his mercyful grace to sende yow
prosperite and many yeris, to the comfort of alle your lovyng pepill."

[Footnote 156: _Omitted._]

But for to tellen alle the circumstauncys,
Of every thyng shewed in centencs,
Noble devyses, diverse ordinauncys,
Conveid be scripture with ful gret excellence;
Al to declare, y have non eloquence,
Therfore y pray to alle tho that it schal rede,[157]
For to correcte where as they se nede.

[Footnote 157: that shall yt rede.]

First, whan they[158] passyd was the fabour,
Entring the brigge of this noble town,[159]
There was a peler reysyd lik a tour,
And theron stod a sturdy champyone,
Of look and chere, stern as a lyone;
His swerd uprered, prowdly gan manace,
Alle foreyn enemyes from the kyng to enchace;

[Footnote 158: he.]

[Footnote 159: citee.]

And in defens of his estat riall,
The geaunt wolde abyde ech aventure,
And alle assautes that were marcyall,
For his sake he proudly wolde endure;
In tokenynge wher of, he hadde a long[160] scripture,
On either syde declaryng his entent,
Whiche sayde thus, be good avisement.

[Footnote 160: _Omitted._]

[Sidenote: Inimicos ejus induam confusione.]

"Alle tho that ben enemys to the kyng,
I schal them clothe with confucione;
Make hym myghti be vertuos levyng,
His mortall fou to oppressen and bere a downe,
And hym to encresene as Cristes champione;
Alle myschevys from hym to abrigge,
With the grace of God, at the entryng of this[161] brigge."

[Footnote 161: the.]

Too antilopis stondyng on either syde,
With the armes of Ingelond and of Fraunce,
In token that God schall for hym provide,
As he hath title be juste eneritaunce,
To regne in pees, plente, and alle plesaunce;
Cesyng of werre, that men myghte ryden and[162] gone,
As trewe liegis, there hertys mad bothe oone.

[Footnote 162: or.]

Forthermore, so as the kyng gan ryde,
Middes of the brigge there was a toure on lofte;
The lord of lordes beynge ay his gyde,
As he hath be and yit wil be ful ofte.
The tour araied with velwetty softe,
Clothys of gold, silk, and tapicerie,
As apperteynyth to his regalye.

And at his comyng, of excellent beaute,
Benygne[163] of port, most womanly of chere,
There issued out, empresses thre;
There here displaied, as Phebus in his[164] spere,
With crownettys of gold and stones clere;
At whos out comyng thei gaf swyche a light,
That the beholders were stonyed in there sight.

[Footnote 163: beyng.]

[Footnote 164: her.]

[Sidenote: Nature.]

[Sidenote: Grace.]

The first of them was callyd[165] NATURE,
As sche that hath undyr here demayne,
Man, beest, and foul, and every creature,
Withinne the bondys of here goldyn cheyne;[166]
Eke hevene, and erthe, and every creature,[167]
This empresse of custum doth enbrace:
And next here com here suster callyd GRACE.

[Footnote 165: called was.]

[Footnote 166: _These lines are transposed._]

[Footnote 167: _These lines are transposed._]

Passyng famous, and of gret reverence,
Most desyryd in alle regions;
For where that evere shewith here presence,
She bryngeth gladnes to citees and to townys.
Of alle welle fare she halt[168] the possessionys,
For y dar sey, prosperite in no place,
No while abidith, but if there be grace.

[Footnote 168: holdeth.]

[Sidenote: Fortune.]

In tokene that Grace shal[169] longe continue,
Unto the kyng, she shewyd here ful benygne;
And next here com the empresse FORTUNE,
To hym aperyng with many a noble signe,
And riall tokenys, to shew that he was digne,
Of God disposyd as lust[170] ordeygne,
Upon his hed to were crownes tweyne.

[Footnote 169: shuld.]

[Footnote 170: lyst.]

[Sidenote: Natura Gracia et Fortuna.]

These thre ladies, al of on entent,
Thre goostly gyftes, hevynly, and devyne,
Unto the kyng anon they dyd present;
And to his hignesse they dyd anon enclyne,
And what they weren pleynly to determyne;
Grace gaf hym first at his comynge,
Two riche gyftes, sciens and cunnynge.

[Sidenote: Intende prospere procede et regna.]

Nature gaf hym eke strengthe, and fayrnesse,
For to be lovyd and dred of every wight;
Fortune gaf hym eke prosperite, and richesse;
With this scripture aperyng in ther sight,
To hym applied of verey due right,
"First undirstonde and wilfully procede,
And longe to regne," the scripture seide in dede.

This is to mene, who so undirstondith aright,
Thow shalt be fortune have long prosperite;
And be nature thow shalt have strengthe, and myght,
Forth to procede in long felicite;
And grace also hath grauntyd unto the,
Vertuously longe in thi roiall citee,
With septre and crowne to regne in equyte.

On the right hand of these Empresses,
Stode thir[171] maydenys verey celestialle;
Like Phebus bemys shone there golden tresses,
Upon there hedes ech havyng a crownalle,
Of port and chere semyng immortalle:
In sight transsendyng alle erthely creatures,
So angelik they weren of there figures.

[Footnote 171: sevyn.]

Al clad in white, in tokene of clennesse,
Liche pure virgynes as in there ententys,
Schewynge outward an hevenly fresshe brightnesse;
Stremyd with sonnys weren alle there garmentys,
Aforne provyded for pure innocentys:
Most colombyne of chere and of lokyng,
Meekly roos up at the comyng of the kyng.

They had on bawdrikes al on saphire hewe,
Goynge outward gan the kyng salue,
Hym presentyng with ther gyftes newe,
Lik as thei[172] thought it was to them due;
Whiche gostly giftes, here in ordre suwe,
Down descendyng as silver dewe from hevene,
Al grace includyd[173] withinne the giftes sewene.

[Footnote 172: them.]

[Footnote 173: include.]

These riall giftes ben of vertu most
Goostly corages, most soveraygnely delite,
The[174] giftes callyd of the Holy Goost,
Outward figuryd be seven dowys white;
Seyenge[175] to hym, lik as clerkes write,
"God the fulfille with intelligence
And with a spirit of goostly sapience

[Footnote 174: these.]

[Footnote 175: And seyyng.]

[Sidenote: Impleat te Deus sp'u sapiciencie et intellectus sp'u
consilii et fortitudinis sciencie et pietatis et sp'u timoris Domin'.]

God sende also to thi moost availe,
The to preserve from alle hevynesse;
A spirit of strenghthe, and of good counsaile,
Of cunnyng, drede, pite, and of lownesse:"
Thus thise ladies gan there gyftes dresse,
Graciously at there out comyng,
Be influence light upon the kyng.

These Empresses hadde on there left syde,
Othere vij virgines, pure and clene,
Be attendaunce continually to abyde,
Al clad in whit, smete ful of sterrers shene;
And to declare what they wolde mene,
Unto the kyng with fulle gret reverence,
These weren there gyftes shortly in sentence;

[Sidenote: Induat te Dominus corona glorie sceptro clemencie,[176]
gladio iusticie,[177] pallio prudencie, scuto fidei, galea salutis, et
vinculo pacis.]

[Footnote 176: _Transposed._]

[Footnote 177: _Transposed._]

God the endue with a crowne of glorie;
And with a[178] septre of clennesse and pite;
And with a sheld of right,[179] and victorie;
And with a mantel of prudence clad thow be;
A sheld of feith for to defende the;
An helm of helthe wrought to thin encres;
Girt with a girdell of love and perfight pees.

[Footnote 178: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 179: swerde of might.]

These vij virgynes of sight most hevenly,
With herte, body, and handys reioysyng,
And of there[180] cheres aperid murely,
For the kynges gracious hom comyng;
And for gladnesse they began to synge,
Most angelik with hevenly armonye,
This same roundelle which y shal now specifie.

[Footnote 180: othir.]

Soverayne lord, Wolcome to youre Citee;
Wolcome oure joye, and oure hertys plesaunce;
Wolcome oure gladnes, Wolcome oure suffisaunce;
Wolcome, Wolcome, right Wolcome, mote ye be;
Syngyng to fore thi riall mageste,
We seye of herte, withoughten variaunce,
Soverayn lord, Wolcome, Wolcome, oure[181] joye;

[Footnote 181: ye be.]

Meir, Citezeins, and al the Comonte,
At youre hom comyng newe out of Fraunce,
Be grace relevyd of al ther olde grevaunce,
Syng this day with gret solempnyte.
Thus resceyvyd, an esy paas rydyng,
The kyng is entred into this Citee;
And in Cornhull anon at his comynge,

To do plesaunce to his mageste,
A tabernacle surmontyng of beaute,
There was ordeyned, be full fresshe entaille,
Richely arraied with rialle apparaille;
This tabernacle of moost magnyfycence,
Was of this byldyng verrey imperiall,
Mad for the lady callyd dame Sapience.

[Sidenote: Septem sciencie liberales.]

To for whos face moost statly and rialle,
Were the vij sciences callyd liberalle;
Rounde aboughte as makyd is memorie,
Which never departyd from his[182] consistorie,
Frist ther was Gramer, as y reherce can,
Chef founder[183] and rote of al connyng,
Whiche hadde afore here old Precian;

[Footnote 182: hire.]

[Footnote 183: founderesse.]

And Logyk hadde afore here ek[184] stondyng,
Aristotill so clerkly disputyng;
And Retoryk hadde eke in her presence,
Tullius, callyd myrrour of eloquence;
And Musyk hadde royde of all discorde,
Boice, here clerk, with hevenly armonye,
And instrumentis al of on acorde;

[Footnote 184: _Omitted._]

For to practyse with sugryd melodye,
He and his clerkes[185] there wittes dyd applye,
With touche of strengys, on orgons we[186] playeng,
There craft to shewe at the[187] comynge of oure kyng;
And Arsmetrik, be castynge of nombrarie,
Ches Pictogoras for here partye,
Callyd chief clerk to governe here liberarie.

[Footnote 185: scolars.]

[Footnote 186: eke.]

[Footnote 187: _Omitted._]

Euclude tok mesures be craft of gemetrie,
And al ther heighest[188] stod Astronomye;
Albunisar last with here of vij^{e},
With instrumentis that raught up into hevene;
The chief princesse callyd dame Sapience,
Hadde to fore here wrete[189] this scripture,
Kynges, quod she, moost of excellence,

[Footnote 188: alderhyhest.]

[Footnote 189: writen.]

[Sidenote: Per me Reges regnant et gloriam sapiencie possidebunt.]

[Sidenote: Et nunc Reges intelligite et erudimini qui iudicatis
terram.]

Be me thei regne, and moost in joye endure,
For thorugh myn helpe, and my besy cure,
To encrese ther glorie and high renone,
They shull of wisdome have ful possession.
And in the front of this tabernacle,
Sapiens, a scripture gan devyse,
Able to be reed withoughten a spectacle,

To yonge kynges seying in this wyse,
Undirstondith and lernyth of the wyse,
On right remembryng the highe lord to queme,
Sith ye be juges other folk to deme;
Forthermore the matir doth devyse.
The kyng procedyng forth upon his way,
Com to the Condyte mad in sercle wyse;

[Sidenote: Domina misericord' a dextris et domina veritat' a sinistris
et cum clemencia roborabit' thronus eius.]

Whom to resceyve, ther was mad no delay,
And myddys above in ful riche aray,
There sat a child of beute procellyng,
Middys of a[190] trone raid like a kyng,
Whom to governe, there were assygned tweyne,
A lady, Mercy, sat on his right syde;
On his lefte honde yf y shall nought feyne,

[Footnote 190: the.]

[Sidenote: Misericordia et Veritas custodiunt Regem.]

The lady Trouthe, his domys to provyde;
The lady Clemence on loft dyd a byde,
Of God ordeyned in the same place,
The kynges throne strongly to enbrace;
For be the sentence of prudent Salamon,
Mercy and Right kepen every kyng,
And Clemence kepit be reson,

[Sidenote: Iudiciu' et Iusticiam.]

His myghti throne from myschief and fallyng,
And makith it strong with longe abydyng;
For y dar say these ladies thre,
A kyng preserve in long felicite.[191]
Thanne stod afore[192] also[193] the sayd kyng,
Two juges, with ful highe noblesse;
Viij^{te} seriauntes ich on representyng;

[Footnote 191: prosperytee.]

[Footnote 192: _Transposed._]

[Footnote 193: _Transposed._]

[Sidenote: Honor Regis iudiciu' dilig^{t}. Deus iudiciu' tuum Regi da,
et justiciam tuam filio Regis.]

For comon profith doom and right wisnesse:
Withe this scripture, whiche shalle expresse,[194]
Honour of kyng is in every mannys sight,[195]
Of comone custom lovyth equyte and right,
Kyng Davyd wrot, the sawter berith witnes,
Lord God, quod he, thi dome yif us[196] to the kyng,
And yif thi trouthe, and thi right wysnes,

[Footnote 194:

     Honour of kyng which I shall expresse,
     With this scripture in every manys sight.]

[Footnote 195:

     Honour of kyng which I shall expresse,
     With this scripture in every manys sight.]

[Footnote 196: _Omitted._]

To the kynges sone here in his levynge,
To us declaryng, as be ther wrightyng,
That kynges, prynces, sholde aboughte hym drawe,
Folk that ben trewe, and wel expert in lawe.
The kyng forthe rydyng entred Chepe anone,
A lusty place, a place of alle delitis,
Com to the Condyte, wher as cristalle ston,

[Sidenote: Thetis est dea aquar'.]

[Sidenote: Bachus est deus vini.]

The water ran, like welles of Paradys:
The holsome licour, ful riche and of gret pris,
Lik to the water of Archedeclyne,
Whiche be meracle were turnyd to[197] wyn:
Thetes, which that is of waters chief goddesse,
Hadde of the wellys power non nor myght,
For Bachus shewyd ther his fulsomnesse,

[Footnote 197: into.]

Of holsome wynes, to every maner wight:
For wyn of nature makith hertys light,
Wherfore Bachus, atte reverence of the kyng,
Shedde out his plente at his hom comyng.
Wyn is a lycour of[198] recreacione,
That day presentyd in tokne of[199] gladnes,
Into the kyngges famous highe renone,

[Footnote 198: of grete.]

[Footnote 199: of alle.]

From[200] to exile al maner hevynes,
For with his comyng, the dede berith witnes,
Out of this[201] lond he put away al trowble,
And made of newe oure joyes to be dowble.
Eke at thise welles, there were virgines thre,
Whiche drew[202] up[203] wynes of joye and of plesance;
Mercy, and Grace, there ther sustre eke Pite,

[Footnote 200: From us.]

[Footnote 201: the.]

[Footnote 202: _transposed._]

[Footnote 203: _transposed._]

Mercy mynystred wynes of attemperaunce;
Grace shed here licour of good governaunce;
And Pite preferryd with ful good foysone,
Wynes of comfort and consolacione;
The wyn of Mercy stanchith of[204] nature,
The gredy thristes of cruelle hastynes;
Grace with here licour cristallyn and pure,

[Footnote 204: by.]

Differith vengeaunce of furious wodnes,
And Pite blemsyght the swerd of rightwysnes,
Covenable welles, most holsome of savour,
For to be tasted of every governour.
O how thise wellys who so tok good hede,
With there licours moost homsome to ataine,
Afore devysyd notably in dede,

For to accorde with the Mairis name,[205]
Whiche be report of his worthy fame,
That day was besy in all his governaunce,
Unto the kyng for to done plesaunce.
There were ek trees, with levys fresshe of hewe,
Al tyme of the yer ful of frutes lade,
Of colour hevenly and evere eliche newe.

[Footnote 205: Nomen maioris Johannes Welles.]

Orenges, almondys, and the pomegarnade,
Lymons, dates, there colours fresh and glade,
Pypyns, quynces, blaundrellys to disport,
And the pom cedre, corageus to recomfort:
Eke othere frutes, whiche that more comown be,
Quenyngges, peches, costardes, and wardons,
And othere manye ful faire and freshe to se.

The pome water, and the gentil ricardouns,
And agaynes hertes for mutegacions,[206]
Damasyns, whiche with there tast delite,
Ful gret plente bothe of blak and white.
And besydes this gracious paradis,
Al ioghe[207] and gladnesse for to multiplie,
Two olde men, ful circumspect and wys,

[Footnote 206: murtygacions.]

[Footnote 207: joye.]

[Sidenote: Nichil proficiat inimicus in eo Et filius iniquitatis non
apponat nocere ei.]

Ther did apere, like folkys faire:[208]
The ton was Ennok, that[209] other Elye,
The kyng presentyng ther gyftes ful notable;
That God conferme his state ay to be stable,
The firste seide, withe benynge chere,
Gretly desyryng his prosperite,
That non enemy have on hym powere,

[Footnote 208: off feyre.]

[Footnote 209: the.]

[Sidenote: Dominus conservet eum vivificet eum et beatum faciet eum
&c.]

Nor no[210] child be fals inequyte,
Perturble nevere his felicite;
Thus old Ennok, the processe gan welle telle,
And preid for the kyng as he rood be the welle.
After Elias with his lokkes hore,
Wel devoutly seyde,[211] lokyng on the kyng,
God conserve the and kepe the evermore,

[Footnote 210: Nor that no.]

[Footnote 211: Seyd well devoutly.]

[Sidenote: Haurietis aquas in gaudio de fontibus salvatoris.]

And make hym blessyd in erthe here levyng,
And preserve hym in al manere thyng,
And special among kynges alle,
In enemyes handes that he nevere falle.
And at the[212] frontour of these welles clere,
Ther was a scripture comendyng ther[213] licour;
Ye shall drawe waters with good chere,

[Footnote 212: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 213: the.]

Out of wellys of oure savyour,
Whiche han vertu to curyne al langour,
Be influence of ther grete swetnesse,
Hertys avoidyng of al ther hevynesse.
Than from thise welles of fulsome abundaunce;
With ther licours as any cristalle clere,
The kyng rood forthe with sobre continaunce,

Toward a castell, beldyd[214] of jasper grene,
Upon whos toures the sonne shone ful[215] shene;
Ther clerly shewyd be notable remembraunce,
The[216] kynges title of Ingelond and of Fraunce.
To grene trees ther grew upright,
From seynt Edward and from seynt Lowys,
The roote etake,[217] palpable to the sight,

[Footnote 214: bilt.]

[Footnote 215: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 216: This.]

[Footnote 217: ytake.]

Conveyd be[218] kynges of gret prys,
Some bare lebardes, some bar flour de lys;
In nowthir armes founde was ther no lak,
Whiche the sixte Henry may now bere on his bak;
The pedegre be iuste successione,
As trewe cronycles trewly determyne,
Unto the kyng is now descendyd down,

[Footnote 218: Conveyd by lynes be &c.]

From eyther party, right as any lyne:
Upon whos hed now freshly done shyne,
Two riche crownes, moost soverayne of plesaunce,
To brynge in pees betwen Ingelond and Fraunce.
Upon this castelle, on the tother syde,
Ther was a tree, whiche sprang out of Jesse,
Ordeyned of God ful longe to abyde,

Davyd first[219] crownyd[220] for his humylyte,
The braunches conveide, as men myghte se,
Lynyally, and[221] the genelogye,
To Crist J'hu, that was borne of Marie;
And whi the Jesse was sett on that partye,
This was the cause in especialle;
For next to Powlys y dar well specyfie,

[Footnote 219: _Transposed._]

[Footnote 220: _Transposed._]

[Footnote 221: Lynally and in, &c.]

Is the party moost chief and principalle,
Callyd of Londone, the chirche cathedralle,
Whiche oughte of resone the devys for[222] to excuse,
To alle tho that wolde agen it frowne or muse.
And fro that castelle the kyng forth gan hym dresse,
Toward Poules chief chirche of this citee;
And at the[223] Conduyt he[224] light and a liknesse,

[Footnote 222: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 223: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 224: _Omitted._]

Indyvysyble mad of the Trinite,
A throne compassyd of his riall se;
Aboughte whiche shortly to conclude,
Of hevenly angelles was[225] a gret multitude,
To whom was gevyn a precept in scripture,
Wreten in the front of the highe stage,
That thei shuld do there besy cure,

[Footnote 225: wern.]

[Sidenote: Longitudinem dierum replebo eum et ostendam illi salutare
meum.]

To kepe the kyng sure[226] from al damage,
In his lyf here, duryng alle his age,
His highe renone to shyne,[227] and sprede[228] ferre,
Of hise too remes to sese the mortall werre.
And last was wreten in the frontours,
I shall fulfille hym with yoye and abundaunce
And with lengthe of many[229] holsom yers;

[Footnote 226: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 227: _Transposed._]

[Footnote 228: _Transposed._]

[Footnote 229: _Omitted._]

And y shalle shewe hym my helthe[230] with al plesaunce,
And of his lieges feithfull obeisaunce,
Multiplie and encrese his lyne,
And make his noblesse thorugh out[231] the world to shyne;
Love of his peple, favour of alle strangers,
In both hise remes, pees, reste, and unyte,
Be influence of the nyne spers;

[Footnote 230: helpe.]

[Footnote 231: _Omitted._]

Longe to contynue in his riall se,
Grace to cherisshe the Mair and the Citee,
Longe in his mynde to be conceyved,
With how good will[232] that day he was resceyvyd.
Comynge to Poules, there he light a down,
Entred the chirche ful demure of chere,
And there to mete hym with processione,

[Footnote 232: Their good will &c.]

Was the archebisshope and the chaunceler,
Lincolne, and Bathe, of hol hert and entier,
Salesbury, Norwych and Ely,
In pontificall arayed richely;
There was the bysshope of Rouchestre also,
The deen of Poules, the chanons everyich on,
Of dute as they oughte to do,

On processione with the kyng to gone,
And though y can nought reherce them on be one,
Yit dar y seye in[233] there entent,
To done ther dever ful trewly they ment;
Lyk ther estates forthe thei gan precede,
With observaunces longyng for a kyng,
Solempnely gan hym conreye in dede,

[Footnote 233: as in.]

Up in to the chirche, with ful devout syngyng;
And whanne he had mad his offryng,
The Mair, the Citezeins, abood, and lefte hym nought,
Unto Westmynster til thei hadde hym brought;
Where, all the covent in copis richely,
Mette with hym of custome as they ought;
The abbot after moost solempnely,

Among the relikes, the scripture[234] out he[235] sought,
Of seynt Edward, and to the kyng he brought;
Though it were longe, large, and of gret weighte,
Yit on his shuldres the kyng bar it on heighte,
In the mynstre, whiles alle the bellys ronge,
Til that[236] he come to the heighe auter;
And ful devoutly Te Deum there was songe.

[Footnote 234: sceptre.]

[Footnote 235: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 236: _Omitted._]

[Sidenote: Ex duabus arboribus viz s'c'i Edwardi et s'c'i Lodewyci.]

And all[237] the peple, glad of look and cher,
Thankynge[238] God with alle there hertys entier,
To se there kyng with too crownes shyne,
From too trees treuly fet the lyne:
And aftyr this,[239] it ys verrey sothe,
Unto his palys of kyngly apparaile,
With his lordes the kyng anon forth goth,

[Footnote 237: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 238: Thanked.]

[Footnote 239: That this is the, &c.]

To take his reste after his travaile;
And thanne of wysdom, whiche[240] may so moche availe,
The Meir, the Citezeins, which al this[241] thing ded se,
Be hom repaired in to there Citee.
The Shirreves, the Aldermen in fere,
The Satyrday alther next suyng,
There Mair presentyd with all there hertes entere,

[Footnote 240: that.]

[Footnote 241: this dyd se.]

Goodly to be resceyved of the kyng;
And at Westmenster confermed there[242] a thyng,
The Mair and they with ful hol entent,
Unto the kyng a gyfte gan[243] present;
The whiche gifte, thei goodly han disposyd,
Tok an hamper of gold that shene shone;
A thousand pound of gold ther inne closyd:[244]

[Footnote 242: there askyng.]

[Footnote 243: gan to.]

[Footnote 244: yclosyd.]

And there with alle to the kyng they gone,
And fill on knees to fore hym everych on,
Ful humbly the trouthe to devyse,
And to the Kyng the Mair seide in this wyse;

Moost cristen prince and noble kyng, the goode folke of youre moost
notable Citee of London, other wyse callid[245] youre Chambre,
besechyn in there moost lowly wyse they mow be recomaundyd to youre
highnesse, and that it can like unto youre noble grace to resceyve
this litel gyfte gevyne with as good a wille, trouthe,[246] and
lounesse, as ever any gift was gevyn to any erthely prynce.

[Footnote 245: cleped.]

[Footnote 246: of trouthe.]

[Sidenote: V'ba t'nslat'.]

Be glad, O Londone, be glad ant make gret joye,
Citee of Citees, of noblesse procellyng;
In thi begynnyng called Newe Troye,
For worthynesse thank God of all thing,
Whiche hast this day resceyved so the[247] kyng,
With many a signe and many an observaunce,
To encrese thi name be newe remembraunce.

[Footnote 247: thy.]

Swyche joye was[248] in the consistorie,
Mad for the tryumple with al the surpluage,
Whan Cesar Julius com hom with his victorie,
Ne for the conquest of Stepyon[249] in Cartage,
As Londone made in every maner age,
Out of Fraunce at his[250] hom comyng,
In to this Citee of there noble kyng.

[Footnote 248: was nevere.]

[Footnote 249: Syprion.]

[Footnote 250: the.]

Of vij thinges y preyse this Citee;
Of trewe menyng, and feithfull obeisaunce,[251]
Of rightwysnesse, trouthe, and equyte,
Of stabilnesse, ay kept in alegiaunce,
And for of vertu, thou hast suche suffisaunce
In this land here, and othere londes alle,
The kynges Chaumbre, of custom men the calle.

[Footnote 251: observaunce.]

L'ENVOYE.

O noble Meir, be it into[252] youre plesaunce,
And unto[253] alle that duellithe in this Citee,
On my rudenes and on myn ignoraunce,
Of grace and mercy for to have pite,
My symple makyng for to take at gre;
Considere this that in the[254] moost lowly wyse,
My wille were good for to do[255] servyse.

[Footnote 252: unto.]

[Footnote 253: to.]

[Footnote 254: _Omitted._]

[Footnote 255: for to do you servyse.]

Here endith the makyng of the Comynge of the Kyng out of Fraunce to
Londone, Be the monk of Bery.--_Deo gracias._[256]

[Footnote 256: _This paragraph is omitted._]

       *       *       *       *       *

P. 139. A^{o} 36 Hen. VI. "In this yere was a grete watch in London,
and al the gates kepte every nyght, and ij aldermen watchyng: and
withynne a while after the kyng and lordes were accorded, and went a
procession in Paulis."

The temporary reconciliation between the adherents of the King and of
the Duke of York, so briefly alluded to in the text, and which is best
illustrated by the following extract from a contemporary letter,
served, like every other event of his times, for the exercise of
Lydgate's pen; but his description of it in the following ballad is
infinitely more valuable from its historical accuracy, than its
poetical merit. Of this article there are two copies extant; one in
the Cottonian MS. Nero A. VI. and the other in the Cottonian MS.
Vespasianus B. XVI.: the latter copy has been printed, though very
erroneously, and with the orthography modernized, by Mr. Sharon
Turner; but the former has not been before noticed. As they differ in
some places from each other, and are very short, it has been thought
advisable that both transcripts should be inserted.


EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM JOHN BOKKING TO SIR JOHN FASTOLF: DATED ON
THE WEDNESDAY AFTER MID LENT SUNDAY, _i.e._ 15 MARCH, 1457.

[_Paston Letters_, vol. i. p. 154.]

"Lyke it your maistership to wyte, that as for tidings, the Counsell
is, the fornone, at the blake Frires, for the ease of resortyng of the
Lordes that ar withinne the toun; and at afternon at the white Frirers
in Fletstrete, for the Lordis with owte the town; and all things shall
come to a good conclusion with God is grace; for the Kyng shall come
hidre this weke, and the Quene also, as some men sayn, and my Lord Buk
and Stafford with hire, and muche puple. My Lord of Caunterbury takith
grete peyne up on hym daily, and will write unto yow the certeynte of
suche tidings as falle; and shuld have doon or this tyme, saf for that
he wolde knowe an ende of the mattre."


UPON THE RECONCILIATION OF THE LORDS OF THE YORKIST FACTION WITH THE
KYNG AND HIS ADHERENTS.

[_Cottonian MS._ Nero A. VI.]

Whan Charyte ys chosen with stats to stonde,
Stedfast and styll, with oute distaunce,
Then wreth may be exilid out of thys londe,
And God oure gide to have governaunce;
Wysdom and welthe with all plesaunce,
May ryghtfulle reigne, and prosperite,
For love hath underleyde wrethfull vengeaunce;
Reioyse Enlond the lords acordid bee.

Reioyse, and thonke God, and sorw no more,
For now shal encrese thi consolacone;
Oure enemes quake for drede ful sore,
That pees ys made that was divisione,
Whiche ys to them grete confusione,
And to us joy and felicite;
God hold them longe in every seasone,
That Englond may reioyce, the concord and unite.

Now ys sorw with shame fled yn to Fraunce,
As a felon that hath forsworne thys lond;
Love hath put owte malicius governaunce,
In every place both fee and bonde;
In Yorke, in Somersett, as y undyrstonde,
In Warwikke also ys love and charite,
In Salisbury eke, and yn Northumberlond,
That every man may reioyce the concord and unite.

Egremond,[257] and Clyfford,[258] and other forseyd,
Ben sett yn the same opynyone;
In every quartre love is thus leide,
Grace and wisdome hath the dominacione;
Awoke welth, and welk in thys regione,
Rewnde abowte in towne and cite,
And thonke them that brought it to thys conclusion;
Reioyse Englond the concord and unite.

[Footnote 257: Thomas Percy, third son of Henry 3rd earl of
Northumberland. He was created Baron of Egremont 20th December 1449,
and died in 1460.]

[Footnote 258: Thomas Lord Clifford. He succeeded to his honours in
1422, and died in 1454.]

At Poules in London, with grete renowne,
On oure Lady day the pes was wrought;
The kyng, the quene, with lords many one,
To worshyppe that virgine as they oght,
Went a prosession, and sparyd right noght,
In sight of alle the comonialte,
In tokyn that love was in hert and thoght;
Reioice Englond the concord and unite.

There was by twene them lovely countenaunce,
Whyche was grete yoy to alle that there were,
That long tyme hadd ben in variaunce,
As frynds for ever they went yn fere,
They went togedre, and made good chere;
O Fraunce and Bretayne, repent shall ye,
For the bergeyne shalle ye bye fulle dere;
Reioice Englond the concord and unite.

Our sovereyn lord the kyng, God kepe alway,
The quene and the bisshope of Canterbury,[259]
And other that have labored to thys love day,
God preserve them we pray hertly;
And Londone for they fulle diligently,
Kept the pees in trobull and in adversite;
To brynge yn rest they labored ful treuly;
Reioice Englond the peas and unite.

[Footnote 259: Cardinal John Bourchier. He was translated from Ely to
the Archiepiscopal see, on the 22nd April 1454, and died on the 30th
March 1486.]

Off thre things, y preys thys worshypfull Citee:
The ferst, of trewe feythe that they owe to the kyng;
The secounde, of love of eache comonialte;
The thyrde, of good rule evermore kepyng;
The whyche God mayntene ever long durynge,
And save the Maire and all the hole Citee,
And that ys amys brynge to amendyng,
That Englond may reioice the pees and unite.


IBID.

[_From the Cottonian MS._ Vespasianus B. XVI.]

Whan Charite is chosen with states to stonde,
Stedfas and stille without distaunce,
Than wrathe may be exiled out of this londe,
And God oure gide to have the governaunce.

Wisdom and wellthe with alle plesaunce,
May rightful regne and prosperite,
For love hath underlaide wrathful veniaunce;
Reioise Anglond oure lordes acorded to be.

Reiose and thanke God, for evermore;
For now shal encrese thi consolacion,
Oure enemyes quaken and dreden fulsore,
That peas is made ther was division,

Whiche to them is a gret confusion,
And to us ioy and felicite;
God hold them longe in every season:
That Anglond may reioise concord and unite.

Now is sorowe with shame fled in to Fraunce,
As a felon that hath forsworn this londe;
Love hath put out malicious governaunce,
In every place bothe fre and bonde;

In Yorke, in Somerset as I understonde,
In Warrewik also is love and charite,
In Sarisbury eke, and in Northumbrelande;
That every man may reioise concord and unite.

Egremown, and Clifford, with other forsaide,
Ben set in the same opynyon;
In every quarter love is thus laide,
Grace and wisdom hath thus the dominacion:

Awake Welthe, and walke in this region,
Rounde aboute in toun and cite,
And thanke them that brought hit to this concluson;
Reioise Anglond to concorde and unite.

At Poules in Londone, with gret renoun,
On oure Ladi day in Lente this peas was wrought;
The kinge, the quene, with lordes many oone,
To worship that virgine as thei ought,

Wenten a procession, and spariden right nought,
In sighte of alle the comynalte,
In token that love was in herte and thought;
Reiose Anglond in concorde and unite.

Ther was bytwyn them lovely contynaunce,
Whiche was gret ioy to alle that ther were,
That long tyme hadden be in variaunce;
As frendes for ever that had be in fere,

Thei wenten togeder, and made goud chere;
France and Britayn repente shul thei,
For the bargayn shul thei abye ful dere;
Reiose Anglond in concorde and unite.

Oure soveraigne lord kyng God kepe alwey,
The quene, and the archbisshope of Canterbury,
And the bisshop of Wynchestre chanceller of Anglond,
And other that han labured to this love day.

God preserve them we pray hertly,
And London for thei ful diligently,
Kepten the peas in trowbel and adversite,
To bryng in reste thei labured ful truly;
Reioise Anglond in concorde and unite.

Of thre thynges I praise the worshipful Cite;
The first, the true faithe that thei have to the kyng;
The seconde, of love to the comynalte;
The thrid, goud rule for evermore kepynge;

The whiche God maynteyn evermore durynge,
And save the Maier and alle the worthi Cite;
And that is amys God brynge to amendynge,
That Anglond may reioise to concord and unite.

       *       *       *       *       *

Neither of the ensuing articles, the whole of which are the production
of the indefatigable Lydgate, can possibly be assigned to its proper
date; and they are therefore arranged in the following order.

1. _A Balade sent by a Poursyant to the Shirreves of London,
acompanyed with theire Bretherne upon Mayes Daye, at Busshopes Wod, at
an honurable Dyner, ech of them bringginge his Dysshe._

This Ballad, which occurs in Ashmole's Collection of Manuscripts, is
introduced from its having been addressed to the Sheriffs of London;
but it contains little that is worthy of attention.

2. _London Lickpenny._

Of the numerous Ballads composed by 'The Monk of Bury,' this is
perhaps the most curious and the best known; and, from its presenting
a great deal of information relative to the Metropolis in the
fifteenth century, it is of considerable interest. Two copies exist in
MS. in the British Museum; one in the Harleian MS. 367, which is
printed in Noorthouck's and Dr. Pugh's History of London, as well as
in several other works; the other, in Stow's hand-writing, in the
Harleian MS. 542: and as they differ very materially from each other,
a copy of each is inserted. To this Ballad, it has been thought right
to add another, by the same writer, which has never been before
printed, on a very similar subject; namely,

3. _Upon the Emptiness of his Purse,--_

In which he treats this, perhaps the greatest of all human
misfortunes, since it prevents the alleviation of almost all others,
with singular address. The subject seems to have been a favourite one
with our early poets; for there is a Ballad with nearly the same title
by Chaucer; and another is printed in 'The Boke of St. Albans.'

4. _On Forked Head Dresses._

The head-dresses of females in the reign of Henry the Sixth closely
resembled the _cauchoises_ still worn by those of Normandy; and which
excited the displeasure of Dan John in so great a degree as to have
induced him to invoke the aid of his Muse in effecting their
abolition. It seems no subject escaped that eternal scribbler's
attention; and if his abilities had equalled his disposition, he would
probably have become the Juvenal of his age. Upon this occasion,
however, he appears to have soared on rather a higher wing than usual;
and the moral of his lay is the truism which has since been so
beautifully expressed, that loveliness

     "Is when unadorn'd, adorn'd the most."

5. _On Fraudulent Millers and Bakers._

This short Ballad would appear, from the following passage in Fabian's
Chronicle, to have been written in the 15th of Edw. IV. A^{o} 1475, if
it were not, that though the date of Lydgate's death has never been
precisely ascertained, yet it is scarcely possible he could have lived
to that year.

"This yere this mayer [Robert Bassett] dyd sharpe correccion upon
bakers, for makynge of lyght brede; in so moche thatt he sett dyverse
upon the pillory," &c.

A similar circumstance might however have occurred some years before,
notwithstanding that it is not noticed by the writers of the period.


A BALADE MADE BY LYDEGATE, SENT BY A POURSYANT TO THE SHIRREVES OF
LONDON, ACOMPANYED WITH THEIRE BRETHERNE UPON MAYES DAYE, AT BUSSHOPES
WOD, AT AN HONURABLE DYNER, ECHE OF THEM BRINGGINGE HIS DYSSHE.

[_Ashmole's MSS. No._ 6943. _Vol._ 59. 2.]

Mighty Flourra, goddes of freshe floures,
Whiche clothed hast the soyle in lousty grene;
Made buddes springe with his swete showres,
By influence of the sonnes so sheene,
To do plesaunce of entent ful clene,
Unto the states whiche that now sitte here;
Hath veere doune sent hir owen doughter dere,
Making the vertue that dured in the roote,
Called of clerkes, the vertue vegytable,
For to trascend moste holsome and moste sweete,
Into the crope this saysoun so greable.
The bawmy lykour is so comendable,
That it rejoythe with the fresshe moysture,
Man, beeste, and foole, and every creature,
Whiche hathe repressed, swaged, and bore doune,
The grevous constreinte of the frostes heere;
And caused foolis for joye of this saysonne,
To cheese their mates, thane by natures loore,
With al gladnesse theire courage to restore,
Sitting on bowes fresshly nowe to synge,
Veere for to save at his home comynge;
Ful pleinly meninge in theire ermonye,
Wynter is goone, whiche did hem gret peyne;
And with theire sweete sugre melodye,
Thanking Nature theire goddesse sovereyne,
That they nowe have no mater to compleyne,
Hem for to proygne every morowneynge,
With lousty gladnesse at Phebus uprysinge;
And to declare ye hys magnifysence,
Howe vere inbringethe al felicytee,
After wynter's mighty prevolence
Avoydinge stormys of al adversytee.
For shee hathe brought al prosperitee
To alle the states of this regyoun,
At his comynge to fore youre hye renoun,
To the mighty prynces, the palme of theire victorie;
And til knighthode nowe, she dothe presente
Noblesse in armes, laude, honnour, and glorie;
Pees to the people, in al hir best entente,
With grace and mercy fully to consente,
That provydence of hys discressioun,
Avoyde discorde and al derysyoun.
Wynter shal passe of hevynesse and trouble;
Flowres shal springe of perfite charite;
In hertes there shal be no meninge double;
Buddes shal of trouthe and unytee;
Plenty for to exyle duplicytee;
Lordes to regne in theire noble puissance;
The people obeye with feythful obeyssaunce;
Of alle estates there shal bee oone ymage;
And princes first shal ocupye the hede;
And prudent juges to correcte outrages,
Shal trespassours consteynen under drede,
That innosentes in theire lowlyhede,
As truwe comunes may bee theire socour,
Truwly contune in theire faithful labour;
And by the grace of oure lorde Jhesu,
That holly chirche may have parseveraunce,
Bee faythfull founde in al pertinaunce,
Mayre, provost, shirreff, eche in his substaunce,
And aldremen, whiche have the governaunce
Over the people, by vertue may abyde,
That noone oppression bee done to the pourayle.
Thus as the people of prudent pollycye,
Prynces of the right shal governe;
The chirche preye; the juges justefye;
And knighthode, manly, and prudently discerne,
Til light of trouthe so clerely the lanterne,
That rightewysnesse throughe this regyoune,
Represse the darknesse of al extorcyoune.
Thes be the tythinges wheeche that wee have brought:
Troubles exylinge of wynters rude derknesse;
Wherfore rejoye yowe in hert, wille, and thought;
Somer shal folowe to yowe, of al gladnesse;
And sithen she is mynistre of lustynesse,
Let her be welcome to yowe at hir comyng;
Sith she to yowe hathe brought so glad tythinge,
The noble princesse of moste magnifisence,
Qweene of al joye, of gladde suffisaunce,
May I be nowe comen to youre hye excellence,
Presenting yowe prosperous plesaunce,
Of al welfare moste foulsome haboundaunce;
As shee that hathe under hir demayne,
Of floures fresshe, moste holsome, and sovereraine.

L'ENVOYE TO ALLE THE STATES PRESENT.

This Princesse hathe by favour of nature,
Repared ageine that wynter hathe defade,
And foolis loustely reviv----
Theire lusty notes, and theire ermenye glade;
And under braunches, under plesant shade,
Rejoyssing theire with many swete odours,
And Zepherus with many fresshe odours,
Copirted fayre, with motleye whyte and rede,
All hilles, pleynes, and lusty bankes grene,
And made hir bawme to fleete in every mede;
And fury Tytane shewe oute heer tresses sheene,
And upon busshes, and hawthornes kene,
The nightingale with plesant ermonye,
Colde wynter stormes nowe she dothe defye.
On Parnoso, the lusty Muses nyene,
Citheera with hir sone nowe dwellis,
This sayson singe, and theire notes tuwyne,
Of poetrye, besyde the cristal wellis,
Calyope the dytes of hem tellis;
And Orpheus with hees stringes sharpe,
Syngethe a roundell with his temperd herpe.
Wherfore to alle estates here present,
This plesant tyme, moste of lustynesse,
May, is nowe comen to fore yowe of entent,
To bringe yowe alle to joye and fresshnesse,
Prosparitee, welfare, and al gladnesse;
And al that may youre hyenesse qweerne and pleese,
In any parte or doone youre hertes eese.


LONDON LICPENYE.

[_From the Copy in the Autograph of John Stow, in the Harleian MS._
542, f. 102.]

In London ther I was lent,
I saw myselfe where trouthe shuld be ateynte;
Fast to Westminstar ward I went,
To a man of lawe to make my complaynt;
I sayd for Maris love, that holy seynt,
Have pity on the powre that would procede;
I would gyve sylvar, but my purs is faynt,
For lacke of money I may not spede.

As I thrast thrughe out the thronge,
Among them all my hode was gonn;
Netheles I let not longe,
To Kyngs benche tyll I come;
Byfore a juge I knelyd anon,
I prayd hym for Gods sake he would take hede;
Full rewfully to hym I gan make my mone,
For lacke of money I may not spede.

Benethe hym set clerks a great rowt,
Fast they writen by one assent;
There stode up one and cryed round about,
Richard, Robert, and one of Kent:
I wist not wele what he ment,
He cried so thike there indede,
There were stronge theves shamed and shent,
But they that laked money mowght not spede.

Unto the Comon place y yowde thoo,
Where sat one with a sylker houde;
I dyd hym reverence as me ought to do;
I tolde hym my case as well as I coude,
And sayd all my goods by nowrd and by sowde,
I am defrawdyd with great falshed;
He would not geve me a momme of his mouthe,
For lake of money I may not spede.

Then I went me unto the Rollis,
Before the clerks of the Chauncerie;
There were many qui tollis,
But I herd no man speke of me;
Before them I knelyd upon my kne,
Shewyd them myne evedence, and they began to reade.
They seyde trewer thinge might there nevar be,
But for lacke of money I may not spede.

In Westminster hall I found one,
Went in a longe gown of ray;
I crowched and kneled before them anone,
For Marys love of helpe I gan them pray;
As he had be wrothe, he voyded away,
Bakward his hand he gan me byd,
I wot not what thow menest gan he say,
Ley downe sylvar, or here thow may not spede.

In all Westminstar hall I could find nevar a one,
That for me would do, thowghe I shuld dye;
Without the dores were Flemings grete woon;
Upon me fast they gan to cry,
And sayd, Mastar, what will ye cepen or by?
Fine felt hatts, spectacles for to rede;
Of this gay gere a great cawse why,
For lake of money I might not spede.

Then to Westminster gate y went,
When the sone was at highe prime;
Cokes to me, they toke good entent,
Called me nere, for to dyne,
And proferyd me good brede, ale, and wyne;
A fayre clothe they began to sprede,
Rybbes of beffe bothe fat and fine;
But for lacke of money I might not spede.

In to London I gan me hy;
Of all the lond it bearethe the prise,
Hot pescods, one gan cry,
Strabery rype, and chery in the ryse;
One bad me come nere and by some spice,
Pepar, and saffron, they gan me bede,
Clove, grayns, and flowre of rise;
For lacke of money I might not spede.

Then into Chepe I gan me drawne,
Where I sawe stond moche people;
One bad me come nere, and by fine cloth of lawne,
Paris thred coton and umple;
I seyd there upon I could no skyle,
I am not wont there to in dede,
One bad me by an hewre my hed to hele;
For lake of money I might not spede.

Then went I forth by London stone,
Thrught out all Canywike strete;
Drapors to me they called anone,
Grete chepe of clothe they gan me hete;
Then come ther one, and cried hot shepes fete;
Risshes faire and grene, anothar began to grede,
Bothe melwell and makarell I gran mete;
But for lacke of money I myght not spede.

Then I hied me into Est Chepe;
One cries ribes of befe, and many a pie;
Pewtar potts they clatteryd or a heape;
Ther was harpe, pipe, and sawtry;
Ye by cokke, nay by cokke, some began to cry;
Some sang of Jenken and Julian, to get themselves mede;
Ful fayne I wold hadd of that mynstralsie,
But for lacke of money I cowld not spede.

Into Cornhill anon I yede,
Where is moche stolne gere amonge;
I saw wher henge myne owne hode,
That I had lost in Westminstar amonge the throng;
Then I beheld it with lokes full longe,
I kenned it as well as I dyd my crede,
To be myne owne hode agayne; me thought it wrong,
But for lacke of money I might not spede.

Then came the Taverner, and toke me by the sleve,
And seyd Ser, a pint of wyn would yow assay?
Syr, qwod I, it may not greve,
For a peny may do no more then it may:
I dranke a pint, and therefore gan pay;
Sore a hungred away I yede,
For well London lykke peny for ones eye,
For lake of money I may not spede.

Then I hyed me to Byllingesgate,
And cried wagge wagge gow hens;
I praye a barge man, for Gods sake,
That they would spare me myn expens;
He sayde, ryse up, man, and get the hens,
What menist thow, I will do on the no almes dede,
Here scapeth no man byneth ij pens,
For lacke of money I myght not spede.

Then I conveyed me into Kent;
For of the law would I medle no more,
By caus no man to me would take entent,
I dight me to the plowe even as I did before.
Thus save London that in Bethelem was bore,
And every trew man of law God graunt hymsels med,
And they that be othar, God theyr state restore;
For he that lacketh money with them he shall not spede.

EXPLICIT LONDON LIKKE PENY.


LONDON LYCKPENY.

A BALLADE COMPYLED BY DAN JOHN LYDGATE MONKE OF BERY, ABOUT ---- YERES
AGOE, AND NOW NEWLY OVERSENE AND AMENDED.

[_Harleian MSS._ 367, f. 126, 127.]

To London once, my stepps I bent,
Where trouth in no wyse should be faynt:
To Westmynster ward I forthwith went,
To a man of law to make complaynt.
I sayd, for Mary's love that holy saynt,
Pity the poore that would proceede;
But for lack of mony I cold not spede.

And as I thrust the prese amonge,
By froward chaunce my hood was gone;
Yet for all that I stayd not longe,
Tyll at the kynge bench I was come.
Before the judge I kneled anon,
And prayd hym for Gods sake to take heede;
But for lack of money I myght not spede.

Beneth them sat clarkes a great rout,
Which fast dyd wryte by one assent;
There stoode up one and cryed about,
Rychard, Robert, and John of Kent;
I wyst not wele what this man ment:
He cryed so thycke there indede,
But he that lackt mony myght not spede.

Unto the common place I yode thoo,
Where sat one with a sylken hoode;
I dyd hym reverence, for I ought to do so,
And told my case as well as I coud,
How my goods were defrauded me by falshood.
I gat not a mum of his mouth for my meed,
And for lack of mony I myght not spede.

Unto the Rolls I gat me from thence,
Before the clarkes of the chauncerye,
Where many I found earnyng of pence,
But none at all once regarded mee:
I gave them my playnt uppon my knee;
They lyked it well when they had it reade,
But lackyng mony I could not be sped.

In Westmynster hall I found out one,
Which went in a long gown of raye;
I crouched and kneled before hym anon:
For Maryes love, of help I hym praye.
I wot not what thou meanest, gan he say;
To get me thence he dyd me bede,
For lack of mony I cold not speed.

Within this hall, neithere ryche nor yett poor,
Wold do for me ought, although I shold dye;
Which seing, I gat me out of the doore,
Where Flemynge began on me for to cry,
Master, what will you copen or by,
Fyne felt hatts, or spectacles to reede?
Lay down your sylver, and here you may spede.

Then to Westmynster gate I presently went,
When the sonn was at hyghe pryme;
Cokes to me, they tooke good entent,
And profered me bread with ale and wyne,
Rybbs of befe both fat and ful fyne;
A fayre cloth they gan for to sprede,
But wantyng mony I might not be speede.

Then unto London I dyd me hye,
Of all the land it beareth the pryse;
Hot pescods one began to crye,
Straberry rype, and cherryes in the ryse:
One bad me come nere, and by some spyce,
Peper, and sayforne, they gan me bede;
But for lacke of money I myght not spede.

Then to the Chepe I began me drawne,
Where mutch people I sawe for to stande;
One ofred me velvet, sylke, and lawne,
An other he taketh me by the haunde,
Here is Parys thred, the fynest in the launde.
I never was used to such thyngs in dede,
And wanting mony I myght not spede.

Then went I forth by London stone,
Throughout all Canwyke streete;
Drapers mutch cloth me offred anone:
Then comes me one, cryd hot shepes feete,
One cryde makerell, ryshes grene, another gan greete,
One bad me by a hood to cover my head;
But fore want of mony I myght not be sped.

Then I hyed me into Estchepe;
One cryes rybbs of befe, and many a pye;
Pewter potts they clattered on a heape,
There was harpe, pype, and mynstrelsye;
Yea by cock, nay by cock, some began crye,
Some songe of Jenken and Julyan for there mede;
But for lack of mony I myght not spede.

Then into Cornhyll anon I yode,
Where was much stolen gere amonge;
I saw where honge myne owne hoode,
That I had lost amonge the thronge;
To by my own hood I thought it wronge,
I knew it well as I dyd my crede;
But for lack of mony I could not spede.

The Taverner took mee by the sleve;
Sir, sayth he, wyll you our wyne assay?
I answerd, that can not mutch me greve,
A peny can do no more than it may:
I dranke a pynt, and for it dyd pay;
Yet sore a hungerd from thence I yede,
And wantyng my mony I cold not spede.

Then hyed I me to Belyngsgate;
And one cryed hoo, go we hence;
I prayd a barge man for Gods sake,
That he wold spare me my expence.
Thou scapst not here, quod he, under ij pence,
I lyst not yet bestow my almes dede:
Thus lacking mony I could not speede.

Then I convayed me into Kent;
For of the law wold I meddle no more,
Because no man to me tooke entent,
I dyght me to do as I dyd before.
Now Jesus that in Bethlem was bore,
Save London, and send trew lawyers there mede,
For who so wants mony with them shall not spede.

EXPLICIT LONDON LYCKPENY.


UPON THE EMPTINESS OF HIS PURSE:

BY JOHN LYDGATE.

[_Harleian MSS._ 2255, _f._ 45^{b}.]

Riht myhty prynce, and it be your wille,
Condescende leiser for to take,
To seen the content of this litil bille,
Which whan I wrot, myn hand I felte quake;
Tokne of mornyng weryd clothys blake,
Cause my purs was falle in gret rerage;
Lynyng outward, his guttys wer out shake,
Oonly for lak of plate, and of coignage.

I souhte leechys for a restoratiff,
In whom I fond no consolacione;
Appotecaryes for a confortatiff;
Dragge nor dya was noon in Bury tone,
Botme of his stomak was tournyd up so done;
A laxatif did hym so gret outrage,
Made hym slendre by a consumpcione,
Oonly for lak of plate, and of coignage.

Ship was ther noon, nor seilis rede of hewe,
The wynd froward to make hem ther to londe;
The flood was passyd, and sodeynly of newe,
A lowh ground ebbe was faste by the stronde;
No maryneer durste take on honde,
To caste an ankir for streihtnesse of passage,
The custom skars, as fow may undirstonde,
Oonly for lak of plate, and of coignage.

Ther was no tokne sent done from the Tour,
As any gossomer the countirpeys was liht,
A fretyng etyk causyd his langour,
By a cotidian which heeld hym day and nyht:
Sol and Luna wer clypsyd of ther liht,
Ther was no cros nor preent of no visage,
His lynyng dirk, ther wer no platys briht,
Oonly for lak, and scarsete of coignage.

Harde to likke hony out of a marbil stoon,
For ther is nouthir licour nor moisture;
An ernest grote, whan it is dronke and goon,
Bargeyn of marchauntys stant in aventure.
My purs and I be callyd to the lure
Off indigence, our stuff leyd in morgage;
But ye, my lord, may al our soor recure,
With a receyt of plate, and of coignage.

Nat sugre plate maad by thappotecarye,
Plate of briht metal yevith a mery sone,
In Boklerys bury is noon such letuary;
Gold is a cordial, gladdest confeccione,
Ageyn etiques of oold consumpcione,
Auru' potabile, for folk ferre ronne in age,
In quynt essence best restauracione,
With silver plate, enprentyd with coignage.

O seely bille! why art thu nat ashamyd,
So malapertly to shewe out thy constreynt;
But povert hath so nyh thy tonne attamyd,
That nichil habet is cause of thy compleynt.
A drye tisyk makith oold men ful feynt;
Reediest weye to renewe ther corage,
Is a fresshe dragge of no spycis meynt,
But of a briht plate, enpreentyd with coignage.

Thu mayst afferme, as for thyn excus,
Thy bareyn soyl is sool and solitarye;
Of cros nor pyl ther is no reclus,
Preent nor impressione in al thy seyntuarye.
To conclude breefly, and nat tarye,
Ther is no noyse herd in thyn hermytage;
God sende soone a gladdere letuarye,
With a cleer sone of plate, and of coignage.

EX^{t}. Q^{d}. LYDGATE.


ON FORKED HEAD DRESSES:

BY JOHN LYDGATE.

[_Harleian MSS._ 2255, f. 6.]

Off God and kynde procedith al bewte:
Crafft may shewe a foreyn apparence,
But nature ay must have the sovereynte:
Thyng countirfet hath noon existence,
Twen gold and gossomer is gret difference;
Trewe metal requerith noon allay,
Unto purpoos by cleer experyence;
Bewte wyl shewe, thouh hornes wer away.

Riche attires of gold, and perre,
Charbonclis, rubies of moost excellence,
Shewe in dirknesse, liht wher so they be,
By ther natural hevenly influence.
Doubletys of glas yeve a gret evidence;
Thyng contirfet wil faylen at assay:
On this mateer concludyng in sentence,
Bewte wyl shewe, thouh hornys wer away.

Aleyn remembryth his compleynt, who lyst see
In his book of famous eloquence;
Clad al in floures and blosmys of a tree,
He sawh Nature in hir moost excellence,
Upon hir hed a keverchef of Valence,
Noon othir richesse of countirfet array;
T'exemplefye by kyndly providence,
Bewte wil shewe, thouh hornys wer away.

Famous poetys of antiquyte,
In Grece and Troye, renoumyd of prudence,
Wroot of queen Helene, and Penelope,
Off Polyceene with hir chaast innocence:
For wyves trewe calle Lucrece to presence,
That they wer fayr, ther can no man sey nay;
Kynde wrouht hem with so gret dilligence,
Ther bewte couthe, hornys wer cast away.

Clerkys recorde by gret auctorite,
Hornys wer yove to beestys for diffence;
A thyng contrary to femynyte,
To be maad sturdy of resistence:
But arche wyves egre in ther violence,
Fers as tygre for to make affray,
They have despyt ageyn conscience,
Lyst nat of pryde, ther hornys cast away.

L'ENVOYE.

Noble Pryncessys, this litel shoort ditee,
Rewdly compiled, lat it be noon offence,
To your womanly merciful pitee,
Thouh it be rad in your audience:
Peysed ech thyng in your iust advertence,
So it be no displesaunce to your pay,
Undir support of your pacience,
Yevyth example, hornys to cast away.

Grettest of vertues is humylite,
As Salomon seith, sone of sapience,
Moost was accepted to the Deite.
Takith heed heer of yeuyth, to this woord credence,
How Maria, whiche hadde a premynence
Above alle women, in Bedleem whan she lay,
At Cristes birthe no cloth of gret dispence,
She weryd a keverche, hornys wer cast away.

Off birthe she was hihest of degre,
To whom alle aungelis did obedience;
Of David is lyne which sprang out of Jesse,
In whom alle vertues by iust convenience,
Maad stable in God, by goostly confidence:
This roose of Jerycho, ther greuh noon suych in May,
Poore in spirit, parfight in pacience,
In whoom alle hornys of pryde wer put away.

Moodir of J'hu, myrour of chastite,
In woord nor thouht that nevir did offence,
Trewe exemplaire of virginite,
Heedspryng and welle of parfit contynence,
Was nevir clerk, by rethoryk nor science
Kowde alle hir vertues reherse to this day;
Noble Pryncessys of meeke benyvolence,
B'example of hir, your hornys cast away.


ON FRAUDULENT MILLERS AND BAKERS.

[_Harleian MSS._ 2255.]

Put out his hed lyst nat for to dare,
But lyk a man upon that tour to abyde,
For cast of eggys wil not conys spare,
Tyl he be quaylled body, bak, and syde;
His heed endooryd, and of verray pryde,
Put out his armys, shewith abrood his face,
The fenestrallys be made for hym so wyde,
Cleymyth to been a capteyn of that place.

The bastyle longith of verray dewe ryght,
To fals bakerys it is trewe herytage;
Severelle to them, this knoweth every wight,
Be kynde assyngned for ther sittyng stage,
Wheer they may freely shewe out ther visage,
Whan they take oonys there possessione,
Owthir in youthe or in myddyl age,
Men doon hem wrong yif they take hym done.

Let mellerys and bakerys gadre hem a gilde,
And alle of assent make a fraternite;
Undir the pillory a litil chapell bylde,
The place amorteyse and purchase liberte,
For alle thoo that of ther noumbre be;
Whatevir it coost afftir that they wende,
They may cleyme be just auctorite,
Upon that bastile to make an ende.

EXP^{t}. Q' LYDGATE.


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON:

PRINTED BY RICHARD TAYLOR.

[Illustration: ALERE FLAMMAM.]










        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRONICLE OF LONDON FROM 1089 TO 1483 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

