





[Illustration: RICHARD ON DRILL. Page 142.]




IN SCHOOL AND OUT;

OR,

THE CONQUEST OF RICHARD GRANT.


A Story for Young People.



BY

OLIVER OPTIC,


AUTHOR OF "THE BOAT CLUB," "ALL ABOARD," "NOW OR NEVER,"
"TRY AGAIN," "POOR AND PROUD," "LITTLE BY LITTLE,"
"RICH AND HUMBLE," "THE RIVERDALE
STORY BOOKS," ETC.



BOSTON:
LEE AND SHEPARD, PUBLISHERS.
NEW YORK:
LEE, SHEPARD AND DILLINGHAM.
1873.

Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1863, by
WILLIAM T. ADAMS,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court
of the District of Massachusetts.

STEREOTYPED AT THE
BOSTON STEREOTYPE FOUNDRY,
19 Spring Lane.




TO

EDWARD JENKINS HOWE

This Book

IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED

BY HIS UNCLE.




THE WOODVILLE STORIES.

IN SIX VOLUMES.

A LIBRARY FOR BOYS AND GIRLS.

BY OLIVER OPTIC.


1. RICH AND HUMBLE.
2. IN SCHOOL AND OUT.
3. WATCH AND WAIT.
4. WORK AND WIN.
5. HOPE AND HAVE.
6. HASTE AND WASTE.




PREFACE.


The second volume of the Woodville Stories contains the experience of
Richard Grant, "in school and out." We are sorry to say that Richard
had become a bad boy, and was in the habit of getting into the most
abominable scrapes, some of which are detailed in the first chapters of
this book. But he is not what is sometimes called a vicious boy, for he
has many good qualities, which redeem him from absolute condemnation.
There is something noble in his character, which is the germ of his
ultimate salvation from the sins which so easily beset him.

Richard, like thousands of others, finds his strongest and most
dangerous foe within his own heart; and the conquest he achieves is not
a triumph of mind over matter, of force over force, but of principle
over passion, of the good angels in the heart over the invading legion
of evil ones.

Richard's experience is full of stirring incidents; and while the
author hopes therein to realize the expectations of his partial young
friends, he begs them to remember that these exciting events are only
the canvas upon which he has endeavored to paint the great change
wrought in the character of the hero. There is a moral in the story,
and though the author has not attempted to "point" it, he hopes his
young readers will feel it, even if they do not see it.

Again it affords me pleasure to acknowledge my indebtedness to my young
friends for the kind reception given to my books. I trust that this,
the twentieth volume of my "Stories for Young People," will not
disappoint their hopes, or fail to improve their minds and hearts.

WILLIAM T. ADAMS.

DORCHESTER,
Oct. 26, 1863.




CONTENTS.


                                                                   PAGE

CHAP. I.
  Richard Grant and Friend get into an awful Scrape.               11

CHAP. II.
  Richard jumps out of the Frying-pan into the Fire.               23

CHAP. III.
  Richard finds that no Chastening seemeth joyous.                 35

CHAP. IV.
  Richard makes a tremendous Sensation at Woodville.               47

CHAP. V.
  Richard is determined to be revenged.                            59

CHAP. VI.
  Richard gives another Illustration of Sleep-walking.             71

CHAP. VII.
  Richard kindles a Fire.                                          83

CHAP. VIII.
  Richard beholds how great a Matter a little Fire kindleth.       96

CHAP. IX.
  Richard goes to the Tunbrook Military Institute.                110

CHAP. X.
  Richard learns the meaning of Right About Face.                 123

CHAP. XI.
  Richard goes through the Drill, and has a set-to in the Grove.  136

CHAP. XII.
  Richard does a "Big Thing" and takes the Consequences.           151

CHAP. XIII.
  Richard listens to a Homily on Fighting, and spends the Night in
  the Guard House.                                                166

CHAP. XIV.
  Richard does Guard Duty, and is captured by an Enemy.           180

CHAP. XV.
  Richard finds himself in the Hands of the Regulators.           194

CHAP. XVI.
  Richard becomes First Sergeant of Company D.                    208

CHAP. XVII.
  Richard gives the Tunbrookers a Lesson in Boating.              220

CHAP. XVIII.
  Richard wins another Race, and Tunbrook is mutinous.            235

CHAP. XIX.
  Richard is determined, and some Allusion is made to
  "Watermelons."                                                  247

CHAP. XX.
  Richard Visits Green Island, and the Regulators consider
  their Plans.                                                    260

CHAP. XXI.
  Richard annihilates the Regulators, and the Story is concluded. 273




IN SCHOOL AND OUT;

OR,

THE CONQUEST OF RICHARD GRANT.




CHAPTER I.

RICHARD GRANT AND FRIEND GET INTO AN AWFUL SCRAPE.


"Now, steady as she is," said Sandy Brimblecom, who lay upon the
half-deck of the Greyhound, endeavoring to peer through the darkness of
a cloudy night, which had settled deep and dense upon the Hudson, and
obscured every object on the shore. "Steady as she is, Dick, and we
shall go in all right."

"Ay, ay; steady it is," replied Richard Grant, who was at the helm.

"Port a little! Port a little!" added Sandy, a few moments after, as he
discovered the entrance of a little inlet, which was the destination of
the Greyhound.

"Shut up your head, Sandy!" replied Richard, in a low but energetic
tone. "You might as well publish our plan in the newspaper as speak as
loud as that."

"Port a little more," said the lookout forward.

"What's the use of hallooing port?" answered Richard, impatiently.
"Don't you see the mainsail shakes now?"

"You will be on the rocks in half a minute more."

"Let her go about, then, and we will get a little farther to windward
before we try to run in."

The Greyhound came over on the other tack, and stood away from the
shore a considerable distance. The wind was very light, and the current
was against them; so the progress of the boat was necessarily very
slow.

"Now, Sandy Brimblecom," said Richard, when the boat had made a third
of the distance to the opposite shore, "we might as well go back to
Woodville, and go to bed, as to attempt to carry this thing through, if
you are going to bellow and yell like a mad bull."

"I didn't think I spoke very loud," replied Sandy.

"Didn't think so!" sneered Richard. "Any one might have heard you clear
across the river."

"O, no, Dick; not so bad as that."

"You spoke too loud, at any rate, and you might as well go up and tell
'Old Batterbones' what we are about as talk half so loud as you did."

"Come, Dick, you have said enough," replied Sandy, who did not relish
all the reflections that were cast upon his conduct.

"You are as stupid as an owl; I thought you had some common sense."

"That'll do, Dick; I don't want any more of that kind of blarney; and
if you don't shut up, you or I will get a black eye."

Richard did not seem to have much doubt which of them would obtain this
ornamental tinting of the physiognomy, for he immediately changed his
tone, and did not venture to apply any more unpleasant epithets to his
companion. Sandy had obtained some reputation as a fighting character,
and was virtually the champion of the ring among the boys in the
vicinity of Whitestone.

"Now be more careful, this time, Sandy," said Richard, as he put the
boat about upon the other tack.

"Don't give me any more lip, Dick, and I will do any thing you want,"
replied Sandy, mollified by the altered tones of his friend.

"Don't get mad; we have no time to quarrel, if we mean to put this
thing through to-night."

"I am ready to put it through, but I have no notion of being treated
like a slave or a fool," said Sandy, as he lay down upon the half-deck,
and began to gaze into the gloom ahead of the boat. "Luff a little," he
added, as he discovered the dim outline of the shore.

"Luff, it is."

This time, both boys spoke in a low tone, and the want of harmony which
a few moments before had threatened to break up the enterprise, and end
in a game of rough and tumble, was removed. The Greyhound, under the
skilful management of Richard,--for there was not a better sailor of
his years on the Hudson,--was thrown into the inlet without touching
the rocks which lay at the entrance.

Sandy, with the painter in his hand, jumped ashore, and made fast to a
small tree on the bank. Neither of the boys spoke a loud word, and
Richard carefully brailed up the sails, so that their flapping should
not attract the attention of any person who might be in the vicinity.

"Now, Dick, if you will follow me, I will lead you up to Old
Batterbones' garden," whispered Sandy, when the sail boat had been
properly secured.

"I will follow you. Have you got the bag?"

"Yes--all right."

Richard followed his companion up the steep bank of the river, across a
field, till they came to a fence, where they paused to reconnoitre.

"Now be careful, Sandy," whispered Richard, nervously, "for I wouldn't
be caught in this scrape for the best hundred dollars that ever was."

"I don't want to be caught any more than you do," replied Sandy.

"Well, it won't make so much difference with you as it will with me."

"Won't it! Don't you think my neck is worth as much to me as yours is
to you?"

"I don't mean that, of course. Your father is a carpenter, and people
won't think half so much of it if you are caught, as they would in my
case."

"My father never was in the Tombs if he is a carpenter," growled Sandy.

"That's mean," said Richard. "You know he was put there for nothing at
all."

"It isn't half so mean as what you said. If you think you are so much
better than I am, what did you ask me to come with you for?"

"I don't think I am any better than you are."

"Yes, you do; and you may go ahead with the game; I won't go any
farther."

"Don't back out, Sandy. Have you got scared?"

"I'm not scared; you are too big for your boots."

"No, no, Sandy, I didn't mean any thing of the sort."

"Didn't you say it wouldn't make as much difference with me as with
you, if we got caught?"

"I only meant that people would talk more about me than they would
about you."

"Perhaps they would, and perhaps they wouldn't. In my opinion, I'm as
good as you are, any day."

"Of course you are; I never doubted it. Come, Sandy, we've run together
too long to fall out now."

"I don't want to fall out, or back out; but I don't want to be snubbed,
every ten minutes, about my father's being a carpenter."

"I won't say another word, Sandy. I didn't mean any thing."

"All right, my boy. I don't live in a big house, and my father isn't
rich; but I'm just as good as any other fellow, for all that. If you
didn't mean any thing, I'm satisfied."

"If I thought you were not as good as I am, of course I shouldn't go
with you."

This conversation was carried on in a very low tone, while the boys
were seated by the fence. When Sandy's injured honor was healed, and
the son of the rich broker of Woodville had acknowledged that the other
was his equal, they were again ready to proceed with the business of
the enterprise. Richard was not content with the homage which his
companions could render without any sacrifice of self-respect, but he
exacted the right not only to command them, but also to be indulged in
the use of opprobrious epithets.

Sandy, as the "bully" of his circle, could not quietly submit to the
domineering style of the rich man's son. He was willing, for the sake
of sharing in the "loaves and fishes," which Richard had to distribute,
to compromise far enough to be ordered in a gentlemanly way; but he
would not tolerate any invidious comparisons. Richard had a fine boat,
and Sandy was very fond of sailing, which made him sacrifice some
portion of his dignity as the champion of the ring. Richard was usually
well supplied with money, which was a scarce article with the son of
the journeyman carpenter, and boys bow down to the Mammon of this
world, as well as men.

Richard patronized Sandy because his hard fist and abundant muscle
rendered him a powerful and influential person. It was easier to buy
the champion than it was to whip him, and the broker's son had
conquered the bully by paying for the oysters at Bob Bleeker's saloon
in Whitestone, and by permitting him to use the Greyhound when he
wished. Richard had a great respect for muscle. If Sandy Brimblecom's
father had chosen to pursue his peaceful avocation in any other
locality than Whitestone, Richard Grant might have been the champion of
the "P.R." The advent of Sandy had produced a fight, in which Richard,
though he behaved to the satisfaction of all his friends and
supporters, was severely punished. His friends called it a drawn
battle; but Richard did not think it advisable to have the question
definitely settled, and Sandy was acknowledged as the champion.

Richard respected the boy he could not whip, and they had become
friends, or, at least, associates. It is scarcely necessary to inform
the intelligent young readers of this book, that the moral standard of
both boys was very low; for those who can fight simply to find out
which is "the better man," have a very inadequate conception of what
constitutes true dignity and nobility of character. "Muscle" and
"backbone"--fighting ability and courage--in a good cause, are to be
respected, and men and boys will always pay them due homage; but
fighting for its own sake is mean, low-lived business--the most vicious
of vices.

Sandy was satisfied with the explanation of his patron, and rising from
his seat under the fence, he looked over into the garden, and listened
for any sounds which might indicate an obstacle in the way of the
enterprise; but not a sound could be heard except the chirping of the
crickets and the piping of the frogs. With a great deal of care, he
climbed to the top of the fence, and then listened again.

"Does he keep a dog?" whispered Richard.

"I don't know; I don't care, either," replied Sandy, as he dropped from
the fence into the garden.

Richard climbed over with the same caution which his companion had
used, and after following him for some distance, reached a patch of
watermelons, which appeared to be the destination of this night
expedition.

"Get down on the ground!" whispered Sandy, who had already prostrated
himself. "You will blow the whole thing if you stand up there."

"Open the bag, and let's fill it up quick!" replied Richard, as he
picked a large melon from the vines, and handed it to the other.

"What's the use of picking such a melon in that?" snarled Sandy. "It
isn't ripe. Can't you tell the ripe ones by the feeling?"

"No; I can't."

"Stick your thumb nail into them. Here, you take the bag, and I will
pick them. We don't want to lug off melons that are good for nothing."

Richard took the bag, and placed the fruit in it as fast as Sandy
gathered it. In a few moments the bag was full, and the young marauders
commenced their retreat with all the haste which a proper caution would
permit. The bag was large and heavy, and it required their united
strength to carry it.

The garden proved to be something like an eel trap--it was easy enough
to get into it, but very difficult to get out. Near the melon patch
there was a piece of corn, by the side of which lay their path out of
the enclosure. They had gone but a short distance when they heard a
rustling in the corn behind them, and before they could make out the
cause of the noise, a strong hand grasped the collar of each of them.

"We've caught you, my lads!" exclaimed one of the men, who had seized
Richard.

It was an awful scrape: so thought the broker's son; and Sandy,
notwithstanding the difference in their social standing, was of the
same opinion.




CHAPTER II.

RICHARD JUMPS OUT OF THE FRYING-PAN INTO THE FIRE.


Richard Grant was the son of a rich man, but he was neither any better
nor any worse for this circumstance. He had been in a great many sad
scrapes before the one in which the reader now finds him. It was not
the first time he had taken that which did not belong to him.

In his father's garden there was an abundance of watermelons, and he
had always been plentifully supplied with all the fruits in their
season. He had, therefore, no excuse for stealing melons. There could
be no excuse, under any circumstances, for stealing. He did not need
them; he did not even want them.

But Richard was fond of exciting adventures, and it was simply the love
of fun which had prompted him to visit the garden of Mr. Batterman. I
hope none of my young friends will think this even palliated his
offence. If he did not have the motive which actuates the common thief,
he was certainly more to blame than if he had needed or wanted the
product of his theft. Stealing for fun cannot be any better than
stealing from the love of gain, or to provide for one's necessities.

Richard Grant is the hero of this volume; but I shall not wink at any
of his vices or inconsistencies on this account. That he may not be
utterly despised, however, I may say of him that he had a great many
redeeming qualities. He was generous to a fault, and his impulses were
generally worthy and noble. He was ready to give to the needy, and to
fight for the oppressed. He was kind-hearted, and nothing but the love
of sport could induce him to violate the rights, or injure the
feelings, of others. He lived upon excitement, and was not always very
choice of the means which he used to procure it.

Richard's father had not been able to bestow that care upon his moral
education which his temperament required. He needed discipline, and the
want of it was seen in his daily life. Mr. Grant was conscious of the
boy's needs, and he frequently talked to him about his vicious course;
but words did not supply the want; he required a more active treatment.

Sandy Brimblecom was as little disturbed by his conscience as his more
wealthy companion. As long as he could stand upon an equality with an
heir of Woodville, he was satisfied to let all moral questions take
care of themselves. The two boys who sailed in the Greyhound on the
eventful night of their introduction to the reader, were well mated in
every respect. Either was ready to follow the lead of the other,
without asking whether he was doing right or wrong. If there was any
fun to be had out of the enterprise, both were ready to engage in it.

They had got into a bad scrape this time, for Mr. Batterman had the
reputation of being a very hard man. He had suffered a great deal from
the depredations of fruit thieves. He carried on a large business in
raising fruit and vegetables for the New York market. It was not
pastime to him, but bread and butter--the means by which he supported
his family and accumulated his property. Those who stole fruit from his
gardens robbed him of so much of his income; and he was not in the
humor to submit to these exactions.

In several instances he had taken these petty marauders before the
courts, and caused them to be fined; but as this course did not remove
the evil, he had taken the law in his own hands, and severely punished
some of the juvenile offenders. For this reason, among the boys he was
called "Old Batterbones," which was only a slight corruption of his
real name.

Of course Richard and Sandy had no idea of being caught when they
embarked in this plundering expedition. They had taken extraordinary
precautions to prevent such a catastrophe; but the farmer was
constantly on the watch, and they had fallen into the trap which he had
set not specially for them, but for any who might invade his grounds
with malicious intent.

[Illustration: RICHARD IN TROUBLE. Page 27.]

The person who held Richard by the collar, and whose finger nails had
already left their marks upon his neck, was no less a person than "Old
Batterbones" himself; and from the manner in which he shook his
prisoner, he seemed determined to make good his title to the sobriquet
the boys had given him. The person who held Sandy in his grasp was the
farmer's foreman, who fully sympathized with his employer in his views
of discipline.

Richard struggled, and Sandy struggled; but they might as well have
attempted to escape from the grip of an iron vise. The farmer and his
man held them fast; and the more their prisoners squirmed, the more
they shook them, and the more they seemed to enjoy the satisfaction of
shaking and choking them.

"We've caught you, my lads," said Mr. Batterman several times.

"Let go of me," growled Richard, his anger fully aroused by the rough
treatment he was receiving.

"I'll let go, you young villain, when I've done with you, but not
before. I'll teach you to steal my melons; and then you can go home and
tell your father how it is done," replied the farmer, as he twisted the
cravat of the poor boy till he could hardly breathe.

Sandy, finding that any violent resistance was hopeless, submitted to
his fate with the best grace he could command; but he only waited his
chance for something to turn up that would afford him an opportunity to
escape. He intended to use his wits, rather than his muscle, on this
occasion; and his prudence saved him from some portion of the hard
usage that was bestowed upon his companion in misery.

"Keep cool, Dick," said he, in a low tone, when he saw that his friend
was wasting his strength and adding to his discomfort by useless
resistance to the fiat of destiny.

Richard profited by this hint; and when he became calm and reasonable,
the farmer relaxed his grasp, and permitted him to breathe with more
freedom.

"Who are they, Bates?" asked the farmer of his foreman.

"I don't know them; it is so dark I can't make them out," replied
Bates.

"We'll take them up to the barn, and see what they look like."

"They have been here before, I think," added the foreman. "I am pretty
sure I saw them the other night."

"No, you didn't," said Richard, testily. "I never was here before."

"Perhaps you never was, my boys; but when chaps like you go far enough
to steal, you don't stand about a lie or two to cover it up. Now, boys,
you may take up that bag, and carry it to the barn."

"I won't carry it," said Richard, promptly.

"Won't you?" And the farmer again applied the twisting process to his
cravat, till the boy's strength was almost gone from the choking
sensation.

"Let go of me! You'll choke me to death!" gasped Richard, who had never
before been so roughly handled.

"Will you carry the bag up to the barn, then?" demanded Mr. Batterman,
as he eased off the pressure upon the prisoner's throat.

"No, I won't!" replied Richard.

"Now, I think you will," said the farmer, as he resumed the torture.

"Come, Dick, we may as well do it. It is no use to kick; we are in for
it, and you had better make the best of it," interposed Sandy, who was
disposed to get off as cheaply as he could.

"I won't touch the bag! I'll die first!" gasped Richard, whose rage had
now reached the boiling point, and there was no more reason in him than
in a mad dog.

"He's a hard one," suggested Bates.

"But he shall come to it, or I'll break every bone in his body,"
answered the farmer.

Richard, insane with passion, and choking with rage as well as from the
discipline of Mr. Batterman, commenced a tremendous struggle for
freedom and self-preservation. He sprang towards his captor in an
ineffectual attempt to hit him, or to scratch out his eyes with his
finger nails. Failing in his efforts in this direction, he began to use
his heels as vigorously as a three-year old colt, and succeeded in
planting two or three hard kicks upon the shins of the farmer.

Mr. Batterman was a large and powerful man, and the efforts of Richard
were as puny as those of a lamb in the fangs of the lion. He foamed and
struggled till his strength was exhausted, and his conqueror permitted
him to drop upon the ground.

"You've killed him," said Sandy, very much alarmed at the apparent fate
of his friend.

"If I have, that's his business, not mine," answered the farmer,
without betraying any remorse at what he had done.

But Richard was not killed, or even very badly injured. The choking had
deprived him of all his strength; but a few minutes' respite from
persecution restored him in a great measure, and he attempted to get
up, when he was promptly seized by the farmer again.

"Will you carry the bag up to the barn, or will you try some more of
the same sort?" asked Mr. Batterman, in a tone which fully indicated
his intention to resume his harsh treatment.

"I can't carry it," replied Richard, in an altered tone, which was, at
least, suggestive of a "caving in" of his obdurate will.

"You carried it very well before you were caught, and perhaps you can
again," sneered the farmer.

"Come, Dick, take hold of the bag," said Sandy. "It's no use."

"I wasn't brought up to do that kind of work," replied Richard, whose
pride, quite as much as his self-will, prompted him to refuse to do the
degrading office.

"Take your choice, and be quick," said Mr. Batterman, preparing to
apply his disciplinary powers again. "Take hold of the bag at once, or
I'll shake the life out of you."

Richard could not stand another dose of the farmer's exhausting
medicine, and he sullenly seized the bag, while Sandy took hold of the
other side. Bates and the farmer kept close to them, so that there was
no chance to break away. After changing hands several times, they
reached the barn, and placed the melons in the position designated by
their tormentors.

"Now, who are you?" asked the farmer, when they had disposed of the
bag.

"None of your business," answered Richard, in a low, sullen tone.

"You haven't got enough of it yet. Bates, bring the lantern, and fetch
a cowhide with you, while you are about it."

Richard did not like the sound of this last order. It was ominous of a
painful and degrading operation, a process of discipline to which he
had never before been subjected. The idea of being whipped was almost
as terrible as that of being shot through the head or heart.

"Will you tell me your name, young man?" demanded the farmer, when the
foreman had gone. "Let me inform you in the beginning, that I am in no
humor to be trifled with. You can answer me or not, just as you think
best."

"I would rather not tell my name," replied Richard, in a subdued tone.

The son of the rich broker of Woodville had conscientious scruples on
this point; for though he did not scruple to commit the theft, he was
fully alive to the disgrace of being exposed. The good name, the
worldly reputation of his family, seemed to be of more value than a
conscience void of offence before Him who readeth all hearts. To speak
of the sin of the act was but to utter trite and commonplace words,
which could be found in any cheap catechism; but to mention the
disgrace attending the exposure of that sin, was to touch him where he
was keenly sensitive.

"You must tell me your name," said Mr. Batterman, firmly. "What is your
name?" he added, turning to Sandy, whom he now held with one hand.

"Sanderson Brimblecom," answered he, for he had no family reputation to
guard.

"Now, yours?" said he to Richard.

The broker's son made no reply. He had now too much respect for Mr.
Batterman to irritate him with words, and too much respect for the name
he bore to connect it with the theft he had committed. He waited in
silence till Bates came with the lantern.




CHAPTER III.

RICHARD FINDS THAT NO CHASTENING SEEMETH TO BE JOYOUS.


"Tell him who you are, Dick," said Sandy, when Bates appeared with the
lantern. "What's the use of trying to cover up your name, when the
light will blow the whole thing?"

"Well, Dick," added the farmer, adopting the name Sandy had used, "if
you don't tell me who you are, I shall see what virtue there is in that
cowhide."

"My name is Richard Grant," replied the broker's son, sullenly, and
with the feeling that he had sacrificed all his manhood by giving up
the point.

"Ah, then you are the son of Mr. Grant, of Woodville!" sneered Mr.
Batterman. "I don't wonder you didn't want to tell your name, for
stealing melons isn't a very respectable business."

"I am willing to pay for the melons, and let the matter drop where it
is," said Richard, who was so far humbled as to be willing to
compromise with the owner of the stolen fruit.

"I am not exactly willing to let the matter drop where it is. You are
the son of a rich and respectable man, and you ought to know better
than to steal; and I am going to give you a lesson which I hope you
will profit by."

"I will pay double price for all the melons, if you will let me go."

"I wouldn't let you go if you would pay ten times the value of the
melons. I want to teach you better than to steal; and when I've done
with you, I don't believe you will want to steal any more of my fruit."

"What are you going to do?" demanded Richard, very much disturbed by
the decided tones of the farmer.

"I'm going to give you a sound thrashing."

"No, you are not," said Richard, who would rather have died on the spot
than submit to the humiliation of a flogging.

"You will see whether I am or not. It's no kind of use for me to take a
rich man's son like you before the court. Your father would pay your
fine, and you would laugh in your sleeve, and call it a good joke."

"You have no right to flog me," protested Richard.

"Perhaps I haven't; but I'm going to do it, if I have to suffer myself
for it. I am going to have the satisfaction of curing you of stealing
my melons."

Bates had taken hold of Sandy again, and Mr. Batterman prepared to make
good his promise. By the light of the lantern Richard saw the hard face
of the farmer. It was stern and forbidding, and he felt that he meant
all he had said. How could the son of the owner of Woodville submit to
the disgrace of being whipped? At home he was treated with respect and
consideration. The servants took off their hats to him. His father, in
his sternest moments, had never hinted such a thing as corporal
punishment.

It seemed absolutely impossible for him to submit to the farmer's
terrible remedy, but there was no way to avoid it. He had offered to
compromise, but nothing would satisfy his relentless captor. The
punishment was to be inflicted in the spirit of revenge rather than
from a sense of duty, which made it all the more intolerable to think
of. He was not to be whipped for his own or the public good, but to
satisfy the malice and revenge of "Old Batterbones."

He decided not to submit to the infliction; but he might as well have
decided not to let the sun rise on the following morning, or to stop
the Hudson in its majestic flow to the sea. His own experience, so
dearly bought in the garden, had shown him that he was utterly
incapable of any successful resistance. He looked around him for the
means of escape, and racked his brain for some expedient that would
enable him to checkmate his unwieldy opponent; but he looked in vain,
and thought in vain. There was nothing upon which to hang even the
faintest hope of resistance or escape.

The farmer held him by the collar, and the terrible instrument of
torture was raised over his head. It fell, and Richard writhed with the
pain, not of the body alone, for the blow seemed to penetrate to his
soul. It lacerated his pride, his self-respect, more than it did his
legs. He trembled like an aspen leaf, as much from intense emotion as
from the smart of the stroke.

Richard was no coward, but he would have begged off, if he could have
done so with any prospect of success; but he might as well have pleaded
with the ocean to hold back its destructive waves, as with Mr.
Batterman to stay his hand, before his revenge was satisfied. Another
and another blow fell. The pain was so severe that the culprit could
not endure it, and the quick-falling strokes soon kindled a fire in his
soul which neither prudence nor policy could check. It burst out in a
raging flame of passion, which caused him to roar like a mad bull, and
to kick, bite, and struggle like an imprisoned tiger.

All this resistance only added to the spite of his persecutor and he
laid on the blows till his own strength failed him. In vain Sandy
remonstrated with Richard upon the folly of his course, and begged him
to keep cool, as though a severe flogging was one of the light
afflictions of this world, that may be endured with patience by a
philosophical temperament.

"Old Batterbones" had exhausted himself in the struggle. His "wind" was
gone; and he gave up because he could do no more, rather than because
he was satisfied with the extent of the punishment.

"There, Mr. Richard Grant, of Woodville, when you want to steal any
more melons of mine, think of that," said the farmer, as he cast the
culprit from him.

"You'll have to pay for this," groaned Richard, who felt as though he
had endured all the tortures of the Inquisition.

"Perhaps I shall," puffed Mr. Batterman; "but if you have got enough to
make you a wiser and a better boy, I shall be perfectly satisfied."

"I'll be revenged on you for this, if it costs me my life," exclaimed
Richard, whose soul smarted even more than his body.

"Shut up, now!" said the farmer, angrily, "or I'll give you some more."

Richard did shut up, for the incident had developed a grain of
discretion in his composition, if nothing better--though nothing better
could be expected from a flogging inflicted in the spirit of malice.

"Now, my boy," said the farmer, turning to Sandy, when he had in some
measure recovered his breath, "we will see what we can do for you. You
are not a fool like the other fellow, and your wisdom will serve you a
good turn."

Sandy made no remark in reply to this speech of Mr. Batterman. He had
made up his mind to submit with all the philosophy he could bring to
his aid. He had been flogged before. It was not a new institution to
him, as it had been to his companion in iniquity. He looked upon a
flogging as one of the necessary evils to which a fast boy must submit;
and though he did not think it was all for the best, he was disposed to
make the best of it. The thrashing was the gate by which he was to
escape from a bad scrape.

The farmer bore less malice towards him than towards his friend. He had
offered no resistance, and been measurably humble under the discipline
of misfortune. The blows were lighter and less in number, and when a
dozen strokes had been administered, Mr. Batterman was satisfied, and
so expressed himself. At the same time he volunteered an opinion that
Richard was the real sinner, and had led the other into the mischief--a
position which Sandy took no pains to controvert.

But Sandy, though he was a philosopher, and an embryo man of the world,
did not submit to his punishment in silence. He was not a Stoic, and
every blow extorted from him a cry of pain, which was as politic as it
was necessary. He labored to convince the farmer that he was suffering
severely from the castigation, so that he might be the sooner satisfied
with what had been done. Compared with that which Richard had received,
his whipping was light. When it was finished, he was surprised that he
had got off with so little; and he congratulated himself upon the
strategy which had so sensibly diminished his portion.

"Now, boys, you can go. If you are satisfied, I am; and when you want
to steal any more of my fruit, just remember my treatment of fruit
thieves," said the farmer.

"You haven't seen the end of this yet," replied Richard, as he moved
off, his skin and his proud spirit smarting in unison.

"You haven't seen the end of it either, if you don't keep a civil
tongue in your head."

Richard was tempted to enter immediately upon the work of revenging
himself for what he had suffered, and when the farmer spoke, he picked
up a couple of stones, with the intention of throwing them at his
tormentor; but Sandy, cool and self-possessed in the hour of
tribulation, dissuaded him from this insane course.

"No use, Dick; drop the stones, and we will pay him off at another
time, when we can do so without danger."

Richard listened to this prudent advice, and concluded to adopt it,
though he was impatient to be revenged upon the farmer. He was not
satisfied with Sandy. He had not been sustained in his resistance to
the barbarous conduct of their captor. He thought his companion had
been tame and mean-spirited, he had submitted so quietly to his
punishment; and when they had got out of the hearing of Mr. Batterman,
he roundly reproached him for his pusillanimous demeanor.

"I don't want to call you any hard names, Dick, but in my humble
opinion, you were a downright fool," replied Sandy. "It's no sort of
use to pound a stone wall with your naked fist. You don't hurt the wall
any."

"I like to see a fellow show some spirit," growled Richard. "I thought
you had some spunk; but you caved in, and took your flogging as meekly
as though you had been one of the saints in Fox's Book of Martyrs."

"I don't know any thing about your martyrs, but I hadn't any notion of
getting a double licking, as you did. You got four times as much as I
did, just because you were fool enough to resist. If there had been any
use in fighting, I would have fought as big as you did."

"I like to see a fellow stand by another when he gets into a scrape,"
whined Richard.

"Do you mean to say I didn't stand by you? Did I run away from you?"
demanded Sandy, indignantly.

"You couldn't run away. The man held you fast, or you would have done
so."

"It's very easy for you to talk. I did all I could to make you act like
a reasonable fellow; but you were bound to be a fool, and you got all
you bargained for."

Richard made no reply to his companion's taunts, for his philosophy was
beginning to commend itself to his common sense, as he thought of the
difference in the two floggings, and realized that it was all owing to
his own stupidity. They walked along in silence, till they reached the
Greyhound, but still with "thoughts too big for utterance."

"A pretty condition I am in to go home," said Richard, as he took his
place at the helm.

"You will be all right in a day or two," replied Sandy, consolingly.

"What will my father say?"

"If you are fool enough to let him know about it, I don't care what he
says."

"How can I help it? The blood is running down my legs now. My skin is
all cut up."

"Wash off the blood, and don't let any body see your legs."

"I could kill Old Batterbones," added Richard, grating his teeth.

"We'll pay him off."

"I'll have my revenge, if I die for it."

"I'm with you there, Dick."

It was midnight when the Greyhound reached the pier at Woodville.




CHAPTER IV.

RICHARD MAKES A TREMENDOUS SENSATION AT WOODVILLE.


The mansion at Woodville was dark and silent when Richard stole
cautiously up the walk which led from the pier to the house. Of course
his father and the other members of the family supposed he was asleep
in his chamber, where he had gone at an early hour to retire. He had
locked his door as usual, and to make the deception more complete, he
had pretended that he was not very well.

His chamber window opened upon the one-story addition which had been
erected to afford room for a conservatory. On one end of the structure
there was a trellis for the support of a grape vine. After he had
locked his door, Richard had opened the window, crawled out upon the
roof of the conservatory, and descended to the ground by the aid of the
trellis.

He intended to return to his room by the same route, but it was now a
more difficult matter than it had been when the family were all in the
sitting room. Mr. Presby's room was next to his own, and the old
gentleman was not a very sound sleeper. The difficulty of gaining
access to his room was so great that he was tempted to sleep in the
boat house, and not take the risk of being discovered; but the
condition of his legs, still smarting severely from the chastisement he
had received, would not permit him to do so. His wounds needed
attention, and though he was no surgeon, he knew that a good washing in
cold water, with the application of a simple remedy he had in his
chamber, might ease the pain, and perhaps save him from serious
consequences.

With a stealthy step he walked round to the conservatory, and with the
utmost care commenced the ascent of the trellis. With all the
precautions he could use, it was impossible to avoid making some noise,
and he trembled lest the wakeful invalid should hear him. But he
succeeded in gaining the roof without creating an alarm. Here he felt
comparatively secure; but sometimes when we think we are safest we are
in the greatest peril. The roof, wet with the dew of night, was very
slippery; and when he reached up to open the window, his feet flew up
beneath him, and he fell, with noise enough to rouse a deeper sleeper
than Mr. Presby.

"Help! Help! Robbers! Thieves!" shouted the old gentleman, as he threw
open his window.

The invalid's lungs did not seem to be at all affected, and there would
have been no difficulty in hearing him all over the house, not to say
all over the estate. Richard, taking advantage of the momentary
confusion, threw open the window, and sprang into his room. Doors were
opening in all parts of the house, and he could hear the hurried tread
of the members of the household in the halls.

But Richard did not lose his self-possession, and hastily threw off his
clothes. Placing himself at the open window, he joined in the cry which
Mr. Presby still continued, and hallooed as lustily as his neighbor in
the adjoining room. The house was in a complete uproar, and presently
he heard the voices of his father and uncle Obed at his door.

"Richard," said Mr. Grant.

"Sir," replied the young scapegrace.

"Open the door."

"They are not in here, father; they are out doors. One of them just
jumped off the conservatory,--at least, I think he did."

"Did you see them?" asked uncle Obed.

"No, I didn't see them, but I think I heard them."

Mr. Grant seemed to be satisfied with the information he had gained,
and retired from the door. Richard lighted his lamp, and waited
impatiently for the disturbance to subside; but he had to wait a long
time, for every body about the place had been thoroughly waked up. Mr.
Presby went down to the sitting room, where, after a thorough search
had been made, the family and the servants had collected to compare
notes, and ascertain to what extent the supposed robbers had been
successful in their enterprise.

Richard's two sisters, Bertha and Fanny, were there, and both of them
very much terrified. Mr. Grant soon pacified them with the assurance
that no one had been injured, and that there was no further danger. But
Richard was not there, and his absence was noticed. He and Mr. Presby
had been the only persons who had heard the robbers, and they had
created the alarm. The old gentleman told his story, and Richard's
testimony was very much needed to complete the chain of evidence. One
of the men servants was sent up to request him to join the party.

"Tell them I don't feel very well, and have gone to bed again," replied
Richard, when the man delivered his message.

But this was the most dangerous answer he could have returned; for Mr.
Grant, followed by uncle Obed and Mr. Presby, hastened up stairs to
ascertain the nature of his illness.

"What ails you, Richard?" demanded his father, in the tones of sympathy
and kindness.

"Nothing particular; only I don't feel just right," replied the young
midnight marauder, terribly alarmed as he thought of the probable
consequences of this visitation.

"Well, open the door, and let me see what I can do for you," added his
father.

"I don't want any thing done. I shall be well enough in the morning."

"You had better open the door, Richard; I want to see you about the
robbers."

"I can't; I am in bed."

"Don't get up then," said Mr. Grant, more anxious than at first for the
health of his son. "I have a key that will open the door."

These words struck terror to the soul of the guilty youth, and he
sprang out of bed with all the haste he could command. One terror
filled his mind--that his father might see his bleeding, lacerated
limbs; and he did, what guilty persons often do, the stupidest thing of
which the circumstances would admit. He had blown out the light when he
heard them coming, and now in the darkness he pulled on his pants,
forgetting that the bed clothes would as effectually hide his injured
members as the garment.

He had hardly clothed himself in this partial manner before his father
succeeded in opening the door. By the aid of the light which uncle Obed
carried, the head and front of the melon expedition was revealed to the
visitors, standing in the middle of the room, half clothed and wholly
scared.

"Why, Richard! What ails you? Where have you been?" demanded Mr. Grant,
as he and the others gazed with astonishment at the sorry figure which
the male heir of Woodville presented.

If Richard had attempted to dress himself in the light, he would have
rejected the muddy pants he now wore, and consigned them to the deepest
depths of the clothes-press. He had rolled in the moist earth of the
melon patch, while under the discipline of Mr. Batterman, till his
clothes were plastered with mud. His face was begrimed with the rich
black mould of the garden, through which the tears of anger and
resentment he had shed, under the influence of their natural gravity,
had furrowed passages down his checks.

In the simple but eloquent language of Mrs. Green, the housekeeper of
Woodville, who had followed the party up stairs, to offer her services
in the capacity of nurse, Richard was "a sight to behold." He had
retired from the sitting room, and bade the family good night before
nine o'clock, looking like a decent person. His pants were in good
condition then; certainly, if they had been in their present plight, it
would have been noticed.

The first impulse of the visiting party was to laugh at the
extraordinary appearance he presented; but a stronger feeling of
interest and sympathy overruled the inclination, and the culprit was
spared this humiliation. Richard was almost as much astonished as they
were, for he had not regarded a thing so trivial as his personal
experience, in the excitement and terror of the hour.

While the party were scrutinizing him with surprise and anxiety, he
happened to glance at the looking glass on the bureau. Then he saw his
hair tangled and matted with mud and filth; then he saw his dirty,
tear-furrowed cheeks; and then he saw his befouled and torn pants. In
the choice language of the boys, it seemed to him that "the cat was out
of the bag" beyond the possibility of recovery.

"What ails you, Richard? What under the sun has happened?" asked Mr.
Grant again, for the terrified boy made no reply to the first question.

But Richard was an old head, and he had no notion of being defeated in
the present contest of words or ideas. He stood like a statue in the
middle of the floor, and made no reply to the interrogatories.

"Where have you been?" said his father. "Can't you speak?"

"I don't know," replied Richard, with a bewildered look, as he glanced
with a vacant stare at his soiled garments.

"Don't know where you have been?"

"No, sir."

"That's very singular," said uncle Obed.

"Have you been up since you went to bed?" demanded Mr. Grant.

"I don't know," replied Richard, vacantly, as though the whole matter
was as much a mystery to him as to the others.

"Where were you when the alarm was given?"

"Out on the roof of the conservatory."

"On the roof!" exclaimed his father. "How came you there?"

"I don't know," answered Richard, shaking his head.

"Don't you know any thing about it?"

"No, sir. I woke up, and heard some one halloo, Robbers! thieves! I was
close by the window, and I jumped in, and hallooed with the rest of
them."

"Were you standing on the roof?"

"No, I was flat on my face."

"I see," interposed Mr. Presby, holding up his hands with astonishment,
"I understand it all. The poor boy is a sleep walker."

"Richard?" said Mr. Grant, who had never known his son to do such a
thing before.

"Yes, sir; your boy is unquestionably a somnambulist. He has been
wandering about the garden, and rolling in the mud, in his sleep. There
have been no robbers or thieves here to-night. The poor boy fell on the
roof; that was what waked him up; and the noise of his fall was what
caused me to give the alarm."

"Very singular," added uncle Obed.

"I never had any suspicion that he got up in his sleep," said Mr.
Grant.

"There are instances on record of persons addicted to the practice who
have followed it for years, without discovery. Now, if you will come to
my room, I will read you several accounts, given by competent medical
authority, of cases just like this," observed Mr. Presby.

But none of the party, at that hour of the night, were disposed to
consult the authorities on the subject. If they had looked on the table
in Richard's room they might have found there a yellow-covered pamphlet
novel, entitled "Sylvester Sound, the Somnambulist." It is a very
curious and amusing account of the antics of a sleep-walker, describing
the wonderful feats he performed in his slumbers, without having the
least idea of what he was doing.

The ingenious young rogue had been reading the book that very day, and
in the drama of the "Midnight Alarm," played at Woodville, he had
chosen for himself the part of Sylvester Sound. While his father went
for a hammer and nails, to secure the window, Richard removed his
telltale trousers, and jumped into bed.




CHAPTER V.

RICHARD IS DETERMINED TO BE REVENGED.


Mr. Grant nailed up the window in Richard's room, so that when he
should again walk in his sleep, he might not be exposed to the peril of
breaking his neck by falling off the roof of the conservatory. When
this important work was accomplished, the party retired. Mr. Presby was
a philosopher, and his library had not been a merely ornamental
appendage of his house. He had read a great deal, and thought a great
deal; and mesmerism, biology, psychology, somnambulism, and kindred
subjects, had each in its turn been considered, and a conclusion
reached.

Mr. Presby, therefore, was not disposed to return to his bed when the
excitement had subsided. So splendid an illustration of the phenomenon
of sleepwalking was enough to kindle his enthusiasm. He tried to draw
uncle Obed into a discussion on the topic, but the latter was too
sleepy. Mr. Grant made a home question of the matter, and did not care
to indulge in any philosophical inquiries. One after another the family
retired, till the old gentleman was left alone, and then, in despair,
he resorted to the "authorities" as he termed his books, and read till
the inmates of the hennery began to sound the morning call.

Richard did not come down stairs the next morning till nine o'clock,
when Mr. Grant and uncle Obed had both gone to the city. He was so
stiff that he could hardly walk; but he had washed himself clean, and
thrown aside the soiled garments he had worn on the expedition.

Already the story of Richard's wonderful doings in his sleep had been
circulated all over the estate, and when he limped into the breakfast
room, every body supposed he was suffering from the injuries he had
received during his nocturnal ramble. Mr. Presby, whose researches were
not yet completed, had taken pains to tell the people of the house,
that somnambulists were peculiarly sensitive in regard to their
involuntary rambles, and, very much to the surprise of Richard, no one
even alluded to the events of the night.

There was upon the faces and in the actions of all with whom he came in
contact, an expression of abundant sympathy. He was treated with
increased kindness and consideration by the family and by the servants.
When he had eaten his breakfast, the thought occurred to him that
something which might betray him had been left on the Greyhound, and he
hastened down to the pier to remove any such evidence.

As he passed the boat house he heard the voices of Mr. Presby and Ben
in the building. The former had by no means slept off his enthusiasm in
the cause of science; and as soon as the dew was off the grass, he
commenced exploring the premises, in search of any appearances that
might throw new light upon the conduct of the "poor boy" during his
midnight ramble. He recalled the dirty and foul condition of the
patient when discovered in his room, and he examined all the vile and
filthy places in the neighborhood, for the marks of some terrible
struggle that might have taken place between the sleep-walker, and any
real or imaginary demon.

The patient seeker after the hidden truths of science had been to the
pigsty, to learn whether he had been wrestling with the pigs; he had
looked into the cow yard, the horse stables, and the dog kennels for
information upon the dark subject; he had patiently explored the
cornfield and the potato patch, and every dirty hole he could find; but
not a single fact or hint could he obtain to assist him in solving the
difficult problem.

In the course of his investigations he had reached the department of
Ben, the boatman. He had carefully noted the appearance of the earth on
the banks of the river, and, quite fatigued by his unusual exertions,
he had seated himself in the boat house, where Ben was at work.

"Have you noticed any thing unusual about the boats, Ben?" asked the
old gentleman, after he had given the boatman a full exposition of his
views on somnambulism.

"Yes, sir; I noticed that the Greyhound was in a very dirty, slovenly
condition this morning. She wasn't so last night, when I looked at
her," replied the boatman.

"Ah, indeed!"

"The white seats in the standing room were covered with black mud, and
upon the edges there were stains of blood."

"Blood?" queried the philosopher.

"Yes, sir, blood; I have seen blood in my day, and I know what it looks
like."

"Can it be possible! Blood! What could have happened to the poor boy?"

"I don't know, sir."

"It is really awful. There is no knowing what the poor boy may have
suffered."

"He got back all right, for the boat was made fast, as usual, to her
moorings."

"The poor fellow must have been off somewhere in the boat, in his
sleep."

"May be he did, sir," answered Ben, respectfully.

"O, there can be no doubt about it. Isn't it a wonder that he wasn't
drowned?"

"Mr. Richard, knows how to handle a boat as well as any boy of his
years on the river."

"Yes, but you forget that he was asleep all the time."

"Perhaps he was, sir," said Ben, who did not seem to appreciate Mr.
Presby's philosophy.

"But he did not get all that mud and filth upon him while he was in the
boat."

"No, sir, of course he didn't; for I wash down the boat every time she
is used, and she was as neat as a new pin when I looked into her at
sundown last night."

"Then he must have landed somewhere," added the logical Mr. Presby.

"No doubt of that, sir."

"Where do you suppose he landed?"

"I haven't the least idea."

"Do you suppose you could find out by sailing up and down the river,
and examining the shore?"

"Well, sir, if you could tell which way the wind is by looking into the
ship's coppers, perhaps you might."

"I feel a very deep interest in the poor boy's welfare," added Mr.
Presby, who did not admire Ben's coldness on the subject; "and if you
could obtain any information that would throw light on this singular
affair, you might confer a great favor on the youth."

"I'll do any thing I can, sir, to find out about it; and if you want to
go up and down the river and examine the shore, I'll pull the boat for
you."

Mr. Presby accepted this offer, and Richard kept behind the boat house
till they had embarked. The roguish author of all these scientific
inquiries listened to the old gentleman's remarks on sleep-walking in
general, and the phenomena of his own case in particular, till the boat
disappeared in the cove above the pier. He then jumped into his skiff,
and pulled off to the Greyhound.

Ben had carefully removed all the stains of dirt and blood, and the
boat now bore no testimony against him. Whatever the boatman might have
thought, he certainly said nothing, and was even willing to countenance
Mr. Presby's theory in explanation of the absence of the boat, and of
her dirty appearance.

Though Richard had every reason to be satisfied with the success which
had attended his representation of the character of a somnambulist, he
could not banish the doubts and fears that haunted him. Some unlucky
mischance might betray him; "Old Batterbones" or Bates might tell the
story; Sandy might be entrapped into an exposure of the affair; indeed,
there were so many ways by which the secret might come out, that he was
far from satisfied with the prospect before him.

He was a high-spirited young man, and prided himself upon his healthy
body and well-developed muscle, and the idea of being pitied as a
person having an infirmity upon him was far from grateful to his
sensibilities. He did not much admire Mr. Presby's inquiring mind, and
thought he was an "old fool" to trouble himself about what did not
concern him. He did not care to be the subject of his meditations.
Being watched, pitied, and made the object of a physiological study,
were almost as bad as being caught in the act of stealing melons.

But above all considerations of his own safety or his own comfort was
the reflection that he had been whipped--unjustly and cruelly
whipped--by such a person as "Old Batterbones." All the bad boys hated
and despised him, and he felt that Woodville had been outraged in the
person of its male heir. These thoughts rankled in his soul, and he was
thirsting for revenge. He was determined to have satisfaction for the
injuries that had been heaped upon him. Already the dim outline of a
purpose whose execution would secure him ample vengeance was presented
to his mind.

While these dark thoughts were passing through his brain, he discovered
the boat, with Mr. Presby and Ben, returning to the pier. Not caring to
encounter the scrutiny, or answer the questions of the philosopher, he
hoisted the sails, and cast off the moorings of the Greyhound. He was
anxious to see Sandy Brimblecom, and ascertain whether he had been
discovered when he went home. Sailing over to Whitestone, he found
Sandy on the wharf, and took him into the boat.

"Did you get into the house all right?" asked Richard as the Greyhound
receded from the wharf.

"I did, but I got caught for all that. My mother had missed me, and
about one o'clock, after I had got into bed, the old man came up to my
chamber to see if I was there."

"Of course you pretended to be sound asleep."

"I did; but it wouldn't go down. The old man asked me where I had been.
I told him I had been over to see you."

"Did you, indeed?" sneered Richard. "And the next thing he will do will
be to go to my father, and ask him if you were at our house. My folks
know I went to bed before nine o'clock. You have got me into a pretty
scrape."

"No, I haven't. The old man won't ask any more questions; but he was
mad as thunder with me for staying out so late. It's all right now,
Dick; you needn't give yourself any trouble about it."

"I shall not do that, whatever happens."

Richard then described the happy "dodge" by which he had thrown dust in
the eyes of all the inmates of Woodville. Sandy was much amused at the
account, and expressed a decided admiration for the wonderful genius of
his companion, and even went so far as to request the loan of the
remarkable work which had suggested the expedient. He would like to
read that book, though he was not in the habit of doing such things.

"See there, Sandy," said Richard, as he pulled up his pants, and
exhibited to his friend the wales and broken skin upon his legs.

"That's hard," replied Sandy, as he shook his head. "The old villain
laid it on well."

"He did, and he shall pay dearly for it," added Richard, as he
compressed his lips and ground his teeth. "I'll be revenged upon him if
it costs me my life."

"I'm with you there, Dick."

"It shall be the worst night's work for Old Batterbones that ever he
did."

"What are you going to do, Dick?"

"Will you stand by me, Sandy?" demanded Richard, earnestly.

"Certainly; to be sure I will. But, Dick, we mustn't burn our own
fingers," said his prudent companion. "What are you going to do?"

In low tones, Richard detailed the scheme into which his outline of a
purpose had grown, and when they parted at noon, the arrangements were
all completed.




CHAPTER VI.

RICHARD GIVES ANOTHER ILLUSTRATION OF SLEEP-WALKING.


For six or seven nights following the expedition to the watermelon
patch of Mr. Batterman, Richard Grant did not "walk in his sleep." The
parental solicitude of his father prompted him to set a watch for
several nights; and Mr. Presby, who was still anxious to pursue his
scientific investigations, slept with one eye open, that he might be in
readiness to avail himself of the reappearance of the phenomenon.

The philosopher's hint that sleep-walkers are sensitive to any allusion
to their infirmity, had prevented him and Mr. Grant from informing the
subject of their precautions of the steps they had taken to observe his
movements, and Richard was entirely unconscious that vigilant eyes were
upon him while he slept, or while he ought to sleep.

But Richard was too lame and sore from the effects of his flogging to
indulge again so soon in the luxury of "sleep-walking." He had not been
questioned in regard to the blood upon the seats of the Greyhound, for,
being asleep when the stains were made, of course he would know nothing
about them. Mr. Presby explained his inactivity and want of energy upon
philosophical principles, and every body seemed to be satisfied.

The salve which the sufferer applied to his wounded members healed the
bruises in a few days, and he was again in condition to pursue his
wonted sports and pleasures. After the lapse of a week, as the patient
exhibited no further signs of the malady, the watch was discontinued;
but Mr. Presby was too enthusiastic in the cause of science to abandon
the case so soon. He sat up in his chamber till midnight, with his ears
wide open, to catch the slightest indication of a movement on the part
of his interesting subject.

Every day, Richard and Sandy met; and they never failed to renew the
mutual pledges they had made to be revenged upon "Old Batterbones." The
plan was discussed and amended till no further improvement could be
made; and by this time Richard was so far recovered from his injuries
as to enable him to take the leading part in its execution. The night
was appointed for the purpose, and it was agreed that the boys should
meet at a point just below Whitestone, where Richard was to take Sandy
into the Greyhound, and proceed to the inlet where they had before
landed.

It was a very difficult matter for Richard to get out of the house
without detection. If he could succeed in opening his door, and walk
through the long halls of the mansion without attracting the attention
of any of its numerous inmates, he could hardly expect to unlock any of
the outer doors with safety. After much reflection, he decided that it
would be the better way to go out as he had gone before--over the roof
of the conservatory, and down the trellis.

With the proper tools, therefore, he had removed the nails with which
his father had secured the window of his chamber. He had then skilfully
adjusted them, so that they appeared to be as his father had left them,
though he could easily pull them out. At ten o'clock he retired as
usual, but the hour of meeting was one o'clock, for the young rascals
had come to the conclusion that their purpose could be better executed
in the small hours of the morning, when the farmer and his man would
probably be asleep.

Richard waited impatiently till he heard the clock strike twelve. There
had been no noise in the chamber of Mr. Presby for some time, and he
concluded that the old gentleman must be asleep. He had gone to bed as
usual, in order to remove any suspicion in case he should find it
necessary to act the part of the sleep-walker again. He rose and
dressed himself for the expedition, using the utmost care to avoid
disturbing the slumbers of the troublesome philosopher in the adjoining
room.

Every thing worked to his entire satisfaction, and he was not conscious
that he had made the slightest noise. The nails were removed from the
window; but, though he had taken the precaution to oil the sash where
it slid up and down, it creaked a little, in spite of all the care he
could use. He was satisfied that the noise could not wake Mr. Presby,
and he continued his operations. Leaving the window open, as a
somnambulist would naturally be expected to do, he crept softly over
the roof, and reached the trellis without accident.

As yet there was no appearance of an interruption; but the first bar of
the trellis, upon which he placed his foot, creaked and snapped. As the
noise, so far as he could see, attracted no notice, he resumed his
attempt, and reached the ground without any further impediment, real or
imaginary.

With stealthy step he retreated from the house till there was no longer
any danger of being discovered. Quickening his pace, he soon reached
the pier, and with the skiff boarded the Greyhound. The night was
certainly favorable for the execution of dark deeds. The midnight
assassin, the incendiary, or the burglar would have rejoiced in its
darkness, its dense black clouds, and its fitful winds.

Richard Grant still felt the cowhide of his enemy tingling upon his
legs, and still felt its iron piercing his soul. The injury he had
received a week before, rankled in his bosom as it had the hour after
it had been inflicted. Neither the time that had elapsed, nor the peril
attending his present enterprise, in any degree moderated the spirit of
revenge that burned in his soul.

As soon as he had secured the skiff at the buoy to which the sail boat
was moored, he opened the door of the stern locker, and drew forth a
small bottle. He shook it to satisfy himself that the contents were
safe, and then restored it to the place from which he had taken it. He
then examined his pockets to assure himself that some other article
necessary for his purpose was all right. No mistakes or omissions had
been made, and he proceeded to hoist the mainsail. He then cast off the
moorings, and hoisted the jib. The wind was too fresh to permit the
Greyhound to carry all sail, and even with what he had set, she put her
rail under the water at the first forward impulse.

One less skilful and courageous than Richard would have been terrified
by the fierce waves and the gloom of the night, especially if bound
upon an errand of evil and crime; but he held the tiller with a steady
hand, and heeded not the spray that broke upon the half-deck of the
Greyhound. A few moments in such a breeze were sufficient to carry him
over the river to the place of rendezvous. The point was as familiar to
him as the pier at Woodville; and as soon as he could obtain a view of
the dark outline of the shore, he ran the boat alongside the point,
with as little difficulty as though it had been broad daylight.

Sandy Brimblecom was not there, and an expression of anger escaped from
the lips of Richard, when he found that the partner of his iniquitous
scheme might possibly fail him. He gave the signal whistle with which
they were in the habit of calling each other; but there was no reply.
The clocks on the churches in Whitestone struck one, and Richard waited
half an hour after he heard them--half an hour, which seemed like half
a day to him.

He was afraid that Sandy's heart had failed him, or that his father had
discovered him; and Richard decided to proceed alone with the
enterprise. Disgusted at the failure of his associate, he pushed off
from the point. As he did so, he discovered another boat a short
distance up the river, moving off from the shore. He watched it for a
moment, till it disappeared in the gloom. It was not a common thing to
see sail boats out at such an hour, and on such a night as this was;
but he concluded that it was some gardener taking his produce to an
early market, and he gave himself no uneasiness.

Just as he lost sight of the boat, he heard the familiar whistle of
Sandy. Putting the Greyhound about, he ran under the lee of the point,
and his friend leaped on board. Richard immediately put off again, and
shaped the course of the boat for the inlet near the garden of "Old
Batterbones."

"You are late, Sandy," said Richard, in reproachful tones.

"Can't help it. I got asleep, and didn't wake up," replied Sandy, with
a long gape.

"Asleep! What did you go to sleep for? I haven't been asleep."

"I didn't mean to, but I was so sleepy I couldn't help it."

"You came pretty near spoiling your share of the fun. I had just cast
off, and was going to put the thing through alone."

"I wish you had," answered Sandy, in a tone which did not please his
companion any better than the words themselves.

"What do you mean?"

"It's a bad scrape we are getting into, and I wish we were well out of
it. If I hadn't promised to go, I wouldn't have any thing to do with
it."

"Old Batterbones licked you as well as me."

"I know that, and I should like to pay him off for it; but I don't
believe it will do to go in quite so steep as we are going."

"You are chicken-hearted, Sandy. I thought you had more grit than
that."

"I think I have got as much as you have, but I don't believe it will
pay to rub your nose on a grindstone. Your nose will get the worst of
it."

"You can back out, if you want to," added Richard, in an indifferent
tone.

"I don't want to back out. I agreed to go, and I am going, if I have to
be hung for it. I only say, it is a bad scrape."

"No scrape at all, Sandy. I don't calculate to get found out."

"You didn't calculate to before, but you did; and Old Batterbones got
more fun out of the scrape than you did. Perhaps he will this time."

"If you are afraid, Sandy, back out, and we will go home again."

"I'm not afraid: don't use that word to me again, Dick. If I had been
afraid, I shouldn't come, of course."

By this time the Greyhound was off the little inlet, near Mr.
Batterman's garden, and, as a matter of prudence, all conversation was
suspended. The boat shot into the inlet, and was made fast to the same
tree as on the former occasion. As the business of these hopeful youths
was not with the melon patch, they took a different road this time.

They had gone but a short distance before the rushing of a boat through
the water was heard. They paused and Richard saw a sail, which he
believed he had seen before that night, pass by the mouth of the inlet.
He caught but a glance of it, as it cut a tangent along the small
circle of his vision.

"I don't like the looks of that boat, Sandy," whispered Richard, as the
sail disappeared in the gloom.

"Why not?"

"What is any one sailing about the river at this time of night for?"

"I don't know," added Sandy, who did not seem to be at all alarmed at
the appearance of the boat.

"I think I have seen her before to-night," continued Richard.

"If you are afraid, we will both back out, and then neither can twit
the other."

"I'm not afraid; come along. I've no notion of backing out." And
Richard moved on, followed by his reluctant associate.

When they had ascended the hill, they carefully walked all over the
grounds to satisfy themselves that the farmer and his man were not
keeping vigil over the melons; but they could neither see nor hear any
thing that betokened the presence of a human being. Satisfied with this
survey of the ground, Richard led the way to the barn, where he had
received his terrible flagellation. The memories of the place were not
pleasant, and they intensified the hatred he bore the owner of the
premises, and fanned the flame of vengeance that was burning in his
soul.

The barn was an old building, and very much out of repair. It contained
the farmer's horses and oxen, his wagons, his hay, and other produce.
On the side nearest to the river, some of the boards had been forced
partly off by the pressure of the hay; and against one of these places
Richard sat down upon the ground.

"Pull out some of the hay, Sandy," whispered Richard, as he drew from
his pocket the bottle which he had taken from the locker of the boat.

Sandy hinted something about backing out again; but a sneer from
Richard silenced him, and he obeyed the order. While he was doing so,
Richard walked round the barn to satisfy himself that no one was near.
They were alone, and the wicked work proceeded.




CHAPTER VII.

RICHARD KINDLES A LITTLE FIRE.


Sandy continued to pull out the hay from behind the board, till
Richard, who, as engineer, conducted the operations, directed him to
suspend his labors. The contents of the bottle were poured upon the
heap of loose hay.

"What's that, Dick?" asked Sandy.

"Spirits of turpentine. I intend to make sure work of it," answered
Richard.

"I wouldn't use that stuff," added Sandy.

"Why not?"

"To tell the truth, Dick, I was in hopes the fire wouldn't burn."

"I believe you are a fool, Sandy Brimblecom. Have you come clear over
here, in the dead of the night, to kindle a fire that will not burn?"

"I don't like the idea of setting the barn on fire," whispered Sandy,
in an earnest tone. "What do you suppose they will do with us, if we
should get found out?"

"We shall not get found out."

"We shall be sent to the state prison--at least I shall."

"I shall, if you are; we shall both be in the same boat, and if one
goes down the other must."

"I don't know about that," said Sandy; "your father is rich, and he
will get you off. I shall have to stand all the racket."

"Shut up, Sandy! I have gone too far to back out now," added Richard,
decidedly, as he took a bunch of matches from his pocket.

"Hold on a moment, Dick, before it is too late. It will be cheaper to
do our thinking now than it will be after the barn is burned down."

"I have done all the thinking I care to do already. The die is cast,
Sandy. I won't back out now, and you shall not."

"It's too bad to burn up the horses and oxen in the barn. That's cruel.
If it wasn't for them, I wouldn't say a word."

"Very well; we will go round and turn out the horses and oxen. I don't
want to burn them any more than you do."

"But the noise will wake the farmer and his man."

"No, it won't. I have thought a great deal about the animals, and it
goes right against my grain to hurt them, especially the horses."

"I don't want to burn the barn, any way."

"You are a coward and a fool, Sandy."

"It's easy enough for you to say so, when you know your father has
money enough to buy up Old Batterbones, if we get into any scrape."

"Come, no more whining, Sandy; I'm going to get the horses and oxen
out, and then I'm going to burn the barn."

"I'm off, then."

"Very good; but if I get into trouble, I will blow on you."

This consideration staggered Sandy, and he concluded to stay and see
the end of the wicked enterprise. The house of Mr. Batterman was at a
considerable distance from the barn, and there was but little danger
that the humane policy of the young incendiaries would expose them to
any additional peril.

Richard, followed by Sandy, entered the barn, and turned all the
animals loose. They drove them into a lot where they could not get near
the fire. The only thing that had weighed upon the mind of the broker's
son, in the prosecution of his mad enterprise, was now removed, and he
returned to the place where he had prepared the materials for starting
the conflagration. Again Sandy stated his objections, and urged Richard
to abandon the scheme; but the latter, without any reply to this
remonstrance, drew a card of matches across a stone, and applied the
burning mass to the hay which had been saturated with turpentine.

The heap of combustible matter suddenly blazed up, lighting all the
fields around them. The work had been surely done, and it was too late
for Sandy to urge any more of his objections.

"Come, Sandy, the work is done. Now use your legs," said Richard, as he
started at the top of his speed towards the inlet where the Greyhound
lay.

Sandy's legs did not fail him on this emergency, for he soon
outstripped his companion. They had gone but a few rods, when both were
appalled at the discovery of two men, who were running towards the fire
with all their might--which was not saying much, for both of them
seemed to be old and stiff, and incapable of making very good time even
on so pressing an emergency as the present.

The guilty boys were filled with terror. The shock was so great that it
seemed to deprive them of their strength, and they found their legs
giving out under them.

"We are caught, Dick," gasped Sandy, when he could regain breath enough
to speak.

"No, we are not; come along. Don't stop here," answered Richard, who
was beginning to recover his self-possession.

They ran as fast as their weakened limbs would permit, till they
reached the bank of the river. Richard jumped into the boat and hoisted
the sails, while Sandy cast off the painter, and they were soon
standing out from the shore before the fresh breeze. Neither of them
spoke for some minutes, for neither of them had breath enough left in
his body to do so.

"The fire don't burn," said Richard, when the boat had gone far enough
to enable him to see over the high bank of the river.

"Don't it?" asked Sandy, hoarsely, for the terror and exhaustion of the
awful moments through which he had just passed seemed to have choked up
his throat, and deprived him of his voice.

"No; it is as dark up there as it was before we landed."

"I am glad of it," gasped Sandy, who was beginning to breathe a little
easier.

"I'm not," added Richard, firmly. "We shall only have the job to do
over again."

"If you ever catch me in such a scrape as this again, you may let me
know it when you do."

"You might as well have the game as the name."

"I don't know about that. I am glad the barn didn't burn. Are you sure
the fire has gone out?"

"No doubt of it. There isn't enough to light your cigar."

"I suppose those men put it out. Who do you think they were?"

"I don't know, and I don't care. I wish they had been somewhere else.
They have spoiled my night's work."

"I am glad they have; and I thank them with all my heart for what they
have done."

"I don't; you might as well be hung for an old sheep as a lamb. If we
are caught it will be all the same with us as though we had burned the
barn."

"Who do you suppose the men were?"

"I haven't the least idea. I don't care."

"Yes, you do care, Dick. What's the use of talking in that way? You
don't want to be found out any more than I do."

"I know that, but we are not found out; and that isn't all--we shall
not be."

"I should like to be satisfied on that point."

"The men didn't take any notice at all of us, and I am certain they did
not see us."

"They couldn't help seeing us, Dick. The fire lit up the whole field,
so that it was as light as broad day."

"Suppose they did see us; they couldn't tell who we were. Keep a stiff
upper lip, Sandy, and it will be all right."

"I can only hope for the best, but I shall be scared at my own shadow
for a month to come," added Sandy, in whose nature a vein of candor
appeared to be suddenly developed, for he was not in the habit of
acknowledging that he was afraid of any thing.

"You don't talk a bit like Sandy Brimblecom," sneered Richard; "and you
act more like an old woman than a fellow of any spunk."

"Humph! I'll bet you are as scared as I am, only you won't own it."

"I don't know what fear means, Sandy."

"O, you can brag; but when a fellow can go and set a man's barn afire,
without wincing, he's worse than I am; that's all I've got to say."

"Worse than you are!" said Richard. "Didn't you agree to the whole
thing? Didn't you go in for paying off Old Batterbones? Didn't you come
down here to burn the barn with me?"

"I did, but I didn't want to come."

"What did you come for, then?"

"Because I agreed to come."

"You're not the fellow I took you to be. You joined me in the affair,
and then, at the last moment, you begin to whine like a sick monkey."

"I'm not so far gone that I can burn a man's barn without feeling it."

"You haven't got the pluck of a mosquito."

"You've said about enough on that tack, Dick Grant," replied Sandy, who
did not relish the reflections cast upon his courage.

"I shall say what I think best."

"No, you won't! I'm sorry for what I've done, and I'm willing to own
it; but I won't take any sauce from you or any other fellow."

"You can talk big enough," sneered Richard.

"Shut up, or I'll bat you over the head."

"Humph!"

"Just put me ashore, Dick Grant, and you and I will part company."

"I'm willing."

Both boys felt that enough had been said, and the conversation was
discontinued by mutual consent. Richard, notwithstanding his bravado,
was no better satisfied with himself than Sandy. Though he had spoken
of "doing the job over again," he had not the slightest idea of
repeating the experiment. The shock which the discovery of the two men
had given him, was too much even for his strong nerves; and though he
was not willing to confess it, he was sorry for what he had done. The
terror of being found out had damped the spirit of revenge. The
excitement of the affair had passed away, and like his companion in
wickedness, visions of public trial, of the house of correction, or the
state prison, began to flit before him.

He was not sorry that the barn had been saved from destruction; and the
only pleasant reflection in connection with the whole transaction was,
that he had insisted upon saving the horses and the oxen. It was with
Richard as it is with all who commit crimes. They are led on by the
spirit of revenge, or some other strong motive. There is a kind of
excitement which urges them on till the wicked deed is committed. Then
the criminal excitement subsides; the hour of reflection comes,
burdened also with the fear of discovery. To some extent, crime is its
own punishment; at least, it is so with those who have not become
hardened in iniquity.

Richard brought the Greyhound up to the point where he had taken Sandy
on board. He did not like to part with him in anger, for, to a certain
extent, he sympathized with him in his penitential confession. But,
more than this, he was afraid Sandy might revenge himself upon him for
the reproaches he had uttered.

"Let's not quarrel, Sandy," said Richard, as he laid the boat alongside
the landing place.

"I don't want to quarrel, but I won't be picked upon by you," replied
Sandy, with spirit.

"I'll take it all back. Let's be friends again. We have failed to do
what we intended, and perhaps it will be just as well for us."

"I'm glad you are coming to your senses. Do you mean to try it again?"

"We won't burn the barn, Sandy, but we must pay off Old Batterbones in
some other way."

"I'll do it. I'll hook his apples, pull out the linchpins of his wagon,
throw a dead cat into his well, or any thing of that sort, with you,
but I won't attempt to burn any man's barn again. No, never!"

"We'll fix him yet, Sandy. When shall I see you again?"

"I shall be round the wharf to-morrow."

"I'll see you there. Good night to you, Sandy."

"Good night, Dick."

Boys don't usually bid each other good night after they have been doing
wicked deeds; and Richard's parting salutation was a peace-offering,
rather than the kindly wish of a friend.

Sandy made his way up to Whitestone, and Richard again pushed off upon
the troubled waters of the Hudson. The Greyhound leaped over the waves
as though she was in haste to get out of the disgraceful business in
which she had been employed. Richard heard the clocks in Whitestone
striking three, as he grappled his moorings and made fast to them.

He landed from the skiff, and, like a thief in the night, stole up to
his father's house. Before he attempted to ascend the trellis, he
pulled off his boots, and fastening them together with his
handkerchief, slung them around his neck. He reached the roof of the
conservatory without noise, and then, to his utter consternation,
discovered a light in Mr. Presby's room. But the precaution he had
taken in the removal of his boots enabled him to reach his chamber
window without producing a sound. Then, to his astonishment and terror,
he found that the window he had left open was closed.

Some one had been there.




CHAPTER VIII.

RICHARD BEHOLDS HOW GREAT A MATTER A LITTLE FIRE KINDLETH.


The window of the chamber was not fastened, and when Richard gained
admission, he found the door locked as he had left it. The window must
therefore have been closed from the outside; but this did not seem
probable, and he came to the conclusion that the sash had dropped of
itself. This was a very comforting reflection, and it removed many of
the doubts and fears which disturbed him.

Congratulating himself upon his escape from manifold perils by land and
water, Richard undressed himself and went to bed. But tired as he was,
he could not go to sleep for some time. His brain was busy calculating
the chances of detection, and devising schemes to avert suspicion if
any should be fastened upon him. Nature triumphed at last, and he went
to sleep.

Late the next morning, when he went down stairs, he was pale and
haggard. Somewhat to his surprise, he found that his father had not
gone to the city as usual. Every body looked sober, and Mr. Grant's
face wore a very stern and troubled expression. Richard ate his
breakfast in silence, wondering all the time what so many serious and
averted faces portended.

"You were out again last night, Richard," said his father, when they
met in the sitting room at a later hour.

"No, sir, not that I am aware of," replied Richard, with as much
self-possession as he could call to his aid, though his heart was
leaping with fear and anxiety.

"If you had been out, shouldn't you have been aware of it?" asked his
father, fixing a penetrating gaze upon him.

"I don't know. I only judge by what happened the other night," answered
Richard, who had determined to "run" the sleep-walking expedient again.

"You mean by that you got up in your sleep if you got up at all?"

"Yes, sir."

"You were entirely unconscious when you got up the other night and went
off in the Greyhound--were you?"

"Of course I was."

A faint smile played upon the lips of Mr. Grant, while the faces of
uncle Obed and Mr. Presby wore a decidedly comical expression. Though
Richard could not see "where the laugh came in," he was conscious that
he had placed himself in a ludicrous attitude.

"And you were asleep last night when you went out--were you?" continued
Mr. Grant.

"If I went out, I suppose I was," replied Richard, going to the window
and looking out, thus turning his back to those in the room.

He could not bear the penetrating gaze of his father, and the quizzing
glances of Mr. Presby and uncle Obed were utterly insupportable.

"Mr. Presby, you have devoted considerable attention to the phenomena
of sleep-walking," added uncle Obed. "What do you think of this case?"

"I think it is the most remarkable one on record," replied the
philosopher, whose smile had grown into a broad grin. "Richard, I am
deeply interested in the investigation of this matter, and I want to
ask you a few questions. Will you oblige me by answering them?"

"I will if I can," said Richard, rather doggedly, for he was fully
satisfied, by this time, that the old gentleman was quizzing him.

"If you _can_, then, will you be kind enough to tell me whether Sandy
Brimblecom was asleep or not, when he joined you in the boat at the
point below Whitestone?"

"Who? Sandy joined me?" stammered Richard, staggered by this home
thrust of the friend of the family.

"Yes; I am very anxious to know whether there is a sympathy between
sleep-walkers which draws them together, even though separated by miles
of space."

Richard made no reply; he had none to make. He had no idea how much his
tormentors knew of the events of the night.

"You don't answer, my boy. I have been the butt of your uncle for the
last week on account of my devotion to the cause of science. I have
studied your case very thoroughly, and I may want to make a report of
it to the scientific associations."

"Why don't you answer him, Dick?" added uncle Obed, who,
notwithstanding the serious character of the matter, could not restrain
his laughter at the ludicrous side of the question.

"I don't care about your making fun of me," replied the poor
somnambulist.

"My dear boy, this is a scientific, a physiological investigation. You
pulled out the nails which your father had driven into the window; you
skulked away from the house; you went down to your boat, got under way
in a squally, dark night, and met another sleep-walker on the other
side of the river;--I presume he was asleep, for you do not say to the
contrary;--you sailed down the river to a certain inlet; you landed,
and went up to Mr. Batterman's barn; you removed the horses and oxen
from it; you poured turpentine upon a bunch of loose hay prepared for
the purpose; you lighted your matches and set fire to it; and all the
while you were fast asleep. And you returned home and went to bed again
without waking. Really, my dear boy, this is the most astonishing case
of somnambulism on record. I have vainly looked over my books for a
parallel instance. Can you tell me what your dreams were last night?
Did you dream any thing of this kind?"

Richard was filled with dismay at this recital of the events of the
night. The mysterious boat he had twice seen was the only explanation
of the minuteness of Mr. Presby's details that suggested itself to his
mind.

"You talked quite rationally in your sleep, which is a new development
in somnambulism. But, after all," continued the devotee of science,
"the phenomena of last night were not near so remarkable as those of
the former occasion. By the way, my dear boy, do sleep-walkers have any
particular fondness for watermelons?"

Uncle Obed laughed outright at this sally, and even Mr. Grant, wounded
as his paternal heart was by the discovery, could not help smiling,
though he felt more like weeping than laughing.

"You are silent, my dear boy," resumed Mr. Presby. "This is an
important physiological inquiry, and you would enlarge the sphere of
human knowledge of this interesting subject, if you would answer me."

Richard was inclined to get into a passion, but the consciousness of
his guilt restrained him, and he listened in silence to the satirical
remarks of the old gentleman.

"But the most astounding fact of all is, that you could take such an
unmerciful flogging as Mr. Batterman gave you without waking up,"
continued the inquisitor. "Perhaps you did wake under this cruel
infliction, but went to sleep again when the castigation was over. Can
you inform me on this point?"

"You have made fun enough of me," replied Richard; but his words were
very tame, considering the amount of provocation he had endured.

"Were you asleep, Richard, on these two nights when you have been
prowling about the neighborhood?" demanded his father, sternly.

"No, sir, I was not," said Richard, to whom the ridicule of Mr. Presby
and uncle Obed was more terrible than any punishment he could receive
for his misdeeds.

"I am glad to see you have some honesty left in your composition. You
acknowledge the deception, and we will let the farce end here. You have
become a thief and a midnight incendiary. I have been weak and
indulgent towards you. My eyes are opened, and I shall pursue a
different course."

Mr. Grant's lip trembled with emotion as he spoke. Mr. Presby and uncle
Obed suddenly became very serious, and it was plain to the culprit that
the farce had really ended.

"Richard, I knew you were wild, and even dissolute, but I did not think
you would steal," added Mr. Grant, with deep feeling.

"It was only for fun, father," pleaded Richard.

"Do you practise the trade of the incendiary for fun?" asked his
father, sternly.

"That was only because Mr. Batterman flogged me. He had no business to
do that."

"And so you would burn his barn?"

"I didn't burn it."

"It would have burned to the ground, if Mr. Presby and Ben had not put
the fire out. I have let my friend expose you in his own way, because
the trouble he has taken reveals to me your true character. You are
worse than your dissolute companions. Richard, you have become a
villain!"

Mr. Grant rose from his chair and walked away to hide the tears which
this sad revelation of his son's character drew from his eyes.

"He is not so bad as he might be," interposed Mr. Presby. "Remember
that he saved the animals in the barn."

"The record is black even with this redeeming line," said Mr. Grant. "I
would rather follow my son to his grave than have him become such a
wretch as you are, Richard. Shall I let you take the consequences of
your crime?"

"What consequences, father?" asked Richard, with a degree of humility
he had never before exhibited.

"Are you a simpleton? Don't you know the penalty of your crime?"

"We didn't burn the barn."

"In the eye of the law you are just as guilty as though the barn had
burned to the ground. If convicted, you would be sent to the state
prison. I have made up my mind what to do with you," said Mr. Grant, as
he walked out of the room, for his emotions would no longer permit him
to remain.

"You have got into a bad scrape, Dick," added uncle Obed, as he shook
his head, and followed his brother, leaving the culprit alone with Mr.
Presby.

"He will not let them send me to the state prison?" said Richard,
fearful that his father might have abandoned all hope of redeeming him
from the error of his ways.

"You have been a very bad boy," replied Mr. Presby.

"I am very sorry for it, and I mean to do better."

"I hope you will, my dear boy. Your father has suffered terribly since
I returned, and poor Bertha has done nothing but weep for the last two
hours. You are ruining yourself and wounding the hearts of your friends
more than words can describe."

"I will try to do better."

"Your father will not trust you again."

"What is he going to do?"

"He will inform you himself," replied Mr. Presby, as he withdrew from
the room.

Richard was alone with his own thoughts and fears. He felt as though
his career had reached its close, though he could not imagine what
terrible thing his father intended to do. He was really sorry for what
he had done, whether his sorrow was caused by a genuine feeling that he
had done wrong, or by the fear of punishment.

His mind was in a confused state; the past with its sorrows, and the
future with its terrors, whirled through his brain. He wanted time for
reflection, and leaving the house, he walked down to the pier to
deliberate upon the situation.

Ben was there, and Richard began to question him, for Mr. Presby had
intimated that the boatman was with him the night before. From him he
learned all the facts in regard to their movements. It appeared that
the old gentleman had heard Richard when he opened the window, and had
watched him closely, fully satisfied, however, that he was asleep.

When Mr. Presby, from the roof of the conservatory, had noted the
direction he took, he had closed the window, and called the boatman to
assist him. They had followed him in the large sail boat, and landed
near the point where Sandy was taken on board the Greyhound. By this
time, Ben's original idea that Richard was wide awake was adopted by
Mr. Presby. By the exercise of great skill and caution, they had kept
near the boys, and had put out the fire almost as soon as it was
kindled.

While they were still on the ground, Mr. Batterman, who had been
awakened by the bright light of the burning hay, made his appearance.
He found the two old men in the very act of putting out the fire. Mr.
Presby smothered the flames by throwing his great-coat upon it.

"Now, Mr. Richard," continued the boatman, "Mr. Presby saved you. He
was acquainted with Batterman, and has a mortgage on his farm. The
farmer suspected who had attempted to burn his building; he laid it to
you at once, and told us all about the scrape when you stole the
melons. You don't know how mad he was, Mr. Richard. But Mr. Presby made
it all right with him, and he promised not to prosecute. Mr. Richard,
you had better not walk in your sleep any more."

Richard did not like this last remark, and he walked down the pier. The
state prison was only a bugbear then; but his father meant to do
something. He was about to get into his skiff to visit the Greyhound
when Ben hailed him.

"My orders are, not to let you have any of the boats," said he.

The new order of things had begun, and he returned to the house. His
father was in the sitting room when he entered.

"Richard," said Mr. Grant, "to-morrow you will leave home for some
months. I have decided to place you in a boarding school, where you
will be under the eye of one who is competent to manage you."

This was the great matter which a little fire had kindled.




CHAPTER IX.

RICHARD GOES TO THE TUNBROOK MILITARY INSTITUTE.


Richard had several times before been threatened with a residence at a
boarding school. Most of his education had been obtained at home, under
the superintendence of tutors, and special teachers in various
branches. He had been under little or no restraint; and the consequence
was, that his mental discipline had been very imperfect, and his stock
of knowledge was small, considering the opportunities he had enjoyed.

His father had long been conscious of his deficiencies, and proposed to
send him to a boarding school, for the benefit of its discipline; but
Richard was so averse to the idea, that his father had from time to
time postponed his departure. When Mr. Grant saw his son associating
with bad boys he again proposed to send him, and had actually sought
out a suitable place for him; but his own financial trials and troubles
had prevented him from executing his purpose.

If Richard's education had failed to develop his intellect in an
adequate degree, it had built up a sound and vigorous constitution.
Riding on horseback, sailing and rowing, had been pastimes for which he
had sacrificed intellectual culture. But there was still time to remedy
this deficiency, for the youth was hardly sixteen.

The establishment which Mr. Grant had selected for the future residence
of his son was the Tunbrook Military Institute, under the
superintendence of Colonel Brockridge. This place had been chosen, not
because it was a military institution, but because its principal was a
thorough disciplinarian. He had the reputation of being a just and fair
man, and was very popular with boys of strong constitution and decisive
temperaments. No "milk-and-water" boys were ever sent to him; or, if
they were, they soon left the Institute, or became vigorous and decided
in their habits.

Colonel Brockridge had been in the army, though his title was won in
the militia. He was a thorough teacher, and was conscientious and
faithful in the discharge of his duties to those who were intrusted to
his care. He was a "positive man," and no fear of what the father or
mother would say or do ever induced him to alter his plans, or change
his purposes.

Though the Institute was conducted on military principles, it was not
peculiarly the school of the soldier. The principal believed in
discipline; this was his hobby; and he believed that he could best
secure system and order by adopting military routine. His success
justified his theory. He had more applicants than he had places.

Richard knew all about the Tunbrook Military Institute. He had
carefully read its circular, and its rules and regulations. They did
not suit him. He was not a devotee of discipline, in its application to
himself. He was very impatient of restraint, as the reader has already
seen, and he did not like the idea of being sent to this Institute.

When his father had given him his final sentence, he retired to his
chamber. The shame which attended the discovery of his guilt still
rested heavily upon him, and he was in a more humble and tractable mood
than usual. Under ordinary circumstances he would have rebelled against
the decision of his father. He would have frightened his sister by
threatening to run away to sea. It is true, this thought occurred to
him on the present occasion; but Ben had told him enough about the life
of a sailor to convince him that he should not improve his condition by
such a course.

There seemed to be no alternative but passive obedience. He did not
want to go, but he felt that his father must certainly conquer if he
attempted to resist. He had always had his own way to a very great
extent. He had always been a conqueror himself--at least he felt so,
and he could not endure the thought of being compelled to yield
implicit obedience to any person.

At this time Richard's thoughts took a peculiar turn. The shame he
endured, the reproaches that had been heaped upon him, caused him to
feel that there was something wanting in his character. The path in
which he had been travelling, for the first time in his life seemed to
lead to destruction. When he considered that he had been detected in
the act of stealing, and of setting fire to a barn, and in practising a
gross and wicked deception, he felt that his road was down hill; that
he should become a dissolute and worthless man.

He was sitting on the stool of repentance. From a prudential penitence
he had arrived at a genuine one. Something must be done. There was
something to be conquered. There was a harder battle before him than
any he had yet fought. He was master of the boats, of the horses, of
the servants, and even of his companions at Whitestone; but there was
one whom he had never conquered--one that held him in leading-strings,
and was pulling him down to ruin and destruction.

He must conquer himself.

Richard had had such thoughts as these before, but they had never
seemed so substantial as now. He felt the necessity of reforming his
life and character--of conquering himself, his greatest enemy. As he
looked upon his dissolute course, upon the events of the preceding
night, and its fellow a week before, he was disgusted with himself, and
wondered how he could so easily embrace his besetting sin.

While he was engaged in these reflections, his sister Bertha entered
his chamber. She had heard of the sentence, and she had come to comfort
him. Her eyes were still red with weeping, for she had almost lost hope
of the reform of her brother.

"I have been trying to see you for the last two hours," said she, as
she sat down by his side.

"Don't cry any more, Berty," said he, with unwonted tenderness.

"I will try not to do so, Richard. Father says you are going away
to-morrow."

"Yes, Berty, I suppose I am," replied he, with an appearance of
resignation.

"I shall miss you very much."

"It will be a good miss--won't it?"

"Why, Richard! You don't think so--do you?"

"Well, I have been a kind of nuisance to you."

"No, Richard; don't say that."

"I have been in all sorts of scrapes."

"I would a great deal rather have you stay at home, and--and----"

"And be a good boy," added Richard.

"That's what I mean, Richard."

"Berty, I think I have sowed all my wild oats now."

"I hope so."

"I suppose I have been a very bad boy," said he, with a kind of
deprecating smile, as though he did not believe more than one half he
said.

"It was all those bad boys you went with; if it hadn't been for them,
you would have done very well. That Sandy Brimblecom hasn't done you
any good."

"I hope I haven't done him any hurt, Berty. I won't be mean, when I get
into trouble. I don't think Sandy is any worse than I am. I don't know
but that he is a little better. I suppose he and I must part company
now."

"It will be all for the best."

"Berty, I am off to-morrow. I have given you a great deal of trouble. I
mean to do better. I am going to turn over a new leaf."

"O, I hope so, Richard!"

"I mean so, this time."

"I am so glad!"

"Don't you think father will let me stay at home, if I do well?"

"Perhaps he will."

"I don't like the idea of being put into a strait jacket, and tied to a
bell rope."

"It would be hard for you."

"I can't stand it, any how. I have made up my mind to be a saint. I
intend to keep out of all scrapes, and behave with perfect propriety
all the time, night and day."

"I hope you are not jesting, Richard," said Bertha, who did not like
the facetious language with which he clothed his resolutions.

"I'm in earnest. I mean every word I say. I solemnly promise you that I
will be a pattern of propriety; but I don't like the Tunbrook Military
Institute. I don't like the idea of being tied down to Colonel
Brockridge's little finger; of being drummed and fifed here and there;
and of reciting a Latin lesson at six o'clock in the morning, after an
hour's drill on the parade ground. Berty, to tell you the truth, I
don't believe I shall be able to keep my good resolutions, if I am to
be tied to a bell rope, or have to move by the tap of a drum."

"I hope you will."

"If I could stay at home, and have my pony and my boat, I should do
first rate."

Whatever the experienced reader may think of Richard's sincerity, he
was uttering an honest opinion. He sincerely feared that his courage
would not be equal to the work of submitting to the discipline of
Tunbrook, and conquering himself, at one and the same time. Tunbrook
and Colonel Brockridge seemed to be formidable obstacles in the path of
reform.

"You would soon get used to the discipline of the Institute," suggested
Bertha.

"I might get used to it as the old man's horse got used to living upon
shavings--when he died. If I go, I shall try to submit; but I don't
want to go."

"I don't see how it can be avoided. Father is determined that you shall
go."

"You can save me from this strait jacket, if you will, Berty."

"What can I do, Richard?"

"Mr. Presby will do any thing you ask him to do. You can tell him that
you think it would injure me to be sent to Tunbrook. Then he can talk
with father about it; and father will do any thing that Mr. Presby
wishes."

Bertha promised to speak to Mr. Presby about the matter, and she did so
at once; but instead of Bertha convincing him that it would injure
Richard to be sent to the Military School, he convinced her that it
would be the best thing in the world for him.

"I am afraid I spoiled my own children by over indulgence, and I cannot
counsel your father to do the same thing," said the old gentleman, with
deep feeling.

Bertha returned to her brother with his answer. Richard was not angry,
as she feared he would be, and this was a very hopeful sign. But he
went over his argument against strait jackets, bell ropes, and drums
and fifes, once more, and then proposed that he should be put on
probation for one or two months; and if he did any thing wrong, he
would submit without a murmur.

Bertha went to Mr. Presby again, and was so far successful that the old
gentleman agreed to speak with Mr. Grant in the evening. He kept his
promise, but the father carried a stronger argument than the friend of
the family. Richard was doomed to go to the Military Institute, and the
fact was patent to him before he retired. He felt as though he wanted
to submit, but the unconquered enemy that had so often led him astray
was rebellious.

He did not sleep well that night. He was excited by the prospect before
him. His good resolutions seemed to be very shaky, and he found himself
running away from them. When he heard the clock strike twelve, he
actually jumped out of bed, under a sudden impulse, fully resolved to
run away and go to sea. He thought he would take the Greyhound, and
make his way down to the city and ship the next day. He put on a
portion of his clothes, under the influence of this impulse.

"This would be becoming a saint with a vengeance!" said he to himself,
as he threw off his clothes, and got into bed again. "I told Bertha I
would try to submit, and I will."

This was the first decided advantage which Richard had gained over his
great enemy; but the battle was a mere skirmish with the outposts of
the potent foe. It was a victory, however, and it strengthened him. It
improved the _morale_ of his fighting element.

He had resisted temptation, and angels ministered unto him. While they
ministered, peace came, and he fell asleep.

At an early hour in the morning he was called by his father. With the
assistance of Bertha he packed his trunk and prepared himself for the
journey. He was sad, but submissive. At nine o'clock, having bid adieu
to all his friends, and taken a sorrowful survey of Woodville, he and
his father were driven down to the railroad station.

Before night they reached Tunbrook, and Richard was introduced to the
terrible Colonel Brockridge. He was a little man of fifty, with great
bushy red whiskers, whose whole face seemed to be eclipsed by the
wonderful sharpness of his eyes. He shook hands with Richard, spoke to
him very kindly, and hoped they should be good friends. The new recruit
was shown to his quarters, as his room was called, and Mr. Grant took
his leave.

Richard felt that he was alone with the future.




CHAPTER X.

RICHARD LEARNS THE MEANING OF RIGHT ABOUT FACE.


The apartment to which Richard was shown was called "Barrack B." There
were ten rooms of this kind, known by the first ten letters of the
alphabet, omitting J. Each barrack contained twenty narrow iron
bedsteads, and no two boys were allowed to occupy the same bed. At the
head of each barrack, there was an alcove large enough to contain the
bed of the assistant teacher, who had charge of the pupils in the room.
This apartment of the instructor was screened from the view of the boys
by a curtain, so that he could see without being seen, when he desired
to do so.

There was a small closet in the wall between every two beds, for the
use of the boys, and Richard was directed to transfer the contents of
his trunk to this receptacle, by Mr. Gault, the assistant teacher in
charge of Barrack B. Richard opened the trunk, and then sat down upon
the bed to wait until the instructor should retire, for he did not care
to exhibit his wardrobe to a stranger.

"Proceed, if you please," said Mr. Gault.

"I think I will do this business by myself," replied Richard.

"According to a rule of the Institute, the wardrobe of each pupil must
be inspected," said the teacher.

"Inspected?" asked the recruit. "What for?"

"To see that no improper articles are brought in."

"I would rather not," added Richard.

"The rule is imperative," said Mr. Gault, decidedly.

The strait jacket had already begun to oppress the male heir of
Woodville, and he was disposed to resent the indignity, as he deemed
it; but almost the last words of Bertha had been an injunction to
observe the rules of the school, however distasteful they might be.
Reluctantly, and with the feeling that he was sacrificing his
independence, Richard transferred his clothing to the closet assigned
to him. Mr. Gault carefully watched the proceeding, and confiscated
several articles which were declared to be contraband, among which were
some cakes and other sweetmeats, prepared by Bertha, and several
yellow-covered novels he had purchased in Whitestone.

"Can't I have those things?" asked Richard.

"No, sir; no boy belonging to the Institute is allowed to eat cake on
the premises."

"Why not?"

"We do not explain to boys the reason for every thing we do," replied
Mr. Gault, rather curtly.

"I don't think you have any right to take my property away from me."

"I don't ask your opinion, and it is of no value whatever."

"You needn't be so crusty about it," said Richard, who was wholly
unused to this style of remark.

"We tolerate no impudence here. If you use an expression of that kind
again, you will be put under arrest, and spend the night in the guard
house."

Richard's blood was beginning to boil, and he was tempted to pitch into
the insolent instructor who dared to use language of that kind to the
only son of the proprietor of Woodville. But he did not want to get
into trouble the first day; besides, the words "arrest" and "guard
house" had a very ominous sound to him.

"Can't I have my books? They are not cake," asked Richard.

"No, sir; you cannot. Such trash as that is not fit for boys to read.
Your property will be kept safely for you, and when you leave the
school, you can have it again."

"The cake will not be very good then."

"You can do any thing you please with it, except eat it. You can sell
it, or give it away."

"You can do what you like with it."

"Very well. Have you any money about you?"

"I have."

"You will hand it to me, and a receipt for the amount will be forwarded
to your father."

"Do you mean to rob me?" demanded Richard, his face flushing at this
new indignity.

"I refer you to the regulations of the Institute. We provide every
thing the boys require, and they have no more use for money than they
have for wings."

"I won't give up my money."

"Very well, sir. I will refer the matter to Colonel Brockridge, and you
may settle it with him. Follow me, if you please," said Mr. Gault,
after Richard had locked the trunk containing the contraband articles.

The new scholar followed the teacher to the office of the principal on
the first floor. He was very uneasy and nervous, and almost wished he
had given up his money. But he felt that the tutor was carrying things
altogether too far. It was subjecting him to a needless indignity.

"This young man refuses to give up his money," said Mr. Gault to the
colonel, who was writing at his desk.

Without waiting to ascertain the result of the interview, the assistant
departed, leaving the obdurate youth alone with the owner of those
terribly sharp eyes.

"Have you read our regulations, Grant?" said Colonel Brockridge,
turning round and looking the recruit full in the face.

But there was a pleasant smile upon his face, and his words were
gentle, and even respectful.

"Yes, sir," replied Richard.

"Then you are aware that pupils are not allowed to have money--are you
not?"

"Yes, sir."

"Boys are tempted to purchase various articles which injure them, such
as cakes and candy, and improper books. Therefore we think it is better
that they should not be provided with money. Is this a satisfactory
explanation?"

"I don't know but it is, sir," replied Richard, doubtfully.

"It satisfies me, at any rate. How much money have you?"

"About five dollars."

"Now, Grant, if you will hand it to me, I will give you a receipt for
it, or send it to your father. I will keep it, subject to your order,
if you desire it."

"I don't like the rule, sir."

"I think it is an excellent rule. But you waste my time. Your decision,
Grant."

"I should like to think of the matter, sir."

"Your decision at once," said the colonel; and Richard saw the sharp
eyes grow a shade sharper, and heard the deep voice grow a shade
sterner.

The recruit winced under the necessity thus laid upon him. The
principal could not be trifled with, and he must either submit, or take
the consequences, which were so indefinite to him that they seemed
sufficiently terrible.

"I will give up the money," said he, with a struggle, as he handed his
wallet to the colonel.

"I am glad to find you are a discreet and sensible youth," added the
colonel, as he wrote the receipt, and handed it, with the wallet, from
which he had taken the money, back to the owner. "If you wish to use
money for any proper purpose, you can draw on me, and your paper shall
be honored to the extent of the funds in my hands."

"I don't think I am likely to want money here," answered Richard,
gloomily.

"Every needed article will be furnished. Now, Grant, I am afraid you
have come here with an intention to resist our wholesome regulations.
If so, you must learn the meaning of "right about, face"--in its moral
application, I mean. Your father has told me all about you, and given
me explicit instructions to make a man of you. I understand your case
perfectly. If you are disposed to observe the rules of the Institute,
we shall treat you like a gentleman. The future is before you, young
man, and you must choose for yourself."

"I intend to obey the rules, sir," said Richard, rather crest-fallen
after what had happened.

"I am very glad to hear you say so. In a few days you will be provided
with the uniform worn by the pupils of the Institute. Here is a time
card for the fall term. Look it over carefully, for you will be
required to conform to it very strictly. To-morrow morning you will
take your place with the boys, and go through with the programme just
as though you had been here all your lifetime. We make no allowances
for beginners; they will have seasonable warning, and they must be on
the ground promptly at the moment. There will be a dress parade in a
few moments, and you can go out and witness it, if you choose," said
Colonel Brockridge, as he handed Richard the card. "After supper, Mr.
Gault will introduce you to the boys of your barrack."

Richard took the card, and left the room. As he passed out of the
building he descried the boys at play on the lawn. They were all
dressed in a uniform of gray cloth, though some wore a loose blouse,
and some, in the heat of play, had thrown off their jackets. The new
scholar walked over to the flagstaff, where the stars and stripes were
flying, and seated himself on a bench. The boys seemed to be having a
good time, in spite of the strictness of the discipline. As he listened
to the tremendous noise they made, and saw the rough-and-tumble games
in which they were engaged, he became convinced that the Institute was
not of the Blember style, and he began to have some hope that he should
survive the shock.

While he was waiting for the dress parade, he examined the time card
given him by the principal. To him it had a decidedly strait-jacket
odor, and he read it with a feeling of repugnance, not to say disgust.
It was as follows:--

    "TUNBROOK MILITARY INSTITUTE.

    FALL TERM.

    _From Sept. 1 to Dec. 1._


     6     A. M.  Reveille.
     6.30    "    Study.
     7.30    "    Breakfast.
     8       "    Squad Drill.
     9       "    Study and Recitation.
    11       "    Battalion Drill.
     1     P. M.  Dinner.
     1.30    "    Recreation.
     3       "    Study and Recitation.
     5       "    Recreation.
     6       "    Dress Parade.
     6.30    "    Supper.
     7       "    Off Time.
     9       "    Retire.

    The 'Off Time' belongs to the student; but deficient lessons must
    be made up during these hours.

    Camp duty will be performed by all students for one week, in each
    term, except the winter term.

                             J. BROCKRIDGE,
                                   Principal."

Richard thought the time card was rather formidable, but he came to the
conclusion that he could stand it, if the rest of the boys could.

While he was musing upon the present and the future, the rattling drum
sounded, and the boys instantly suspended their play. In a moment the
whole crowd had disappeared within the buildings that flanked the lawn;
but presently the rattle of several drums was heard, and one company
after another marched upon the parade ground, and formed the line.
Every boy was dressed in full uniform now, the blouses and other
non-conforming garments having been thrown aside, and every one wore
white gloves.

Richard found that the teachers were not the officers of the companies,
or the battalion, as he had expected. Several of the instructors were
present, but they appeared to take no part in the proceedings. Every
thing was managed by the boys, apparently without any assistance from
the teachers. The captains, lieutenants, sergeants, and corporals were
all in appropriate uniform, with their rank designated as in the United
States army. The swords and muskets were genuine weapons, though not so
large and heavy as those used by older soldiers. The students varied in
age from fourteen to eighteen.

The various evolutions of the dress parade were regularly performed.
The adjutant announced to the major that the parade was formed; the
band, consisting of eight pieces, marched up and down the line; the
first sergeants reported "all present or accounted for," and the
company officers marched up to the commander of the battalion. The boys
were as rigid as statues when the order, "Parade--rest," was given. The
companies marched back to the armories, broke ranks, and were
dismissed.

Richard was delighted with this exhibition, and the Tunbrook Military
Institute went up many degrees in his estimation. He followed the boys
into the supper room, where, without much ceremony, he made the
acquaintance of several captains and lieutenants. He received a hearty
welcome from his new associates, and began to feel very much at home.

The supper was not exactly what he had been accustomed to at Woodville,
but it was plain wholesome food; and when he saw officers and privates,
from the major down to the drummers, partake of it with hearty relish,
he was not disposed to grumble.

After supper, the boys scattered in every direction. Some went out
doors, some to the barracks, some to the school rooms. It was
"off-time," and without much assistance from Mr. Gault, who attempted
to introduce him, he made the acquaintance of half the students in the
Institute. At nine o'clock the sound of the drum rolled through the
halls, and the boys all retired.




CHAPTER XI.

RICHARD GOES THROUGH THE DRILL, AND HAS A SET-TO IN THE GROVE.


Richard slept very well, and was attending to the business of sleeping
with great pertinacity, when the reveille sounded at six o'clock in the
morning. He did not feel much like getting up, and though the other
boys in Barrack B instantly jumped out of bed, he did not heed the
summons. It went against his grain to get up at the sound of a drum, or
of a bell; not that he cared to lie in bed any longer, but the
principle of the thing was utterly objectionable.

"Come, Grant," said the boy who occupied one of the beds next to him,
in a kind and friendly tone, "it's time to turn out."

"I suppose it is," yawned Richard, "but I'm not quite ready to get up
yet."

"Better get up at once. They call the roll to half past six. You are in
our company, you know."

"Suppose I don't get up--what then?"

"It will be all the worse for you."

"What will they do?"

"I don't know; but fellows don't like to be late at roll-call."

Richard concluded to get up, for he preferred to see a punishment
inflicted upon some one besides himself before he got into trouble.
Bailey--for this was the name of the boy next to him--told him what to
do, and where to go, till they made their appearance at the armory of
Company D, to which the recruit had been assigned. They were then sent
to the school room for an hour's study. Richard was examined to
ascertain his attainments, and placed in a class, and he was told to
prepare himself for the lessons of the day. There was no great hardship
in this, and as Richard's talents were of a high order, he had no
difficulty in performing the work assigned to him.

The breakfast call scattered the boys again, and they were soon
reassembled in the dining room. When they were seated, profound silence
reigned throughout the apartment. The principal, all the assistant
teachers, and every one else belonging to the establishment, were
present. The chaplain then read a short passage from the Scriptures,
which was followed by a prayer, the whole service occupying not more
than three or four minutes.

The breakfast consisted of coffee, beefsteak, potatoes, with cold bread
and butter. The new comer was perfectly satisfied with this fare, and
taking it as a sample of his living, he did not believe he should
starve.

"What next, Nevers?" asked Richard of the boy who sat next to him, and
who wore the designation of an orderly sergeant.

"Squad drill, my boy. We shall give you some now," replied Nevers. "We
begin to find out what a fellow is made of on drill."

There was a little spare time before the drill came on, and the new
student improved it by inquiring particularly into the nature of his
duties. Bailey was patient and communicative, and he obtained from him
all the information he wanted.

Again the drum rattled, and the boys made their way to the several
armories. The doors and windows were thrown open, and the drill
commenced. It was conducted by Mr. Gault, who was assisted by various
officers of the company.

"Nevers," said the assistant, "you may take Grant and instruct him in
the positions."

Richard glanced at the orderly sergeant to whom this command had been
given, and the look of satisfaction which Nevers put on did not please
him.

"This way, if you please, Grant," said the young orderly sergeant, as
he led the way to one corner of the armory.

"What are _you_ going to do?" demanded the recruit.

"Give you the positions."

"Are you my teacher?"

"I am ordered to give you the positions," replied Nevers, chuckling
with a delight which the new comer could not understand.

"You want to find out what I am made of--don't you?" said Richard,
remembering what the other had said to him at breakfast.

"I always obey orders."

"Well, I think I should rather be instructed by the regular teachers."

"Very well; I will report to Mr. Gault."

"You needn't trouble yourself. If this is the custom, go ahead. I am
ready."

"Stand as I do, if you please--heels on the same line, feet turned out
equally, knees straight."

Richard observed all these instructions, and being a very tractable
scholar, he was soon master of the positions.

"Eyes--right!" continued Nevers, explaining the meaning of the order.
"Front."

There were three other boys, who had not yet been supplied with
uniforms, having come to the Institute a few days before. These also
were placed in Nevers's care, and he began to drill them in the
facings.

"Attention--squad," said the drill master, explaining what he meant,
and going through with the next movement. "Right--face."

Richard did not come to time, and the sergeant repeated his
instructions, and gave the order again; but it was done no better than
the first time.

"Move quicker, Grant. How long will it take you to turn on your left
heel? Now, try again. Right--face!"

The young gentleman from Woodville did not like the style of the drill
master's remarks. Though he had been scrupulously polite in all he had
said, up to the point of Richard's failure to obey the order with
promptness, there was something in his tone and manner that was very
offensive to him. Nevers seemed to feel that he was armed with
authority, and he intended to make the new comer feel it; but Richard
took his own time, and after they had tried half a dozen times, he
could not "right face" till after the others had completed the
movement.

"How long will it take you to turn on your heel, Grant?" said Nevers,
sharply, when his patience had been sorely tried.

"Till you speak a little more civilly," replied Richard, quietly.
"Perhaps not till you have found out what I am made of."

Nevers bit his lip at this reply. Perhaps he was conscious that he
ought not to have used the remark, or he might have reported the
contumacy of the recruit to the assistant in charge of the room.

"We will try again," continued Nevers. "Right--face."

The result was no better than before; for Richard was so offended at
the manner of the instructor that he determined not to obey.

"Well, Grant, you won't get round till the first day of January. You
are a perfect dough-head," said Nevers, the last remark being in a low
tone, though it was distinctly heard by the subject of it.

"All right," muttered Richard. "If you have found out what my head is
made of, I will show you, by and by, what my fist is made of."

"Ready when you are," replied Nevers, dropping his voice so that the
assistant teacher could not hear him. "Now, about--face;" and he
explained the movement, and went through with it himself.

Richard, having made up his mind what to do when the occasion offered,
did not deem it necessary to carry his resistance any farther at
present. Besides, he was very desirous of learning the drill, that he
might join the company. His "about face," therefore, was
unexceptionable.

"Very well, Grant," said the drill master, in a satirical tone, and
with a patronizing air.

"Your praise and your censure are all the same to me. Spare me both, if
you please," replied Richard, with a dignity becoming the male heir of
Woodville.

"No impudence, you puppy!" growled Nevers, his cheek flushed with
anger. "If Gault wasn't here, I'd boot you."

"I will make an opportunity for you when he is not present. Do your
duty like a decent fellow, if you can," answered Richard.

"Squad, forward--march," said Nevers, as he explained how the command
was to be executed.

As Richard and his companions in the squad were very tractable
scholars, they soon mastered all the mysteries of the step in common
time, and were then instructed in the principles of the "double quick."
They were then reviewed several times in what they had learned: after
which muskets were placed in their hands, and they were taught to
"shoulder arms," "support arms," and "present arms."

The hour devoted to drill was finished, and in spite of the overbearing
manner of the instructor, Richard was pleased with the exercise, and
even began to entertain visions of military glory.

The two hours devoted to study and recitations passed off without any
thing to distinguish them. Richard had learned his lessons, and every
thing went off to his satisfaction. The next item on the time card was
the battalion drill. The recruits were placed in the ranks, and for an
hour and a half they were exercised in the school of the battalion;
part of the time by Colonel Brockridge, and part of the time by the
young gentleman who had been elected by the company officers to the
command of the battalion--Major Morgan. If Richard was pleased with the
squad and company drill, he was delighted with that of the battalion.

After dinner came the hour of recreation. During this time the boys
were allowed to go any where upon the estate, which contained about a
hundred acres of land. Some of them made up games on the parade ground,
and others went over to the grove, a short distance from the Institute
buildings. Richard and Bailey, who had become good friends in the short
time they had been acquainted, took a walk over the estate. They found
the students engaged in every amusement which the genius of a boy could
devise, from base ball and cricket down to mud dams and water wheels.

In the grove they found Nevers, whom Richard was very anxious to meet.
The orderly sergeant was a year older than Richard, and somewhat
heavier.

"There is the fellow I've been looking for," said Richard to his
companion.

"Who--Nevers?"

"Yes, that's his name."

"Do you know him?"

"He drilled our squad this morning, and took the trouble to insult me
several times."

"Just like him. He is the biggest bully in the school."

"I am going to knock some of his impudence out of him."

"You?" exclaimed Bailey, stopping short, and looking with astonishment
at the new comer.

"I am going to try it, at any rate," added Richard, more modestly. "I
don't let any fellow insult me."

"Why, he will break every bone in your body. He can lick any fellow in
the school."

"I don't care for that. I won't be imposed upon by him."

"But it won't do; if any fellow gets up a fight here, it goes hard with
him."

"Can't help that."

"But he will whip you, as sure as you attempt it. I tell you he is the
bully of the school."

"He called me a dough-head, on drill, this morning."

"If you had reported him to Mr. Gault, he would have punished him
severely. No officer is allowed to speak impudently to a private,
especially to a new fellow. Why didn't you report him?"

"Because I feel able to fight my own battles; besides, I don't like the
idea of being a tell-tale."

"I advise you not to touch him. He will make mince meat of you, if you
do."

"Perhaps he will; he shall have a chance to try it."

"I should like to see him licked, and so would every other fellow in
the school."

"I think I can take care of him."

"Do you know any thing about the science?"

"O, well, something," replied Richard, with assumed indifference.

But Richard had been very thoroughly educated in the science of
self-defence by Bob Bleeker, who had served his time as a butcher's boy
in New York city, and done duty there as a rough of the first water.

"Nevers knows all about it. He has had half a dozen pitched battles
with fellows whom he bullied, and all of them got whipped. Nevers has
been 'cock of the walk' for the last year, for no fellow dares say a
word to him."

Richard said no more, but went directly to the place where the bully
was standing. He walked up to him with a bold and defiant air.

"I am glad to meet you, Nevers," said he, with easy self-possession.

"Are you, my fighting chicken?" laughed Nevers.

"You called me a dough-head this morning," added Richard.

"I did; and to make sure that there is no mistake, I repeat it--You are
a dough-head."

"Then take that for your impudence!" said Richard, as with a sudden
movement he slapped the bully's face.

"A fight! A fight!" shouted the dozen boys who were gathered in that
part of the grove.

"What do you want, Grant?" demanded Nevers, turning pale and red with
rage. "Do you want me to lick you?"

"If you please. You wanted to know what I am made of. I am ready to
show you."

"Clear the ring!" shouted the boys, forming a circle round the two
belligerents.

Richard coolly threw off his jacket and vest, rolled up his shirt
sleeves, unloosed his suspenders, and wound them round his waist, to
support his pants. Nevers threw off his jacket only. By this time, at
least fifty boys had assembled to witness the encounter; and so
unpopular was the bully, that Richard had the sympathy of the whole
crowd, except a few personal friends of his opponent.

"I am all ready," said Richard, taking the most approved attitude.

"So am I," replied the ready Nevers, as he edged up to Richard, and
attempted to plant a blow by the side of his head, which was handsomely
parried, and a left-handed rap lodged under the eye of the bully.

This blow maddened Nevers, and he redoubled his efforts to crush his
opponent, as he had expected to do at the first onset. "Keep cool, and
have both eyes open," had been the oft-repeated admonition of Richard's
distinguished instructor in the sublime art of self-defence, and he
carefully observed the instruction. After a few more plunges on the
part of Nevers, he found himself on the ground, from the effect of a
stunning blow which Richard had given him on the side of the head.

"Are you satisfied?" called Richard, flushed with victory.

"No!" yelled Nevers, as he sprang to his feet, and rushed upon his
antagonist.

Richard's coolness enabled him to do wonders, and the bully was down
again in a moment more.

"Come on if you are not satisfied," said Richard, whose nose was
bleeding, and on whose face there was a huge swelling, caused by the
bully's hard fist.

"Time!" shouted the boys.

"Gault's coming! Dry up!" "Settle it another time," added others, as
they began to scatter.




CHAPTER XII.

RICHARD DOES A "BIG THING," AND TAKES THE CONSEQUENCES.


In the language of the "prize ring," Nevers was still able to "come to
time;" therefore Richard could not be regarded as the victor in the
fierce contest. The boys who formed the ring began to scatter as soon
as the coming of the assistant teacher was announced. But they helped
the combatants to clothe themselves, and used every effort in their
power to conceal the fact that a fight had taken place.

"A drawn battle," said one of the students.

"Grant," said Nevers, "I am far from being satisfied. At five o'clock,
if you are ready, we will finish this business."

"With all my heart," replied Richard, wiping the blood from his nose.

"I hope you will do so," said the bully, earnestly.

"You hope I will! Do you suppose I will not? I am willing to be put
under bonds to appeal at the time named, Nevers. If any body backs out,
I shall not be the one."

"I am sure I shall not."

"Good!" shouted the boys.

"Now, keep still, fellows," added Nevers. "Don't say a word about it,
or all the fun will be spoiled."

The spectators of the barbarous spectacle all promised to keep still,
and Richard moved over to a brook behind the grove to wash the blood
from his face. His opponent had sundry very bad-looking places on his
physiognomy, but no blood had been drawn.

By this time Mr. Gault made his appearance in the grove; but so well
did the boys play their parts, that he did not even suspect that any
unusual event had transpired. Some of them commenced a game of "tag,"
and played with such zeal that no one could have suspected they were
not in earnest. Others engaged in conversation, and those who had
followed Richard to the brook resumed their labors upon the dam and
water wheel.

Mr. Gault had no particular motive in visiting the grove. He was merely
taking a walk in the discharge of his duty, which included a general
supervision of the boys on all the grounds. But Richard kept out of his
way, fearful lest his swelled face should betray him, and thus prevent
the final settlement of the account. He felt like a victor already, for
he was perfectly confident that his superior science and coolness would
give him the battle.

I am sorry to add that he did not think of the good resolutions he had
made; or, if he did, he banished the thought as inconvenient and
uncomfortable. He really believed that he had been deeply injured by
the bully of the Institute, and if he did not regard it as a positive
duty to obtain satisfaction, he at least felt that such a course was
perfectly justifiable.

Nevers was the bully of the school. Weak and timid boys were obliged
to submit to his insults. He had won the position of the "best man" in
the school, and he employed his power in playing the tyrant. Richard
felt that he must either whip him, or acknowledge him as his superior,
and submit to his rule.

The element of pride also had a powerful influence upon his mind.
Bailey had told him that Nevers could whip any fellow in the Institute;
and it followed, of course, if he could master him, he should at once
become the champion of the ring. Richard regarded this as a proud
distinction, and he was quite willing to have a battered nose and a
swelled face in the achievement of such an honor.

More than all this, Richard was animated by the generous sentiment
that, in fighting and whipping the bully of the ring, he became the
champion of the weak and the timid, who dared not resent the insolence
of Nevers.

When he had washed his face and stopped the bleeding, he followed the
course of the brook, till it emptied itself into the river, which was a
small stream some four or five rods wide. He was attended by Bailey and
two or three other boys, who had suddenly conceived a very great
admiration for him. If he was not the victor in the fight, he had the
advantage, and he had already partially entered upon the enjoyment of
the honors which would be bestowed upon the conqueror of Nevers.

A short distance above the mouth of the brook, the river received the
waters of the beautiful and picturesque Tunbrook Lake. The Institute
grounds bordered upon it for some distance, and great was the
satisfaction of Richard when he saw several boats, which his companions
informed him belonged to the school. There was a large schooner-rigged
sail boat, two twelve-oar race boats, besides three smaller craft. He
felt at home here, and inquired particularly whether the boys were
allowed to use these boats. They were only permitted to sail in company
with some of the instructors.

The boys were exercised in rowing on Saturday afternoons, when the
regular sessions of the school were suspended, and also upon the
occasional holidays which were granted. The lake was seven miles long,
by about two in breadth, so that there was abundant sea room. While
they were examining the boats, and viewing the beautiful lake, the
signal bell in the tower of the Institute school room sounded its
warning peal, and summoned them to study and recitation.

"How does my face look, Bailey?"

"Not very bad."

"Do you think Gault will smell a mice when he hears my lessons?"

"I don't see why he should."

"I guess I can stave him off if he does," added Richard, confidently.
"Didn't you see me tumble down when that fellow chased me?"

"What fellow?" asked Bailey.

"Any fellow you please," replied Richard, with a knowing smile.

"I didn't see any fellow chase you," added Bailey, innocently.

"Can't you see through a millstone when there is a hole in it?"

"Of course I can."

"Don't you see what I mean?"

"No, I don't."

"If Gault asks me how I hurt my face, I will tell him a fellow was
chasing me, and I tumbled down. Of course all the rest of you saw it."

"But I don't see it," persisted Bailey.

"Don't you, indeed! Then I think you ought to have a pair of leather
spectacles."

"O, I know what you mean, but I don't believe in lying about it."

"Ah, then you are a military saint--are you?" said Richard, with a
sneer.

"All but the saint," laughed Bailey. "I don't think there is any use in
lying about it."

"Then I suppose you think it was very wicked of me to fight with
Nevers."

"No, I don't," answered Bailey, promptly and decidedly. "Nevers is a
bully, and he insulted you. My father always told me never to take an
insult, but he would thrash me for telling a lie."

"Well, Bailey, I believe you are right. I think it is mean to tell a
lie; but how shall I manage it?"

"Face the music. A fellow who can stand such a pounding as you have
had, wouldn't mind being punished."

"I don't like to be punished."

"I don't know as the colonel would punish you. If a fellow gets up a
fight, he has to take it; but if he only defends himself, he says he
does no more than his duty."

"Well, who got up this fight?"

"That's the point. Nevers insulted you, and you pitched into him. I
don't know which is most to blame."

"We will leave it to the powers that be, and not bother our heads about
the question. I won't lie about it, any how."

By the time this point was settled the boys had reached the school
room. Richard applied himself with zeal and patience to the labors of
the afternoon, determined to do his whole duty. When called out to
recite, Mr. Gault noticed the swelling upon his face, and at recess
asked him what had caused it.

"It was done in a little affair out in the grove sir," replied Richard.

"What kind of an affair?"

"Nevers and I had a little set-to," said Richard.

"Rather rough play, I should think," added Mr. Gault, as he struck the
bell for the work to be resumed.

Richard congratulated himself that he had escaped, and, as he thought,
without telling a lie. He told none with his lips, but his manner was
such as to assure the teacher that the affair in the grove had been
nothing but friendly sport. Deception, or wilfully misleading another,
for the accomplishment of a purpose, is, in our opinion, just as
culpable a falsehood as gaining the same end by a lie expressed in
words. But Richard had not come up to this standard.

At the close of the school session, Richard hastened to the grove, as
did all the boys who were in the secret of the fight. Nevers was on the
ground soon after him, and the arrangements for the fight were hastily
completed. A line of scouts reaching from the parade ground to the
grove was stationed at convenient distances to give warning of the
approach of any of the teachers. The ring was formed, and Richard
coolly divested himself of all superfluous clothing, and prepared with
the utmost care for the desperate encounter.

Nevers was ready sooner than Richard, for he was not so precise in the
arrangement of his garments. As he took his place in the ring, though
he stood strong and defiant, there was a kind of nervousness in his
manner, which might have been detected by a keen observer.

"Come, Grant, we shall not get to work to-day, if you don't hurry up,"
said Nevers, his lip curling into a sneer.

But it was the bully in him that spoke. He had a reputation to sustain,
and he was saying and doing all he could to ward off any imputation
upon his courage.

"In one moment, Nevers," added Richard.

"You are as particular as though you were going to a ball," continued
Nevers.

"I suppose you are too much of a man to bawl, whatever happens; so
there won't be any," replied Richard.

"We shall have the colonel and all the teachers down upon us, if you
don't get fixed soon."

"I'm all ready," said Richard, throwing himself into the attitude of
the pugilist.

"Come on, then."

Richard edged up to his antagonist, and after considerable sparring,
the fight commenced in good earnest. Nevers was too much excited to use
all his strength to the best advantage, for the first hit he received
seemed to make him angry. In the first round Richard had the advantage.
In the second, Nevers knocked him down; but he was not at all
disconcerted. The heavy blows he received did not appear to disturb his
equanimity, while his opponent worked himself up into a towering
passion. The fight went on for ten minutes with varying results. At one
time all the spectators were sure that Nevers would win, and at another
they were equally sure that Grant would be the victor.

The anger of Nevers exhausted him more than his tremendous efforts.
Both parties had been terribly punished, but Richard was still cool and
self-possessed. At last Nevers became desperate, and rushed upon his
foe, determined at one effort to crush him. He was furious, and
abandoned all the science he had brought to his aid, and apparently
depended entirely upon brute force. The consequence was, that he laid
himself open to his cool rival, and Richard rained a series of
tremendous blows upon his head, which carried him under. He fell
heavily upon the ground, and lay there incapable of moving.

Richard, though his nose was bleeding, and he could not see out of one
eye, seated himself on the ground for a moment, till he had recovered
his breath, and then took his place in the ring.

"Time!" cried the friends of Richard.

But Nevers could not "come to time." He raised himself partly up, but
sank back again, incapable of making the effort to rise.

"Come on!" said Richard, as he sparred a little with his fists to
assure the spectators that he was "game" to the last.

Nevers made no reply, and Richard was declared the victor by his own
friends, and the proposition was admitted by those of his prostrate
antagonist.

"I am satisfied," added Richard, as he picked up his clothes, and made
his way down to the brook, attended by an admiring crowd.

When Nevers recovered his breath, he rose from the ground, and his
companions helped him down to the water, where he was bathed by his
sympathizing friends. Both of the combatants were severely though not
seriously injured.

"What's to be done now, fellows?" asked Richard, when all that cold
water could do for him had been done. "I suppose we are all in a bad
scrape."

"That's so," replied several. "We will stand by you, Grant, as well as
we can."

"I am not exactly in condition to appear at dress parade," added
Richard, turning his head round, so as to bring his available eye to
bear upon his companions.

"You are better off than Nevers, who is first sergeant of Company D."

"Can't we keep out of sight till we get our eyes open, as little
kittens do?"

"Roll call before dress parade," suggested Bailey.

"Can't some fellow answer for me? I will spend the night in the cabin
of the sail boat on the lake. It won't be the first time I've slept in
a boat."

"That won't do. Better face the music, Grant."

"But I shall be punished for this affair. I don't----"

"Colonel Brockridge is coming!" was the word passed down the line of
scouts, interrupting Richard's remarks on the subject of punishment.

"What shall I do?"

"Don't do any thing, Grant," said Bailey. "You are sure to be found
out, whatever you do. If you run away, it will be all the worse for
you."

Richard, after a moment's reflection, was of the same opinion, and he
decided to take the consequences, whatever they might be.

"What does all this mean?" demanded the colonel, sternly, when he saw
the swelled face of Richard.

"Been a fight, sir," replied several of the boys.

"Between whom?"

"Nevers and Grant."

"Nevers and Grant will report forthwith in my office," said the
principal, as he walked back to the Institute.




CHAPTER XIII.

RICHARD LISTENS TO A HOMILY ON FIGHTING, AND SPENDS THE NIGHT IN THE
GUARD HOUSE.


Richard, in obedience to the order of the principal, immediately
repaired to the office, where he was soon joined by Nevers, both of
them very much the worse for the encounter.

"You have been fighting--have you, young gentlemen?" demanded Colonel
Brockridge, as he entered the room.

"Yes, sir," replied both of the culprits, in the same breath.

"You know the rules of the Institute, Nevers," added the principal,
sternly.

"I do, sir; but I was struck, and was obliged to fight in
self-defence."

"And you, Grant, had common sense enough to know better than to engage
in a fight. You struck the first blow--did you?"

"I struck the first blow that was given with the fist, but Nevers
struck the heaviest blow with his tongue."

"Explain, Grant."

"At breakfast I was informed by Nevers that they found out what boys
were made of on drill."

"Did you make use of this remark, Nevers?" asked the principal.

"I did, sir."

"What did you mean by it?"

"Simply that we found out something about a boy's capacity."

"Ah, indeed!" added Colonel Brockridge, in a slightly satirical tone.
"What did you understand by the remark, Grant?"

"That a fellow who hadn't spunk enough to protect himself must submit
to be insulted, and to be bullied by those who were wiser than he in
military matters."

"I did not mean that, sir," protested Nevers.

"His looks and his tone indicated it," said Richard. "And when he was
directed to instruct me in the positions, his tone and manner were
haughty and domineering. I so understood it, sir; if I am wrong, I am
willing to apologize. In the course of the drill he called me a
dough-head."

"Is this true, Nevers?"

"It is; but I did not call him so till I was satisfied he did not mean
to observe the order. In teaching him the facings, he would not come
about till all the others had finished the movement."

"I wouldn't, if I had been in his place," added the colonel, very much
to the astonishment of Richard, and very much to the indignation of
Nevers. "You know very well that one boy is never permitted in this
school to domineer over another. You took pains beforehand to inform
Grant, by your words, and especially by your looks and actions, that
you meant to haze him, to bully him. As a decent boy, he could not
submit to it. Then you called him a dough-head; which, as Grant
suggests, was the heaviest blow that was struck, for it touches a spot
which the fist cannot reach. Nevers, you commenced the fight."

"I think not, sir."

"We don't argue the matter, sir," said the colonel, sharply. "One thing
more: no pupil is allowed to use ungentlemanly language to another
pupil. Obedience to officers who are merely students is purely
voluntary. If a boy refuses to obey the officers, he must leave the
company. No boy is compelled to go into the ranks. On drill the case is
still stronger, Nevers. If the recruit will not obey, it is the duty of
the drill officer to report him to the instructor. If you had done so,
it would have been Mr. Gault's duty to drill Grant himself."

Nevers made no reply to these remarks. He cast a savage glance at
Richard, who appeared to have conquered him in the forum as well as in
the field.

"Grant, you are also to blame," continued the principal. "We will not
permit you to be insulted, bullied, or domineered over. I will protect
you, but you must not take the law into your own hands. A blow is not
justifiable except in self-defence, or when all other means have
failed. You knew it was wrong to strike Nevers."

"I did not think so, at the time, sir," replied Richard. "What you have
said has changed my view of the matter."

Nevers sneered at this remark of his antagonist, and Richard saw and
felt that sneer. It was as much as to say that he, Richard, was making
his peace with the principal by pretending a penitence he did not feel.
It stung him where he was very sensitive, and he was angry.

While his wrath was boiling, and he was considering in what manner he
should punish his crestfallen rival for his savage look and his bitter
sneer, the parting admonition of Bertha came to his mind, with the
promise that he had made to obey the rules of the school. This
suggested his big resolutions to reform his life and character. A
brutal fight on the first day of his residence at Tunbrook was not
exactly redeeming his solemn promise to his sister; nor was the
conquest of Nevers a step towards the conquest of himself.

Yet, in spite of his promise, and in spite of his resolutions, he could
not believe that he had been altogether in the wrong. He thought
Colonel Brockridge's views of the case were very sensible: and while he
wished he had not been so hasty in hitting Nevers, he felt, as the
principal had suggested, that his conduct was greatly palliated by the
provocation he had received.

Nevers cast looks of hatred and contempt at him, which stirred his
blood deeper than even the words of insults he had received. He came to
the conclusion that the bully had not got enough yet, and impulsively
he determined to give him some more at the first convenient
opportunity. But when he thought of the promise he had made to Bertha,
when he thought of his resolution to conquer himself, he struggled with
the temptation, and finally had the strength to say to the malignant
demon of hatred and revenge, "Get thee behind me, Satan." The victory
was won; the heart of Richard was at peace; he had actually conquered
himself this time.

"You have both done wrong," said the principal, after a few moments'
consideration, during which time Richard had won a greater and nobler
victory than that he had gained in the grove.

"I am sorry for it," said Richard, and it was almost the first time in
his life that he had acknowledged himself in the wrong.

Nevers cast a look full of contempt at him when he uttered these words;
but Richard, under the influence of the good angel which had taken
possession of his soul, did not permit the look to ruffle him.

"I will do right, and feel right, this time, if I never did before,"
said he to himself.

"Nevers," added the principal, "your warrant as orderly sergeant is
withdrawn; you are reduced to the ranks. You can go, now. Remove those
stripes from your arms."

The sentence was a heavy blow to the bully. For a year he had been
trying to obtain promotion. He wanted a commission. The company
officers were elected from the sergeants, and he was confident that he
should be chosen captain of Company D at the next election. He had been
a sergeant for a year and a half, and would have been a captain if he
had not been a bully; for there were enough who disliked him on this
account to prevent his election. As the first sergeant of the company,
he was almost sure that he should be chosen the next time. But his
sentence removed all hope of such preferment.

"Grant, I believe you are sincerely sorry for what has happened; but
you have done wrong, and you must be punished."

Richard's anger rose at these words, and he was disposed to resent the
idea of being punished for what he had done, especially after the judge
had ruled so decidedly in his favor.

"I shall order you to be placed under arrest, and to spend the night in
the guard house. You will report to me at dress parade. You can go."

The culprit's lips were compressed, and his teeth were tightly closed.
He was angry, for he had expected to be fully justified before the boys
for his conduct. An impudent remark trembled on the end of his tongue,
but the memory of the conquest he had achieved over himself prevented
him from uttering it.

"I have done wrong, and I have owned that I was in the wrong. I will
submit," said Richard to himself, as he left the office.

When he went out upon the play ground, he found the boys assembled in
groups discussing the exciting event of the day. They gathered around
him to learn the result of the trial.

"Nevers has lost his office, and I am under arrest, to spend the night
in the guard house," replied Richard, in answer to their inquiries.

"You got off easy," said Bailey.

"I suppose I did; at any rate, I am satisfied."

"Nevers has lost his warrant," exclaimed the boys, who were
particularly technical in speaking of military events. "Let's give
three cheers."

"Don't do it," said Richard. "It's a hard case for him."

"I am glad of it. The bully is down," added one."

"You licked him well," said another.

"I am sorry I did," replied Richard. "I didn't understand the matter so
well then as I do now. Colonel Brockridge is a trump!"

If any of Richard's friends at Woodville had heard this remark, they
would have been ready to canonize him at once, for it was so utterly at
variance with his style, that his acquaintances would not have
recognized it as coming from him. But Richard was engaged in the
conquest of himself, and had won two or three important victories.

The early call for dress parade sounded, and the boys all hasted to the
armories to prepare for it. As Richard had no uniform yet, he was
excused from serving, and reported himself to the colonel, as he had
been ordered. When the parade was finished, the principal delivered a
homily on fighting, stating the facts connected with the combat of that
day, and commenting upon them. He condemned fighting in round terms,
declaring it was never necessary, except in self-defence. The civil and
the social law would protect every member of the community, and there
could be no need of resorting to the barbarous custom of settling
differences by single combat. He applied the principles he laid down
to the case before him so clearly, that Richard lost much of his
admiration of the "noble art of self-defence"--as pugilists stupidly
style the act of fighting, to ascertain who is the better man.

Lest our boy friends should not fully understand us, we must add, that
the colonel's views are ours. A boy ought to fight in self-defence;
never to find out which is "the better man." He should use no more
violence than is necessary to defend himself. A boy is bound to protect
his weak friend--not from words, but from blows--to the best of his
ability, by using blows, when they are necessary. We can excuse, but we
cannot justify, the boy who strikes another for insulting his mother or
his sister. We believe in a "kiss for a blow," but we also believe that
cannon are often the best peacemakers. "Blessed are the peacemakers,"
but he who permits himself to be unjustly scourged is more truly a
fomenter of strife than he who conquers a peace in a good cause by the
might of his strong arm.

At the conclusion of his remarks, Colonel Brockridge ordered Richard to
be conducted to the guard house, where he was to spend the night. Mr.
Gault was directed to see the order executed, and the culprit was
marched to the apartment which served as a place of confinement for
offenders. He submitted to the punishment with the best grace he could
command, but he was mortified and humiliated.

The guard house was a bugbear to the boys of the Institute. It was a
small room, with the mockery of iron bars at the window, placed there
more for effect than for any thing else. It contained a bed and a
stool, with no other furniture. But it was regarded as a terrible place
by the boys; not that it was a very great hardship to spend a night
there, but because of the disgrace which the popular sentiment of the
establishment had attached to the prison.

Richard entered, and the door was locked upon him. The room was dark,
but he was not permitted to have a light. He seated himself upon the
stool, and it was literally the stool of repentance to him. His supper
was brought to him, and the servant stood by with a lamp till he had
eaten it. He was then left alone for the night, to meditate upon the
folly and wickedness of engaging in a fight without justifiable cause.

One of the first questions which the hero of the fight asked himself
was, whether he had not too tamely submitted to the authority which had
humiliated and punished him. That he had done so was the most
surprising thing he had ever known himself to do. And when he came to
ask himself why he had submitted, he could very clearly trace the
reason to the good resolution he had made to reform his life and
character--to conquer himself. It was hard for him to give in, but he
was satisfied with himself, and began to feel that he had really made
some progress in the great work.

He wanted to write a letter to Bertha, and tell her all about the
events of the day--how patiently he had submitted to reproof and
punishment; and record his solemn determination to conquer himself. He
had no light, and no materials for writing; so, at an early hour, he
went to bed; and fatigued with the labors and excitement of the day, he
forgot in sleep that he was a prisoner.

At reveille, in the morning, he was discharged from arrest, and ordered
to report for duty in the school room. He was still strong in his good
resolutions, and the sneers and frowns of Nevers and his clique did not
disturb him--did not even tempt him to indulge in the cheap retaliation
of sneers and frowns in return.

In the course of the day Richard found that he was a lion. He had
thrashed the bully of the school, and won the enviable position of
champion of the Institute. But even this glory did not seem to be worth
much; for since the fight, he realized that he had whipped a bigger
fellow than Nevers.

For a week, in school and out, Richard was true to himself, and behaved
nobly. More times than we have room to record, during this period, he
got the better of his ever-familiar foe, and every new victory improved
his _morale_ and added to his _prestige_.

At this point in his school career, the students were ordered to
perform the usual round of camp duty; and at eight o'clock in the
morning, the battalion took up the line of march for the appointed
place, at the other end of Tunbrook Lake, distant ten miles by the
road.




CHAPTER XIV.

RICHARD DOES GUARD DUTY, AND IS CAPTURED BY AN ENEMY.


Camping out was a great event at Tunbrook, and the students looked
forward to it with pleasant anticipations for weeks. The principal was
shrewd in his policy, and no one knew when it would take place till it
was announced, only a day or two before the march. By this plan he
prevented any diversion of the thoughts from the lessons. Neither did
the boys know where they were going when they started. They obeyed the
orders which were given from time to time, and even when they halted
for the night and pitched their tents, they could not find out whether
they had reached the end of the march or not. The colonel told them
that soldiers should be taught to obey orders, and cured of all
propensity to ask questions.

The tour of camp duty for the summer term had been almost a continuous
march; and during the campaign of ten days, they had travelled over a
hundred miles. Colonel Brockridge was an earnest believer in the
necessity of physical development in boys. He was of the opinion that
they could stand almost every thing, if they were regularly and
systematically inured to hardship. Weak papas and tender mammas raised
their hands with horror at the idea of having their Johnny sleep on the
ground in a tent, and stick to the camp whether it was fair weather or
foul; but the colonel could adduce hundreds of instances where boys of
puny constitutions had become strong and vigorous under this treatment.

He believed that more boys had been spoiled by being "babied" than ever
had been injured in the slightest degree by hardship--if military duty,
as it was performed at Tunbrook, could be called hardship. It was very
certain that the boys enjoyed camping out; and if a few of them sneezed
or coughed after their return, these were not regarded as fatal
symptoms.

Richard was in his element when the school was put upon its muscle.
Though nothing but a private in Company D, and subject to the orders of
his inferiors in body and mind, he performed his duty cheerfully, and
enjoyed it very much. After Nevers had been cured of his folly, there
was not another boy in the establishment who had the hardihood or the
desire to impose upon him.

Every thing was done with military order and precision on the morning
that the battalion marched from the Institute. Though the reader knows
where they were going, not an officer or a private had a suspicion of
their destination; and none but a few of the new comers asked the
question, or appeared to care. In front of the battalion was the band,
and behind it came the wagons containing the tents, baggage, and
pontoon train. The principal and the instructors were scattered along
the line, where they could superintend the operations of the column.

Major Morgan, in command of the battalion, had evidently received
instructions for a portion of the day; for, without any direction from
the teachers, he led his command over the road to the grove, and in
fifteen minutes after they started, the order to halt was given. The
battalion stood rigid as a stake where they were ordered, and presently
the engineer corps was detached for duty. The pontoon wagon was brought
up, and unloaded by the side of the river. The boats, which were of
rubber, were inflated, and the business of building a bridge across the
stream was commenced.

Every thing was so nicely prepared that the work was accomplished in an
incredibly short space of time. The battalion, followed by its wagons,
crossed the pontoon bridge, the boats and the planks were taken up and
loaded upon the wagon again, and the troops were ready to march.
Neither Colonel Brockridge nor any of the instructors had spoken a word
during these operations, for the engineers had been thoroughly trained
in their difficult duty.

For an hour the battalion marched without stopping. The orders
"shoulder arms," "support arms," "right shoulder shift" relieved them
occasionally; but some legs began to ache before a halt was permitted.
During the next hour they marched most of the way with the "route
step." At twelve o'clock they halted for dinner and an hour's rest. The
haversacks of the soldiers had been filled with crackers and cold ham,
and they had a jolly dinner in a grove where they stopped.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, they reached the upper end of the
lake, and the orders necessary for forming a camp were given. The tents
were pitched, the boundaries of the camp marked out, and a detail for
guard duty was made from each company. Every thing proceeded precisely
as it would if they had been old soldiers, and engaged in the actual
business of war.

Richard was one of those who had been detailed from Company D, for
guard duty. The camp ground was a large, open plain, bordering on one
side upon a dense forest. The night was dark and dismal, and at nine
o'clock Richard found himself walking his lonely beat, on the verge of
the forest. There was a novelty about the situation that was very
attractive to him, and as he walked his solitary round, he actually
enjoyed it. It was not to all probable that an enemy, or even a
straggler, would disturb the quiet of the scene by attempting to pass
the line; but though the guard had been commanded to be vigilant, he
had abundant time and opportunity for reflection and castle-building.

Our sentinel had imbibed much of the spirit of the soldier, from the
martial exercise to which he had been trained, and he indulged in some
pretty visions of military glory. They were very pleasant and very
alluring at that time, when the country was enjoying profound peace.
Even the politicians, who were compromising with difficulties, present
and future, never dreamed that the war blast would sound through the
land in their day and generation, and were unbelievers in the dire
prophecies which they uttered. While Richard's fancy led him to scenes
of blood and glory on the battle field, he little thought that an
opportunity would so soon be presented for the practical application of
his military knowledge, and for the indulgence of his military
ambition.

While he was dreaming of war and glory, while in imagination he was
leading battalions of brave men to battle and victory, his reflections
were disturbed by the approach of a squad of boys. It was so dark that
he did not see them till they were within a few rods of him. It was
evident that they had left the tents by stealth, and must have crept
some portion of the way on the ground to escape observation. When they
came near enough to be challenged, the guard called out,--

"Who comes there?"

"Friends," replied one of the party.

"Advance, one friend, and give the countersign."

One of them stepped forward, and Richard held him at bay with his
bayonet, according to military custom.

"I declare, I have forgotten the countersign," said he.

"Then I will call the corporal of the guard."

"No; hold on a minute. I shall think of it in a moment."

Richard was willing to give him a fair chance, as there was no enemy in
the vicinity who could possibly intend to capture the battalion. But
while he was waiting, the fellow suddenly grasped his musket, and
attempted to wrest it from his hands. But this was a game at which two
could play as well as one; and Richard, instead of giving the alarm, as
he should have done, threw himself upon his muscle, and attempted to
beat off his assailants.

The rest of the party immediately came to the assistance of the fellow,
and, after a short but sharp struggle, the sentinel was overpowered,
and his gun taken from him. At the conclusion of the struggle Richard
found himself upon his back, on the ground, held down by the whole
squad of boys, or as many as could get hold of him. One of them held a
handkerchief over his mouth, so that he could not give the alarm, now
that he found it necessary to do so.

Richard supposed this rough treatment could be nothing more than a
practical joke--one of those tricks played off upon raw recruits, to
teach them the necessity of vigilance, and a nice observance of the
rules of the service. When he was overpowered, therefore, he submitted
to his fate, whatever it might prove to be, hoping his captors would
relax their hold upon him just long enough to enable him to turn the
tables upon them; for he was vain enough to believe that he could whip
the whole dozen of them, if he could only have fair play.

"Let him up, now, and we will tie his hands behind him," said one of
the party, in a feigned voice, to prevent the victim from recognizing
the speaker.

"But he will halloo, if we let him up," replied the one who had
answered his challenge, and whose voice Richard could not identify.

"I'll stop his mouth, if he hallooes," added the first speaker. "I'll
hit him over the head with the butt of his musket."

"No, no," said the other; "you'll kill him. We don't want to injure
him."

"I do; I wouldn't mind cracking his skull for him."

"No, no; we shall get into trouble ourselves if we do any thing of that
kind."

Richard thought they would any way, as soon as he could obtain the use
of his arms. He felt so well qualified to take care of himself that he
would have been willing to give his bond not to halloo, or call any one
to his assistance, though he could not help wondering that the
sentinels whose beats were next to his own, did not arrive at the scene
of operations. It was evident to him that they were asleep on their
posts, or that they were accomplices of the conspirators.

"Now, get up," said the speaker, who used the disguised voice.

Richard promptly obeyed this order, and though several of the boys held
on to him as he rose, a terrible struggle ensued, in which the captured
sentinel almost made good his mental boast; but they were too many for
him, and his hands were tied behind him with a knapsack strap, in spite
of his best exertions to shake them off.

"I told you he would be a hard customer," said one, who had not before
spoken.

"Shut up, you ninny! You'll blow the whole of us. No fellow is to speak
but--you know whom," said he with the assumed voice.

Richard tried to obtain, in the thick darkness that shrouded them, some
clew which would enable him to identify the ruffians; but he could not
make out any thing peculiar in their form or motions to guide him, and
he was equally at fault in regard to the voices. He stood quiet when he
found that resistance was useless; but he determined to keep a sharp
lookout for an opportunity to release himself from his mortifying
situation.

"Now, you----"

"My name is Dobbin," added the false voice.

Richard did not remember any such name, though he had heard the roll
called in all the companies, and he concluded that it was a "blind," to
deceive him.

"Now, Dobbin, take him off, and we will settle the case in the woods."

"Lead the way, Kennedy, and we will follow; but be careful and not make
a noise."

"Hush!" said Dobbin; "somebody is coming."

"Grand rounds!" added Kennedy. "Hurry him off as quick as you can.
Stuff a handkerchief in his mouth; choke him if he attempts to cry
out."

"But they will miss him," suggested Dobbin, "and then there will be a
row and a search."

"Off with him! Off with him! We shall all get caught," whispered
Kennedy. "I will take his gun, and keep guard."

Richard was literally dragged from the spot, and the fellow who called
himself Kennedy--though that was not his name--took the musket of the
defeated sentinel, and began to travel his beat as regularly as though
he had been duly detailed.

"Who comes there?" demanded he, as the officer of the day, attended by
a sergeant and two men, approached his beat.

"Grand rounds," replied the sergeant.

"Halt, grand rounds! Advance, sergeant, with the countersign."

The sergeant advanced to give the countersign, without discovering that
he had been challenged by the wrong man.

"_Bennington_" said the sergeant, giving the word appointed for the
night.

"Advance, rounds!" added Kennedy, as he placed himself in the proper
position.

The officer of the day passed on with his attendants, and as soon as
the ceremony had been repeated with the next sentinel, Kennedy threw
the musket upon the ground, and followed his companions into the
forest. Taking a road which led into the wood, he soon overtook the
rest of the party.

Richard was very curious to find out what his captors intended to do
with him; for he could not even yet believe that any thing more serious
than a practical joke was intended. He was not conscious that he had an
enemy in the battalion, with the exception of Nevers, who, though he
had bestowed a great many sneers and looks of hatred upon him during
the week that had elapsed since the fight, had betrayed no intention to
seek revenge for his defeat in fair fight. He knew that Nevers hated
him, but he could not believe that he would resort to such underhand
measures as the conspirators had adopted.

"What are you going to do?" asked he, after Kennedy had joined them.

"Shut up! You will find out soon enough."

Richard tried to open a conversation with them, but they were too wary
to talk, and no one spoke except Dobbin and Kennedy. They conducted
their prisoner half a mile, as he judged, from the camp, when they
halted, and fastened Richard to a tree, seating themselves upon logs
and stumps. The captive waited impatiently for the proceedings to
commence.




CHAPTER XV.

RICHARD FINDS HIMSELF IN THE HANDS OF THE REGULATORS.


"Come, fellows, we have no time to spare," said Kennedy, when the party
were seated, and Richard fastened to the tree. "We must finish this
business at once."

"We are all ready," replied Dobbin.

"Ready for what?" demanded Richard.

"Ready to settle your case. We are going to give you the biggest
licking you ever had in your life."

The prisoner thought this was rather doubtful; but as they could not be
supposed to have any knowledge of the thrashing inflicted upon him by
"Old Batterbones," he was willing to excuse any exaggerations of which
they might be guilty. When the young ruffian spoke of flogging him,
Richard could not help recalling the incident at the barn of the farmer
on the Hudson. Then he was guilty, now he was innocent; and his
feelings on the present occasion were as different from those of the
former one as light is from darkness.

He had been captured while in the discharge of his duty, and was not
conscious that he had given his assailants any cause of offence. He
could not explain how it happened that he was not angry. He did not
chafe in the bonds that confined him. The consciousness of being
innocent of all offence before his comrades, sustained and supported
him; and he felt a kind of proud superiority over his captors, which
placed him out of the reach of fear, and even out of the reach of
malice and revenge.

Richard was a courageous boy; he had been so in his foolish and vicious
enterprises; but he was doubly so now, when his soul was free from the
stain of transgression. He did not borrow any trouble about what his
persecutors intended to do, though he felt a very natural curiosity to
see the end of the adventure.

"Go on," replied Richard, calmly, as the spokesman of the party
announced their intentions.

"Shall we tell him what for? Shall we try him?" asked Kennedy.

"Yes; let us give him a drum-head court martial. The licking won't do
him any good if he don't know what it is for," replied Dobbin.

"Grant," said Kennedy, with the solemnity of a judge, "you have ruined
the best fellow in Company D."

"He ruined himself," replied Richard.

"No, he didn't. Of what you did in fair fight in the grove, we haven't
a word to say. But you have prejudiced the colonel against him, and
caused him to be deprived of his warrant, which will prevent him from
obtaining his commission at the next election. You set yourself up as a
leader among the fellows before you had been a week in the school. Have
you any thing to say?"

"Nothing, except that all your charges are false," answered Richard;
and if there had been light enough to see it, a smile would have been
discovered upon his countenance.

"In the interview with the principal, you pretended to be a saint, and
to be sorry for what you had done. You did not stand up like a man, and
take the consequences of your acts."

"Go on; I have nothing to say," added Richard, when the speaker paused.

"You are a dangerous fellow in the school. You intend to climb up
yourself by pushing others down. We won't submit to it."

"What are you going to do?" coolly asked the prisoner.

"We are going to thrash you, as you deserve."

"You are brave fellows!" sneered Richard. "What you are afraid to do in
the daylight, with fair play, you do by stealth and trickery in the
night. You are a set of cowards, and if you will untie my hands I will
whip the whole of you."

"That is very fine talk, Grant," said Kennedy, "but it don't amount to
any thing."

"No talk is necessary to prove your cowardly meanness. Go on, and do
your best. I am not afraid of the whole of you, even with my hands tied
behind me. I despise the whole of you."

"We will give you a chance to escape."

"I don't ask any chance to escape."

"Grant, you talk like a fool."

"Better be a fool than a knave and a coward."

"We don't want to hurt you. There are fellows enough in our crowd to
make Tunbrook Institute too hot to hold you. We advise you to write to
your father, advising him to send you to some other school. Will you do
so?"

"I will not," replied Richard, promptly.

"Then you must take the consequences. We are organized, and we are
determined that you shall leave. If you ask your father, and insist
upon it, no doubt he will take you away."

"Very likely he would," added Richard, "but I shall not ask him to do
so."

"You plainly don't understand what is in store for you. Our plans are
well laid, and we have been through the same mill once before. A fellow
about your size, and one who could fight as well as you do, had to
leave about a year ago. He undertook to be a leader before his time
came. We hunted him out, as we shall you."

"When you hunt me out, I will go, but not till then."

"Grant, this is all idle talk on your part. You don't understand your
situation. We can count up fifty fellows belonging to our association.
We can drive out any fellow who makes himself obnoxious. We mean to be
fair, and we are willing that any fellow who works his way up should
have all the honors he wins. But do you suppose we fellows, who have
been here two or three years, and who have worked ourselves up, are
going to step one side for a fellow who has been here only a week or
two?"

"Who asks you to step aside?" demanded Richard, indignantly, for this
show of fair play had touched him in a tender spot, and in spite of
himself he began to be interested in the argument.

"You do; you have licked the best fellow in the school, and then you
begin to play saint, and curry favor with the colonel. You mean to
lead, and not follow."

"I mean to be and do just what circumstances require."

"Grant, there is no such thing as misunderstanding your position. What
your looks indicate is more than all you may say with your mouth, or do
with your hands. You are a dangerous fellow, and you must leave, or
compromise."

"What do you mean by compromise?"

"We'll let you stay if you will keep in your proper position."

"What is my proper position?"

"At the foot of the ladder, of course, till the fellows above you have
got out of the way."

"You mean Nevers?"

"Nevers and others."

"I will agree to no such compromise. All the officers, I am informed,
are chosen by ballot."

"They are."

"Then, of course, the fellows can choose whom they please."

"They can; and since you have whipped Nevers, they will elect you; and
those who have done their duty for two or three years must go into the
shade. If you will agree to step one side, we will promise to let you
alone. Will you do it?"

"I will not."

"Mind what you do, for if the 'Regulators' make war upon you, they will
drive you out."

"The what?"

"The Regulators. They are a secret society for certain purposes. It is
a powerful organization, Grant, I can tell you. If you will do the
right thing, we will take you in."

"No you won't. I'm not to be taken in by any such bait," replied
Richard, who was disposed to laugh at the ridiculous association that
had taken upon itself the duty of regulating the affairs of the
Tunbrook Institute.

"You may sneer as much as you please. Every fellow in the school knows
there is such a society, but no one but members can tell who belong to
it. We mean to have fair play in this institution, and we have never
yet failed in getting it."

"Come, Kennedy, you will talk all night," said Dobbin. "You can't do
any thing with him."

"Well, Grant, you may leave, compromise, or take the consequences.
Which will you do?"

"I will not leave; and I certainly will not compromise on the terms
named. I mean to behave myself like a man, while I am here. If any one
is a better fellow than I am, I will step one side for him, as I must.
If any fellow gets above me in the class, I will not complain, or
attempt to pull him down. If the fellows think I am fit to be a
sergeant, or a captain, or a corporal, I shall abide their decision. I
won't pull any fellow down, or be pulled down myself. I think the
Regulators are a mean, dirty, cowardly set of bullies, who mean to
build themselves up by pulling others down. Let every fellow be judged
by his own merits. That's my opinion. Now you can do what you please."

And they did do what they pleased, though it was evident the Regulators
were not accustomed to deal with so stubborn a subject. At the word
from Kennedy, who seemed to be the chief of the society, the whole band
fell upon Richard with sticks which they had cut in the woods, and gave
him a most unmerciful beating. The prisoner bore it with silent
disdain. He felt that the cause in which he was engaged was a good one,
and he did not flinch from the penalty of fidelity.

At the word from the chief, they suspended the flagellation, and
Kennedy again attempted to bring him to terms by argument, but it was
in vain.

"Very well," said he, evidently disappointed at the ill success of the
reasoning process. "This is only the first installment of what is your
due. When any thing goes wrong with you, when you get into a scrape,
when you find the ushers and the colonel down upon you, just understand
that the Regulators are round. You have fifty enemies now, instead of
one, as you had two hours ago."

"That's all, Kennedy; don't say any more," interposed Dobbin,
impatiently. "Let's take him back now. He will find out the rest of it
fast enough."

If Richard could have heard the conversation among the Regulators
before they waited upon him, he might have been flattered by the
complimentary manner in which his name was handled. His talents and his
muscle, no less than his growing popularity, were appreciated by the
band, and it was more desirable to win him than it was to drive him
out. They knew what a valuable acquisition he would be to their number.
But he must stand one side, and wait for his turn before he aspired to
become a leader.

The Regulators, using the utmost caution, unloosed the prisoner, and
marched him back to the camp. When they reached the line, they threw
him upon the ground. While one of the largest of them, having all the
advantage, held him there, the others disappeared in the darkness. The
fellow that held him then removed the strap from the arms of the
captive, and bounded away as fast as his legs would carry him.

Richard jumped up as quick as he could and gave chase. But the
Regulator had the start of him, and the pursuit was useless. The victim
returned to his beat, felt round upon the ground till he found his gun,
picked it up, and resumed his solitary walk. He was a little confused
by the events which had transpired, and he was forced to acknowledge
that the Regulators had managed their business with consummate address
and skill. He hardly knew what to make of the affair. He knew that he
had been whipped; this fact was still patent to his consciousness in
the tingling sensation that played over his legs.

The whole thing seemed very much like an illusion. It was almost too
strange and ridiculous to be credited, and he could not help
considering whether he had not actually been walking in his sleep this
time. The Regulators appeared, to his sober senses, to be the most
absurd institution ever invented by the mischievous brain of a boy. Yet
he could not disbelieve the evidence of his senses, and especially of
his smarting legs, and he was compelled to admit that the society
actually existed; though there was a remote possibility that the whole
affair was a practical joke, devised by Nevers and his clique.

We have before intimated, in the course of this story, that Richard
Grant was an "old head." He had a very tolerable conception of the
principles of strategy; therefore he did not do as most boys would have
done--make a tremendous row over the occurrences of the night. He
decided that it would be politic for him to keep both eyes and both
ears open, while he kept his mouth closed. By this course he hoped to
obtain a clew to the mystery, and thus eventually to make the daylight
shine in upon the dark proceedings of the Regulators.

"Where have you been this hour?" demanded the sentinel, whose beat was
next to his own, when they met.

"I haven't been far off," replied Richard; "that is, not more than half
a mile off," he added, in a tone so low that his companion could not
hear him.

"I understand. You have been taking a nap."

"'Pon my word, I haven't."

"But you have; I haven't seen you before for an hour."

"I haven't been asleep."

"Honor bright, Grant, haven't you?" asked his companion, good
naturedly.

"No, I haven't."

"Where were you when the grand rounds were made?"

"I was close by."

"Of course you were, or you would have been missed," added his
neighbor, as he turned on his heel and made off.

Richard thought he was very easily satisfied, and he wondered if he
wasn't a member of the secret band of Regulators. Our sentinel marched
to the other end of his beat. His neighbor on this side had missed him,
but he was as easily satisfied as the other had been, and Richard
wondered whether _he_ was not a Regulator.

While he was musing upon the extraordinary events of the night, the
relief came round, and he was marched to the guard tent, where, for
four hours, he had an opportunity to dream of the Regulators, and their
secret management of the affairs of the Tunbrook Institute.




CHAPTER XVI.

RICHARD BECOMES FIRST SERGEANT OF COMPANY D.


The next morning Richard was discharged from guard duty, and returned
to the battalion. From the moment he opened his eyes he carefully
observed the actions of his companions, and even studied the glances
which were bestowed upon him. All his watching seemed to be in vain,
for he could not obtain a particle of information that would aid him in
solving the mystery of the Regulators.

Among the boys there were several with whom he had become quite
intimate, particularly Bailey, who occupied the next bed to his in
Barrack B. So eager was he to fathom the mystery, that he was tempted
to make some inquiries of them; but they might themselves be members of
the Regulators. Even Bailey might belong to the potent organization,
and he did not care to expose himself in the slightest degree to their
jeers or their malice. Though, as he had been informed, there were
fifty boys who had become his enemies, and who were pledged to annoy
him to the utmost of their ability, every one seemed to be his friend.

Hardly had he been discharged from guard duty before his arrest was
ordered, and he found himself accused of sleeping at his post. He was
conducted to the tent of Colonel Brockridge, where the charge was
distinctly recited to him.

"What do you say to this charge, Grant? Are you guilty or not guilty?"
demanded the principal.

"Who are my accusers, sir?" asked Richard, thinking only of the task he
had laid upon himself of discovering the Regulators.

"That does not answer my question, Grant. I asked you whether you were
guilty or not guilty," added the colonel, sternly.

"Not guilty, sir!" replied Richard, promptly and firmly.

"Then you wish to have the charge proved?"

"I do, sir."

"That is rather inconvenient," said the colonel, biting his lip. "If
you are guilty, I should prefer to have you say so."

"I am not guilty, sir."

Colonel Brockridge had had too much experience with boys to neglect the
looks and actions of the accused while he questioned him, for the
expression often reveals more than the words. Richard's communication,
on this occasion, was "yea, yea; nay, nay." He had the look of one who
speaks the truth, and the principal was duly impressed by the
appearance and manner of the prisoner.

"You speak very decidedly," added the colonel. "Were you at your post
at half past nine o'clock?"

"I was not, sir."

"Where were you?"

Richard hesitated; there were several teachers and several company
officers present. He did not like to tell the story before them, and he
did not think it would be prudent to do so. Probably some of the
Regulators were within hearing, and he preferred to unearth them in
some other way.

"Your answer, Grant," said the principal.

"Without intending any disrespect to you, sir, I would rather not
answer," replied Richard, glancing at the officers present.

A slight curl on the lip of a cadet by the name of Redman attracted his
attention. It was a kind of suppressed sneer, which Richard interpreted
that he dared not expose the doings of the secret society. His answer
had been a virtual admission of the charge, and the case seemed to have
gone against him. Richard concluded that the boy who could rejoice at
that moment must be a Regulator.

"The penalty of sleeping at your post and deserting it would be the
same; and as you admit the charge in substance, it will not be
necessary to proceed any further," said Colonel Brockridge.

Richard was tempted to make a full explanation of the events of the
night, but he had some doubts whether he would be believed if he did
so. Besides, he was curious to know what the Regulators would do. The
penalty for the offence with which he was charged could not be very
heavy, and he determined to submit to it, for the purpose of exposing
the Regulators at some future time.

The principal then gave him a lecture on the impropriety of deserting
his post, when placed on guard, explaining the consequences that might
result from such unfaithfulness in time of war. Richard listened
patiently to the reproof, and was sentenced to be confined in the guard
tent for twenty-four hours.

Richard possessed his soul in patience, and slept off a good portion of
his imprisonment. He devoted all his wakeful hours to a consideration
of the doings of the Regulators, and in devising plans for
"ventilating" their secret proceedings.

When he was relieved from arrest, and permitted to join his comrades,
he kept a close watch upon Redman, and also upon the two privates who
had been next to him in the line on guard. They must have been his
accusers, and he was satisfied that they belonged to the obnoxious
association. Nevers, no doubt, was also a member, and he believed him
to be the "Dobbin" of the party that had whipped him. Here were four
whom he suspected, and during the week the battalion remained in camp,
their words and their actions were carefully scanned; but they were too
adroit to expose themselves, though Richard's close scrutiny was not
entirely fruitless.

Our soldier entered heartily into the spirit of the occasion, and
performed his duty with the utmost fidelity. Though he was made the
victim of various petty tricks, such as smearing the stock of his
musket with grease, cutting the straps of his knapsack, and hiding his
blanket, he bore all these things with politic patience, and treated
his comrades with the most scrupulous fairness. He was the champion of
the weak, and, being the conqueror of Nevers, no one ventured to carry
their opposition to his will beyond a few respectful words. He would
not let a small boy be insulted or bullied; and a frown from him was
generally a sufficient protection. He was foremost in all the sports of
the boys, and every day increased his popularity.

If the Regulators said or did any thing to his injury, they did it very
slyly, for Richard could not discover that there was any one who was
not his friend. On the last day of the encampment, the election of
officers was to take place, and during the week, of course there was a
great deal of electioneering done for various candidates.

On the day before the election, a petition was circulated among the
boys, requesting the principal to reinstate Nevers in the office from
which he had been degraded. There were about fifty names on the paper
when Bailey brought it to Richard. It was not very favorably received
by the boys generally. Nobody could tell when or where the fifty names
had been obtained; no one had seen the signers place their autographs
upon the document. Richard heard Bailey and a dozen others refuse to
sign it, and some of them even proposed to get up a remonstrance.

"I am going to sign the petition," said Richard, to the astonishment of
his companions.

"You, Grant?" exclaimed a dozen boys, in the same breath.

"I am; just to show the fellows that I bear him no ill will," replied
Richard. "Nevers was degraded for that affair with me; and, as I licked
him, I think I can afford to do the handsome thing."

"Then he will be elected captain of Company D," said Bailey.

"I don't know about that," added Richard. "I am willing to see him
restored to the place he was in before I came, but I shall not give him
my vote for captain, or any thing else."

The victim of the Regulators took out his pencil and wrote his name
upon the petition. Though he fully believed that Nevers was the
"Dobbin" of the party that had assaulted him, he could not prove it and
he was disposed to give him a fair chance, so that neither he nor his
friends should have any good ground for complaint. His example was
followed by all the boys present, and from that moment the number of
names on the paper increased very rapidly.

At dress parade, Colonel Brockridge, to whom the petition had been
presented early in the afternoon, called Nevers forward, and after a
few remarks, restored him to his former position as first sergeant of
Company D, observing at the same time that the name of Richard Grant on
the paper had had more influence upon his mind than that of all the
others. It was a magnanimous act, which he heartily approved.

"Three cheers for Nevers!" shouted some friend of the first sergeant,
when the company broke ranks.

They were given, but it was only a partial demonstration, evidently
confined to about a dozen of the company.

"Three cheers for Grant!" said Bailey, when those for the first
sergeant had been given.

The call was promptly responded to, and though the cheers seemed to
proceed from the entire company, there were probably about a dozen who
did not join.

"Tiger!" added Bailey, with an earnestness that assured Richard he was
not a member of the Regulators.

The "tiger" was added, together with a volley of applause by clapping
the hands. Richard's position in Company D was not to be doubted, and
the Regulators present must have felt that their influence was not very
powerful.

On the following day they had a further proof of the popularity of
Richard, and if they had not been very stupid, they might have seen
that he had more influence than the whole band of Regulators put
together. On the first ballot in Company D, the first lieutenant was
elected captain; the second sergeant was elected first lieutenant. The
second lieutenant was believed to be a strong friend of Nevers, and no
promotion was awarded to him.

Richard Grant was elected second sergeant, and when the vote was
declared, the result was greeted with a round of hearty applause. The
other places were all filled, as the inclination of the majority
dictated, subject only to the healthy rules of the Institute. If there
had been no limit to the choice of the boys, we have no doubt their
favorite would have been elected captain.

The face of Nevers was as dark as a thunder cloud after the election.
The remark of Richard that he would not vote for him had been
circulated through the company, and had been influential in defeating
the aspirations of the first sergeant. Nevers knew very well that he
owed his defeat and his restoration to his rival, whom he hated with
ten fold greater vigor than before--hated him for what he had done, and
hated him for what he had left undone.

Of course, Richard felt very good-natured, and snapped his fingers at
the Regulators. He sat upon a stool alone after supper, thinking of his
good fortune, and congratulating himself upon the skill with which he
had conquered his enemies. He was satisfied that in being true to
himself he had won the respect and confidence of his companions. The
good resolutions he had successfully carried out had rendered him
worthy of the favor bestowed upon him. In conquering himself he had
conquered others.

While Richard sat on the stool thinking of the pleasant events of the
day, and perhaps wondering how long it would be before he became the
major of the battalion, his vanquished rival sauntered up to him, his
face still looking dark and malignant.

"You have beaten me again, Grant," said he, sourly, "but your day will
come soon."

"Eh, Dobbin?" replied Richard, with a good-natured smile, as he glanced
at his fellow-sergeant.

"What's that?" growled Nevers. "What do you mean by calling me Dobbin?"

Richard was satisfied from the appearance of Nevers, that the name was
not wholly unfamiliar to his ears. It was the first time he had ever
ventured to hint at the proceedings of his first night in camp; and it
was the first time that his rival had ever dared to speak to him in a
surly tone.

"If you don't understand it, no matter," added Richard, with a merry
twinkle of the eye.

"If you call me by that, or any other improper name, you shall suffer
for it."

"How many of you will it take to punish me for it, eh, Dobbin?"

"Dobbin again?"

"Do you know a fellow by the name of Kennedy?" added Richard. "If you
don't, I'll introduce you some day."

Nevers concluded that Richard was a tough customer, and he made no
further allusion to any suffering in store for his defiant rival. But
Richard's taunt about Kennedy, and his promises to introduce him, were
not pleasant to the bully, and he walked away. He feared that the
victim had been making dangerous discoveries.

On the following morning the battalion took up the line of march for
the Institute, and arrived without incident or accident; and that night
the boys exchanged the hard ground for the iron bedsteads in the
barracks.




CHAPTER XVII.

RICHARD GIVES THE TUNBROOKERS A LESSON IN BOATING.


Among the favorite recreations of the cadets of the Tunbrook Military
Institute was that of boating. The beautiful lake afforded them
abundant space for sailing and rowing, and quite a number of them were
proficient oarsmen and excellent navigators.

On the Saturday afternoon following the return from the camp, Colonel
Brockridge proposed to exercise the boys in the boats. This
announcement was received with hearty applause by the cadets, and they
gathered round the principal to learn the order of exercises upon the
lake.

"Well, boys, suppose we appoint a couple of coxswains and have a race."

"Hurrah!" shouted the boys. "A race! A race!"

"You like the plan, I see. Who shall be your leaders?" added the
colonel.

The boys made no reply, but looked curiously at each other, as though
they were not competent, to settle the question.

"Nevers for one," said Redman.

"Very well; Nevers, we all know, is a good boatman, and has always won
the races. Who shall be the other?"

No reply was made, and the principal waited some time for a suggestion.

"Grant has had considerable experience with boats, his father informed
me," continued Colonel Brockridge.

"Grant! Grant!" shouted the boys.

"Grant shall be coxswain of the other boat, then. What do you say,
Grant?"

"I am very willing, sir, if the fellows desire it," replied Richard,
modestly.

"Very well. The race shall come off at four o'clock. Each leader shall
have two hours to train his crew. The course shall be round Green
Island and home, making a pull of about three miles. You shall draw
lots for the choice of boats, though I don't think there is a particle
of difference between them."

The choice was between the Alice and the Emma, as the two club boats
had been named. Nevers drew the first choice, and selected the Alice,
and of course Richard was obliged to be satisfied with the Emma.

"The coxswains shall select their own crews. Now, draw for the first
choice."

Nevers drew the prize this time also, and named Redman as his stroke
oarsman. Richard took Bailey for the same station, and they continued
to select alternately till each had taken his twelve oarsmen. The
coxswain of the Alice had a decided advantage over his rival, for he
had a complete knowledge of the capacity of each boy, and had before
taken part in several races on the lake. Richard was aided in choosing
by his friends whom he had selected, and when they stepped into the
boat, he was well satisfied with his crew.

"We shall get beaten," said Bailey, in a low tone, as they shoved off
the Emma.

"What makes you think so, Bailey?" demanded Richard, with a smile.

"Nevers is a great boatman. He knows all about a boat, and when he was
in command he always won the race."

"Don't you croak, Bailey," laughed Richard. "I have seen a boat before
to-day, and I tell you we shall not get beaten."

The coxswain spoke in a loud tone, so that all his crew could hear him,
for he knew that the first requisite of success was confidence.

"I hope so," said Bailey. "I would rather any other fellow in the
school should beat you than Nevers. It will be a feather in his cap."

"Don't croak, Bailey. Just believe that we shall beat, and we shall."

"I hope we shall. Nevers first got ahead of all the fellows in boating.
His success elected him to his first office in the company, and if he
beats you in this race, he will be captain at the next election. The
boys will all stand by the fellow that beats in any thing."

"There, Bailey, if you say another word, I shall wish I had chosen some
other fellow. You will defeat us if you keep on croaking," added the
coxswain, earnestly.

"I'm not croaking. I only want you to understand what you have got to
do; and I will do all I can to help you win the race. What are you
going up here for?" demanded Bailey, as the boat's bow was pointed down
the river, which was the outlet of the lake.

"You ask too many questions, Bailey. If you will leave this thing to
me, I will agree to whip Nevers all to pieces," said Richard, who did
not like the discipline on board the Emma.

"All right, Grant. Let him alone, Bailey," said one of the boys in the
middle of the boat.

"Where's the other boat?" asked Richard. "I see her; she has gone up
the lake. That's just what I wanted her to do. I have a little business
to do here before we go into the race."

He ordered the crew to cease rowing, and, to the surprise of his
companions, ran the boat up to the shore. As he had intimated to them
that questions were not agreeable to him, they asked none, and waited
patiently till his movements should explain themselves.

"Now, Bailey, will you go up to the store-house, and bring down some
black lead, and the brushes they use to clean the stoves. Don't let any
body see you, and don't say a word to any one."

Bailey did not very clearly understand what this request had to do with
winning the race, but he ran off with all haste to execute the mission
intrusted to him. While he was gone, Richard improved the opportunity
to develop his system of rowing to his companions. He had attended a
great many boat races on the Hudson, had belonged to a boat club in
Whitestone, and had clear ideas upon all matters connected with the
business of boating.

On the return of the messenger, the articles he had brought were thrown
into the stern sheets, and the boat shoved off. Again, to the surprise
of the crew, Richard took them down the river, half a mile, till they
came to a sandy shore, where he grounded the Emma.

"Now, tumble out, fellows," said Richard, "and take your oars with
you."

The boys wondered more than before at the singular proceedings of the
coxswain, and Bailey so far overcame his respect for discipline again,
as to suggest that they should have no time to practise with the oars,
if they spent the precious moments in this stupid manner.

"Shut up, Bailey; I have more to lose in this race than you have," said
Richard, rather curtly. "If the fellows don't believe in me for this
business, I am willing to step one side, and let any other one take
hold who thinks he can do it better than I can."

"Go ahead, Grant!" shouted the crew. "We are all satisfied, and so is
Bailey."

"I won't speak another word, Grant," said Bailey. "I only wish I had as
much confidence as you have."

"Bear a hand lively, my lads," added Richard, as he seized the painter
of the boat; "I want to get her out of the water."

The boys took hold with a will, and the Emma was soon placed high and
dry upon the beach. She was then turned over.

"There, fellows," said Richard, as he pointed to the foul bottom of the
boat, "do you expect to win a race with the craft in that condition? In
fifteen minutes we will have her in the water again, as clean as a
lady's parlor."

By direction of the coxswain, the crew fell to scrubbing the bottom of
the boat with an earnestness and zeal which soon removed every trace of
moss and grass. She was then permitted to dry for a short time, and the
bright October sun soon completed their work. The bottom was then
covered over with black lead, and rubbed with the brushes till it shone
like a newly-polished stove. The boys used their muscle upon the
brushes, being relieved every minute by fresh hands.

"Now, my lads, we are in condition to win the race. Shove her off,"
said Richard, whose energy inspired the whole party with resolution and
confidence.

The Emma was afloat again; the boys took their places, though not till
Richard had rearranged them by their weight, so that the boat was in
perfect trim when she started. For an hour and a half Richard trained
them in rowing, till the stroke exactly suited him, and they fully
understood all his signs and signals.

"Now, fellows, mind your eyes, and we are sure to win," said the
wide-awake coxswain, as the gun fired that was to call them to the
stake boat. "I never saw a better set of rowers in my life, and I am as
well satisfied with you as though we had been pulling together for a
year."

"Bully for you, Grant," said one of the boys at the bow.

The Emma pulled leisurely up to the large sail boat, on board of which
were the colonel, the assistant teachers, and as many of the boys as
she would comfortably accommodate.

"Are you all ready?" shouted the colonel, as the Alice and the Emma
took their stations.

"All ready, sir," replied Richard, cheerfully.

"All ready, sir," added Nevers, confidently.

Both parties were impatient for the contest to begin, and both were
almost certain of winning the victory. Even the boats seemed to share
in the spirit of their crews, and anxious to have the fetters removed
that they might bound away upon the errand of conquest. Each had
appropriate flags at the bow and stern, and one with a taste for boats
would have been delighted by the appearance of the trim craft.

"Ready for the signal!" shouted the colonel again.

"Down with that flag in the bow, Carter," said Richard to the bowman,
as he took down the color in the stern.

"What's that for?" asked one of the crew of the Emma.

"They hold the wind, and keep us back a little. We will be on the safe
side. Now, ready, fellows, and mind what I have said to you. Don't look
at the other boat till you can see her over our stern."

Nevers disdained to follow the example of his rival in removing his
flags, saying that he could beat him with his colors flying. Nevers
prided himself upon his skill in handling a boat, and he felt that the
opportunity had come which would enable him to triumph over the hated
usurper, as he considered Richard. He knew how much glory and honor
would be awarded to the conqueror in this race, and that if he could
beat his rival, scores of those fair-weather friends, who always attach
themselves to a rising man, would leave him.

The signal gun was on shore, and at a gesture from the colonel, it was
discharged. The report seemed to unloose the bonds which chained the
boats to their stations, and they bounded away. The crew of the Alice
bent to their oars with the most tremendous energy, while that of the
Emma seemed to be inspired by the cool and steady nerve of her
coxswain. They had been fully and thoroughly instructed in their duty.

The crowd of boys on the shore were silent and breathless with the
interest they felt in the exciting race; and when, before the boats had
gone a quarter of a mile, they discovered the Alice more than half a
length ahead of her companion, the jaws of Richard's friends dropped,
and their faces were as long as though a ten pound weight had been
fastened to the chin of each, while a smile of triumphant satisfaction
lighted up the faces of Nevers's well-wishers.

"Nevers has it!" exclaimed one of his intimates, as, when she rounded
Green Island, the Alice was found to be more than a length ahead of the
Emma.

"Not yet," said one of the other clique. "Let Dick Grant alone. He
knows what he is about. He don't half try yet."

The crew of the Emma could not yet see the Alice over the stern of the
boat, and we doubt not they shared the anxiety and despondency of their
friends on shore. But no sooner had the boats rounded the island, and
commenced on the home stretch, than Richard's vibrating body began
gradually to move more rapidly, and just in proportion as he increased
the movement, the Emma lessened the distance between herself and the
Alice.

"Steady, fellows; don't get excited. Dip a little deeper," said
Richard, in a quiet, cool tone. "We are doing splendidly, and you shall
see the Alice over the stern in about three minutes."

Nevers, as in the fight with his rival, began to be very much excited
when he saw that he was losing ground. He spoke quick and earnest words
to the crew of his boat, who had been doing their utmost from the
beginning, urging them to increase their exertions. Richard had not
permitted his crew to do their best at first, but had kept in their
muscles a reserve of strength for the final emergency. The party in the
Alice had no such reserve power, and their efforts to increase the
speed of the boat were put forth at the expense of a proper attention
to skill and precision.

The boats were now side by side, and they continued in this relative
position until they were within half a mile of the stake boat. The race
had become intensely exciting, and again the two cliques on shore were
breathless and silent with interest. Neither party had any thing to
indicate the success of its favorite.

Even yet Richard had not put his crew to their utmost. But the decisive
moment had arrived, and his body began to sway backward and forward
with increasing rapidity, and a quarter of a mile more gave him half a
boat-length's advantage over his rival.

"Steady, fellows; keep cool," said he, in a loud whisper. "Don't miss a
stroke, and make every one tell all it will. Now you see her over the
stern--but pull steady."

The Emma was a length ahead of the Alice when Richard finished these
remarks. The boats were within an eighth of a mile of the end of the
course, and the murmuring applause of the Grant party on shore began to
reach the ears of the contestants.

"Pull! Pull!" shouted Nevers, filled with rage and vexation. "Pull with
all your might, fellows. We can beat him yet, if you only stick to it."

He increased the rapidity of his motions, but his crew were unable to
keep up with him. Their stroke was unsteady; some of them forgot to
feather their oars, and some scarcely dipped the blades in the water.

"Steady!" said Richard, with more energy. "Mind your stroke. Keep both
eyes on me. Here we are!" shouted he, jumping up from his seat in the
stern, and giving the order to cease rowing.

The Emma flew by the stake boat two and a half lengths ahead of the
Alice, and a stunning roar of cheers from the shore and the sail boat
saluted the victors.

"Grant forever! Three cheers for Grant!" shouted Bailey, as the crew of
the Emma rose and made the welkin ring with their huzzas.




CHAPTER XVIII.

RICHARD WINS ANOTHER RACE, AND TUNBROOK IS MUTINOUS.


It was a proud moment for Richard Grant when he rose from the stern
sheets of the Emma, and found the Alice was two or three lengths
behind, and when he heard the shouts of his friends rend the air. It
was victory--another triumph over the Regulators, who had threatened to
make Tunbrook too hot to hold him. They did not get ahead very fast,
and he felt that his conquest over them was complete.

The hour of prosperity, of triumph, is the most dangerous period in the
experience of a young man. He is on the top of the wave, and he sees
not the dark abyss that yawns on either side of him. Truly we need
adversity to keep us from forgetting God and duty; to keep us from
forgetting that truth and justice are more mighty than mere success.

But when Richard came to Tunbrook, he came with a solemn resolution to
forsake the error of his ways, and find happiness in the path of
rectitude. Whatever success had attended him, he attributed to the
influence of this good resolution. He had manfully resisted temptation;
he had cured himself of several bad habits, and he had made good
progress in the conquest of himself. He had often felt an inclination
to resent with hard words and heavy blows the sneers of the Nevers
faction, but he had controlled himself; and each victory of principle
over inclination had made him stronger in his purpose to do right.

Bertha's answer to his letter, in which he had informed her of his
election to the post of sergeant, cautioned him against being too much
elated by his good fortune. She hoped his promotion would not make him
think too much of himself. When he realized that he had won a new
victory, when he heard the boys shouting his name, the words of his
sister came to his mind, and he determined to bear his honors meekly,
and to feel kindly towards Nevers and his friends.

As they pulled to the stake boat, Richard cautioned his crew not to
"crow" over the fellows in the other boat, for it was a friendly
contest, and he did not wish to see any ill feeling on either side. The
Alice was already alongside the sail boat. Nevers was in no enviable
frame of mind; he looked dark and sour, and Richard only bestowed one
glance upon him, lest his looks should be misconstrued.

"Grant, you have won the race," said Colonel Brockridge, as the Emma
came up. "I had no idea of such a result."

"Three cheers for Grant!" shouted an enthusiastic boy in the sail boat.

"No," added the principal, as he glanced at the crest-fallen coxswain
of the Alice, and saw that he was taking his defeat very hardly. "You
have cheered enough. We don't want any unkind feelings to grow out of
this affair. Nevers, you have been beaten, but----"

"I shouldn't have been, if I had had fair play," growled Nevers, whose
anger was manifest in his tones.

"Has there been any foul play?" demanded the colonel.

"Yes, sir, there has," replied Nevers, sharply.

"What was it?"

"The fellows in the Emma took her out of the water, cleaned her, and
covered her bottom with black lead."

"I don't see any unfair play in that. You had the right to use your
time for preparation as you wished," said the principal.

"He couldn't have beaten if his boat hadn't been in better condition,"
added Nevers.

"It is a good driver that keeps his horse in good condition. I think it
is rulable for each crew to prepare their boat as they think best."

"Well, he beat us by a trick. What did they go down the river for to
haul up their boat?"

"That is their business. I see you are not satisfied, Nevers."

"No, sir, I am not. I like to have fair play in these things."

"So do I," said the colonel, with a quiet smile, "and I think you had
better try this thing over again. Now, suppose you exchange boats, and
pull round once more, that we may see how much good the black lead did.
What do you say, Grant?"

"I am willing, sir," replied Richard.

"We are all fagged out, now, sir," interposed Nevers.

"I proposed this method to remove your objections to the race, Nevers.
You might have cleaned your boat, if you had been so disposed."

"I didn't think of it," snarled Nevers.

"If a general should get beaten because he did not think to bring up
his ammunition, or by neglecting any precaution, his want of
forethought would hardly be deemed a sufficient excuse. I should like
to have you exchange boats for a short pull, if you don't go round the
island."

"We are tired out, sir."

"The other crew have pulled the same distance you have," added the
principal.

"Try it, Nevers, try it," whispered Redman. "We shall be laughed at for
a month, if we don't. We will whip them this time."

"I am willing to try it, sir," said Nevers, though his words belied his
feelings.

Both crews were somewhat rested from the fatigue of the race, and they
exchanged places in the two boats, taking the positions assigned to
them.

"We shall get beat this time, sure," said Bailey.

"No, we won't," replied Richard.

"Well, if you say so, then we shall not. It would be the greatest thing
that ever was, if we should whip them again. It will show that black
lead isn't a great institution, after all."

"No, it won't. Those fellows don't pull worth a cent. If they can't do
better than they did before, we shall whip them all to pieces. Now,
mind what I told you; don't hurry, and keep cool."

The signal was given, and the two boats dashed off. The race was very
nearly a repetition of the first one. Richard kept a sufficient
quantity of muscle in reserve for the last half mile of the race, and
came in about a boat length ahead of the Emma. The one and a half
length's difference in the two races seemed precisely to indicate the
amount of virtue in black lead.

[Illustration: RICHARD WINS THE RACE. Page 240]

Again the thundering cheers of the Grant party reverberated over the
lake and through the grove. Nevers was astonished, as well as angry,
and his face was darker than ever.

"Are you satisfied now, Nevers?" asked the colonel, when the Alice and
the Emma came alongside the stake boat.

"Yes, sir," replied he, desperately; "but I don't understand it."

"I do," said the principal. "The other crew pull better than yours. I
never saw better pulling in my life than those fellows showed us. I
hope there is no hard feeling between you."

"No, sir," replied Nevers; but his looks and his tones belied his
words.

"He will pull us all down at this rate," muttered Redman, as the Emma
left the stake boat.

"Something must be done," added Nevers. "He has got half the fellows on
his side now."

"What shall we do?" asked Redman, who seemed to regard it as a hopeless
case.

"We'll fix him yet."

Some earnest conversation followed these remarks. It was carried on in
whispers, and entirely suspended when the Alice approached. The boats
were secured, and both crews landed.

"Grant, you have beaten me fairly, and there is my hand," said Nevers,
when the two coxswains met on shore.

Richard was utterly confounded by this show of good will on the part of
his rival. He took the proffered hand, and gave it a hearty pressure.

"Thank you, Nevers; it is very kind of you to treat me in this handsome
manner. I'm sure I don't feel any ill will toward you," replied
Richard.

"We will be friends, Grant, and perhaps you will tell me how this thing
was done?"

"With the greatest pleasure."

"You have some secret in rowing."

"I will tell you all I know about it, any time you please," said
Richard, frankly.

"Thank you; you are the first fellow that ever beat me rowing, and I
honor you for it, but I don't understand it. Shall we be friends now,
Grant?"

"With all my heart."

Richard could not have been more astonished if the sky had fallen, than
he was when his great enemy approached him with words of kindness and
conciliation. He could scarcely believe his senses; but there was
Nevers by his side, as good-natured as though he had won the race; and
more than this, the rival crews were suddenly on the most excellent
terms, and were fraternizing like brothers. Nevers had evidently given
up the point, and intended to withdraw all opposition to the
advancement of Richard.

Nevers and his friends seemed to be sincere, and the hatchet appeared
to have been actually buried. Richard was so well treated by them, that
he came to the conclusion that the Regulators had been dissolved, or at
least that they had turned their attention to some more promising field
of labor.

On the first of November, when the boys assembled for morning prayers,
the principal announced a new regulation, requiring every member of the
Institute to be in-doors during the off time, from seven till nine in
the evening. Before, they had been permitted to go where they pleased
during these hours, as long as they did not leave the estate. But some
of the boys had been seen in the village of Tunbrook after eight in the
evening; and all efforts to discover who they were had been unavailing.
The prohibition had been made to correct this evil.

When the new regulation was announced, there was a general murmur of
disapprobation among the students, for some of their best sport had
been enjoyed out of doors, after dark. No one ventured to remonstrate,
but the order was exceedingly unpopular.

"I won't stand it," said one and another, during the first recreation
hour in the afternoon. "It's too bad; it will spoil all our fun."

"The fellows are all agreed on this point," said Redman.

"I am willing to observe all reasonable regulations, but we might as
well go into a monastery as submit to this thing," added Nevers. "What
do you say, Grant?"

"I don't like it. We intended to have a first-rate game of foot ball
these moonlight evenings."

"There isn't a fellow in the school that likes it," said Redman.

"That's so," replied Bailey. "I don't see the use of the rule either."

"Nor I."

"Some of the fellows have been down to Tunbrook almost every night."

"What's that to us, as long as we didn't go?" said Bailey. "The
innocent ought not to be punished with the guilty."

"The colonel couldn't find out who they were," said Redman, with a kind
of chuckle. "No fellow would 'blow' on the others."

"It is easy enough to talk," said Bailey, "but what are you going to
do?"

"Do? Why, resist it, of course," replied Redman. "I am ready to do so,
for one. Let us all stay out to-night till nine o'clock."

"Agreed," added some of the larger boys.

"We shall get punished if we do," suggested Bailey.

"No matter. They will have to punish the whole crowd. The guard house
won't hold us all," replied Redman.

"Let us have a plan about it. We will get up a regular mutiny," said
Nevers. "If we can get a hundred fellows to go with us, we shall make
the old man cave in."

"Good, Nevers! Let all the fellows that will join meet under the big
oak by the river, at five o'clock, or as soon as we get out of school.
Let each fellow talk it round in a quiet way, but don't let the
teachers hear a word."

"Will you be there, Grant?" asked Nevers.

"I don't know. I will see."

"Don't know?" said Nevers. "Don't you see all the fellows are in for
it?"

"I will think of it," replied Richard, as he walked away.




CHAPTER XIX.

RICHARD IS DETERMINED, AND SOME ALLUSION IS MADE TO "WATERMELONS."


There had been a time when Richard Grant would have desired no better
fun than to engage in such a mutiny as that proposed by Nevers and
Redman; and he was not yet so far removed from his evil propensities as
to be able to decline the proposition. The boys of the Institute
believed they had a real grievance, for it seemed harsh and needless to
deprive them of some of their best hours for amusement. It looked just
as though the principal was angry because he could not ascertain who
had broken the rules of the school, and spitefully intended to punish
the innocent with the guilty.

Probably none of them intended to carry their opposition any farther
than to express their disapprobation of the new regulation. The colonel
was a universal favorite, and they had full confidence in his judgment
and his justice. Perhaps the desire to have a little fun and excitement
was the strongest motive that actuated them.

During the afternoon, the plan to redress their grievance was whispered
among the boys. "All the fellows were going to join the mutiny" was the
strongest inducement that could be used to obtain the consent of the
timid ones; and if "all were going to join," it would require a great
deal of moral courage to stand aloof from the scheme.

Richard was sorely perplexed. With the others, he felt that the new
regulation was arbitrary and unnecessary; and such a scrape as the boys
proposed was exactly in accordance with his antecedents. He wanted to
join for the fun of the thing, and because the rest of the boys were
going to do so. He did not like to be singular. Besides, he might
injure his popularity, and lose some of the influence he possessed, if
he refused to join.

The temptation was so strong that he could not at first resist it; and
though he did not positively promise to meet the others under the big
oak, he gave them some encouragement that he would do so. The little
time he had to think of the matter during the study and recreation
hours did not enable him to arrive at a conclusion; and at five
o'clock, when school was dismissed, he was still halting between two
opinions.

When he left the school room, he fixed his mind upon the question, and
began to discuss it in the most vigorous manner. He knew that any
resistance to the authorities of the school was wrong. Colonel
Brockridge had made the rule, and it was his duty to observe it. What
would Bertha say, after he had given her such a glowing account of his
success in overcoming temptation, when she was informed that he had
joined a mutiny?

"I'll keep my resolution!" said he, stamping his foot upon the ground
to emphasize his determination. "I'll stand out against the whole of
them."

Half past five came, and nearly every boy in the school had gone to the
appointed place. Richard sat on the bench at the foot of the flagstaff
on the parade ground, thinking whether his duty required him to do any
thing more than simply refuse to join the mutiny. Somehow, it entered
into his head that it was his duty to prevent the rebellion if he
could. It even occurred to him that he ought to inform Colonel
Brockridge of the intention of the students, and thus place himself on
the side of law and order; but he rejected this suggestion, it was so
utterly repugnant to his nature. He could not "tell tales out of
school." If any body's life, property, or happiness had been at stake,
he might have felt differently. Richard was a novice in advocating the
claims of law and order, of truth and justice; and he was more easily
satisfied than some would have been in a similar situation.

"While he was debating this matter with himself, Nevers, Bailey, and
Redman approached, and interrupted his meditations. They appeared to be
a committee appointed to wait upon him, and ascertain his views upon
the momentous question.

"You didn't come down," said Nevers.

"No; I have concluded not to join in the scrape," replied Richard,
gravely.

"Why not?"

"Because I don't think it is right; and I think if we speak to the
colonel about the matter, he will make it all right."

"I tell you, Grant, he has no right to make such a regulation," added
Nevers, with energy; "and I, for one, am not going to beg him not to do
that which he has no right to do."

"Come, Grant, you are almost the only fellow in the school who won't
join the mutiny," said Redman.

"The fellows are all in for it, and you had better come," added Bailey.

"No; I won't join," replied Richard, decidedly.

"Come down to the grove, whether you join or not," suggested Nevers.

"I am willing to go down to the grove, but I shall not go in for this
scrape."

"Come along, then."

The boys walked over to the grove, the committee using all their
eloquence and logic to induce Richard to change his mind; but thus far
he remained firm and loyal to his good resolution. His arrival at the
grove created a sensation, for it seemed to be evidence that he was to
form one of the party.

The position of Richard Grant on the present occasion was so novel that
he could hardly believe in his own identity. Like the old woman with
the little pig, it did not seem to be he that was refusing an
invitation to join in a scrape so harmless as the one proposed; and he
almost needed an introduction to himself.

But Richard was himself, truly himself--himself in the highest and
noblest sense. His determination to keep his resolution seemed to
create around him an atmosphere of purity, and the more he breathed it,
the firmer and the stronger he became. The boys exhorted him singly, in
couples, and by squads, to join the foolish enterprise, but without
effect.

"Better come with us, Grant," said Nevers. "We have got a first-rate
plan, and we shall have a tip-top time."

"I have fully made up my mind not to go," replied Richard.

"I shall not go, if Grant doesn't," added Bailey.

"Nor I," said another.

"Back out--will you?" sneered Nevers, his face darkening with an
expression of anger.

"I said I would join if Grant did," replied Bailey, stung by the
reproach.

Most of the boys were silent for a time, for the decided and unexpected
stand taken by Richard, the favorite of the school, altered the
complexion of the whole affair. This silence was succeeded by a more
unequivocal demonstration. One after another followed the example of
Bailey, and deserted the bad cause, till Richard found himself no
longer alone, but supported by at least thirty of the best fellows in
the Institute; and then they began to come over in squads.

"You are the meanest set of cowards I ever saw in my life," exclaimed
Nevers, bitterly, when the enterprise appeared to be fully nipped in
the bud.

"Grant is right," several of the boys replied.

"Grant!" sneered Nevers, angrily. "He wasn't always so nice as he is
now."

"That's so," said Redman, as he placed himself by the side of the
bully. "We know a thing or two about Grant, before he became pious."

"What do you mean by pious?" demanded Richard, stepping up to the
speaker; and as he did so, his fists were involuntarily clinched.

"Watermelons!" replied Redman, vindictively.

"Watermelons!" added Nevers.

"Watermelons!" responded a dozen or more of the large boys, who had
gathered around Redman.

"Do you walk in your sleep any now, Grant?" said Redman, with a mocking
laugh. "You wasn't pious _then_."

Richard was so mortified and confused by these taunts that he wished
the earth might open and hide him from the exulting gaze of his
assailants. His blood boiled with shame and indignation, and more than
ever before he realized that "the way of the transgressor is hard." His
first impulse was to rush upon his dastardly foes, and crush them
beneath the weight of his strong arm.

Most of the boys looked at each other with astonishment, wondering what
could be meant by "watermelons," and walking in his sleep. It was
evident to Richard that only a few of his companions understood the
reflections cast upon him. There he stood, trembling, as it were, in
the balance, and ready to be carried up or down by this new and most
terrible trial--up into a higher sphere of virtue, or down into a
deeper degradation than any he had yet fathomed.

"I will be true to myself!" said he to himself, after he had stood
silent for a moment, blushing with shame, and assailed by the foe
without and the foe within.

His clinched fist unclosed, the muscles relaxed, and though his face
was still red, a smile of triumph played upon his lips.

"Will you go, Watermelons?" sneered Redman.

"I will not," replied Richard.

"Shut up, Redman," interposed Nevers, who entirely mistook the singular
change which had come over Richard's countenance. "Come, Grant, you and
I will talk it over alone;" and he took his arm, and led him away from
the crowd.

"You see we know all about these things," continued Nevers, "but we
don't want to be hard upon you. Only about a dozen of us know any thing
about those scrapes."

"Who told you about them?" asked Richard.

"That's nothing to the purpose. You are a good fellow, Grant, and I
advise you to join us; if you do, not a fellow shall ever say a word
about watermelons or sleep-walking."

"I will not join you, whatever you say and whatever you do."

"Then you won't hear any thing but watermelons while you stay here. I
called you out as a friend, and I think you had better go with us."

"I will not."

"Then we will tell all the fellows."

"I will save you the trouble by telling them myself."

"Come, Grant."

"I will not."

"Go it, then, Watermelons!" said Nevers, as he ran back to the others,
and told them of the result of the interview.

Richard wondered who could have informed them of his scrapes, but he
could form no idea. Lest our readers should be equally in the dark, we
will tell them, confidentially, that Sandy Brimblecom had done the
mischief. A cousin of his, on his way to Tunbrook, had stopped a day in
Whitestone. This relative was, unfortunately, one of the Nevers'
faction, and the information he brought was carefully preserved for an
emergency.

"All who join, come under the big tree!" shouted Redman. "If you walk
in your sleep, Grant, perhaps you will pay us a visit."

"Asleep or awake," replied Richard, calmly, but forcibly, "I shall know
enough to keep out of bad company."

"Do you mean me by that?" demanded Redman, rushing up to Richard, and
shaking his fist in his face.

"I do."

"Then take that;" and Redman struck Richard in the face.

The latter did take that, but the next instant his assailant lay upon
the ground, where Richard with a single blow had thrown him.

"None of that, Redman," interposed Nevers. "The colonel will be down
upon us."

"Let's lick him," said another.

"I am ready," coolly replied Richard, throwing off his coat.

But prudence carried the day, and the mutineers retired to the big oak.
Only about fifty, or one fourth of the students, responded to the call
of Redman, and the rest retired from the ground.

"What did they mean by 'watermelons'?" asked Bailey, as they walked up
to the Institute.

"I'll tell you all about it;" replied Richard. "I got into some scrapes
before I came here;" and he told his companions the whole story. "But,
fellows, I have turned over a new leaf."

"Good!" said Bailey. "I am glad you told us; and I'm sure no decent
fellow in the Institute will ever fling it at you."

Richard felt better when he had told the whole truth. He confided in
his friends, and feared not his enemies. When they reached the parade
ground they saw that the mutineers had taken possession of every one of
the boats, and were sailing up the lake towards Green Island. They
dared not return to the Institute, fearing that their plan might be
discovered.

Richard was informed that arrangements had been made before he joined
them; that they intended to take all the boats, so that the instructors
could not reach them, and encamp on the island.

When the rolls were called, the absence of about fifty of the boys was
discovered by the teachers. The truth came out, and the sharp eye of
Colonel Brockridge seemed to glow with unwonted lustre.




CHAPTER XX.

RICHARD VISITS GREEN ISLAND, AND THE REGULATORS CONSIDER THEIR PLANS.


The evening exercises proceeded as usual, no allusion whatever being
made to the absence of the mutineers, after the facts had been
revealed. But no one supposed that the energetic principal would drop
the matter where it then stood.

Richard had been "putting that and that together" since the events
which had transpired in the grove, till he was pretty well satisfied
that the mutineers now upon Green Island were the Regulators. The
evidences which led him to this conclusion had been carefully collected
from the time he had been whipped by them in the woods near the camp.
Though Nevers had appeared to be very friendly since the race, his
conduct had not been above suspicion.

During the evening the boys had a great deal to say about the mutiny,
and some of them even regretted that they had not joined, especially as
the colonel did not seem to care much about the affair. About eight
o'clock in the evening, Richard was sent for by the principal.

"Grant," said Colonel Brockridge, as Richard entered the office, "I
have heard all about your conduct, and I wish to express to you my
approbation. You have, indeed, turned over a new leaf, as you told the
boys, and I congratulate you upon your success in keeping your good
resolution. I have just written a letter to your father, which you may
read."

The principal handed him the letter, and with a glow of pride and
satisfaction, Richard read the high commendation which was bestowed
upon him. There was no allusion to the affair of the day, and the
praise covered his general conduct since he had been at Tunbrook.

"I learn that you have been true to yourself, and true to the rules of
the Institute, under peculiar trials. I sympathize with you. But you
have won the respect and regard of all the good boys. You can afford to
be disliked by the others."

"I have tried to do my duty, sir," replied Richard, blushing at the
praise bestowed upon him.

"You have done well. I know how fond you are of exciting adventure, and
I wonder that you had the strength to resist this temptation."

"I am surprised myself," added Richard.

"If I except the fight, which was greatly palliated by the
circumstances, and the sleeping on guard when we were in camp, your
conduct has been entirely unexceptionable since you came to the
Institute. Sleeping on guard is not----"

"I didn't sleep on guard, sir," interposed Richard, mildly and
respectfully. "I am prepared to explain all about that now."

"Indeed? It is rather late now," said the principal, shaking his head.

"I think I have unearthed the Regulators."

"The Regulators? I haven't heard any thing of them for a year. I
supposed they no longer existed."

"They do exist," added Richard. "I happen to know something about
them."

"What do you know?"

In reply to this question, Richard narrated all the particulars of his
abduction from his post while doing guard duty.

"But why didn't you tell me about this?" demanded the colonel,
surprised and indignant at the audacity of the Regulators. "Why did you
suffer the penalty of deserting your post, when you were innocent?"

"I thought it would be better in the end, sir. I wanted to find out who
the Regulators were."

"Well, have you found out?"

"I think I have, sir."

"Who are they?"

"I am pretty well satisfied that they are encamped upon Green Island
just now," said Richard, with a smile.

"What evidence have you?"

Richard stated, at considerable length, the facts and incidents which
had led him to this conclusion: but the colonel was not fully
satisfied.

"If you will permit me, sir, I think I could prove what I say to your
entire satisfaction."

"What do you wish to do?"

"I wish to visit Green Island," replied Richard, boldly.

"They would whip you again."

"I am not afraid of them."

"How will you get over to the island? The young rascals have taken all
the boats."

"I can borrow a skiff; if not, I can go over on a plank."

"But they would handle you rather roughly."

"I don't intend to let them see me. I think I can manage the matter,
sir."

"Well, Grant, your plan will harmonize with mine. I intend to punish
these mutineers, as they foolishly call themselves, in a novel way; and
I have already made my arrangements to do so. But you shall carry out
your scheme first."

"I should be very glad to do so, and I am confident that I shall
succeed."

"You shall try it, at all events."

"Will you let Bailey go with me?" asked Richard.

"No; I do not wish to expose him to danger. You can take care of
yourself, it appears, if you get into trouble. Do you want some one
with you?"

"I think it would be better."

"Mr. Gault shall accompany you, but you shall manage the matter
yourself."

"Very well, sir. What shall I do for a boat?"

"You shall have one of the pontoon boats. It will be better than a
skiff."

"Good! I didn't think of that," said Richard, with enthusiasm.

"Now, Grant, not a word must be said of the events of to-night."

It was after nine o'clock when this conference was finished, and the
boys had retired. Richard and the principal left the office, and
repaired to the stables, where they found three of the instructors,
including Mr. Gault. The horses were attached to the pontoon wagon,
ready for a start. The whole party seated themselves in the vehicle,
and were driven by the public road to a spot near the shore of the
lake. One of the rubber boats was unloaded, and Mr. Gault and Richard
carried it down to the bank.

The night was cloudy and dark. Green Island was half a mile from the
place where they proposed to embark, and there was no danger that the
mutineers would see or hear them. The boat was filled with air, by the
aid of a bellows, and placed in the water. Richard requested Mr. Gault
to lie down in the boat, and, with a short paddle he had brought for
the purpose, he propelled the light craft towards her destination.

The utmost care and quiet were necessary to prevent the mutineers from
gaining any knowledge of the movement; and when the boat was within a
few rods of the island, Richard laid aside his paddle and listened. He
could hear the Regulators talking and laughing at some distance from
the shore, and he soon satisfied himself that no sentinels had been
detached to guard the approaches. With a few strokes of his paddle, he
brought the boat alongside the island.

Richard seemed to be a master of strategy, and conducted his movements
with such skill and prudence, that he and Mr. Gault succeeded in
effecting a landing without disturbing the mutineers.

"Now, sir, we must lie down and crawl upon the ground till we get
within hearing distance of them," whispered Richard.

"I will follow you, Grant," replied the instructor.

"We must move very slowly."

"There is plenty of time."

Richard led the way, crawling like a snake upon the grass, so slowly
and so cautiously that not a particle of noise seemed to be made. Near
the centre of the island there was a clump of trees, which had been
dignified by the title of a grove. The mutineers were seated upon the
ground in this place. Though the distance to the grove from the place
where Mr. Gault and Richard had landed was only a few rods, more than
half an hour was consumed in reaching a spot which would be near enough
to enable them to hear what was said.

The deep gloom beneath a spreading oak afforded them a friendly
shelter; and here they disposed of themselves to the best advantage to
effect the object in view. For half an hour they listened to
conversation on all topics. Various wild schemes were proposed to bring
the colonel to terms. Some declared their intention to spend a week on
the island.

"We should freeze and starve," said another.

"No; Leslie--I mean Kennedy--said he would supply us with food; and we
can make a tent of the sails of the boat."

"Let us stick together, whatever we do," added another. "If we could
only have got Grant over here, we should have fixed him."

"Thank you," said Richard to himself; and he listened to this kind of
talk for some time, beginning to fear that he should not obtain the
information for which he came.

"Regulators, come to order!" said Nevers, at last, much to the
satisfaction of the listeners. "Are all present Regulators?"

"They are," replied Redman.

"Guards, to your stations."

Richard could not see where their stations were; and he hoped the line
of their duty would not lead them to the oak under which Mr. Gault and
himself were seated.

"It is a long time since we have had a chance to hold a regular
meeting; and it may be a long time before we are able to do so again.
Perhaps it was lucky that all except the Regulators backed out,"
continued Nevers. "You all know the business we have on our hands."

"We do," replied several.

"By a judicious use of _watermelons_ and _sleep-walking_, we shall
accomplish our purpose," continued Nevers.

"We must do it before the next election, my chief," said Redman.

"It is of no use to attempt to whip him, or any thing of that sort,"
answered "my chief," which seemed to be the official designation of the
presiding officer.

"I have a plan which I think will procure his expulsion from the
school."

"State it; and every Regulator will remember the penalty of disclosing
one of the society's secrets."

"He shall be pounded till he is black and blue," said the members, in
concert.

"And every Regulator shall despise him as man and boy, to the end of
his life."

"That's so," responded the members.

"Go on, Redman," said the chief.

"Next Sunday night, the sheds, near the grove, will be set on fire. On
Friday night Grant's French exercise book will be taken from his desk.
He will fail in his lesson on Saturday, and the colonel must punish
him. This will make him mad. The exercise book will be torn up, and
pieces of it, especially the cover with his name on it, will be found
near the burnt building. Masters, who is on good terms with Grant, on a
certain pretence, known to him and me, will induce him to wait at the
shed until after dark, where he will be seen by Mr. Gault, when he goes
his rounds. A broken bunch of matches will be found in Grant's closet,
where no fellow is allowed to keep matches. Other suspicious
circumstances will appear at the time for they are in charge of proper
persons."

"You hear," said the chief.

"I don't like the plan," said one.

"Nor I," chimed in a dozen others.

"It is a mean thing," added the first objector.

"How many officers has the Society of Regulators?" demanded the chief,
sternly.

"One, whom all obey," replied the members.

"Who is he?"

"Nevers."

"I am chief, and I command that this be done," said the chief.

Twenty or thirty of the members, as Richard judged by the voices,
protested against the scheme; but the measure was ordered in spite of
this opposition.

"Is there a traitor here?" demanded the chief.

"Not one," replied the members.

The chief then urged the necessity of using strong measures. He pointed
out the danger of permitting Grant to remain in the school; and the
plan would insure his expulsion. But still the intractable ones
objected, and their names were ordered to be given. As they were
announced, Mr. Gault, aided by faith rather than sight, wrote them down
on the back of some letters he had in his pocket. The business was
finished, and it was proposed to establish a watch on the island for
the night.

"We must go," whispered Richard; and he crawled off, followed by Mr.
Gault.

They reached the water without being discovered, and embarked in the
rubber boat.

"If they place sentinels on the watch, the colonel's plan will be
defeated," said Mr. Gault.

"What is his plan?"

"To get all the boats away from them, and keep them on the island till
they have had enough of it."

"We must do it before the watch is set," added Richard.

To accomplish this purpose, he paddled the float to the place where the
boats were moored, and cast them all adrift. The slight current of the
lake carried them slowly down to the river, and the listeners returned
to the shore, and reported what they had done to the colonel. The whole
party were then driven round to the outlet of the lake, where they
secured the boats as they floated down.

The business of the night was done, and the party retired to their
several apartments.




CHAPTER XXI.

RICHARD ANNIHILATES THE REGULATORS, AND THE STORY IS CONCLUDED.


It would have damaged the self-esteem of the Regulators if they could
have seen how little notice was taken of their absence at the Institute
on the day following the development of the mutiny. Every thing went on
as usual, and the instructors did not even allude to the rebels or the
rebellion. It seemed to be the policy of the principal to maintain a
"masterly inactivity" in regard to them.

Perhaps Colonel Brockridge was not so indifferent as he appeared to be.
He had stationed men on both sides of the lake to prevent any
communication between the mutineers and persons on the shore. At noon
it was reported that a boy by the name of Leslie, who lived in
Tunbrook, and who had been expelled from the Institute, had attempted
to visit the island. Richard was curious to know who Leslie was, for he
had heard the name mentioned by the Regulators.

The first day of November was very mild and pleasant. It was one of the
sweet days of the Indian summer, and the rebels on Green Island were
highly favored by this circumstance. On the second day the wind
changed, and it blew clear and cold from the north-west. Just before
sunset, a white flag was seen upon a pole, near the landing place on
the island. Colonel Brockridge was informed of the fact, and the large
sail boat was sent off to relieve the rebels from their uncomfortable
situation.

Richard and two of the instructors were deputed to visit the island,
and ascertain the import of the "flag of truce." The teachers were not
boatmen, and our hero was the only person available as a navigator; and
he was too deeply interested in the fate of the Regulators to be averse
to the visit.

On arriving at the island, the rebels were found to be in a very
deplorable condition. They had eaten nothing since dinner on the
preceding day, and were shivering with cold. Mr. Gault calmly inquired
what they wanted.

"We want to return," replied Nevers, whose teeth chattered as he spoke.

"Step into the boat, then."

But the boat would not carry them all, and it was necessary to make two
trips to convey the entire party. On the passage, Richard attended
closely to his duty, and did not speak a word to the rebels. The two
instructors were as taciturn as the boatman.

The party seemed to be astonished that their return created no
sensation. No restraint was placed upon them, and when they landed each
went where he chose, but most of them found their way to the warm rooms
of the Institute.

"Have you had a pleasant time, Nevers?" asked the colonel, when he met
the chief of the Regulators.

"Not very, sir," replied Nevers, with a ghastly smile.

This was all the allusion that was made to the affair. Provisions
disappeared with astonishing rapidity at the supper table that night.
The Regulators looked very tame and "chapfallen" for a day or two; and
Nevers condescended to inform Richard that the whole thing was a bad
failure.

Colonel Brockridge had requested Mr. Gault and Richard to be entirely
silent in regard to what had transpired while they were upon the
island. He did not explain his purpose to Richard, but his injunction
was faithfully observed.

The Regulators, even to Nevers and Redman, were very cordial and
considerate towards their intended victim, and Richard believed they
had abandoned their wicked purpose, till, on Saturday morning, he
missed his French exercise book. Without it, he could not recite his
lesson, and he was checked for the failure, and reported to Colonel
Brockridge. The principal sent for him, and every boy in school
supposed he was under censure for the deficiency.

On Sunday night, when the boys were permitted to walk, Masters told
Richard that Bailey wished to see him on particular business near the
Grove shed, as the building was called. Richard promised to meet him at
the place assigned. He waited there some time, but as Bailey did not
come, he returned to the parlor of the Institute. He met Bailey there,
and asked if he wished to see him.

"Yes; I wanted to show you something in the shed, but it will do just
as well in the morning," replied Bailey, somewhat to the astonishment
of Richard, who, of course, understood what all these things were for.

"What was it?" asked the intended victim.

"It was a piece of your exercise book; and I didn't know but the piece
might enable you to find the whole."

While they were talking the alarm of fire was given; but before they
could reach the spot, some ready hands had extinguished the flames. In
accordance with the programme laid down upon the island, pieces of
Richard's exercise book, some of them half burned, were found in and
near the shed. Several cards of matches, and half the printed paper
that had enclosed the original bunch, were also picked up near the
building which had been devoted to destruction.

An investigation was immediately commenced. The boys were ordered to
the school room. The pieces of Richard's exercise book were examined. A
dozen boys had seen its owner standing near the shed before the fire
originated. The teachers were sent to examine the closets for further
evidence. Not only were several cards of matches found in Richard's
closet, but also part of the printed envelope that had enclosed them.
This piece of paper was a portion of the wrapper, of which the other
part had been found in the shed.

These facts were duly announced to the boys, and it seemed as clear as
noonday that Richard Grant was the incendiary. He was ordered to report
forthwith at the office, and the boys were dismissed for the night.

"We have fixed him this time," said Nevers, in a whisper, as he and
Redman left the room.

"He is under arrest, and to-morrow he will be sent home in disgrace,"
replied Redman, rubbing his hands. "Nevers, you will be the next
captain of Company D."

"We have broken the fellows' idol, at any rate. Grant will spend the
night in the guard house," added Nevers.

Nevers was slightly mistaken; for Richard, though he did not appear in
Barrack B that night, occupied the guest chamber of Colonel
Brockridge's private residence. His friends, especially Bailey, were
gloomy and sad. The more lukewarm ones were sure, and always had been,
that Grant was a bad boy.

On Monday morning, when the boys had assembled in the school room,
Colonel Brockridge appeared, followed by Richard. The students
understood that the incendiary case was to be settled, and a breathless
silence pervaded the hall.

"Grant stands before you accused of a very grave offence," the
principal began. "We cannot permit a boy who sets fire to a building to
remain in the Institute. If guilty, he must be expelled. But Grant
assures me this is a conspiracy to injure him. He declares that there
is a secret organization in the Institute called the Regulators, who
have determined to drive him away from the school. Some of us have
heard of such an institution before, but its existence has never been
clearly proved. Redman, do you know any thing of such an association."

"I never heard of it before, sir," replied Redman.

"Do you, Nevers?"

"No, sir."

"Grant charges you both with being connected with the Regulators."

"Let him prove it," said Nevers, in defiant tones.

"Who is Dobbin?" asked the principal.

"I never heard the name before," answered Nevers. "I think it is very
hard to be accused without evidence. I hope you will make Grant prove
what he says, sir."

"I will, my chief," said Richard, at a nod from the colonel; and,
without giving the source of his information, he told all he knew about
the Regulators.

"How many officers have the Regulators?" asked Mr. Gault, rising from
his chair, at the farther end of the room.

"_One, whom all obey_," replied Richard, repeating what he had heard on
the island.

"Who is he?"

"_Nevers._"

"Are there traitors among us?" continued Mr. Gault.

"_Not a traitor._"

"What shall be done to him who discloses the secrets of the
Regulators?" asked the teacher.

"_He shall be pounded till he is black and blue, and, as man and boy,
be despised till the end of his life_," replied Richard, repeating
the words of the Regulators as nearly as he could remember them.

"What do you think of this, Nevers?" asked the colonel.

"I don't know what it all means, sir," answered he, with a
well-counterfeited look of astonishment.

There were a great many pale faces, beating hearts, and quivering lips
in the seats, for it was certain that the daylight had been shining in
upon the dark doings of the Regulators. Who was the traitor? who had
betrayed the secrets of the fraternity? Confusion and trembling
overwhelmed the Regulators.

"Before we proceed any farther," continued the principal, "if there are
any of this secret band present who wish to acknowledge their guilt,
and are willing to be forgiven, they may stand."

The silence was intense and deep. Nevers and Redman did not move a
muscle, but some of the mutineers glanced at each other, and seemed to
be in doubt.

"Now is the only time for confession," added the colonel.

Half a dozen boys rose; then one after another followed their example,
till it seemed as if the whole band intended to absolve themselves from
their vows. Those who rose were ordered to the rear of the room. Only
ten of the band decided to abide the issue. They were called out by
name.

"Here are the rest of the Regulators," said the colonel, when the
obdurate ones had taken their places upon the platform.

Mr. Gault told his story, and Richard told his. The evidence was
complete and overwhelming. Two of the teachers had been concealed in
the shed, and had seen Redman set it on fire, and scatter the pieces of
the exercise book in the vicinity. Another had seen Masters place the
matches in Richard's closet. The colonel, knowing the details of the
plot beforehand, had arranged every thing so as to insure the
conviction of the conspirators.

"Boys," said Colonel Brockridge, "I am happy to inform you that Grant
is entirely innocent."

Those in their seats received this announcement with a storm of
applause.

"I knew he was innocent from the beginning."

Another burst of applause.

The principal detailed with great minuteness the particulars of the
conspiracy, with which our readers are already familiar. The ten
Regulators were expelled at once, and sent away by the next train that
left Tunbrook. The whole forenoon was occupied in disposing of the
matter; but when the boys were sent out, there was no end to the
cheering for Richard Grant.

It was plain that Nevers and Redman were the head and front of the
Regulators. They were the authors of the association, and when they had
gone, the organization died a natural death. Leslie was Kennedy, as
Nevers was Dobbin. All the secrets and signs were bandied about and
laughed at among the boys. Those of the band who remained were punished
by being deprived of various privileges; but they behaved themselves
afterwards with commendable propriety. One of them ventured to say
"watermelons," one day, when he was angry with Richard, but a hundred
boys hissed him for it.

Three of the expelled Regulators were eventually restored, but the
lesson they had learned was all-sufficient.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Richard's victory was complete; and the events we have related rendered
him a greater favorite than before. At the spring election he was
chosen captain of Company D, and was regarded as the best officer in
the line.

Richard's victory over himself was as complete as that over the
Regulators. That good resolution, kept through trial and temptation,
eventually reformed his life and character. During the spring vacation,
he spent a week at home, and rejoiced the hearts of Bertha and his
father by the evidences of his reformation. Ben wept for joy, and Noddy
Newman "couldn't tell, for the life of him, what had come over Dick."

Richard continued two years longer at Tunbrook, and maintained the high
character he had won to the last. He was a favorite with the boys, and
with the teachers. Colonel Brockridge pointed with pride to Major
Grant--which was the title of our hero during the last year of his
residence at Tunbrook--as one of the brightest ornaments of his school,
and as one of the best fruits of his system of education.

And now we must take leave of Richard Grant; and we do so with greater
regret than we should have done when his reputation was stained by
"watermelons" and "sleep-walking."

Our hero is still true to himself. As we use fictitious names, our
sympathizing readers will not be able to recognize Colonel Richard
Grant, commanding a brigade in the Army of the Potomac, at the present
time; but, true to his country in her hour of peril, he has served with
that gallant band of brave men from the commencement of the war.

If my young friends would conquer others; if they would be chosen of
men to reign in the hearts of their fellow-beings, and thus guide the
destinies of men and nations; if they would be chosen of God to do his
work in earth and heaven,--they must first conquer themselves.




LEE & SHEPARD'S JUVENILE PUBLICATIONS.

TALES OF ADVENTURE.


THE FRONTIER SERIES.

_Four volumes. 16mo. Ill. Price, per set, $5.00._


_THE CABIN ON THE PRAIRIE._ By REV. CHARLES H. PEARSON. 16mo.
Illustrated. $1.25.

"_The Cabin on the Prairie_ is an earnest, healthy book, full of the
hardships, trials, and triumphs of life in our new settlements."


_PLANTING THE WILDERNESS_; or, The Pioneer Boys. By JAMES D. McCABE,
JR. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.25.

"_Planting the Wilderness_ tells of the strange adventures of real
life, which, more than the fancies of the novel writer, are of
absorbing interest."


_TWELVE NIGHTS IN THE HUNTERS' CAMP._ By REV. W. BARROWS. 16mo.
Illustrated. $1.25.

"_Twelve Nights in the Hunters' Camp_ is a pleasant, stirring, sensible
book, full of life and incident, and all aglow with the breezy
freshness of woods and prairies, lakes and rivers."


_A THOUSAND MILES' WALK_ across the Pampas and Andes of South America.
By NATHANIEL H. BISHOP. 16mo. Illustrated. $1.50.

"_A Thousand Miles' Walk across South America_ is a record of the
experiences of a Yankee boy, full of enthusiasm to see and learn by
actual experience the wonders of that almost _terra incognita_."


This series of books are of sterling merit, and while they closely
follow real experiences, are full of those thrilling incidents which
charm both youth and age.


Sold by all Booksellers and Newsdealers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on
receipt of price.

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




REV. ELIJAH KELLOGG'S

ELM ISLAND STORIES.


Six vols. 16mo. Illustrated. Per vol., $1.25.


1. Lion Ben of Elm Island.
2. Charlie Bell.
3. The Ark of Elm Island.
4. The Boy Farmers of Elm Island.
5. The Young Shipbuilders of Elm Island.
6. The Hardscrabble of Elm Island.

"There is no sentimentalism in this series. It is all downright
matter-of-fact boy life, and of course they are deeply interested in
reading it. The history of pioneer life is so attractive that one
involuntarily wishes to renew those early struggles with adverse
circumstances, and join the busy actors in their successful efforts to
build up pleasant homes on our sea-girt islands."--_Zion's Herald._

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




_Wonderful Stories._

JUTLAND SERIES.


Four vols. Illustrated. Set in a neat box, or sold separate. Per vol.,
$1.50.


The Sand Hills of Jutland.
By Hans Christian Andersen. 16mo. Illustrated.

Yarns of an Old Mariner.
By Mrs. Mary Cowden Clarke. Illustrated by Cruikshank. 16mo.

Schoolboy Days.
By W. H. G. Kingston. 16mo. Sixteen illustrations.

Great Men and Gallant Deeds.
By J. G. Edgar. 16mo. Illustrated.

Four books by four noted authors comprise this series, which contains
Adventures by Sea and Land, Manly Sports of England, Boy Life in
English Schools, Fairy Tales and Legends,--all handsomely illustrated.

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




Illustrated Natural History.

YOUNG HUNTER'S LIBRARY.


By MRS. R. LEE. Four volumes. Illustrated. Per vol., $1.50.


The Australian Wanderers.
The Adventures of Captain Spencer and his Horse and Dog in the Wilds
of Australia.

The African Crusoes.
The Adventures of Carlos and Antonio in the Wilds of Africa.

Anecdotes of Animals,
With their Habits, Instincts, &c., &c.

Anecdotes of Birds, Fishes, Reptiles,
&c., their Habits and Instincts.

This is a very popular series, prepared for the purpose of interesting
the young in the study of natural history. The exciting adventures of
celebrated travellers, anecdotes of sagacity in birds, beasts, &c.,
have been interwoven in a pleasant manner. This series is not only very
interesting but is decidedly profitable reading.

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.




_The Great West._

THE FRONTIER SERIES.


Five vols. Illustrated. Per vol., $1.25.


Twelve Nights in the Hunters' Camp.

A Thousand Miles' Walk Across South America.

The Cabin on the Prairie.

Planting the Wilderness.

The Young Pioneers.

"The romance surrounding the adventurous lives of Western pioneers and
immigrants has suggested nearly as many stories as the chivalric deeds
of knight-errantry. These tales of frontier life are, however, as a
rule, characterized by such wildness of fancy and such extravagancy of
language that we have often wondered why another Cervantes did not
ridicule our border romances by describing a second Don Quixote's
adventures on the prairies. We are pleased to notice, that in the new
series of Frontier Tales, by Lee & Shepard, there is an agreeable
absence of sensational writing, of that maudlin sentimentality which
make the generality of such tales nauseous."--_Standard._

LEE & SHEPARD, Publishers, Boston.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN SCHOOL AND OUT; OR, THE CONQUEST OF RICHARD GRANT ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

