



The Young Berringtons, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________
This is quite a short book that had been published in parts in a
children's magazine.  One branch of the Berrington family had been
established in Australia for a long time, and had built up quite a
profitable station.  Another branch of the family had been living in a
wealthy style in London, when their business failed, and they had just
enough money left to make their way to Australia, to join their cousins.

They find that life is not going to be all that easy.  A mob of original
inhabitants were in the neighbourhood, and were threatening them.  Who
can blame them?  A terrible storm comes, and blows the roof off the
house.  Then the river floods, much higher than it had ever done before,
and the house is destroyed.  So is much of the stock.  The decision is
made to look further inland for a better place to start a new station.
That is the part of the story that gives the book its second title, "The
Boy Explorers."  They do find a suitable place, but are once again
attacked by aborigines, whom they beat off with great difficulty.

Eventually they make peace with the aborigines, and all begins once more
to go well.  The various people, adults and children, are well drawn,
especially two rather tiresome ones: Hector, one of the children brought
from Britain, and Mrs Berrington, the wife of the original settler, who
has a dreadful habit of fainting every time anything stressful occurs.

________________________________________________________________________
THE YOUNG BERRINGTONS, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE YOUNG COLONISTS INTRODUCED--EXPECTANT RELATIVES--IN SEARCH OF "OLD
BOLTER"--A DINNER IN THE BUSH--BOLTER TRIES TO ESCAPE--ENCOUNTER
BLACKS--BOLTER BROUGHT BACK--SANDY MACDOUGAL.

"I wonder what sort of fellows these English cousins of ours will turn
out?" exclaimed Harry Berrington, as he rode up alongside his elder
brother Paul.  "Judging by their photographs, which Uncle Frank sent us
out last year, I have an idea that they are mighty fine young gentlemen,
who will be apt to turn up their noses at us colonial `corn-stalks.'"

"Hector and Reginald are good-looking fellows, I should think, and wear
fine clothes but beyond that--whether they are dark or fair, have blue
eyes and pink cheeks, or whether they can ride, and shoot, swim, and
play cricket, or can only dance and sing, or draw, or suchlike girlish
things--I have not the slightest notion," answered Paul.  "We shall,
however, soon know; for, according to the letter father got yesterday
their ship ought to reach Moreton Bay in the course of three or four
weeks; and I hope that I may have the chance of going down to Ipswich to
meet them."

"I don't think you will be so lucky," observed Harry.  "I heard father
say that he intended going himself, as he expected poor Aunt Augusta
would require a good deal of attention, as she has been accustomed to
live luxuriously, and has never done anything for herself.  From a
remark he made, I suspect that both the boys and girls have been brought
up in the same fashion.  Although they may get into our ways at last,
they won't like our style of life at all when they first arrive."

"They must learn to like it, somehow or other," observed Paul.  "Poor
Uncle Frank!  I really pity him; he has lost nearly all his fortune; and
to be obliged, at his time of life, to begin to work hard!  And work
hard he must, like the rest of us."

"Yes, indeed; I have heard mother say that they lived in a large house
in London, with butlers, footmen, housekeeper, nurses, and all sorts of
servants; and had carriages and horses, and saw lots of company," said
Harry.

"They'll not have much of that out here; they will have to be their own
servants, or consider themselves fortunate if they can hire an Irish
girl, or get a black _gin_ to do the rough work.  We must try and help
them, however, as much as we can, until they get accustomed to our
ways," observed Paul.  "And Mary, and Janet, and Lizzie will, I am sure,
do their best to save them trouble."

"Of course, we all will, in reality; but I don't think I shall be able
to help laughing when I see the exquisite Mr Hector and his brother
Reginald attempting to round up cattle, riding after stray horses, or
milking cows.  And there are two other boys--Edgar and Albert.  I wonder
what they will be like; they are about the same ages as Bob and Tommy,
and if they are as great pickles they will manage to lead each other
into all manner of scrapes; but we shall have rare fun with the girls if
they have got any life in them."

The two speakers were fine, active-looking lads, sons of Captain Hugh
Berrington, who had settled in the colony of Queensland a short time
before Paul, the eldest, was born.  They might have been known as young
gentlemen by the tone of their voices rather than by their costume,
which consisted of a red serge shirt, loose trousers fastened at the
waist with a leathern belt, large boots coming up to their knees, and
broad-brimmed cabbage-tree hats.  Each carried in his hand a heavy whip
with a long thick thong.  The elder, in addition, had a brace of pistols
in his belt, which weapons were necessary in case of the sudden
appearance of any strange natives.  They were mounted on strong, active
little horses, which evidently got but a small amount of grooming.

The lads had just left their home, which was situated on the banks of
the Burnett river.  It is worthy of a short description.  The
house, though built entirely of wood, and on one floor, was a
substantial-looking building, containing ten rooms, with a broad
verandah running entirely round it.  The frame-work was of rough timber,
and the walls were composed of slabs, which are boards split out of the
iron-bark or blue gum-tree.  The roof was covered with shingles, or
tiles of wood, split like the slabs and sawn to the required size.

Bound the homestead was a field of Indian corn, an orchard full of
fruit-trees of various descriptions, a kitchen-garden supplying all
sorts of vegetables, and a smaller space devoted to flowers, most of
which would have been highly prized in an English conservatory.  There
were several out-buildings beyond the cultivated ground, with yards and
pens for cattle and sheep.

Altogether, Stratton was considered a very flourishing little homestead,
of which the owner was justly proud.  The sun had scarcely risen, when,
after a hurried breakfast, the two young Berringtons had set out on an
expedition in search of "Old Bolter," one of their horses, well
so-called, who--no unusual circumstance--was reported missing.  They had
a difficult task before them, for Old Bolter was a cunning rogue, and by
this time had probably got far away into the bush; but to find him they
were determined, as he was wanted for work, and could do twice as much
as any other horse when he chose.  They were now, as fast as the
numerous trees would allow them, cantering forward through a scrub,
extending for some distance from the banks of the river.  Familiar as
was the scenery to them, Paul, who had an eye for the picturesque, could
not help remarking the beauty of the rich tropical vegetation amid which
they were passing.  The sun, now rapidly rising behind their backs,
threw a bright glow on the dark-green branches of the huge fig-trees,
the feathery leaves of the cabbage and other palms, and here and there,
tall pines or red cedars, towering above the mass of foliage, with vines
and creepers of many hues hanging to the boughs in wreaths and festoons,
or extending to the ground like loose ropes from the rigging of a ship.

They soon got clear of the scrub, for Old Bolter would certainly not be
hiding within it, for the best of reasons--not a blade of grass grew on
the leaf-covered ground.  They now entered the more open country, called
forest land, in contradistinction to the scrub.  Here, though gum-trees
of vast size towered to the sky, they generally stood far apart--their
curiously-shaped leaves, with their edges turned upwards, allowing the
sun's rays to penetrate to the grass-covered ground.  Paul and Harry now
began to look out eagerly for the runaway.  There were one or two places
in which he had before been found, and these they had settled first to
visit.  They were gullies, or dry creeks, bordered thickly by trees,
beneath the shade of which he could stand during the heat of the day,
and, while whisking off the flies with his long tail, meditate at his
leisure.  Three of these places were visited, but Old Bolter was not
there.  The water-holes in their neighbourhood were dry, which would
account for the absence of the knowing old steed.

"He has gone to Myall Creek, depend upon it," observed Paul; "we shall
find him in the scrub thereabouts."

Harry agreed that his brother was very likely correct in his surmise,
and, the ground being open, they again rode forward.  Harry especially
delighted in a hard gallop.  By getting over the ground at an early
hour, they might rest during the heat of the day under the shade of the
myall trees--from which the creek took its name--and employ themselves
in shaping a few stock whip-handles, which are made from its fragrant
wood; they would then recommence their search for Old Bolter.  Once
having found him, there would be no stopping until they had got him safe
back into the paddock.  An hour's hard riding brought them up to Myall
Creek, within the dry bed of which they hoped to find Bolter, provided
he had not discovered their approach, when to a certainty he would be
off to some other place of concealment.  They had prudently brought
provisions with them, and, having securely hobbled their horses so that
they might feed close to them, they sat down beneath the shade of a tree
on the edge of the scrub and ate their dinners.  They then cut some
sticks from the myall trees suited for their purpose, and, while they
sat resting in the shade, employed themselves in shaping the wood into
the required size with their knives.

"Now," cried Paul, jumping up, "we must hunt up Old Bolter."

They quickly caught their steeds, and, unhobbling them, mounted.

"You go round the north side, and I will take the south of the bush,"
said Paul.  "If you see Bolter, cooey to me, and take care that he does
not make off westward, or we shan't get back to-night--or to-morrow,
perhaps."

"No fear about that.  I'll head him if I catch sight of his ears, and
take good care to turn him towards you."

Harry accordingly rode away to the northward, while Paul directed his
course round the southern end of the bush, and then circling round,
reached the west side of the creek, in the dry bed of which he hoped to
find Bolter.  He examined the ground carefully, expecting to find some
track of the missing horse, but not a sign could he see.  Half an hour
or more elapsed, when he heard Harry's shrill cooey; but, from the
faintness of the sound, he knew that his brother must be a long way off.
Putting spurs to his horse he galloped forward, expecting every moment
to see Bolter dash out of the creek and make for the west.  At last he
caught sight of Harry, and directly afterwards, from some thick bushes,
out sprang Bolter, and, as had been expected, made off towards the west,
just midway between the two lads.

"After him!" cried Paul, and turning their horses' heads they gave them
the rein.  The animals seemed to know the object of the chase, and were
eager as their riders to overtake the truant.

The ground was rough and broken, with here and there trees lying across
it, blown down by a whirlwind; but they scarcely stopped Bolter, who
seemed to take an especial pleasure in leaping over them, and leading
his pursuers along the worst ground he could find.  The other animals
were, however, quite as eager to come up with Bolter as he was to
escape, and exerted themselves to the utmost.  Should he once get out of
sight, as there appeared every probability of his doing, days might pass
before he could again be discovered.  They were approaching another
scrub, which was, however, sufficiently open to allow the horses to pass
through.

"If he once gets in there, our game will be up!" cried Paul.  "On,
Harry, on! we must head him before he reaches it."

"Very well to sing out, `On, on!'  My beast is doing his best, and
Bolter doesn't intend to be caught," cried Harry.

That Bolter would escape seemed very likely.  He had got within a few
yards of the scrub, when he suddenly wheeled round, almost on his
haunches, and galloped back the way he had come.  Scarcely had he done
so, when a black figure started up from behind some bushes, and hurled a
long lance at him, but the weapon merely grazed his side, and stuck in
the ground.

"Back, back! the blacks!  There may be more of them!" cried Paul.

Harry had seen the native, and pulled up as his brother spoke.  They
were just in time, for a dozen or more black fellows, showing
themselves, sprang forward poising their spears ready to hurl at the
young horsemen.  Old Bolter, fully comprehending the danger which he and
his owners were in, instead of going over the bad ground took that to
the left, allowing Paul and Harry to ride up close to him on either
flank.  Nevertheless, he kept his eyes about him, evidently intending to
make off in some other direction if he could.  The three horses now tore
along over the ground, the nimble-footed blacks, with their spears in
hand, following them for some distance.  At length, however, Paul,
looking back, found that they had got well ahead of the natives.  It was
important not to be overtaken, for they evidently belonged to some
hostile tribe who intended mischief.  Bolter, who seemed to be aware
that there was no longer any danger from the blacks, made two or three
attempts to escape; but Paul and Harry reminding him of his duty with
their stock whips, he at length made straight as an arrow for the
station, over the very course they would have chosen.  Nothing stopped
him.  Across the country he galloped, with the two riders on either
side.  As they approached the yard they shouted to Sandy Macdougal, the
overseer, who, fortunately, was close at hand, to open the gate, and in
rushed Old Bolter.

"We had a hard matter to find him, and he would have got away from us
after all if a number of black fellows had not tried to spear him,"
observed Paul.  "We must be on our guard against them, or they will be
doing some mischief."

"You've indeed done vera weel to bring the brute back so soon," said
Sandy, as he carefully closed the gate, not to give Bolter another
chance of escaping.  "It would be wise to send over to Ogilvie to let
the police know that there are strange blacks in the neighbourhood.
Better to prevent the mischief than punish their puir bodies after it's
committed, and as they attacked you, there's sufficient reason for
warning them to take their departure."

The lads having unsaddled their horses, turned them into the paddock,
and, accompanied by Sandy, repaired to the house.  On the way the
overseer inquired more particularly about their meeting with the blacks.

"It's a mercy they didna spear you.  Praise the Lord for His goodness,
lads; He always watches over those who trust Him.  Dinna fail to do
that."

Sandy Macdougal was an old follower of Captain Berrington.  He had
accompanied him from ship to ship as his coxswain; and when the captain
retired from the service, and obtained the allotment of land on which he
finally settled in Australia, Sandy, though he might have obtained a
pension by serving a year or two longer at sea, insisted on accompanying
him.  While the captain was going through the arduous work of settling,
Sandy was like his right hand.  When the old sailor might have set up a
farm of his own he declined doing so, preferring to serve his old
commander in the capacity of overseer; and most faithfully did he
discharge his trust.



CHAPTER TWO.

JOURNEY TO MEET THE BERRINGTONS FROM ENGLAND--MRS HUGH BERRINGTON AND
HER FAMILY--MR HAYWARD, THE TUTOR--HARRY RETURNS--PREPARATIONS--THE
ARRIVAL.

The drays for the intended journey were packed, and the horses put to.
The captain stood ready, booted and spurred.  Harry, to his great
delight, was to accompany his father.  Paul would much have liked to go,
but not the slightest sign of disappointment did he allow himself to
exhibit; indeed, he was justly proud of having the responsibility, with
the aid of Sandy, of looking after the family.

The drays were not at all like the cumbersome vehicles which are known
under that name in England.  They were merely large, strongly-built
carts on two wheels, drawn by three, four, or five horses, as the nature
of the country might require; though, on a smooth road, one could drag
them.  Old Bolter might have suspected that he would be wanted when he
ran off, for he was put into the heaviest.  They were now chiefly loaded
with wool and other produce, and with a few articles the travellers
required for their journey.  On the return journey they would be fitted
in a very different way--with canvas tilts to keep out the sun or rain,
while in the inside goods were to be packed, easy chairs, or piles of
bedding, and cushions for the accommodation of the ladies and young
children.  Besides the horses for the drays, four others were taken, in
case the new arrivals should wish to ride.  They were steady animals,
not addicted to following Old Bolter's example.  The drays having been
sent on ahead, the captain and Harry, wishing the loved ones at Stratton
good-bye, mounted their horses, and quickly overtook them.  The captain
felt no anxiety about the blacks, as Sandy had given notice to the
police of their threatened attack on the young Berringtons, and a party
had been sent out, under an experienced officer, to drive them away.

Now that her husband was fairly off to meet his brother's family, Mrs
Hugh Berrington began to realise the fact that they were coming, and
actively commenced making preparations for their reception.  She was a
motherly, active, cheerful little woman, who never, by any chance, lost
her temper, even under the most vexatious circumstances, and always saw
things on the bright side.

Her girls were very like her in many respects--hearty, merry creatures,
with plenty of good sense, not only ready to work, but absolutely hating
idleness.  Mary, who was older than Paul, took somewhat after her
father, a tall, handsome girl, though she did not think about the
matter; nor did any one else, because they loved her for her good
qualities.  Janet and Lizzie were very like their mother; and Effie was
a fair-haired, blue-eyed little damsel, not yet five years old, though
she, like her sisters, could assume a sedate air, and help in household
matters in all sorts of ways, besides looking after the pet animals.
Rob, who came next to Janet, was a sturdy little chap, courageous as a
young lion.  No pain could make him cry out, and he could already ride
after the cattle with as much boldness as his elder brothers.  Tommy,
the youngest, it must be acknowledged, was inclined to be a pickle.
Effie patronised him, and did her best to keep him out of mischief, and
he, in most instances, followed her precepts; though, as yet, he had
done very little towards making himself useful, nor had he made any
great strides in book-learning.

The captain and Mrs Berrington had felt the difficulty of educating
their children, and had resolved to send the elder boys and girls to a
school at Sydney or Melbourne, when the captain, while on a journey,
happened to stop at a shepherd's hut towards night to obtain shelter
from a storm which was coming on.  The hut-keeper was a rough-looking
fellow, and the captain fully expected to find the shepherd the same
description of person.  The sheep having been folded, the shepherd
entered the hut.  What, then, was Captain Berrington's surprise to find
himself addressed in a tone and manner which showed that the speaker was
a gentleman and a person of education, as he proved by his conversation,
while the small but well-chosen library on a shelf above his bunk, and a
copy of Horace which he took from his pocket, showed that the rough life
he led did not prevent him from still indulging in the pleasures of
literature.

He had gone through his course at the university, and had intended
entering one of the learned professions, when he was obliged to visit
Australia for his health.  During his absence from home, he heard that
every penny of the property he possessed was lost; and unable, after
frequent attempts, to obtain employment in the cities, he had, as a last
resource, been induced to go into the bush and turn shepherd, hoping
ultimately, by the knowledge he would gain, to be able to take some
superior situation on an estate.  He, however, confessed that he was
heartily weary of the life which, it was evident, was rendered doubly
disagreeable by the character of his mate, although he uttered no
complaint against the man.  The term of service for which he had engaged
was just about to expire, and Captain Berrington, much pleased with him,
invited him, as soon as he should be at liberty, to come to Stratton.
In the meantime he made all the inquiries in his power about Mr
Hayward, and was satisfied of the truth of the account he gave of
himself.  Mr Martin Hayward was not only a scholar and a gentleman, but
was a fair artist, and possessed considerable musical talent; he was,
moreover, a true and enlightened Christian.  He had spent about a month
at Stratton, when Captain Berrington made him an offer to act as tutor
to his children.  This he had eagerly accepted, and had faithfully
fulfilled his trust, never showing the slightest inclination to resign
it.  The boys were very fond of him, and, for the few hours they were
every day engaged in their studies, they worked most diligently.  He
also afforded Mrs Berrington considerable help in instructing the
girls, so that they were fully as well educated, at all events, as the
generality of young ladies.

Mrs Hugh Berrington received a letter from her husband, saying that his
brother Frank and family had arrived, including a Miss Emily Saville,
the younger sister of Mrs Berrington, and that they proposed setting
out directly the ladies should have recovered the effects of the
sea-voyage.  The letter had been some days coming; no time was to be
lost, the party might quickly follow.  Mrs Hugh and the girls were busy
from morning to night making preparations for the reception of their
relatives.  Mr Hayward insisted on putting up a hut for himself near
that of the overseer, in order that his room might be devoted to their
use; and Paul, answering for Harry, agreed to follow his example.  Even
then it would require pretty close packing to accommodate the two
families.

All preparations had been made, and Mrs Hugh Berrington began to wish
that her relatives would arrive and terminate the period of suspense.

It was nearly two months since the drays had started, when one evening,
just as Paul had returned from stocking the cattle, and was on his way
home, with his saddle on his arm, he caught sight of a person on
horseback galloping towards him.

"It must be Harry!" he cried.  "No--yes--it is him!  He'll bring us
news."

Harry soon came up, and as he threw himself from his steed and shook
hands with his brother, exclaimed, "They'll be here soon after dark, and
father sent me on that mother might have supper ready, and be prepared
for them."

"What sort of people are they?  How do you like them?" asked Paul.

"As to that, if we take them in the lot, the less said about them the
better.  Uncle Frank's a fine fellow, and father seems very glad to have
him; but Aunt Augusta--well, you'll see her when she comes.  She wishes
herself home again, and so do Evelina and Adela, I suspect.  The younger
boys are jolly little fellows; but Hector--we shall have to break him
in--he's just what we thought he'd be.  Reginald is more likely to take
soon to our ways; he's a manly sort of fellow, and there's some fun in
him.  However, you will soon be able to judge for yourself about them
all; only there's one thing--we must not let Mr Hector lord it over us.
If he attempts it, we must take the shine out of him."

Before Harry had told Paul half of what he wanted to know they reached
home, when, as may be supposed, the whole household was aroused into a
state of the greatest activity.

At last the beds were made, the supper-table was laid, the lamps were
lighted, and all was ready.  Mrs Berrington and her daughters had sat
down, and taken up their work.  Two of them had attempted to read, but
found that impossible just then.  Biddy was watching over the pots and
pans in the kitchen.  The boys were at the front door, now and then
running along the road to listen, when the cracking of whips, the tramp
of horses, and the sound of wheels was heard.

"Here they come! here they come!" cried the boys, in chorus.

Paul and Harry lighted their lanterns.  "That's Uncle Frank," exclaimed
the latter, as a tall, gentlemanly-looking man rode up alongside their
father.

Mrs Hugh Berrington came out to receive them.  Greetings were over by
the time the first dray drew up at the door.  The captain and Mrs
Berrington assisted a lady to descend, and carried her in their arms
into the house.  Two young ladies were next helped out, who appeared to
take very little notice of any one, until Mary and Janet, hurrying
forward, kissed them affectionately, and welcomed them to Stratton, when
they led them into the sitting-room.

"That's Aunt Augusta, and those two Evelina and Adela," whispered Harry.
"And here comes Sybil, the youngest; a jolly little bird, isn't she?
Then Gertrude, Edgar, and Albert are with their Aunt Emily in the other
dray.  I shouldn't be surprised if Mr Hector were there too, for I
don't see him on horseback; but here comes Reginald--he'll want to be
introduced, or he'll not speak to you," and Harry laughed.  "Here,
Reginald, old fellow, this is my brother Paul, and these are Rob and
Tommy," exclaimed Harry, as a fine-looking lad rode up and, dismounting,
shook hands with his cousins.

The second dray now drove up, and Hector, a delicate-looking youth, was
the first to get out, stretching himself and yawning as he did so.

A very nice-looking young lady, whom the children called "Aunt Emily,"
followed; and then Gertrude, Edgar, and Albert, of whom little could be
known, as they did not utter a word, were lifted out.

"Here, lend a hand and help us, you fellows!" said Paul to his cousins,
as he and Harry went to assist their father and Mr Berrington, who,
with their tutor and Sandy, were engaged in unloading the drays.

Reginald at once came forward, but Hector, without replying, sauntered
into the house.

The articles as they were taken out were piled up round the walls of the
rooms, leaving but little space to move about.  Mr Hayward at once went
back to his hut, telling Paul and Harry that he was ready for them, and
that there would be a bed for one of his cousins if he wished to come
up.  It was some time after the ladies had been shown their rooms,
before they made their appearance at the supper-table--Mrs Berrington
leaning on her husband's arm, the elder girls following, having changed
their travelling dresses for evening costume, such as was not often seen
in the bush.  Their cousins, who wore their usual plain dress, looked at
them with no slight astonishment.  Hector came in shortly afterwards,
and took his seat without speaking.

"I am afraid that you must be very tired," remarked Mrs Hugh to her
sister-in-law.

"Yes, indeed; I wonder that I have survived it coming over those
dreadful mountains--sufficient to shake the nerves of the strongest, and
mine are sensitive to a degree," was the answer.

"A few days of quiet will set you all to rights," observed the captain.
"Your girls do not appear to be the worse for it, though Hector looks
somewhat knocked up."

"Ah, yes! he takes after me," said Mrs Berrington.

"I'm rather more bored than tired," observed Hector.  "I didn't imagine
that such a country as this was to be found in the Queen's dominions."

"It's the finest country in the world, old fellow," said Harry, from the
other end of the table.  "You'll learn to like it in time.  So cheer up,
we'll soon make a man of you."

Hector turned a disdainful glance towards the speaker.

"Harry, do not let your tongue run loose," observed his father, though
with no very angry glance.

The conversation soon became general, Miss Emily Saville doing her best
to make amends for her sister's silence.  She and her nieces expressed
themselves delighted with the delicious fruits offered them, and the
evening passed by more pleasantly than might have been expected.
Reginald accepted his cousins' invitation to accompany them to their
quarters, thus enabling Hector to share his room with Rob and Edgar.  It
is not necessary to particularise how the rest of the family were stowed
away.



CHAPTER THREE.

EARLY RISING--MILKING COWS--HOW TO "BAIL-UP" A COW--VICIOUS ANIMALS--
HECTOR CHARGED, AND TAKES TO FLIGHT--REGINALD AND HIS PAIL UPSET BY A
CALF--TRIES AGAIN, AND SUCCEEDS.

"Rouse up, you fellow, and come and learn how to milk cows!" exclaimed
Harry, as, the second morning after the arrival of the party, he, just
at the break of day, rushed into his cousin Hector's room.  Hector had
done nothing the previous day but sit, rod in hand, on the bank of the
river, attempting to catch some fish.  He now yawned and stretched
himself.

"It cannot be time to get up yet--it is scarcely daylight."

"There's light enough to milk the cows, and the cool of the morning is
the best time," answered Harry.  "Your Aunt Emily and the rest of the
girls are there already."

"I'll get up presently, when I've had a little more sleep," said Hector,
yawning again.

"No, no; you've got to learn how to do it, and if you don't begin now,
you never will.  You must learn how to do everything, or you cannot
become a prosperous settler.  I'll not leave you until I see you up."

Hector reluctantly, and in no good humour, began to dress.  As he
intended finishing his toilet after his return, he was soon ready.

"Come along!  Sandy, Paul, and Reginald are driving in the cows; though
we have a few which won't come up to `the bail,' as they will soon be
taught to do; and it will be some fun to you to see how we manage
things."

"You don't expect me to milk cows?" said Hector, as they walked along.

"Indeed I do, if you are to have milk for breakfast; it is what young
hands like you and the girls are most suited for."

"I am older than you are," exclaimed Hector, looking indignantly at
Harry.

"Older in years, but younger in this country.  Why, my little brother
Rob is of more use than you'll be for months to come, if you don't look
sharp about it."

"It's a horrid country, to say the best of it; I wish I hadn't come out
here," exclaimed Hector.

"It is my country," answered Harry, "and I'll not have it abused.  It is
as fine a country as any in the world, or finer, I believe."

"You call that rocky range, which took us three days to get over, a fine
country!"

"Ah! that's nothing! you must take the rough with the smooth.  I dare
say there are quite as many rugged places in England."

"From what I have seen of it, all I can say is, I intend to leave your
beautiful country as soon as papa gets back some of his property.  I
hope to obtain a commission in the Guards."

"You'd better try and get a commission in our Black-guards," answered
Harry, laughing.  "They are a very useful body of men, and most of their
officers are gallant fellows."

"Bosh!" cried Hector, who felt too indignant to make any other reply.

He, nevertheless, accompanied Harry to the stock-yard, where they found
Mary and Janet with their milk-pails, and their two elder cousins and
Miss Saville.  Within the yard into which the cattle were being driven,
on one side, were two strong posts, about five feet high, with a
cross-piece on the top and another at the bottom, with a strong rail
between them, which could be moved from side to side and fixed by means
of a peg.  Just behind this, but outside the yard, was a windlass, with
a rope passing between the two posts.

"Do you see those posts?" asked Harry; "that's where we milk our cows."

As he spoke he patted a cow on the back, and crying, "Bail-up!" she
walked quickly up and put her head between the posts, where it was so
secured by the rail that she could not withdraw it.  Taking one of the
pails, and seating himself on a stool close by, he commenced the
operation, which, to Hector's intense astonishment, he performed in a
thoroughly efficient manner.  Other cows walked up without the slightest
trouble, and were milked in the same way by his sisters.

"Now, girls, you had better clear out of the yard!" shouted Paul; "we
have two or three somewhat restive animals to deal with."

Mary and Janet, whose pails were by this time full, followed their
brother's advice, and, accompanied by Miss Saville and their cousins,
made their way out of the yard; while Mr Hayward, who summoned Harry
and Reginald to his assistance, stood ready at the windlass.  Paul took
hold of the rope, which was unwound, with a noose at the end of it fixed
to a long stick, and approached one of the cows just before driven into
the yard.  Immediately he attempted to throw the noose over her head she
swerved, now on one side, now on the other, taking care never to put her
nose to the ground.  At last, however, Paul succeeded in throwing the
noose over her horns, when he drew it tight by a jerk.

"Haul away!" he shouted; and round went the windlass, the cow, in the
meantime, making every effort to free herself, leaping and bounding,
throwing up her head and trying to shake off the rope.  But all was in
vain.  Sandy sounded his stock whip at her flanks, now and then giving
her a touch to remind her that it was at hand, until gradually she was
drawn up to the posts and her head securely fixed, when Sandy approached
with the milk-pail.

"I'm not going to trust you yet, my lady," he said, fastening her
hind-legs up on the side on which he was about to take his seat.  This
done, he began the operation of milking.  He had almost drawn as much as
he expected to obtain, when the cunning cow, finding that she could not
kick over the pail, came down on her side; and Sandy, with difficulty,
made his escape from under her with the loss of the contents of his
pail.

There were two other cows to be milked, which had been standing by
watching attentively the treatment received by their companion.  Paul,
taking the rope, approached one of them.  The creature seemed to have
made up her mind not to be milked, and as he drew near she whisked round
with wonderful rapidity, now and then making as if she would run at him;
but Paul was far too active to be caught.  Suddenly her eyes fell on
Hector, who had been ashamed to leave the yard, although greatly longing
to do so.  Putting down her head, with a loud bellow she rushed towards
him.

"Run for it!  Spring on one side, and then make a bolt for the palings.
I'll help you over!" shouted Harry.

Hector, however, was too much frightened to follow the advice.  Instead
of facing the cow and watching what she was about to do, he turned round
and ran across the slippery yard; before he got far, as might have been
expected, down he fell.  The next instant the cow would have been upon
him, had not Paul, who had been following with the noose, succeeded
dexterously in slipping it over her horns, when the windlass being
turned rapidly round, she found herself brought up by a violent jerk.
In vain she endeavoured to get free.  The hide rope which had caught her
was strong enough, as Sandy affirmed, "to hold a seventy-four," and she
was quickly, in spite of her bellowings and kickings, hauled up to "the
bail;" while Hector, much frightened and excessively angry at his
accident, picked himself up, and ran to the paling towards which Harry
was beckoning him.

Sandy took care on this occasion not to be caught by the cow, and
managed to take all the milk he required.  Several others were brought
up in the same fashion.  Two who had been looking on, seeing that,
whatever they might do, they would have to submit at last, walked up
quietly and poked their heads into "the bail."

"I should like to try and milk a cow," exclaimed Reginald, who felt
ambitious to imitate his cousins' example and make himself useful.

"We have two more heifers to milk, and you shall try; but I don't think
you will succeed at first," said Paul.

Reginald was determined to make an attempt.  As the heifer showed no
great inclination to submit to the process--being accompanied by her
calf--she was caught by the horns, quickly dragged up to "the bail," and
leg-roped.  Here she stood quietly enough while Paul stroked her, patted
her back, and scratched her about the ears.

"Now, Reginald!" cried Paul, "get your stool and milk-pail, and try what
you can do."  Neither Paul nor his cousin had observed that the calf--
only a few weeks old--which had remained on the other side of the yard,
had been stamping and pawing the ground, and exhibiting other signs of
indignation at seeing its mother made captive.

Reginald, with sleeves tucked up and eager face, commenced trying to
milk, but not a drop could he produce.  Suddenly, uttering a loud cry,
the calf, with head lowered, made a dash across the yard, sending
Reginald flying in one direction, his milk-pail and stool in others, to
the great amusement of the lookers-on.  Reginald picked himself up, not
being really hurt; and although he at first looked very frightened, he
soon recovered his equanimity.

"Now, Reginald," said Paul, "you will very likely succeed better this
time.  Try again."

Reginald had plenty of spirit, and getting the pail and stool, once more
sat himself down; and Paul showing him how to work, he managed to draw
milk from the heifer.

"Capital!" cried Paul; "but you had better let me finish--one cannot
tell how long she may stay quiet."

At breakfast Hector and Reginald gave very different versions of the
milking business of the morning.  Hector described it as "a nasty,
disgusting affair;" while Reginald declared "that it was very good fun,
and that he was proud of his own performance, in spite of his
misadventure."



CHAPTER FOUR.

PETS--A RAMBLE THROUGH THE SCRUB--ROB ACTS THE HERO--SEES A LURKING
BLACK--THE PARTY HURRY HOMEWARDS--ALARMING INTELLIGENCE BROUGHT BY PAUL.

As much of the time of the young Berringtons was likely to be taken up
by their newly-arrived cousins, it was arranged that they and Mr
Hayward should make holiday.  As soon, therefore, as Mary and Janet had
finished their household duties they invited their cousins to take a
walk round the gardens, which they had not yet seen, and along the bank
of the river.

"We can show you some pretty views," said Mary.

"You shall see all our pets," added Janet.

"Pray take your sunshades, girls," murmured Mrs Berrington, who had
just come out of her room.  "Without them you will spoil your
complexions to a certainty, and perhaps suffer from a _coup-de-soleil_.
You do not let your daughters go out without them?" she added, turning
to her sister-in-law.

"We never think of such a thing," answered Mrs Hugh; "our hats are
lined with pith, and broad-brimmed, and we do not mind a few freckles."

The young ladies, acting on their mother's suggestion, took their
sunshades, which, it must be confessed, were not altogether useless,
although their cousins did very well without them.

They had got a short distance from the house, when Evelina uttered a
scream and pointed to a large animal with a long tail, pointed nose, and
short arms, which came hopping along at a great rate towards them.

"Oh! what's that monster?" she exclaimed.  "How can we get out of its
way?"

"That's only our tame kangaroo, Jumper," answered Janet, laughing.  "He
is a great pet; he has been out with Sandy all the morning, and is now
coming to pay his respects to us."

The kangaroo, which was upwards of five feet high, came bounding along,
moving himself by the wonderful muscular power of his long hind-legs,
though he had in addition to carry his tail, which he lifted off the
ground when moving; this tail, however, assisted him to rest when he
reached his young mistresses and waited to receive the piece of bread
they had brought to give him.  Close behind came an animal on four legs.

"Oh! here comes another horrid creature," cried Adela.  "A wolf! a
wolf!"

"No; we have no wolves here.  That is our kangaroo dog Bruce.  He and
Jumper are great friends, though he would run down, and kill any of
Jumper's relatives without the slightest remorse.  Here, Bruce, Bruce."

A magnificent dog, a mixture of a Saint Bernard and greyhound, came up
and licked Mary's and Janet's hand, and attempted to treat their cousins
in the same way.  The young ladies, not liking his looks, started back,
and it was some time before they could be persuaded to pat him on the
head.  Although Janet called Jumper and Bruce to accompany them, the
latter only obeyed; the former bounded towards the house.

"The rogue has gone to see what he can get in the kitchen; if he can
catch Biddy off her guard, he'll snatch up anything he can find, and be
away with it," observed Mary.

The menagerie was in the flower-garden, where several of their pets
which could not be allowed to remain at liberty were confined.  Among
the prettiest was a flying squirrel, a little animal with beautiful fur,
its legs united by a membrane which enables it to float from the
treetops to the ground without injury, then to run up the trunk of
another, once more to descend, and thus make its way along.  Poor little
"Fussy!" its habits were nocturnal, and it had been accustomed to roam
about at large in the house; but Captain Berrington, fearing that it
might disturb his guests, had turned it out of doors to live with
several other animals which his children had tamed.

The young ladies had made their way along a path which had been cut
through the scrub, close to the banks of the river, that Mary might show
her cousins the views she had spoken of.  They had been joined by Rob
and Edgar, who considered that they could not let them go so far from
home without an efficient escort.

"With such valiant guards we may, I think, venture further than we have
been accustomed to," said Mary.  "We shall have to stoop now and then to
get under the vines, or squeeze ourselves between the trunks of the
trees.  We have no wild animals to fear, and need only be careful not to
tread upon a snake."

"A snake!" exclaimed Evelina.  "Oh, how dreadful!  Let's go home."

"Oh, come on," cried Bob, "I'll clear the road, and kill any snakes
which may show their ugly heads."

Flourishing his hatchet, which he drew from his belt, he proceeded to
cut away the vines and any branches which impeded their way.

Their progress was of course slow, but Rob asserted that they would soon
come out into a more open spot, when they would be able to walk as fast
as they liked.  The air beneath the shade of the tall trees was
deliciously cool compared to the hot atmosphere of the open ground; and
even Evelina acknowledged that it was very pleasant.  She had not gone
far, however, before she shrieked out to Mary--

"You said there were no savage creatures!  Look at this monster; it will
kill us all!"

"Why, that's only an iguana.  It has no teeth, and wouldn't bite you if
it had.  I'll try and catch it, and you shall have it for dinner; it
makes an excellent stew," exclaimed Rob, who heard her cry out.

The iguana, a large species of lizard, was, however, far too quick for
Rob, and was away out of sight before he got up to the tree on which he
had seen it.  Edgar manfully kept up with him, but having no weapon
except a clasp knife, he could render but little service in clearing the
road.  Rob was shouting to the girls to "come on," when suddenly he
himself stopped short.

"Edgar, did you see any one?" he asked, in a low voice.

"Yes, a hideous black face; it popped down immediately behind the
bushes."

"We had better not go on, then; for though many of the blacks are
friendly hereabouts, yet others who come from a distance are very
treacherous."

Not stopping to hear more, Edgar scampered away to tell the ladies, who,
as soon as they heard the alarming intelligence, began to beat a
retreat.  They were quickly overtaken by Rob, who had not only seen a
black man, but a bundle of spears, and was fully satisfied of the danger
of remaining longer in the scrub.

Mary was the first to recover herself.  "After all, the boys may have
mistaken the stump of a tree for a native; or if they did see a black,
he may have come with no bad intentions," she observed; "we need not
give up our walk in consequence."

However, her cousins looked so frightened that she led them directly out
of the scrub towards the kitchen, garden, intending to go round under a
trellis work, which had a thick hedge on the outside, and at that hour
of the day afforded a pleasant shady walk.  They were passing along that
part which was nearest the open ground when they heard the tramp of a
horse's hoofs galloping at fall speed, and directly afterwards Paul
shouting out to Harry--

"Where's our father?"

"He has gone off with Uncle Frank to Gibson's station," answered Harry.
"But what's in the wind?"

"The blacks have shown their ugly faces again, not far off.  I caught
sight of a mob of them just before I passed Jenkins's hut, and when
stopping to leave a message I could nowhere find him.  The blacks have
evidently been there, and, I am afraid, have killed him.  I did not stop
to search longer, but came on to tell father, that he might send over to
Ogilvie to set the police after them."

"I'll ride Bolter, and get Reginald to come with me," answered Harry.

"Reginald!  He's no use; he will never keep up with you, and the chances
are that he is pitched off before you have galloped a mile.  Get Mr
Hayward or Sandy to go with you," said Paul.

"They are both away just now," answered Harry; "but why can't you get a
fresh horse and go yourself?"

"Look here," the girls heard Paul say; "one of the black fellows dashed
a spear, and gave me this ugly scratch on the side, and I should be
foolish to attempt riding so far.  I must go in and get mother to doctor
it."

The young ladies, on hearing this, were naturally much alarmed.  Mary
was about to call to her brothers, but they were already beyond hearing;
so she, followed by the rest of the party, hastened to the house that
she might break the intelligence to her mother.



CHAPTER FIVE.

PAUL COMES HOME WOUNDED--PREPARE FOR AN EXPECTED ATTACK--HECTOR
MISSING--THE BOYS GO IN SEARCH OF HIM--BIDDY GIVES THE ALARM--ROB AND
EDGAR AGREE TO KEEP WATCH--THE WAY THEY DO SO--ARRIVAL OF THE BLACK
POLICE AND THEIR OFFICER.

As soon as Mary arrived at home she told her mother what she had heard;
and lint, salve, and bandages were speedily got ready.

Paul's pale cheek when he arrived showed that he was suffering
considerably, though he made light of the wound.

"Oh! it's nothing!" he said, trying to laugh.  "A black fellow's spear
merely grazed my side, though had not Polly swerved at that moment it
would have stuck into her neck."

"It is a mercy, my boy, that it did not strike you in the back," said
Mrs Hugh Berrington, examining the wound, which she thought far more
severe than Paul was inclined to suppose it.

"I had been looking after some cattle which had strayed from one of the
herdsmen, a new hand," he said, "when I suddenly found myself close to a
mob of strange blacks, the very same, I suspect, Harry and I met with
when hunting up Old Bolter.  Knowing the imprudence of trusting myself
among them, I immediately turned my horse's head and galloped off, but
not until several spears had been hurled at me.  I felt one pop through
my clothes, but I thought that it had given me only a slight scratch.
On reaching Jenkins's station, wishing to warn him of the vicinity of
the black fellows, I looked about everywhere, but could not find him,
and therefore came on that information might be sent to the police
without delay, in order that they might proceed in search of the
strangers and drive them away.  Before returning home I found Mr
Hayward, who, with Harry, has gone over to Ogilvie to give information
of the blacks being in the neighbourhood."

"But what if they should come here while our husbands are away?"
exclaimed Mrs Berrington, trembling with alarm.

"I am here, and this slight hurt won't prevent me from defending you,"
exclaimed Paul, feeling not a little indignant at his aunt's remark,
"and there are Reginald, and Hector, and Sandy, and the other men will
be back before long."

"And _we_ can fight too," exclaimed Janet.  "I know how to fire a
pistol, so does Mary."

"What a fearful state of things!" ejaculated Mrs Berrington.

"Oh, aunt, you'll soon get accustomed to it," said Janet, who often
spoke very like Harry.

"I hope that we shall not be reduced to such extremities," said Aunt
Emily.  "But where are Reginald and Hector?"

"I saw Reginald at our hut; I told him to come on here in case he might
be wanted, but as to Hector, I do not know where he is."

"Suppose he should be fishing by the river, and the blacks should find
him.  They may kill the poor boy," exclaimed Mrs Berrington.

Though Paul thought this more than possible, should Hector have gone to
any distance, he tried to reassure his aunt, intending to go himself and
try and find his cousin.

When, however, he attempted to move, he discovered that he could not do
so without great pain and difficulty.  He was thankful when Reginald
came in, and Rob at the same time making his appearance, he sent the two
off in search of Hector, warning them to keep away from any place which
might conceal a lurking enemy.  He then held a consultation with Mary
and Janet, and arranged with them how they might best prepare the house
for defence, should the blacks attack it.  They all knew that there was
not much real danger provided that they were not taken by surprise, as
the natives, unaccustomed to the use of fire-arms, were sure to run away
if sturdily withstood.  He knew he could depend upon his two elder
sisters, though he suspected that his cousins would not prove heroines.

The day wore on, the captain and his brother were not expected until
late.  Reginald and Rob had not returned from their search for Hector,
and Sandy, whom they expected, had not yet made his appearance.

The sun set, and darkness came on; the girls agreed to watch in
different directions, from whence they could command the approaches to
the house.  Biddy was naturally stationed at the kitchen end of the
house, which looked towards the bush.  Poor Mrs Berrington's alarm
became greater and greater.

Mrs Hugh and her daughters were doing their best to keep her from
fainting by the due application of sal volatile, though they themselves
could scarcely restrain their own fears.

Suddenly a fearful shriek ran through the house; it came from Biddy.
Mary and Janet hurried round, shutting the doors opening on the verandah
where they had been stationed, and rushed towards her.

"Sure, the nagers are coming! the nagers are coming!" they heard her
again and again shriek out.  She was, however, at her post at the door,
but had thrown her apron over her head.  Before closing the door, the
courageous girls looked out to ascertain how far off the natives were
from the house.  There, sure enough, they saw three figures approaching
with what looked like long spears in their hands.

"Arrah! come in, me darlin's, and don't let the nagers catch ye!"
shrieked Biddy.

"What's all that hullabaloo about?" exclaimed one of the figures,
approaching, and Hector, and Reginald, and Rob came up to the door.

Biddy, however, who had stopped her ears as well as hid her face, still
fancied that they were blacks, and continued shrieking as loudly as
ever.

"Run, Rob, and tell mother and aunt that you have come back safe, while
we try and bring this foolish girl to her senses," said Mary.

It was, however, some minutes before Biddy could be quieted, and assured
by the sight of the young masters that it was they whom she had seen,
and that no natives had shown themselves.

Reginald then told Mary that they had found Hector fast asleep on the
bank, while his fishing-rod was floating in the middle of a water-hole,
and that they had spent some time in attempting to recover it.  Though
the boys had returned safe, and one cause of anxiety was removed, there
was still a possibility that the blacks would attack the place, should
they have been on the watch, and have discovered that the gentlemen were
away.

Paul, however, did not think this likely, as, had they been lurking
about, they would certainly have caught the boys, and perhaps have
killed them.  Poor Mrs Berrington continued bemoaning her hard fate in
coming to such a country.

"But, my dear Augusta," said Mrs Hugh, "no harm has happened to those
we love, and we ought not to mistrust God.  You and I have gone through
numerous trials and troubles, and have been mercifully preserved through
them all."

At length the captain and his brother returned, and, having heard
nothing of the blacks, were greatly surprised at the state of agitation
into which the family had been thrown.  The captain commended Paul for
his judgment in sending for the police.  Taking their fire-arms with
them, they at once went back to let Sandy and the other men know that
the blacks had been seen near the house, that they might be on their
guard.

"They are not likely to be surprised while Bruce is on the watch,"
observed Paul; "he can scent a black a hundred yards off."

Poor Mrs Berrington was thus again made anxious, fearing that her
husband and the captain might be attacked before they got back to the
house.  At last they made their appearance, reporting that Sandy and the
men were on the watch at the stock-yards, but that Harry and Mr Hayward
had not yet returned; indeed, the captain believed that they would
probably accompany the police, or, at all events, not come back until
the morning.

The children were put to bed, and the ladies were at length persuaded to
retire to rest.  The captain and Mr Berrington arranged to keep watch
and watch, so that they might run no risk of being surprised.  Paul
wanted to join them, but his father insisted that he should remain
quiet, lest his wound, trifling though he considered it, might become
inflamed.  Hector went into his room without offering his services.  Mr
Berrington looked vexed, but said nothing; possibly he thought that he
would go to sleep at his post, and thus be worse than useless.

"I say, Edgar, though we are sent to bed, we are not bound to go to
sleep," exclaimed Rob.  "I vote that you and I keep watch at the window,
turn and turn about.  I have got one of Paul's pistols, and if any
blacks come we will shoot them."

"But they would have to come fearfully close to do that, and I don't
think I could fire at a man with a spear in his hand, grinning horribly
at me out of the dark."

It is easy to imagine the picture Edgar conjured up.

"That's the very time I would shoot," answered Rob; "if I did not, he
might hurl the spear and stick it into me."

"Keep quiet, you fellows," growled out Hector, who was awakened by their
talking, though he did not hear what they said.  They were silent till
they thought that he was again asleep.

"If you're afraid I'm not," said Rob.  "I will take the first watch, and
I will call you when it's time for you to look out, and then you can
rouse me up if you see anything, and I will be alongside you in a
moment."

Edgar having agreed to this, Rob sat himself down on a stool, with his
head just above the window-sill, on which it soon dropped.  He was, in
reality, fast asleep, though all the time he thought that he was keeping
a very bright lookout, and that he saw savages creeping up in the
distance, but that he was waiting to give the alarm until they should
get somewhat closer.  At last he awoke with a most uncomfortable crick
in his neck, and found, to his surprise, that the dawn had broken.
Hector and Edgar were sleeping soundly, and believing that no blacks
would venture near the house by daylight, he wisely crept into his bunk,
where he lay until roused by the sound of the gong which summoned the
family to prepare for breakfast.

The night had passed without any appearance of the blacks, and the
captain, who had searched round the house in every direction, could find
no traces of them.  He began, indeed, to suspect that Rob must have been
mistaken in supposing that he had seen a lurking native in the scrub.
He and Mr Berrington, followed by Bruce, after breakfast made a long
circuit through the scrub, and visiting the spot Rob described, the
captain had reason to change his opinion, for he at length found traces
of natives, and the remains of a fire, where they must have encamped
that very night.  This satisfied him that the precautions he had taken
had not been useless, but, as far as he could judge, the blacks had
retreated to the westward.  The chief anxiety of the family was now
about Harry and Mr Hayward, who had not yet returned.  Late in the day,
however, Rob and Edgar, who were patrolling round and round the house
under the idea that they were keeping guard, saw Harry galloping up to
them.

"Well, what news?" shouted Rob.  "We have been expecting the blacks all
day, but they have not come yet.  Have you fallen in with them?"

"Yes, indeed we have!" answered Harry, "and had a desperate fight too.
We killed some of them, and the rest ran off.  Lieutenant Bertram, of
the police, believes that they will still remain lurking in the
neighbourhood, and has come on with some of his men to be ready to act
as a guard to the house should father wish it.  We have had some
exciting work, let me tell you.  It was wonderful the way our black
police hunted down their countrymen; but I must not stop, as they will
be wanting to know at home what has happened."

Dismounting, Harry hurried into the house, while his younger brother led
his tired steed to the paddock.

Harry had just made his report, and Mrs Hugh was busy in preparing some
food for their expected visitors, when Mr Hayward, accompanied by a
young officer, rode up to the door, closely followed by a dozen black
troopers, in dark blue and red uniforms.  Mr Hayward introduced
Lieutenant Bertram, who explained his reasons for coming.

Mrs Berrington was profuse in her thanks.  "We have had a dreadful
fright, Mr Bertram, and I hope that you and your men will remain here
until the blacks are driven out of the country.  I shall get no rest,
night or day."

"I am afraid, madam, that will not be so easy an operation as you
suppose," answered the lieutenant.  "The blacks have an idea that they
are the owners of the soil, and that we are intruders, and they are not
very willing to decamp.  Our business is rather to keep them in order,
and prevent them from attacking the whites."

As Harry explained that they had been a good many hours without eating,
supper was immediately placed on the table, while provisions were
carried out to the troopers, who sat down in a circle on the
grass-plot--it could not be dignified as a lawn--with their horses
picketed near them.  The ladies went out to see them as they sat in the
sunlight, not at all inconvenienced by its glare.  They seemed merry,
careless fellows, laughing and chattering away in their own curious
lingo--a mixture of English and native words.

Mr Bertram said they were all blacks from a distance, composed of two
or three different tribes who could not understand each other's original
language.  The captain was grieved to find that there was little doubt
that his shepherd had been murdered, although his body had not been
discovered.  The flock had been driven to a station nearer home, where
two of the police had been left to watch the hostile natives, although
it was not at all likely that they would for the present make another
attack.

Poor Mrs Berrington saw, with much regret, the lieutenant and his men
take their departure.  They were going, he said, to make another
thorough search for the hostile natives, and to advise them to remove to
a distance from the white men's stations.



CHAPTER SIX.

PLEASANT RIDES THROUGH THE COUNTRY--MAGNIFICENT VEGETATION--HECTOR STUNG
BY A NETTLE--A HURRICANE--ROOF OF THE HUT BLOWN OFF.

Some weeks passed away, and the new comers were getting accustomed to
bush-life.  Even the unimpressible Evelina and Adela began to take an
interest in what was going on, though they were still open to the
criticism pronounced on them by Harry to Reginald--

"Those girls of yours are very well in their way, but it is a pity they
cannot learn to make themselves useful."

Aunt Emily was, however, delighted with all she saw--the trees, the
birds, the animals; and much indeed there was to admire during the rides
she and two or three of the girls were accustomed to take, either with
Mr Berrington or Paul, Harry or Reginald.

All apprehension of an attack from the blacks had subsided, and they
frequently rode to a considerable distance from Stratton.  The country
beyond the scrub was open, or rather only sprinkled with tall ungainly
gum-trees, but there was to be found in many spots other and very
beautiful foliage.  In some places groves of acacia-trees with yellow
blossoms, and in other spots tall coral trees with long pendulous red
flowers, looking exactly like strings of coral hanging from the dark
foliage.  Sometimes they came upon the curiously-shaped bottle tree,
which greatly resembles a lemonade bottle placed in the ground.  Then,
not far off, would be found the grass tree, from the summit of which
long pendants projected like enormous blades of grass.  Even these trees
were of considerable height.  Mr Berrington said that during the hot
months he always had a supply of the wood, as the smoke arising from it
emits not only a very pleasant odour, but is much objected to by the
mosquitos, and by burning it in the room those pests of Queensland are
always driven out.

One of the most remarkable trees they met with was the bunya-bunya, a
species of pine.  It towered like a pinnacle above all the other trees,
reaching a height of upwards of two hundred feet.

Some of the young trees were peculiarly handsome, throwing out branches
all around close to the ground to a distance of many yards, and smaller
branches rising in regular gradation to the top, thus forming a perfect
cone with so dense a foliage that it was evident no animal could
penetrate it.  At the top of the older trees grew an enormous cone of
fruit, each being the size of a chestnut.  From some of these a bare
pole shot up nearly a hundred feet above the branches, with this
prodigious cone at the summit.  Notwithstanding this, the party saw a
couple of blacks belonging to a friendly tribe, who occasionally camped
near them, climb to the top, whence they threw down the fruit in
handfuls.  Harry and Reginald filled their pockets with some of it,
which they carried home.  It was cooked as chestnuts are, but was
pronounced more farinaceous and much nicer to eat.

The party frequently took provisions with them, and enjoyed a picnic in
some beautiful spot while their horses were hobbled near.  On one of
these occasions Hector had condescended to accompany them.  He and Paul,
with Mr Hayward, were walking some little distance from the rest, when
Hector, not taking an interest in the conversation of his cousin and the
dominie, sauntered away from them.  Hector had the habit as he walked
along of pulling off the leaves of any shrub or tree he passed, from
mere thoughtlessness, not with any idea of examining their shape or
character.

"Where's Hector got to?" suddenly exclaimed Paul.

"There he is," said Mr Hayward; then he shouted, "Come back, Hector;
come back!  Don't touch those shrubs."

But Hector either did not hear or did not heed the call, and Mr Hayward
and Paul set off to run after him.  Presently they heard him shriek out,
and throw down a large leaf like that of a mallow, which he had plucked
from a shrub about fifteen feet in height.

"That's a nettle tree," exclaimed Mr Hayward; "poor fellow! he'll
suffer for it."

They found Hector wringing his hand, and declaring that he had been
stung by a snake.  He was somewhat consoled when Mr Hayward and Paul
assured him that he had only by mistake caught hold of a huge nettle,
though he might expect to suffer from its effects for some days to come.
He wanted to run off to a stream near which the party had picnicked, to
cool his hand in the water.

"That will only make matters worse," said Paul; "you must keep your hand
as dry as possible, for every time you wet it the pain will come on
again."

Poor Hector could scarcely refrain from crying out with pain.

"You must grin and bear it, old fellow," said Harry, really wishing to
console him.  "When you get home mother will, I dare say, apply some
remedy.  We were fortunately warned about catching hold of nettles
before we had your experience; but you'll never do it again."

All the party enjoyed the ride, except poor Hector, who complained
bitterly of the pain he suffered from the stinging-nettle.  On their
arrival at home, Mrs Hugh applied ammonia and oil.  At length he
acknowledged that the pain had considerably abated, but during the
remainder of the evening he took every opportunity of abusing the
country and "its horrible productions."

Harry, who was always ready to take up the cudgels in favour of his
native land, answered, "Why, even you in England have got nettles, and
poisonous berries too, and, I am sure, have not got one-tenth part of
the fruits and plants which this country can produce.  We can grow the
sugar-cane, cotton, coffee, rice and tobacco, and Peruvian bark, or what
answers as well, and spices of all sorts, while few of our berries are
poisonous; and, except those rascally dingos, we have not an animal in
the country which can do any harm to man or beast."

"Oh, yes! it's a very nice land indeed," sneered Hector.

"Come, old fellow, you're shut up, after all," exclaimed Harry,
triumphantly, "and it is time to go to bed.  I'm off to our hut.  Come
along, Reggy; Paul went there an hour ago."

Family prayers were over.  The two lads, wishing their fathers and
mothers and all hands good night, set off to their abode.

Mr Hayward and the rest of the inmates of the hut had been some time
asleep, when they were awakened by a fearful uproar, like the howling,
shrieking, and hissing of a thousand locomotive engines dashing on at
full speed--so Reggy described it.  They could scarcely hear their own
voices as they shouted to know what was happening.

"A storm, lads, and such a one as we don't often get," said Mr Hayward,
who was dressing as fast as he could.  The rest followed his example,
for at any moment the roof of their hut might be carried off.  As they
looked out they saw the tallest trees bending and groaning under the
fearful blast.  At that moment a huge branch, broken off, was dashed to
the ground near them with a tremendous crash, while the whole air was
filled with leaves, twigs, and smaller branches.

The thunder, which had been heard at a distance, came near.  At first it
sounded like a faint cannonading, but now it broke overhead with
terrible roars and rattles, as if a pitched battle were raging amid the
clouds, drowning all other sounds.  In such rapid succession did peal
follow peal, that they appeared like one continuous roar.

Black clouds made the night as dark as pitch, until the lightning burst
forth and lit up the whole of the surrounding scene.  Streams of the
electric fluid, running down the stems of the tall trees, went hissing
along the ground like fiery serpents.  Blast succeeded blast, until
suddenly the whole roof of the hut, being lifted together, was carried
off, the inmates knew not where; when down came the rain in a sheet of
water, rather than drops.  The lads were thankful that they had got on
their clothes, at all events, and had time to slip into their
waterproofs.

"We must go and see what is happening at the house.  I only hope the
fencing won't be blown down, or we shall have work enough to-morrow to
collect the stock again," cried Paul.

In spite of the storm, and the danger they ran from falling boughs, they
commenced making their way towards the house.  Sometimes it was so dark
that they could not see a foot before them.  Then, in an instant, a
bright flash would illumine the whole scene, and they rushed forward
again, stopping when darkness came upon them.  At length they calculated
that they must be close to the house.  A flash revealed it to them, but
it appeared as if the roof had gone.  No one was to be seen.  They
shouted, but no reply came.  They tried to open the door, but it was
fastened within.  Perhaps those they loved had been crushed by the
falling roof.  The thought was too dreadful.  Paul and Harry shook at
the door, and shouted again and again.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE BOYS GO TO ASSIST THEIR FRIENDS--PAUL AND HARRY ENTER THE HOUSE
THROUGH THE ROOF--ALARM OF THE FAMILY--FEARS OF THE RIVER RISING--PAUL
SETS OFF TO OBTAIN PROVISIONS.

Paul and Harry, who had run on first, kept knocking and knocking at the
door, and shouting at the top of their voices, but the creaking of the
verandah posts, the rattling of the shingles on the roof, the continuous
roar of the thunder, and the howling of the wind among the trees,
completely drowned their voices.  They ran round to try and find an
entrance by one of the windows or back door, but the shutters were all
closed.  At length Mr Hayward and Reggy came up, but they were not more
successful in making the inmates hear when they knocked and shouted at
the front door.  Harry proposed climbing up and dropping down through
the opening in the roof.  A large portion of the verandah had been torn
away, but the beams remained.

"You forget, Harry," shouted Paul in his ear, "we may reach the roof,
but how shall we get down without the risk of breaking our legs over the
fragments which may have fallen in, or the tables and chairs?  Stay a
moment!  There's a rope in the harness room, and if that has not been
blown away I'll get it."

Paul recollecting where he had last seen the rope, was able to lay his
hand on it, even in the dark.  He soon groped his way back.

Harry having proposed the expedition, climbed up first, Paul handing him
the rope.  He soon reached a rafter, and lowering the rope until he knew
that it touched the ground, he fastened it securely, and at once
descended, followed by Paul.  They had dropped into their own bedroom,
which they had given up to Hector; after feeling about, however, they
decided he was not there.  Neither were Rob nor Edgar.  They then groped
their way along the passage at the back of the house, to the
sitting-room end.  During a momentary lull of the storm they thought
they heard voices.  On opening the door, they presented themselves to
the astonished eyes of their family.

Mr Berrington, aided by Mrs Hugh and Miss Saville, was endeavouring to
calm the fears of his wife and elder daughters, who were well nigh in
hysterics, while Mary and Janet were attending to the children--who,
poor little things, were naturally very much frightened.  Hector, who
had got his hand wet, was crying out that he had been bitten by a
scorpion, forgetting how he had been stung by a nettle the previous
morning.  The captain, meantime, was doing his best to keep the windows
closed, with the assistance of Biddy, who was bringing him such pieces
of wood as she could find to nail up against them, for they threatened
to give way, when the wind would have blown out the only lamp which was
burning on the table in the centre of the room.

"Where have you boys come from?" asked their father; "I thought all the
doors were shut."

"So they are," shouted Paul, "but we came down through the roof."

"What! were you blown all this way?" asked Mr Berrington, looking up.

"Not exactly," answered Harry, "we came on our legs."

"Has your hut been blown down?" asked their father.

"The best part of it, on a night like this--the top has," answered
Harry.

Paul then explained that Mr Hayward and Reggy were all this time
waiting outside, not knowing how to get in.  The captain would not let
them open the door, however, without his assistance, and they all three
accordingly repaired to it.

"Are you still there?" shouted Harry.

A voice answered, "Yes."

"Stand by to close the door again," said the captain, and slightly
opening it, in rushed Reggy and Mr Hayward, when the whole party,
pressing hard, once more closed it, though the blast which came in sent
several of the articles of furniture rattling down.

"How, in the name of wonder, did you get in?" exclaimed Reggy, when he
found Paul and Harry inside.

He could scarcely believe it when they told him how they had managed to
find an entrance.  The door being secured, they hastened back to the
sitting-room.  It was no easy matter to carry on a conversation amid the
wild uproar, though the captain, accustomed to storms at sea, made
himself heard.  He could not tell how much of the roof had gone, for,
even through a small aperture the rain made its way in torrents.  He was
thankful that any part remained which could afford them shelter.  Paul
could give no account of how it fared with Sandy and the men at the
stock-yard.  Mr Hayward volunteered to go back and ascertain, but the
captain would not allow this.  "You ran risk enough in coming, and I am
thankful that you have escaped," he said.

Nothing more could now be done until daylight, as the whole house was in
darkness, for as soon as the lamp was lighted in any part, except in the
sitting-room, it was blown out again by the wind which made its way
through the roof.  The captain did not express his fears to the rest of
the party, with the exception of Mr Hayward and Paul, but his chief
anxiety was about the river.  On listening at the side of the house
nearest to it, they could hear the water rushing along its hitherto dry
bed, evidently at headlong speed.  Mr Hayward, ever ready to assist,
offered to go out and ascertain how high it had risen.

"We may remain here in safety at present, I trust," said Captain
Berrington: "it is still a dozen feet below us, probably more, and
unless it should rise much higher, we should only unnecessarily expose
the ladies to this tremendous rain and the fearful danger of falling
branches were we to quit the house.  We must, however, keep a watch upon
it and escape in time."

Several terrific blasts came, which threatened to blow down the house,
or tear off the whole roof.  The wind, after the last, began to lull,
and the rain ceased.  The house, with the exception of the sitting-room,
was in such a condition that the family were compelled to remain in that
apartment.  The night wore slowly away, and every one was thankful when
daylight at last returned.  Sad indeed was the havoc which had been
committed by the tempest; but the captain was thankful that none of the
family had been injured, and not a word of complaint escaped him.

No time was lost in commencing to repair the damages.  While Biddy was
trying to get her kitchen in order and light a fire, Janet and Mary,
with pails and mops, assisted by their cousins, were busily employed in
"swabbing decks," as their father called it, and hanging up the wet
bedding to dry.

The captain and his brother, with Mr Hayward, got the carpenter's
tools, and commenced repairing the roof, while the younger boys
collected all the shingles they could find.  Paul, Harry, and Reggy
started off to the stock-yards, to see how things fared there, and to
assist Sandy and the men if necessary.  Before going they took a glance
at the river.  Reggy could scarcely believe that it was the same stream
he had seen the day before, as it now went foaming and rushing by,
carrying huge trunks of trees and dead cattle in its vortex, while it
appeared four times as broad as before.

"We have often had it as high as this in a rainy season, although it has
seldom risen so high at other times," said Paul.

Hector declared that his hand hurt him too much to allow him to do
anything, although he at length condescended, when summoned by his
sisters, to try and put his own room in order.

As the lads went along, they observed the havoc which had been produced
by the storm.  Several tall trees had been blown down, others denuded of
their branches.  The maize was beaten to the ground, the kitchen-garden
had suffered greatly, and flower-blossoms had everywhere been torn off,
while many of the fruit-trees were destroyed.

"It cannot be helped," said Paul, "happily, things grow here very
rapidly, and in a short time we shall have all to rights again."

Reginald thought Paul a great philosopher, but he only spoke the truth.
They met Sandy coming to ask how the family had fared; he reported more
favourably of the stock-yard than Paul had expected.  A portion of the
roof of some of the buildings had been blown off; but the strong fences
intended to resist the charge of a fierce bull or angry heifer had
withstood the strongest blasts.

"We ken weel where our weak points are," observed Sandy; "we will soon
get things to rights."

Every one had enough to do during that and several following days.  The
buildings were re-roofed, the fallen trees were sawn through and dragged
out of the way to be split up or burned.  The garden fences were
repaired, and everything else put to rights.  Meantime the river had
fallen almost to its usual level, though the water-holes were united,
and it now ran in a regular current.  The captain's chief regret was for
his maize crop; nothing could restore that, and he expected to obtain
scarcely a quarter of the produce he had looked for.  It would be
necessary, therefore, to dispatch the drays some hundreds of miles to
obtain flour, and this must be done as soon as possible, before the
regular rainy season should set in.  It would not last long, but during
that time many of the creeks would be impassable, and other places might
be flooded.

There was so much to be done that Captain Berrington did not wish to go
himself, and though Paul was always very useful at home, he determined
to send him in charge of the party.  Paul would have liked to take
either Harry or Reggy, but they now worked so well together that his
father was unwilling to separate them, besides which they were able to
do a great deal of work, and had in addition to attend some hours in the
day to their studies, as Mr Hayward had resumed his duties as tutor,
the girls, as well as the boys, regularly attending the school.

Paul could not but feel proud at being so thoroughly trusted by his
father, and he hoped to perform his commission well; although he would
gladly have had a companion in his long and tedious journey.

The men who accompanied him had been some time in the captain's employ,
and were considered thoroughly trustworthy.  He himself felt much more
anxious about the family.  It was not only possible that the blacks
might return and cause them alarm, but he might not obtain flour where
he expected to find it.  Although they would not in consequence be
actually in want of food, it would be a considerable privation to have
to go without bread.  The captain had also confided to him a project Mr
Berrington and he had in view, of forming a new station further up the
country.  They had not, however, fixed on it; but beyond the ranges to
the north-west the captain had heard that a fine region existed, and he
proposed forming a party to explore it.  He had promised Paul that he
should go, and told him that he proposed setting off at the termination
of the rainy season.  Paul, having bid farewell to his family,
accompanied by Harry and Reggy, who were going to see him a few miles on
the way, rode after the drays, which had started at daybreak that
morning.

The two boys returned towards evening, reporting all well.  Paul was
much missed; even Hector complained that he had not now a companion to
talk to.  Although Harry and Reggy were merry fellows, it was generally
acknowledged that they were not equal to Paul.

"I trust we shall have him back soon," said his mother, after he had
been gone some time; "although I wish that tidings of him had reached
us."



CHAPTER EIGHT.

A KANGAROO HUNT--CHASING EMUS--A PACK OF DINGOES PUT TO FLIGHT.

Reggy had by this time learned to make himself almost as useful as
Harry.  Their great delight was riding after stray cattle and horses,
which afforded them constant occupation.

Occasionally they visited the sheep-stations, to see that all was right,
or to give directions to the shepherds.

Sometimes they drove one of the drays carrying provisions and stores, a
task which was not so pleasant as galloping over the country.  Now and
then Hector was persuaded to join them in the former duty, but he would
never even attempt to learn to drive a dray.

"If I could manage to get hold of a well-built dogcart from London, I
should have no objection to turn out a tandem," he said, as he
contemptuously surveyed the dray.

As the captain was convinced that "all work and no play makes Jack a
dull boy," he occasionally allowed all hands who could be spared to go
out hunting, the game being kangaroos or emus, when Bruce and the other
dogs at the station had an active part to play.  Hector, who rode pretty
well, had no objection to join in it.  Even Rob and Edgar were at times
allowed to go out.

The damage caused by the storm having been repaired, about a week after
Paul left home a hunting party was organised, the captain and Mr Haward
joining it, with all the boys.  Sandy, on such occasions, always
remained at home, although he had learned to stick to the saddle as well
as any man.  Hunting was not to his taste; besides which, he considered
it his duty to look after the ladies at the house and the cattle at the
station.

It was a lovely morning; not a cloud was in the sky.  The air was so
pure, and so fine a breeze was blowing, that no one felt the heat.  The
boys were in high spirits as they rode along on their sturdy little
horses, with the dogs barking and frisking around them.  They had not
gone far before a large kangaroo was sighted--an "old man," as the big
kangaroos are called by the settlers.  He was employed in plucking the
leaves from some shrubs which partly concealed him.  So busily engaged
was he, that he did not at first notice their approach, but as they got
near his quick ear detected the sound of their horses' feet, and taking
one glance at them over his shoulder, he bounded off to seek safety in
flight.

The dogs gave chase, the horsemen followed close upon their heels.  The
kangaroo appeared to move but slowly, and to be making his long bounds
with deliberation.

"We shall be up to him in three minutes!" cried Reggy.

"Not so fast as that, by a long way," answered Harry; "he is now going
at double the speed you suppose, and will soon increase it."

Harry was right.  On went the kangaroo towards a creek in which there
were two or three deep water-holes, a couple of miles to the northward.
Hector and Reginald could not help laughing as they saw the wonderful
bounds he made, holding his little front claws close to him, as a man
does when running a race, with his knowing head held upright.
Sometimes, when passing through high grass, the head and shoulders alone
were visible, and the dogs could not be perceived except by the waving
grass, while often they could not see the chase; still they kept on in
its tracks.  At last a large water-hole was reached, the kangaroo leapt
into it, and having gained the centre, turned round and watched for the
approach of the dogs.  Bruce--knowing old fellow--was well aware that
the kangaroo would have him at a great disadvantage, and contented
himself by standing at the edge and barking, as he knew the animal must
in time abandon his present position and again take to flight.  All the
older dogs imitated Brace's example; but two young ones, thinking
themselves braver than their companions, swam out, expecting to catch
the kangaroo by the neck and bring him down.  The first which approached
was caught in his short arms before the dog could seize his throat, and
was held down under the water, the kangaroo looking round all the time
with perfect unconcern.  In vain the dog struggled: the greater its
efforts to free himself, the more rapidly the water entered its mouth.

The second dog attempted to make a diversion in its favour, but the
kangaroo managed to give it a blow with the sharp claw of one of its
hinder feet, and, with a yelp of pain, it swam back to the shore,
leaving a ruddy stain in the water, while the body of the first dog
which had been seized floated up deprived of life.

Harry and Reggy, with Mr Hayward, who were leading, now came up, but
the kangaroo observing one side of the water-hole unguarded, suddenly,
with a few bounds, reached it and made off before the dogs could get
round to seize him.  Away he went, bounding on as before towards the
scrub in which he might have hoped to obtain shelter.  The horsemen lost
some little time in first getting the dead dog out of the water-hole and
by crossing the creek; but they soon recovered their lost ground, as the
kangaroo was becoming wearied with his exertions.

A thick scrub was ahead, and directly in front were some large trees.
The dogs got almost near enough to catch hold of the tail of the
kangaroo, when renewing his exertions, he managed to jump up close to
one of the big trees, and to turn round with his back to the trunk.
Here he stood at bay, showing, however, not the slightest sign of fear.
As the dogs came barking fiercely round it, Reggy, wishing to display
his courage, leapt off his horse, and was on the point of running up to
the kangaroo when Mr Hayward shouted to him to stop; and he had soon
good reason to be thankful that he had done so, for another of the young
dogs getting within reach of the kangaroo, it struck out with one of its
hind-claws and inflicted a terrible wound on its assailant.  The dog,
uttering a yelp of pain, endeavoured to crawl away, but before it did so
another blow stretched it dead in front of the kangaroo as a warning to
its companions.

It seemed cruel, after the animal had so bravely fought for his life, to
destroy him; but, as he would probably have killed more of the dogs, Mr
Hayward fired and finished his career.

The kangaroo was quickly skinned, his long tail being secured to one of
the saddles.  The best part of the meat, being wrapped in large leaves,
was hung up in the shade, to be carried home on their way back.  The
remainder was left as a trap to the dingoes, whom it was hoped would
remain feasting, and be shot by the party on their return.

The object of the expedition, however, was to hunt emus.  Leaving the
scrub, they reached some open downs of wide extent.  Keeping, by the
captain's directions, on the lee side, they rapidly advanced, with a
bright lookout ahead.  The emu will run from human beings, especially
from blacks.  It is not, however, afraid either of horses or drays.  It
greatly resembles, in size and shape, the ostrich; but its colour is of
a uniform brownish-black with feather-like hairs in lieu of feathers,
and it has no wings, but its legs being very strong it can run at a
rapid rate.  As its head reaches seven feet or more from the ground it
can obtain a wide view over the plain.

Mr Hayward, who well understood the habits of the bird, rode on in
front.  At length he made a sign that he saw emus in the distance, when
the whole party, as had been arranged, dismounted and led on their
horses, keeping them between themselves and the emus.  They were thus
able to get within a couple of hundred yards, when the wingless birds
showed signs of alarm.  Mr Hayward gave the signal to mount, and
leaping on his horse the rest followed his example, and the emus set off
running at a speed calculated to try the mettle of the fleetest horse
and the endurance of the dogs.  The pack, with loud yelps, bounded after
them, followed by the horsemen, whose object was to keep them together.

The emus had no intention of being caught, but they had the wind against
them, which somewhat impeded their progress.  Two, however, showed signs
of flagging, and the dogs got up to them.  It would have been better for
them had they kept at a respectful distance, for the hindmost emu
kicking out struck one of them on the chest, and sent it flying among
its companions.  The rest of the pack taking warning kept out of reach
of the bird's powerful feet.  At length one of the hard-pressed
creatures dropped to the ground, where it was speedily despatched by the
captain, while Mr Hayward and the boys galloped after the remainder of
the flock.  Two more were run down and killed in the same manner.  The
skins were soon taken off and thrown across the horses' necks.  A
portion also of the flesh was secured, as Harry, Reggy, and Edgar
expressed a strong wish to taste it.

The party then commenced their return home.  On reaching the spot where
the kangaroo had been killed, they caught sight of a pack of dingoes, to
which they gave chase.  Bruce and his companions pulled down several of
these pests to the settler, and others were shot.  Not a particle of
kangaroo remained on the ground.  The dingoes had been unable to reach
the meat hung up among the branches, although, from the appearance of
the trampled ground beneath, they had evidently made great efforts to
get at it.  There were numbers of flies, however, buzzing around, and in
a very few hours it would have been uneatable.  This was only one of
several kangaroo and emu hunts in which the boys took a part.  Even
Hector acknowledged that there was some fun in the sport, though he
should like to have turned out in a red coat and riding-cap.

"With the thermometer at ninety in the shade?" remarked Harry.  "I don't
think you would ride out a second time in such a fashion."



CHAPTER NINE.

A BLACK HELP FOR BIDDY OBTAINED--BENDIGO, HER HUSBAND--PRODUCTS OF THE
ESTATE--SHOOTING EXCURSIONS--HECTOR AND THE LEECHES--THE BOYS AWAKENED
BY A LAUGHING JACKASS--A FLOOD IN THE RIVER.

Things went on quietly enough at the farm, until one day Biddy struck--
not for wages, but for help.  She could not bear to see the young ladies
do the work they were compelled to do, and yet it was more than she
could do herself.

The captain inquired whether she would object to a black help.

"Sure not, yer honour, if she kapes a dacent tongue in her mouth,"
answered Biddy.  So the captain rode out to obtain the assistance Biddy
asked for.  A short distance away, a small tribe of friendly blacks were
encamped; among them was one called Bendigo.  He had frequently visited
the station, and was ready to make himself generally useful by chopping
wood or occasionally assisting the shepherds.  He had a wife named
Betty, who, if she was not pretty to European notions, was thought to be
so by Bendigo, and she was a young, good-natured, merry little woman.

The captain invited the couple to come and take up their abode on the
farm.  They were to have a hut to themselves.  Betty was to help Biddy,
and Bendigo was to do any work required of him.  The offer was accepted,
and Betty was forthwith installed as Biddy's help.  Her costume when she
made her appearance was not altogether suited to her new style of life,
as it consisted of a man's old shirt and a piece of grass matting as a
petticoat.

The young ladies immediately manufactured for her a robe of blue serge
trimmed with red braiding, while Biddy initiated her into the use of
soap and water, to which she had hitherto been a stranger.  She
carefully brushed her hair and combed it out with a horse-comb, none of
those in ordinary use being strong enough for the purpose.

Betty was immensely proud of her new costume, and hurried away to
exhibit herself to her husband and the other black fellows on the
station.  Had not Bendigo stopped her she would have gone off to the
camp; but he, not without reason, feared that she might have been
deprived of her new dress by some of her beloved relatives.

Every morning she appeared at daybreak, and if Biddy overslept herself
she was sure to awaken her by loudly knocking at the door of the kitchen
in which Biddy slept.  They were very good friends, though neither could
understand a word the other said.  But Betty quickly learned, after a
certain sort, Biddy's language, and, as may be supposed, a very curious
lingo was the result.  Harry declared that any day Betty might be taken
for a black Irish girl.

"Sure we have no naguers in the ould country, Master Harry!" answered
Biddy.

Betty soon learned to perform any work she was shown how to do; but she
preferred tending the children, and if she saw them running down to the
river, or wandering too far from the house, she was after them like a
shot, always bringing them back in her arms, sitting down and lecturing
them after her own fashion--telling them of a fearful monster which had
its abode beneath the water, or of wild men who lay concealed in the
scrub ready to carry them off and eat them.  Poor Betty had no notion of
right or wrong, and, although she did not steal or tell falsehoods, it
was from the belief that the white people, who knew everything, would to
a certainty find her out.  As soon as she had obtained some knowledge of
English, Mary and Janet endeavoured to instil into her dark mind some
religious ideas.  It was long, however, before they were satisfied that
she had comprehended the simplest truths.

The family were now anxiously waiting Paul's return.  All the flour in
the store-room had been exhausted, but they were not so badly off as
they might have been in some regions.  The captain had an acre or more
planted with the sweet potato--a species of yam, each root weighing from
three to four pounds, and sometimes even more.  Biddy had learned to
cook them properly, when they appeared dry and floury.  Though the
cousins at first declared that they were too sweet to eat, they
acknowledged, however, when dressed under the roast meat, that they were
very nice.  Then they had bananas, a pleasant, nutritious fruit.  The
captain, on first coming to the farm, had formed a plantation of these
trees, and as they had been well protected they had escaped destruction
from the hurricane.  The trees were raised from suckers, which grew
around the bottom of the parent tree.  Within eighteen months from the
time the plants had been set out the trees began to bear fruit.  This
comes out from the centre of the plant, and hangs down in a large bunch,
five or six in a bunch.

One great advantage was that there were ripe bananas all the year round,
though they were most plentiful in the summer.  The trees were upwards
of twenty feet in height, with broad green leaves four to six feet in
length.  There was an avenue composed of them running from one side of
the garden to the other, which afforded at all times a delightful shade.
The stems contain a quantity of fibrous matter, which makes excellent
rope.

"We shall not starve while we have these to subsist on," observed the
captain to his brother.  "The people in the south call us `Banana-men';
and not a bad name either, for with their aid we could manage to subsist
on beef and mutton, even had we no other vegetable productions to depend
upon."

Mary and Janet had nearly two hundred hens in their poultry yard, and by
attending carefully to them and not allowing them to stray, they were
able to obtain several dozen eggs daily.

Hector and the younger boys frequently went out fishing, but Harry and
Reggy preferred shooting.  On one occasion Hector volunteered to
accompany them.

The boys were feeling somewhat fatigued from their walk, when they
reached a large water-hole, which they had not before visited.

"The water looks very refreshing; I intend to have a bath," said Hector,
beginning to undress.

Just then Harry caught sight of a flight of parrots, which had pitched
in some trees near at hand.  Reginald and he crept near.  Firing
together they brought down nearly a dozen.  They were picking up the
birds when they heard Hector cry out.  Running back to the water-hole,
they saw him almost in the middle.

"Help me! help me!" he shouted.

"Why, if you've got thus far, why can't you wade back again?" asked
Harry.

"There are some horrid creatures sticking to me, and I don't know what
they will do," cried Hector.

Harry and Reggy, caring nothing for the wetting, plunged in, and soon
helped Hector back on to dry ground.  He had not cried out without
reason, for what was their dismay to see twenty or thirty leeches
sticking to his body, and several had fixed themselves to their own arms
even during the short time they had been in the water.  They pulled them
off as fast as they could, but found it no easy matter to stop the blood
which flowed from some of the spots to which the creatures had fixed
themselves.

"I shall bleed to death!  I shall bleed to death!" sighed poor Hector.

"I don't think things will be so bad as that," said Harry.

The leeches were very small at first, looking somewhat like thick bits
of hair, but they rapidly began to swell, and two which stuck on Reggy's
wrist, which he did not observe while assisting his brother, had grown
to the size of his little finger.  Fortunately the leeches were wiped
off poor Hector's body before they had time to extract much of his
blood.  Although he declared that he felt very faint he soon recovered,
and being attended to by Reggy and Harry, put on his clothes, vowing
that it should be the last time he would ever bathe in that detestable
country.

"All water-holes have not got leeches in them," observed Harry.  "There
are none in those near Stratton, and I would advise you to break that
resolution."

Hector, however, declaring that he felt very ill, insisted on returning
home.

"Any news of Paul yet?" asked Harry, as they arrived at home.

"Not a word," said his father; "if he does not appear to-morrow I intend
to ride out and try to discover him."

Hector, meanwhile, was bitterly complaining to his mother of the
sufferings he had endured.  "I wish that you'd let me go back to
England, or try and get me some gentlemanly post in Sydney or
Melbourne," he said.

"I will ask your father," was the answer.

The captain, to whom Mr Berrington communicated his son's request,
laughed heartily.  "I am sorry for the poor boy.  He would find that he
had dropped out of the frying-pan into the fire.  If he cannot find
occupation in the bush, depend upon it he will not in the city.  People
there do not want fine young gentlemen any more than they do here.  Do
not let him go, as you will only be throwing your money away, but have
patience with him, and by degrees he will get accustomed to our ways,
and prove useful at last."

Mr Berrington told his son "that he would think about the matter," and
Hector used to talk to his cousins of the Government appointment he
expected soon to obtain.

The heat had been very great.  Not a cloud was in the sky, and not a
breath of wind fanned the topmost boughs of the tallest trees.  Captain
Berrington had determined on starting to discover what had become of
Paul.  Rob and Edgar were awake before daylight.  The whole family
intended to be up to see the captain off.  The window was left open on
account of the heat.  Presently, from the wood close at hand, there came
forth a wild shriek of merry laughter, which made Hector start up.

"Where in the world did that come from?" he exclaimed.

Rob pointed to the wood.

"What can it be?" asked Hector.

Rob did not answer, amused at his cousin's astonishment.

Again, another jovial peal of laughter, followed by a self-satisfied
chuckle, came from the wood.

"What is it?  What is it?" asked the others.

"You would have heard it before, many a time, if you had been awake at
this hour," answered Rob.  "That is the settler's alarum--the laughing
jackass."

"Laughing jackass!" exclaimed Hector.  "I never heard that a jackass
laughed, and I don't see one there," for in his eagerness he had jumped
up, and gone to the window.

The dawn, it should have been said, had just broken.

"Wait until we have more light," said Rob; "perhaps you will then see
our friend.  I can just make him out.  He is not down on the ground,
where you are looking for him--he is up in yonder tree."

"Up in a tree?" exclaimed his cousins, in chorus.

"Yes; he generally lives up there, but he does not indulge in such
uproarious laughter until early in the morning.  I suppose he laughs at
the folly of people lying in bed, and so tries to wake them up."

Hector and Edgar were more mystified than ever.  At last they caught
sight of a large brown bird with a big beak, sitting on a bough and
nodding its head, and then laughing away with all its might.  They could
now no longer have any doubt whence the sound proceeded.

Just then Harry, arriving from the hut, came into the room.

"Come along, Harry," cried Reggy, "you said there would be time for a
bathe before breakfast."

"I'm your man," said Harry.  "Come, be quick, Hector, or we shall be
back before you have put the finishing touch to your toilet."

The two lads hurried down to the river.  Except in the water-holes which
were joined by a trickling rivulet the whole bed was dry, but the ponds
were of sufficient depth to afford a pleasant bath.

The boys were on the point of throwing off their clothes to plunge in,
when Harry exclaimed, "Hark! what's that sound?"

"It is like distant thunder," answered Reggy.

"It can't be thunder, there's not a cloud in the sky," replied Harry.
"It seems to me to be coming right down the river.  I don't like it; I
heard just such a sound some years ago, when a great flood came down and
rose nearly up to the house.  We won't bathe, but run back and tell
father; he'll judge what it is and what's best to be done."

The boys hurried back; but before they had got up to the top of the bank
the roaring sound had greatly increased, and Harry was more convinced
than before that a heavy flood was approaching.



CHAPTER TEN.

ALARMING PROGRESS OF THE FLOOD--THE CAPTAIN REMOVES HIS FAMILY TO HIGHER
GROUND--THE BOYS, IN THEIR EAGERNESS TO SAVE MORE PROPERTY, ARE CUT OFF
BY THE WATER.

Directly on receiving the information brought by Harry and Reggy,
Captain Berrington hurried down to the river, followed by Hector, Rob,
and Edgar.  Presently, as they looked up the dry bed between the high
banks, they saw a wall of water moving on towards them, such, on a
smaller scale, as might have been beheld by the Egyptians when
attempting to cross the Red Sea.  But this was high enough to overwhelm
any human beings, or horses or cattle, which might have been in its way.
The summit hissed and foamed, rising almost to the top of the bank.  No
streams advanced before it: it was literally a wall of water.  On it
came, its roar growing louder and louder.  In less than a minute after
it had been seen it rushed by, filling the whole bed of the river, and
sending its surges up those portions of the bank which sloped more
gradually.

"Back, back, boys!" shouted the captain.

They had to run as quickly as their legs would carry them to avoid the
torrent.  Where the ground had just before been perfectly dry there was
now a hissing, foaming torrent of yellow water, carrying along branches
of trees, and even big trunks.  The captain, who had been joined by his
brother, watched it anxiously.

"I had hopes that this was merely the result of a thunder-storm up the
country," he observed; "but see, it continues to rise, which shows me
that there must be a vast volume of water behind what there is here.  We
have some cattle feeding on the low land higher up; I trust that White
has had the discretion to drive them to the upper ground."

"I fear some animals have been caught, if not ours," observed Mr
Berrington.  "There go the bodies of two heifers.  See, here comes a
third."

The captain was silent for a few minutes.  "Harry!" he exclaimed, "run
and tell Sandy to put the horses in all the drays, and bring them down
here."

"What's that for?" asked Mr Berrington, as Harry ran off to obey the
order.

"The river once came up within three feet of the house.  Had it risen a
foot higher it would have flooded the whole ground.  It may rise two,
three, or four feet higher than that.  I wish to be prepared for the
worst, and to save what property we can, with our wives and children, in
case the house should be flooded."

The captain desired all the party to return with him, and then announced
his apprehensions to the ladies.  "We will breakfast first, and then
pack up the most valuable portion of our property, so that we may decamp
if necessary," he said, calmly.  His spirit inspired the rest: even Mrs
Berrington, who for a wonder had got up, ate some breakfast.  The boys
set to with a will.

"You know we may have some work to do, and it's wise to take in plenty
of provender beforehand.  We don't know when we may have time to eat
again," observed Harry, cracking his third egg.

His brothers and cousins followed his example, in spite of the roaring
sound which continued outside.

Biddy and Betty were busy packing up the cooking utensils, while the
ladies were employed in filling their trunks with their clothes and the
most valuable articles they possessed.  Poor Mrs Berrington's state can
better be imagined than described.  Her sister's time was much taken up
in endeavouring to calm her alarm.  The captain again went out.  The
river, as he feared would be the case, had greatly increased.  Still, it
might possibly not rise higher than it had done before.  He stuck
several poles in the ground to mark its progress.  The first, then the
second and the third, were reached with unexpected rapidity.  Already
the water was rushing over the opposite bank where the ground was
lowest, sweeping everything before it.  There was a danger that the
scrub being carried away might form a dam lower down, and, if so, create
much greater damage than if the river continued open to its mouth.

"I wish the drays would come," the captain said to his brother.  "We
must get our wives and girls as soon as possible to the top of the
ridge.  I thank heaven this did not occur at night, or we might have
been washed out of our beds."

Still Mr Berrington could not believe that the water would come up
higher.

"Look there!" said the captain, pointing to the southward among the
trees; "it is flooding the whole scrub.  In a short time this place will
be surrounded."

As he spoke, two or three kangaroos and several wallabies were seen in
the distance making their escape into the open.

"These fellows know there is danger, or they would not be going at that
rate," observed the captain.

As the drays had not arrived, Reggy offered to set off to hurry them on.

"We intend to take you for a morning drive," exclaimed Mr Berrington to
his wife, in as cheerful a voice as he could command.

"But why should we leave the house?" she asked.

"Merely as a matter of precaution," answered the captain.  "It is
possible that the water may reach close up to us, and the ground between
this and the ridge is lower, so that we should have a difficulty in
crossing it should the house be flooded."

"Here come the drays," cried Rob, who had been looking out for them.
Harry was driving one, Reggy another, and Bendigo a third.  Sandy and
the men had galloped off to gather in the cattle on the higher ground,
and Bendigo and Harry had had a hard matter to put to the horses, which
had caused the delay.

"There is no time to be lost now," whispered the captain to his brother.
"We will load the drays as fast as we can.  You shall drive your wife
and mine, with the young children; the rest of us will follow as soon as
we can."

Without a moment's delay the drays were loaded.  Biddy and Betty, as
Harry declared, "worked like troopers."  The trunks and boxes having
been put in, their bedding was placed on the top of them.  Still there
was all the furniture and various articles which it seemed a pity to
leave to the mercy of the flood.

"You go on, father," cried Harry to the captain, "with the girls; Reggy,
Hector, and I, with Biddy and the blacks, will soon load up with a few
more things and quickly overtake you."

The captain, who was anxious to place the girls in safety, with a
portion of their property, trusting to Harry's discretion, followed his
advice.

"Don't delay," he shouted, pointing to the water, which was already
overflowing the kitchen-garden, though it had not yet reached the road
they were to cross.  Hector was ashamed to ask to go with the captain,
though he would infinitely rather have done so.  He, indeed, exerted
himself far more than he had ever been known to do before.

Biddy and Betty were as active as ever, carrying out all sorts of
things, some of which might have been left behind, until Harry and Reggy
pointed out what was considered of most value.  Already the dray was as
full as it could hold.  Bendigo shouted out that it was time to be off,
and jumped on the seat.

"We go now, we go now!" he cried.

Biddy and Betty clung to the hinder part of the dray, struggling in vain
to get in.

"Off with you," exclaimed Harry; "we will follow on foot."

Bendigo cracked his whip, and his horses dashed forward at such a rate
that it was a wonder the dray did not immediately capsize.  Harry
watched it anxiously as it went down a dip from which there was a gentle
rise.  Already a stream of water was running through the hollow, but it
looked a mere rivulet, not half a foot deep, which could be passed over
with a good spring.

"It is a pity we should not get a few more goods," said Harry; "although
I don't believe the water will reach the house: yet, if it does,
everything will be spoiled, if not washed away."

They hurried through the rooms, picking up whatever they thought most
valuable.  Even Hector was inspired with a desire to save something,
especially several articles belonging to himself.  Harry had taken a run
into the kitchen, where he discovered some dampers, which Biddy in her
alarm had forgotten to remove from the ashes.

"It is a pity to lose these," said Harry, clapping them into the pockets
of his jacket--good capacious ones, as every bushman's should be.  There
was, besides, a pot of yams, by this time completely cooked.

"Here, Reggy, stow some of these away," he cried out.  "The chances are
that we shall not have too much to eat on the top of the hill there,
unless Biddy has been more thoughtful than she appears to have been when
she left these.  What she could have been about I don't know!"

So busily were they engaged that they did not hear the increased roar of
the waters.

"Come, you fellows, it's time to be off, I'm sure," cried Hector, who
had been feeling very nervous all the time.

"Just half a minute longer," answered Harry; "I must lash these things
up."

Hector, however, would not stop, and rushed out of the house.  Directly
afterwards he came back, looking very pale.

"The water is rushing through the hollow like a mill-sluice!" he
exclaimed; "we shall lose our lives if we attempt to cross."

Harry and Reggy followed him out.  He spoke too truly.  They were cut
off from what was now the mainland by a foaming torrent twelve yards or
more in width, which was carrying along fruit-trees, rocks, and palings,
whirling them round and round so that it would be impossible to swim
across or to wade, even should the depth allow of their doing so.
Hector threw down his load and wrung his hands.

"Stay!" cried Harry, "we've got a ladder! we may get across by that."

They all three ran back for it, and attempted to throw it across, but
the channel was too wide, and it was almost torn from their grasp.  It
would have been lost had not Harry fastened a rope to the lower round,
by which it was hauled in.

"The ladder may be useful for another purpose," observed Harry.

They lifted it up and carried it back to the house.  The water was by
this time rising even faster than before.  The maize field, the yam and
potato-ground, the orchard and kitchen-garden, were all flooded.
Palings and hedges were everywhere giving way before the torrent.  A
rise of another foot would bring it up to the walls of the house.  The
floor was somewhat higher, so that it would not damage that much should
the flood cease to rise when it got thus far.  But would it cease? was
the question.  If it once began to beat against the walls of the house,
would they stand?  Reggy proposed climbing up to the roof by means of
the ladder.

"That would be a place of very doubtful safety," said Harry.

They looked up the stream, now extending a quarter of a mile or more on
either side of its original bed.  The whole country around them seemed
flooded, with the exception of the hill to which the drays had gone.

"I am afraid that it will reach the stock-yard," said Harry, "and it
must be close to it already; if so, the cattle will have a poor chance.
See, it has already carried away the hen-house, and there go the poor
hens, flying away towards the nearest branches they can reach.
Unfortunately, I cut the wings of a number only the other day because
they would stray, and now they will all be lost."

"Oh! what shall we do?  What shall we do?" exclaimed Hector.

"We are not going to lose our lives if we can help it," said Harry, who
retained his presence of mind.

He was just then watching the piggeries.  The torrent struck them,
carrying away the palings and letting the inmates loose.

"Foolish beasts!" exclaimed Harry, "instead of swimming towards the
shore they are going with their heads down the stream, taking it quite
coolly.  They might have been on dry ground in five minutes if they had
gone in the right direction."

Notwithstanding Harry's warning, Hector insisted on getting upon the
roof.

"The water would surely not rise much above the floor, and as the house
had withstood the hurricane it would not be knocked down by the flood,"
he said.

Calling to Reggy to help him, he climbed up and took his seat on the
ridge.

"Come up! come up!" he shouted to Harry and Reggy; "you will be safe
enough here."

"You had better come down and get up that tree," answered Harry,
pointing to one which stood on ground of the same level as the house,
and but a short distance from it.

Besides its trunk there were the numerous pendants, which had struck
down and taken root, so that it was more likely to resist the torrent
than any other of the trees near.

Hector, however, was obstinate.  He was confident that he was safe, at
all events for the present, and thought he should remain so.

"I should grow giddy if I were to climb up into such a tree as that," he
answered; "Reggy, you may go if you like, but I'll stay here."

Harry, who carried the ladder, placed it against the tree, which reached
sufficiently high to enable them to get hold of one of the lower
branches, by which they could hoist themselves higher.  Harry, however,
had no intention of going up until it became absolutely necessary.
Still the water rose.  It was now sweeping over the ground on which they
stood.  Reggy, again entreating Hector to come, rushed up to the tree
and mounted the ladder.  Just then the captain and Mr Berrington
appeared in the distance.  The roar of the waters prevented their voices
being heard.  Their alarm at seeing their boys placed in so perilous a
position was, of course, very great.  Harry saw them making signs and
pointing to the tree.

"They want you to do as I advise," shouted Harry.  "Come down! come
down!"

Hector felt the house shake, as a surge beat against it larger than any
of its predecessors.  He lost confidence in the safety of his position.

"Slip off the roof by the verandah," shouted Harry.

At length, as he saw Harry still standing below him, not being aware
that the water was over his ankles, he slid down.

When Hector discovered that he must jump into the water, he attempted to
climb back again.  This, however, from his alarm, and from being
unaccustomed to climb, was more than he could do, and down he slid,
Harry catching him at the bottom.

"Now run for it!" cried the latter, seizing him by the arm, and they
made towards the ladder, the water hissing and foaming at their heels.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE BOYS TAKE REFUGE IN A TREE--THE HOUSE CARRIED AWAY--DESTRUCTION OF
CATTLE--A COW CAUGHT IN THE BOUGHS--A NIGHT UP THE TREE--HARRY KEEPS UP
THE SPIRIT OF THE PARTY.

The flood came roaring up, carrying everything in its course on either
side of the ground over which the lads were making their way.  Hector
had begun to cry out when he saw how high the water was.

"It won't wash us away yet, never fear," exclaimed Harry, dragging him
along.  It was almost up to their knees, however, before they reached
the ladder.

"You go up first," said Harry.  "Be quick about it; I'll follow."

Hector began to climb the ladder much slower than Harry liked, for as he
looked round he saw a huge wave, far wider, though not so high as that
which first appeared, roaring and leaping as it came down the river.
Trees and fences, which had hitherto withstood the flood, gave way
before it.

"Quick, quick," cried Harry, shoving Hector up, "it will be upon us in a
few seconds, and may carry the ladder away."

On it came, surging up against the walls of the house.  Reggy caught
hold of Hector's hand and handed him up on the branch.

"We must get higher up than this," he shouted; "look there! look there!"

Harry again turned round.  The house seemed literally to melt away
before the flood.  The water rose around it, and then, as the wave
rushed on, the fragments of the walls and roof were seen floating on
mixed with articles of furniture, chairs, tables, and bedsteads.  Now
the wave surged against the tree.  Harry had just time to spring on to
the branch, and to secure the ladder by a rope when the lower end was
lifted, and it would have been carried away by the flood had it not thus
fortunately been secured.  The lads watched the various articles as they
floated by, hopelessly lost, for in a few minutes they would be driven
by the current against the trunks of trees, or the rocks, and would be
dashed to pieces.

By climbing out to the end of a branch Harry was able to see where his
father and uncle were standing, and to make a signal to them that he and
his cousins were safe.  This must greatly have relieved the mind of the
captain and his brother, though they probably still considered the lads
in greater danger than they themselves were inclined to believe that
they were.

Several trees had been uprooted and carried along by the torrent, and
theirs might share the same fate.  Harry returned again to the end of
the branch, and found that his father and uncle had gone away to look
after the party on the hill.

Harry now proposed that they should get higher up, for the water had
already risen several feet above the ground, and might in a short time
be up to the branch in which they sat.  Higher and higher they got.

"When is it going to stop?" cried Reggy.  "Harry, do you think this is
such a flood as that which drowned all mankind except Noah's family?"

"I'm very sure it is not," answered Harry.  "God promised never to send
such another, and put His bow in the clouds as a token.  I have heard of
many such floods in this country, though this, to be sure, is higher
than any we have known, and I cannot account for it; but I have not the
slightest doubt that it will stop before long, though no doubt it will
have done a great deal of damage.  That cannot be helped.  It might have
come on at night, and we might all have been washed away before we knew
where we were, or fifty other things might have happened.  We have
reason to be thankful, as matters might have been worse."

"I don't see how that could be," cried Hector.  "To have to take refuge
in a tall tree, cut off from all help, without anything to eat or drink,
is as bad as one can well conceive."

"Come, come, don't grumble; it never makes a person happy, though it is
said there are some fellows who are never happy unless they are
grumbling, but I don't believe that."

"But if the flood does not subside before night, where are we to sleep?"
asked Hector.

"Why, up in the boughs, like birds or 'possums, to be sure," answered
Harry.  "By-the-bye, we may find a 'possum, and he may serve us for
supper."

"But how can we get a fire to cook him?" inquired Reggy with a slight
suspicion that Harry was quizzing his brother.

"Oh, as to that, we must eat him raw; but many a sailor, wrecked on a
desert island, has had to live on worse fare," said Harry.

"Oh, dear!  Oh, dear!  I wish we had never come out to this horrible
country.  We shall be starved, to a certainty," moaned Hector; "I'm
desperately hungry already."

"Are you?  Poor fellow! then you will have to come to 'possum, or have
to eat a tree-lizard, or our friend the laughing jackass, or her eggs,
if she happen to have a nest in this tree.  We must set off on a voyage
of discovery directly."

"I wonder you can joke, placed in so fearful a position as we are," said
Hector, in an angry tone.

"What would be the use of moaning and sighing, I should like to know?"
asked Harry.  "I always like to make the best of things.  The flood
won't last for ever.  It is sure to go down in two or three days or a
week at the most, and in the meantime we must make ourselves comfortable
where we are."

"Comfortable, indeed! up a fig-tree with nothing to eat," groaned
Hector.

"Well, well, old fellow, things are not so bad as that.  Here's a bit of
damper to stay your appetite until we can catch a 'possum or a laughing
jackass for dinner;" and Harry produced one of the dampers which he had
stowed away in his pocket.

This somewhat consoled Hector, who had hitherto declared that he could
never touch such doughy stuff, although he ate his share eagerly, as did
Reggy his.

"It may be a satisfaction for you to know that I have got some more,"
said Harry; "but it won't do to eat them all up at once; we must put
ourselves on an allowance, or we may have to starve at last.  Now let us
see how things are getting along."

Harry looked out from the leafy covert in which the three lads had
ensconced themselves high up among the forks of the huge tree.  The
flood was still surging on, setting towards the south-east, and
spreading farther and farther over the country.  He was grieved to see a
number of bullocks floating by, showing that the flood must be sweeping
over some of the pastures, and have carried them off before they could
be driven on to the higher ground.  They were in all probability his
father's.  Their loss must inevitably be very heavy.  Their house and
the greater part of their furniture was gone.  How many heads of cattle
he could not calculate.  Other settlers farther down must have suffered
in the same degree, perhaps in a still greater.

"We ought to be thankful that the lives of all the family have been
saved, and three drays full of property.  If father hadn't been wide
awake, they would have been lost too," said Harry.  At last he caught
sight of some pigs feeding on the shore.  "Well, those fellows have
saved themselves, at all events, and I see some hens, too, in those
trees; well, matters might be worse, we must acknowledge that."

Reggy agreed with him, but nothing would comfort Hector; his only remark
was that--"It is a horrible, detestable country; if I can once get out
of it I won't come back in a hurry."

"Three little blackbirds sat in a tree--Singing, heigh-ho, heigh-ho,
fiddle-de-dee," sang Harry.  "Now I vote we make a nest for ourselves;
as to the water sinking low enough to allow our getting on shore
to-night, that's out of the question.  Come, Reggy, help me up with the
ladder, we must not let that go; we may find it useful in getting down
some day or other, and the rope will help to make our nest."

They hauled up the ladder and placed it horizontally across the boughs.

"Stay," cried Harry, "if we get it up into this fork it will serve as a
back to our sleeping-place, and the rope passed two or three times
backwards and forwards will secure the sides."  Harry had his axe in his
belt.  "We must cut some boughs to raise the sides, lest we should stray
in our sleep and tumble overboard."

By creeping along one of the boughs they were able to reach some small
branches suited to their purpose.  These were secured by means of some
of the fine vines which hung about the boughs.  Harry and Reggy declared
the nest they had formed was perfect.

"I vote we have an annual feast here in commemoration of this flood,"
said Harry, "and we will invite our friends to join us."

"It will hold all who come," growled Hector.  "I would rather try to
forget so disagreeable an event."

"There are some fellows who are never satisfied," said Harry, looking
away from Hector.

Harry did his best to keep up his cousins' spirits and his own by
talking away.  Their conversation was interrupted by feeling some heavy
body strike the tree, and looking down they saw a bullock, which had
come down the torrent, driven against some of the lower branches, on
which the poor animal was endeavouring to find a foot-hold; it
succeeded, and remained fixed in the boughs.  Its struggles soon ceased,
and it was pretty clear that, overcome by its exertions, it was dead,
for its head hung over the boughs into the water.

"No fear of starving," said Harry; "we may have as much beef-steak as we
like."

"Thank you!  I'd rather not eat such horrid stuff," said Hector.

"As you please," answered Harry.  "The time may come when you will
change your tone."

Night was approaching, the water was evidently rising less rapidly than
before, still it was spreading over the country.  Here and there
hillocks and knolls appeared like islands in the midst of the sea.

"I wish that we had brought a gun with us; we could have made a signal
to our friends that we are all safe.  My fear is that they will be
anxious about us."  Harry did not for a moment think about himself.
"Well, old fellows, it's time to turn in."

After they had finished their frugal supper of damper and sweet potatoes
they arranged themselves for the night.

"Don't take to walking in your sleep, Hector, and you'll be all right,"
said Harry.

"But what if the tree should give way!  I'm certain I felt it shake,"
groaned Hector.

"Cling to the boughs like grim death," answered Harry; "it won't sink,
and we shall be floated to shore somehow or other."



CHAPTER TWELVE.

AWAKENED BY THEIR FRIEND THE LAUGHING JACKASS--ANOTHER DAY UP THE TREE--
THE FLOOD SUBSIDES--RETURN TO DRY LAND--FIND THE FAMILY ENCAMPED--PAUL
RETURNS.

The darkness of the night contributed to make the position of the three
lads even more trying than it had been during the day.  Notwithstanding
Harry's assertions, even Reggy could not help fearing that the tree
might be carried away.  The roar of the waters did not for a moment
cease, while the wind howled through the branches, and the occasional
lowing of some heifers more fortunate than their companions, and who had
landed on some island knoll, reached their ears.  The stout tree,
however, held firm, and after some hours' anxious watching they all
dropped off to sleep.  They were awakened by a loud cheerful cachination
close above their heads, and on looking up, what should they see but
their friend the laughing jackass, looking very much surprised to find
them in such near proximity to its mate's nest.

"Much obliged to you, old fellow," said Harry to the bird, which nodded
its head in response, and laughed again as if he were going to split his
sides.

"That's a good sign," observed Harry; "there's no storm coming, or he
would not be so merry.  It's my belief that we shall find the water has
dropped considerably."

Harry was right, for on looking down they saw the unfortunate bullock
hanging in the branches considerably above the surface, while the force
of the current was evidently much lessened.  The water, indeed, at the
first glance seemed to be sinking into the earth, but, watching more
narrowly, they could detect currents running from all quarters into the
main stream, which still went hissing and foaming on as before.

They all felt very thirsty, but none of them were inclined to drink the
muddy liquid which flowed by them.  At last they could hold out no
longer, and Harry, unreeving the rope, descended to the water and
brought up a hatful.  It did not look nearly as yellow as they had
expected, and they were thankful to quench their thirst.  The day wore
on.

"If no further flood comes down, I really believe that we may be able to
get on shore to-night," said Harry.

"I hope so, indeed," moaned Hector; "to have to sleep again up among the
boughs would be terrible; my back aches fearfully."

Harry proved to be mistaken, for when darkness returned the water was
still too deep to allow of their making their way to the hill where they
hoped to find their family, especially as they could not tell what
channels and holes might have been formed by the torrent.  They had
still enough damper and sweet potato to last them for another meal.

They were again awakened by that irrepressible fellow, the laughing
jackass, at early dawn, and on looking out from their leafy bower they
found that the ground beneath their feet was dry.

"Now let us get down and make the best of our way to the hill, to let
our fathers and mothers know we are safe," he exclaimed.  They soon
reached the ground.  To walk over it, however, was not very easy, as it
was thickly covered with slime.  Not a vestige of the house remained,
nor a fence of any sort.  The whole land had been reduced to a perfect
wilderness.

"It is ours still, however," observed Harry, "and will probably prove
twice as fruitful as it was before, and won't require manuring for years
to come.  I dare say father will think of that, and it will be some
consolation to him.  Now, let's move on."

This was more easily said than done.  They attempted to walk steadily,
but, instead, went slipping and sliding about, and in some places they
could with difficulty make progress.  They had not gone far when they
caught sight of Mr Hayward.  He expressed his delight at seeing them.

"We have indeed been anxious about you, though the captain was satisfied
that you were safe," exclaimed their tutor.

On getting off the ground which had been covered with water, the boys
hurried on, and soon reached the hill, on the side of which, under a
grove of acacia-trees, they found the family encamped.  The tent which
had been stowed at the station had been put up for the accommodation of
the ladies, while the rest of the party slept either in or under the
drays.  They had not in reality suffered much hardship, as they were as
well off as they would have been in making a journey, with the exception
of want of bread.

Mrs Hugh and her daughters were making the best of everything, though
it was sad for them to contemplate the fruitful spot amid which their
house had stood, now a slimy wilderness.

"Any news of Paul?" asked Harry.

Captain Berrington shook his head.  "I am thankful I had not started
from home when this occurred; but I must now try and learn what has
become of him," he answered.  "Should he have escaped all other dangers,
he may have been caught by this flood; and I am indeed very, very
anxious."

Harry told Mr Hayward what his father had said.

"I am ready to start this instant, either alone or with any one whom
your father will allow to accompany me," he said.

"I'll go!" cried Harry.

"You may be wanted; there is work to do for all hands, though perhaps I
can best be spared," answered Mr Hayward.

Thinking that Bendigo might be useful in learning from any blacks they
might meet if Paul's drays had been seen, he asked whether he would go.

Bendigo replied that he was quite ready.  Harry, also, to his great
satisfaction got leave to accompany his tutor.

As the horses were quite fresh, and the saddles had been saved, they
agreed to start immediately; though they would have to trust to their
guns for provisions, except when they could fall in with any
sheep-stations, where beef and mutton could be procured.

Everywhere as they rode along were signs of the destruction caused by
the flood.

"It must be a lesson to us and others not to build near one of these
rivers, liable to such inundations," said Mr Hayward.  "Had not your
father possessed cattle and sheep, he would have been ruined; as it is,
he has suffered severe loss.  But how admirably does he and your mother
bear it, as they do the prolonged absence of Paul.  It raises them more
than ever in my estimation.  I hope we shall be fortunate in finding a
satisfactory spot for a new location, as he will not be again tempted to
build in his old one.  I believe if Paul is restored to them safe, they
will look upon their losses as trifles."

This conversation occurred on the second day of their journey.  They had
just mounted a slight ridge, and before them spread out a wide extent of
level land.

"I think I see something very like a dray, with two horsemen near it,"
said Harry.

Mr Hayward could not make out the objects which his young companion's
sharp eyes had detected; still they both instinctively increased their
speed.

"I'm sure it is a dray, with a man on horseback.  The dray is very like
ours, and the rider like Paul.  Hurrah!" cried Harry, and putting spurs
to his horse he dashed forward.

Mr Hayward followed, although not quite as fast, and saw Harry shaking
hands with the stranger; and even he was soon convinced that the first
of the two was Paul.

After the first greetings were over, and they were once more moving
towards Stratton, Paul described how he had been attacked by
bush-rangers, whom he had beaten off, and his narrow escape from the
flood.

Paul, as may be supposed, was received with joyful welcome by the
family.

The first thing to be done was to build a house for the ladies, where
they might be secure should another inundation occur.  The captain,
however, was of opinion that that was not at all likely, as the late one
was higher than had ever been known to take place by the oldest
colonists.  Towards the proposed work all hands devoted the whole of
their energies; and hewing, sawing, and carrying of timber went on from
morning until night.

In little more than a week, a tolerably substantial house of a size
sufficient to hold the ladies of the family was put up, but some days
more were required to manufacture bedsteads, chairs, tables, and other
articles of furniture.  However, within a fortnight the family were once
more settled, and a stranger visiting them would not have supposed how a
short time before they had been houseless.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

THE EXPLORING EXPEDITION SETS OUT--PASSAGE OVER THE MOUNTAINS--
PRECAUTION AGAINST THE NATIVES--WITNESS A CORROBBEREE--ESCAPE FROM THE
BLACKS--THE PARTIES SEPARATE.

The captain was anxious to commence, without a moment's delay, his
proposed exploring expedition.  He intended to form two parties, so as
to inspect a large tract of country in a short time.

Naturally, his brother would have taken one, and he the other; but Mr
Berrington was so little accustomed to bush-life, that the captain
persuaded him to remain at home, and to let Mr Hayward lead the other
party.

Hector, who had no great liking for Mr Hayward, begged that he might
accompany his uncle.

Sandy would have liked to follow his master, but his duties kept him at
home.

"Mr Berrington is a verra gude gentleman, but he kens little about
farm-work as yet, and I canna trust him," he observed.

The captain took the most trustworthy of the men, thus making up his
party to four.  Paul, Harry, and Reggy accompanied Mr Hayward, and with
the addition of Bendigo, who was likely to prove very useful, their
party was complete.

They were all well mounted, Paul having Old Bolter to ride.  Their
equipment was simple in the extreme.  They each carried their rifles and
pistols, with a good supply of ammunition, small shot and bullets, axes
and long knives, a blanket to sleep in at night, and a tin pannikin;
while between them they had a kettle for boiling water, a camp oven, two
large canvas water-bags, a store of tea, salt and pepper, some flour in
a bag, with a thick piece of canvas for kneading it, while sugar and all
other luxuries were dispensed with.

Their dresses were red shirts, thick duck trousers, broad-brimmed hats,
blucher boots, and leggings, with a strap round the waist to hold the
axe and pouch containing matches, knife, and other small articles.
Their course was to be towards the west and north-west.  The first four
or five days they were to travel together, after this they were to
separate, the captain keeping a little to the northward of west and then
circling round to the southward; and Mr Hayward travelling to the
southward of west and circling round to the northward; and then to
return towards the spot from whence they had started.  They would thus
explore a wide extent of country, and would, they hoped, find a suitable
spot for forming a fresh location.

The boys were in high spirits, forgetting all their previous troubles.
The expedition they were undertaking was exactly what they had often
talked about doing alone, without any grown-up person.  However, Mr
Hayward always made himself so completely one of them that they were
glad of his society.

The country they passed over during the first two days they were well
acquainted with, and they met with no adventures.  The first night they
stopped at a hut on their most remote out-station.  Beyond this they
reached a lofty range, on the opposite side of which their explorations
were to commence.  As it rose in the distance it appeared to be no
formidable barrier, but as they got near, lofty cliffs or precipices,
and steep slopes covered with brushwood, seemed to rise out of the
plain, such as must present an almost insuperable obstacle to the
progress of the horses.  Hector declared that no human being could
surmount them.

"We must get up somehow or other, and with our horses too," answered
Captain Berrington, laughing.

In a short time they found a dry channel down which a torrent had made
its way, and by this they proceeded, still keeping in their saddles.  At
length, however, they had to dismount to climb a steep slope among rocks
and trees.  Now they turned to the right, now to the left, now they had
to descend a shoulder of the mountain, now to ascend again, the captain
carefully marking the way by barking the trees, or, where there were no
trees, by piling up fragments of rocks.

The eastern was fortunately the worst side of the range.  The descent on
the west side down a moderate slope brought them into an undulating
park-like plain, covered with grass sprinkled over with the ever-present
blue and white gum-trees, while just before them appeared an open patch
of green plain, offering a tempting feed to cattle.

Smoke ascending from two or three shepherds' huts in the distance showed
that this part of the country was already occupied.  They had,
therefore, to proceed until they could reach an unclaimed district.  The
last night the party were together they camped in a wood on the borders
of a river in which, though its course was dry, there were several
water-holes within half a mile of each other.

As they had ridden on all day without water for the horses they halted
early.  The captain, however, would not allow a fire to be lighted until
nightfall, lest its smoke might attract the attention of the blacks,
who, although they might not venture to attack them, would watch their
future movements, and perhaps, if unfriendly, cause them some annoyance.

At night there would be less risk of a fire being seen, unless by any
one coming close up to the camp, providing the flames were not allowed
to ascend to any great height.  The horses, as usual, were hobbled near,
and they were sure not to stray away from the good grass and water.

As usual, the captain and Paul, who were the best shots of the party,
took their guns to provide supper and breakfast, no difficult task, as
parrots, pigeons, and other birds abounded.  They brought back an ample
supply, with the addition of a wallaby and a bandicoot.  The larger
portion of the latter animals would serve as a supper for the dogs.  The
boys had taken off the edge of their appetites with some cold damper,
which they had brought in their pouches, and some wild fruit they had
met with, but were very glad when the captain allowed them at last to
light the pile of sticks they had collected, to put on the kettle, and
to begin roasting the game.  Harry and Reggy undertook to make some
fresh dampers, Paul to attend to the camp oven, while Hector was set to
turn the spits.  The rest of the party were clearing the ground round
the fire, bringing water, looking after the horses, and putting up some
slabs of bark to serve as a shelter for the night.  All hands were "as
busy as bees," as Harry remarked.

Supper over--the last they expected to take together for some weeks--
most of the party prepared for rest.  The fire was allowed to smoulder,
but no fresh sticks were put on, and they believed that even should any
natives be in the neighbourhood they would not have discovered the camp.

Harry proposed, before turning in, taking a bath in another water-hole,
a short distance down the bed of the river, as they did not quite like
the idea of bathing in the one from which they were to fill their kettle
and water-bottles the next morning.  The sun had only just disappeared,
though darkness was rapidly coming on.  However, there was the moon
which would enable them to see their way.  They could not possibly lose
it by returning along the bank of the river; but as the scrub was
tolerably open and the ground hard, they settled to make their way
through it instead of trudging over the soft sand in the bed of the
stream.

They had got near the water-hole when they saw a number of small lights
moving among the trunks of the trees, now appearing, now disappearing.

"Why, those must be fire-flies," cried Reggy.

"They are far too red and bright for that," whispered Paul; "don't speak
above your breath.  The lights come from the fire-sticks carried by
natives, they always move about with them by night, and they are
gathering round the water-hole.  See! there are others coming from an
opposite direction, they are either going to have a corrobberee or a
fight, perhaps both; we must take care not to be discovered.  They are
so intent on what they are about, however, that they are not likely to
observe us."

"I should like to see what they are going to do," said Reggy.  "We need
not retreat, I suppose?"

"Oh, no! let us stop," said Harry.  "They will not find us out if we
keep quiet."

"We had better be off," remarked Hector, somewhat alarmed; "they may
knock us all on the head."

"No, no," replied Harry, "we have our arms, and we are not going to run
away from a few blacks; I vote we stay and see what is going forward."

Paul consented, though he felt it would be more prudent to return to the
camp and warn their friends of the neighbourhood of the natives.

Concealed by some low bushes they remained where they were, and could
see all that was going forward.  Suddenly all was dark, but the sound of
the natives' voices showed that they were still near where they had
first been seen.  Presently bright flames burst up from the ground--a
fire had been lighted, but no one could be seen.

"They are between us and the fire," whispered Paul.

"I hope they are not coming this way," said Hector.

"No fear of that," answered Harry.

A minute elapsed, when Hector uttered an exclamation in a voice so loud
that it was a wonder it did not betray them.

"Oh, look there! look there! what can those horrid things be?"

As he spoke, at the opposite side of the fire there appeared what looked
exactly like a band of dancing skeletons leaping and twisting in the
most grotesque fashion.  At the same time wild shrieks, cries, and
shouts rose from a hundred voices, intended to represent singing,
accompanied by the rattling of musical instruments, and the slapping of
their parchment-like skins by the older natives rose in the night air.
Now all the legs on one side would go up, now those on the other, now
the arms would be thrown above the grinning skulls, now they would be
placed akimbo, now they would sink close to the ground with bended
knees, now spring up into the air.  Indeed, they assumed in succession
every possible attitude, all moving together as if pulled by one string.
Then, as suddenly as they had appeared, they vanished from sight.

Reggy was on the point of crying out when Paul put his hand on his
mouth.

"Can those be real skeletons?" inquired Hector.

"Oh, dear, no!" whispered Paul; "they are merely blacks who have painted
their bodies in that curious fashion.  They are holding one of their
corrobberees.  They will keep it up all night, and little rest we shall
get while they are howling and shrieking in this fashion."

The boys, however, remained some time watching the strange, weird scene.
It would be difficult to describe the various antics performed by the
savages.  So amused were the lads that they forgot how time passed; but
Paul at length suggested that they should find their way back.  It was
no easy matter to do so through the thick wood, although they were
assisted in steering their course by the noise behind them.  At last
they reached the bank of the river, when they were able to make better
progress.  They found the captain and the rest of the party very anxious
about them.  The noise of the natives had reached the camp, and it was
feared that they might have fallen into their hands.  Bendigo advised
that they should start before daybreak.

"Black fellow sleep then; no come after us," he said.

The captain resolved to follow Bendigo's advice, but not to separate
until they had proceeded some little way farther westward; so that the
blacks, when they should discover their trail, would be influenced by
the number of persons forming the party, and not venture to follow them.

A strict watch was, of course, kept during the night.  Paul, his
brother, and cousins, notwithstanding the noise, slept like tops.  At
the hour proposed the horses were caught and the party mounted.

The explorers crossed the bed of the river some way to the north, at a
distance from the blacks' camp, and, as the ground was level, were able
to make good progress.  At noon they stopped at a water-hole, which,
though very muddy, enabled them to give a draught to their horses; but,
unless it could be filtered, they felt no inclination to drink it
themselves, their water-bottles being full.  A fire was lighted, and
some pigeons and other birds shot and cooked.

The two parties now separated, the captain pointing out the course Mr
Hayward was to take, while he struck more to the northward.  What
adventures might they not encounter before they again met!



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

STOP AT A SHEPHERD'S HUT--SUFFERINGS FROM WANT OF WATER--MR HAYWARD
TAKEN ILL--RETURN TO THE HUT--THE YOUNG EXPLORERS PROCEED ALONE.

The captain's party was soon lost sight of.  The boys rode on in high
spirits.  In spite of the heat the air felt pure and bracing.  The
scenery for miles, however, was unvarying--everywhere the same gigantic
gum-trees were to be seen; but vast as were their limbs, they afforded
but little shade.  Some were scathed and leafless, from others hung in
tatters long strips of bark, giving them a peculiar, ragged appearance.
In the evening they reached the hut of a shepherd.  On account of the
blacks there were two hut-keepers, sturdy fellows, well-armed.  They
said that further west there were no other white men, and as they
themselves had never been more than a few miles from their hut in that
direction they knew nothing of the country, but that there was a
water-hole at the extreme limit of the station in the direction the
explorers were proceeding.  It was full, the shepherd said, when he was
last there, but he could give them no other information.  He and his
mate would be very happy to accommodate them for the night; but Mr
Hayward, after surveying the interior of the hut, replied that he and
his party would not incommode them, but would be content to sleep round
their own camp fire, under a neighbouring tree.  Tea, damper, and mutton
were, however, plentifully supplied by their hosts.

Roused next morning by a laughing jackass, who had conveniently perched
himself on a bough overhead, they took breakfast in the hut with the
shepherd, and set off at the time he drove out his flock to pasture.

"I am very much afraid we shall be disappointed after all," said Paul,
as they approached the water-hole.

"Why?" asked Reggy.

"Because I see no cockatoos, laughing jackasses, or other birds flying
about.  If there were water they would be there."

Paul's fears were realised--there was not a drop of water in the hole.

"Patience," cried Paul; "we shall probably fall in with another before
night."

The poor horses, however, suffered more than their riders, as they had
still some water in their canvas bottles.  They rested for a time in the
shade under the trees round the water-hole, and then again rode on.
They were now in a perfectly new country.  They kept their eyes about
them on every side to discover such a region as they were in search of.
They passed through a country which might have suited their purpose, but
there was a great drawback--the want of water.  That was absolutely
necessary for either a sheep or cattle station.  They rode on and on,
their horses began to droop their heads; all that could be done was to
moisten the poor animals' lips with a little water from the bottles.

"What would I not give for a large, juicy water-melon?" exclaimed Harry.

"Don't talk about such a thing," said Reggy; "still I shouldn't mind a
few bunches of grapes."

"They are sour enough now," observed Paul; "but cheer up, the trees look
thicker, and we shall come on water soon, or I am very much mistaken."

Mr Hayward had spoken but little during the day.  The boys observed
that he was not in his usual spirits; though he did not complain, he was
evidently ill.  As the day advanced he grew worse, and Paul would have
proposed stopping had they found water, but it would be out of the
question to camp without it.  Bendigo had never been in this part of the
country, as he belonged to a tribe which inhabited a region to the east,
until the white man came and drove them farther into the interior.  The
signs of water, however, should there be any in the neighbourhood, were
not likely to escape his observation.  He frequently stood up in his
stirrups to look about him, but each time shook his head, observing, "No
water here."

For several hours the poor horses had not tasted a drop, while they
themselves had had barely sufficient to wet their lips.  They were more
likely to find it by going straight on than by turning either to the
right hand or to the left.  So on they went.

The day was drawing to a close, not a sign of water appeared, when
suddenly Bendigo shouted, "Dare, dare!" and pointed to some trees which
could be just seen in the horizon.

They pushed on, but on reaching the trees, the hollow in which water
once had been was dry.  A chorus of groans escaped the explorers.  "On,
on!" cried Paul.

"We must not despair, we can hold out a few hours longer."

The moon got up, and, relieved from the heat of the sun, the explorers
were better able to endure the want of water.  Mile after mile they went
on, their weary horses, however, moving but slowly.  At length Paul
cried out, "My beast seems to fancy that water is near; I feel him
tugging at the rein."

"So does mine," said Harry.

Bruce gave a bark, signifying his satisfaction, and dashed on.  A silver
spot appeared ahead, lighted by the beams of the moon, which had now
risen high in the sky.  The horses galloped on, Bruce dashed forward,
Mr Hayward seemed to revive.  They reached a large water-hole!  It was
necessary to keep back the horses, however, lest they should rush in and
stir up the mud.  Paul and Harry dismounted, and while Bendigo took
charge of their horses, they, unstrapping their pannikins, hurried down
the bank.  It was no easy matter to fill them, as they had to go down
the bank, and then to wade through the mud to get to the water, which
looked so bright at a distance.

"Take care that there are no leeches," said Mr Hayward.

Paul had a piece of linen through which he strained the water from one
pannikin to another, then handed it to Harry, who carried it to their
tutor before he would touch any himself.  Reggy was next served, then
Harry, and Paul drank last.  How delicious the liquid tasted.

"I could drink a dozen pannikins full," said Harry, as he drained off a
second.

"So could I--two dozen, for that matter," said Reggy.

Paul had, therefore, no sinecure in filling the pannikins.  Bruce had in
the meantime quenched his thirst.

At last, as Harry said, "having taken off the edge of their thirst,"
Bendigo and the horses might now drink.  The steeds were then hobbled,
and preparations made for camping.

Bendigo said that he did not think any black fellows were in the
neighbourhood, as he could discover no traces of them near the edges of
the water-hole.  None of the rest of the party could have pronounced an
opinion on the subject.

The moon shone brightly over the ground, the fire was lighted, and
damper and tea quickly made, while some birds which they had shot in the
morning, and had been carried hung to their saddles, were speedily
cooked.

During the night Mr Hayward grew so much worse that Paul thought he was
going to die.  To advance, with the risk of not finding water the next
day, would be madness.  Paul suggested that they should go back to the
hut, and leave him with the shepherd, while they went forward to meet
the captain, who would otherwise become alarmed at not seeing them.

Mr Hayward agreed to this, though he expressed a hope that he might
sufficiently recover to be able to accompanying them.  "We will wait
here a day, however, and see how I am.  After a short rest I may be
strong enough to go forward."

During the day Paul and Harry shot several birds and pigeons, three
ducks and a couple of wallabies.  While Reginald sat by Mr Hayward,
Bendigo wandered about in search of fruits and roots, which none but a
black would have discovered.  When well boiled the latter served instead
of potatoes, while the wild fruits were very refreshing.  They had thus
an abundant and varied fare.

Mr Hayward did not appear to get better.  They had come away without
medicines, no one dreaming of being ill; still Paul hoped that their
tutor would be sufficiently recovered to continue the journey the
following morning: but when the time came, it was evident that he was
not in a fit state to run the risk of having no good water to drink.
They determined therefore to go back together, though two days would
thus be lost.  By starting at sunrise they made good progress during the
cooler hours.  Having filled their water-bottles they had enough to last
them during the day, and to wet the lips of the horses and Bruce.

It was not until nightfall that they got back to the shepherd's hut.
The men promised to take every possible care of Mr Hayward, who, though
not much worse, was certainly not better.  He assured his young
companions that he should recover in the course of a few days.  "At all
events, do not fail to come and look for me on your return," he said,
smiling.  "I should not like to be left here longer than is necessary."

They remained only during the night, and again starting before the sun
rose they reached the water-hole where they had before camped by
nightfall.

It was satisfactory to find no traces of blacks.  Bendigo now assumed a
great air of importance.  Paul and Harry agreed that he fancied himself
the leader of the party.  "Let him do so," said Paul, "it may make him
more careful.  He will consider himself responsible should we meet with
any misfortune."

Travelling through a new country, hitherto untrod by the foot of a white
man, is no doubt very interesting in theory, but it becomes dreadfully
wearisome in practice.  To go on hour after hour with huge gum-trees on
every side, the only change being the sight of a kangaroo, a wallaby, a
bandicoot, or a jolly little paddy-melon hopping away.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

THE EXPLORERS RUN SHORT OF POWDER--SCANTY FARE--CAMPED AT NIGHT--
CONTINUE JOURNEY--BENDIGO OBTAINS HONEY.

Two days had passed away; the young explorers made good progress.  They
now discovered, what caused them some anxiety, that they were running
short of ammunition.  Without it they would have a difficulty in
obtaining food, although Bendigo and Bruce might help them.  It was
absolutely necessary to retain sufficient powder to protect themselves
should they encounter any hostile blacks.  Paul insisted that they
should not fire another shot, except to kill a kangaroo or emu; at the
same time, he did not wish to confess to Bendigo the small amount of
ammunition they possessed.  They had thus been for some time on short
commons, and were beginning to feel the effects of scanty fare.  Bendigo
trapped several creatures, now and then catching a 'possum in its hole,
or an iguana.  Occasionally he found eggs where they themselves would
not have discovered them.  Had they been able to preserve the animals
they caught they might have subsisted very well; but after a few hours,
even though the meat was cooked, it became uneatable, and they were
obliged to give it to Bendigo or Bruce, who were not so particular.

They had been very unsuccessful all day, and had made a long march, when
they encamped somewhat earlier than usual near a water-hole.  They were
fully aware of the risk they ran when selecting such a spot of a visit
from the blacks; but they hoped, by keeping a good watch, not to be
surprised by them.  They knew that their chief danger would arise should
they not be prepared; for when the natives see white men on their guard,
they will seldom venture to attack them.  The fire had been lighted,
but, excepting a 'possum and a few small eggs, and a little damper, they
had nothing to eat.  They had, however, a good supply of tea, the most
welcome of beverages, the only one which can be taken with impunity
under all circumstances.

An hour or more after dark was spent in talking over the prospects of
their journey.  In three or four days more they hoped to meet the
captain's party.

Bendigo and Paul, accompanied by Bruce, having made a circuit of the
camp, to be sure that no natives were lurking near, the whole party lay
down to rest.

For the first time during their expedition, the following morning they
started without breakfast, except a draught of cold water.

"I hope we shall find something during the day," said Harry.  "This sort
of work doesn't tend to keep up a fellow's spirits, and we shall be
inclined to give a less favourable report of the country than it
deserves."

As they rode along they carefully observed the character of the trees
and soil over which they were passing.  The grass was thicker and
greener than they had anywhere seen it.  Of course they kept an anxious
lookout for game.  They caught sight of kangaroos, wallabies, and other
small animals in considerable numbers, but were unable to catch them, or
even get near enough to shoot one.

Reggy now began to cry out bitterly for food.

"People told us that this land, was one flowing with milk and honey; we
have had none of either since we started on this expedition," he
exclaimed.

Just as he said this they observed Bendigo watching something in the
air, and, urging on his horse, he started off ahead of them towards a
large tree, beyond which they caught sight of the glitter of water.
Near it were some trees with wide-spreading boughs, intertwined by
numbers of the never-failing vine.  Here was just the place they wanted.

Bendigo, knowing that they would camp there, dismounted, and hobbled his
horse.  They then saw him narrowly examining a tall gum-tree, up to
which he had ridden.  It must have been a hundred feet in height before
any branches were reached.

"If he sees anything up there it will be of little use," observed Reggy,
"for I am sure he will never get it."

"Stay a minute," answered Harry; "the black knows what he is about."

Bendigo, without explaining his object, cut some long vines; he then
rapidly plaited, from the grass growing near, a rough basket, which he
fastened to his belt.  Taking the vines, he now twisted them in the form
of a hoop round the tree, leaving sufficient space to admit his own body
between the trunk and the hoop; holding the hoop in both hands, he
jerked the side furthest from himself upwards.  He then cut with his
hatchet a notch for his feet, and then gave another jerk, and cut
another notch, and thus up he went until he reached the branch.

The boys had never seen their black companion perform this feat before,
and felt no little fear that he might slip down.  It was wonderful with
what rapidity he went up, evidently feeling himself perfectly secure.
In a few minutes he returned, having cut a large comb of honey out of a
hole high up in the tree, the owners of which were seen hovering about
their rifled abode.  Having descended, he handed his prize to Paul, who,
placing it on a slip of bark, which served as a dish, served it on
leaves to his companions, with whom he shared it.

Without waiting to be complimented for his performance, of which he
seemed to think nothing, the black again started off, and ascended
another tree, towards which his quick eye had detected some bees flying.

The young explorers, who had eaten nothing for some hours, set to with a
will, and quickly devoured the first comb, wax and all, being ready for
the second, which Bendigo soon brought them.  He again came back with a
third, which, however, they could not attack, so he ate the greater
portion himself, giving the remainder to Bruce, who gobbled it up with
evident satisfaction.

"Plenty of food now," said Bendigo, as he led his companions from tree
to tree, some of which were oaks, and others honeysuckles.  Wherever
there was a hole in the trunk it was occupied by a colony of bees.  The
insect which makes this honey is exactly like a common house-fly in
appearance, the combs being generally small and the wax quite black.
The cells into which the comb is divided are two or three times larger
than those of the English bee, and are roundish and irregular in shape,
but the honey is very good, being sweet, and having besides a slight
pleasantly acid taste.  As these bees possessed no sting, they could be
robbed with impunity of the result of their industry.  Since that time
English bees have swarmed in prodigious numbers over the country, and
now afford ample food to whites and blacks alike.

"While we can get this honey there is no fear of starving," observed
Paul.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

A SUITABLE SPOT FOR A STATION FOUND--ENCAMP ON A HILL--BLACKS DISCOVERED
TO BE IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD--PREPARATIONS FOR DEFENCE--ATTACKED BY THE
NATIVES--AMMUNITION EXHAUSTED.

The young explorers had been upwards of two days travelling through a
splendid country, subsisting chiefly on honey, though they might have
revelled in abundance had they ventured to use their guns, when they
came in sight of a river of veritable running water, bright and clear.
In the distance, moreover, were a range of hills of no great elevation,
but rising precipitously apparently out of the plain.  Not without some
difficulty they found a ford, by which they crossed the river.  It ran
south for some distance, then circled round in front of the hills, and
then again struck off south and east.  They galloped forward, eager to
ascertain the character of the hills, for much depended on their being
precipitous or not.  Paul surveyed the country with a delighted eye.

"If cattle cannot get over these hills, we have found such a situation
as we might look for over hundreds of miles and not find," he exclaimed;
"they form a fence along one side and a half of the run, and the river,
which appears to be impassable, except in a few places, will serve for
another side and a half, or more, so that there will be but one outlet
for cattle."

"Excellent!" cried Harry.  "Father will be as pleased as you are, if it
turns out as we hope."

As they approached the hills they discovered, to their intense
satisfaction, that they were as precipitous as they had expected.
Cliffs from fifty to a hundred feet extended along the whole length of
the range, with here and there dark impassable gullies, having steep
sides, up which no cattle could climb.  Down them ran streams of various
sizes, all concentrating in the river through which they had passed.

"No fear of drought here!" exclaimed Paul.  "It is worth all the trouble
we have gone through to find it."

Returning to the river, they rode along, tracing it as far up as the
range, which extended a considerable way to the southward, and would
serve as a fence to their station.  The country on the other side,
further to the south, was more thickly wooded, and consequently afforded
less pasture.  There was a risk, to be sure, that the river might
overflow, but they could find no traces of a flood.  All would depend on
the place where it took its rise; if in the range above them, there was
no fear, but if it had a long course on the opposite side of the range,
a sudden downpour of rain might swell its waters before they had time to
escape through their natural channel.  That important point would be
ascertained when their father arrived.  They had, it should be said,
notched the trees as they came along, so that he was not likely to cross
their track.

"In case there is a chance of the country being flooded, I think we
might build our house on yonder knoll, close under the hill, with the
river bending round it," observed Paul; "it is a beautiful spot, and we
should get a fine view from it over the whole district.  I vote that we
camp there to-night, and set up a flag-staff, so that our father may see
it miles off; for I feel sure he will not pass to the west of this range
without first examining the country where we now are."

Paul's proposal was at once adopted.  The trees on the knoll, though
growing pretty thickly, were of no great height, and it would be easy to
cut a flag-staff long enough to rise above them.

"Old Bolter" was hobbled as usual, and the young explorers, having
ascertained that the river was nowhere fordable in the neighbourhood of
the knoll, nor up to the point where it came out of the hills, the rest
of the horses were turned loose, as there was no fear of their bolting.

As they hoped their journey westward was now terminated, they ventured
to shoot as many parrots and pigeons as would serve them for an ample
meal.  This done, they lighted their fire, leaving Reggy to cook the
birds, while Paul, Harry, and Bendigo went down to the scrub on the bank
of the river to cut a pine suitable for a flag-staff.  The soft wood
yielded easily to their axes, and in a few minutes it lay on the ground.
To lop off the branches and bark it occupied but a short time, and
then, all three placing it on their shoulders, they carried it up the
hill.

"But what are we to do for a flag?" asked Reggy.

"We must fasten our handkerchiefs and my spare shirt together.  A strong
breeze will be required, to be sure, to blow it out; but, depend upon
it, our father will guess what it means at any distance," answered Paul.

The flag was made, and lashed on with some strips of hide taken from the
last kangaroo they had shot, as they had no halyards with which to hoist
it.  The pole was lashed to the trunk of another tree.  When it was up,
it was seen to tower above all those on the knoll.  They enjoyed a
better meal than they had had for many a day, and drank success to their
new station--for they already considered it their own--in pannikins of
tea.

While daylight lasted they kept a lookout for the captain and his party;
but their friends did not appear.  As far as they could ascertain, no
white man had ever before set foot in that region, and very proud they
felt at being the discoverers of so fine a country.  Below them they
could just distinguish their horses feeding quietly, and they felt sure
that the animals would not stray far from the camp.

Near the top of the knoll, on the steepest side, just behind their camp,
was a huge rock, like an excrescence, although the rest of the elevation
was almost smooth.  As the glare of their fire fell on it at nightfall,
it looked like the ruins of an ancient castle perched on the hillside.

"I vote we call this `Castle Hill;' it will be a good name for our
station," said Harry.

Paul and Reggy tried to find another name, but could not improve on
Harry's suggestion.  At length, as they were all pretty well tired with
their day's work, they lay down by the fireside, wrapped in their
blankets, Bruce keeping watch.

Two or three times during the night Paul was awakened by hearing the dog
utter a low growling bark.  On each occasion Bendigo started up, and
looked out, but did not like to go far in the dark by himself.  Paul
asked him if he thought any one was near.

"Me see in morning," was the only answer he could obtain; and the black
crouched down again, as if going to sleep.

Paul, confident that Bruce--who was evidently on the alert--would arouse
him should danger be near, again fell asleep.  He did not awake Harry
and Reggy, who slept on, notwithstanding Bruce's barking and his
conversation with Bendigo.  The black roused up Paul at daybreak.

"Stay here; me go look round.  Black fellows near, I tinkee."

Harry and Reggy soon got up, and shook themselves--the only dressing
operation they had to perform.

"I vote we go down and have a bathe," exclaimed Harry.

"You had better not," said Paul.  "Bendigo suspects that natives have
been near us during the night; and I believe that such was the cause of
Bruce's barking.  We must look to our arms, at all events, in case they
should prove unfriendly.  Not to lose time, let us light the fire and
cook breakfast."

They all, accordingly set about doing so.  As the light increased, Paul
climbed to the rock which has been spoken of, to look out for the
horses; for he naturally feared that, if the blacks had been in the
neighbourhood, they might have driven them away or speared them.

As he cast his eye over the plain he could nowhere see the animals.
They might, of course, have got round to the other side of the knoll,
but still their non-appearance made him anxious.  A shout from Harry,
announcing breakfast, called him back to the camp.  Bendigo had not yet
returned.  It was not necessary to wait for him.  The young explorers
made a hearty meal--Bruce coming in for his share--to prepare them for
the work to be done, whatever that might be.

They had just finished breakfast, having laid aside a share for the
black, when he was seen coming up the hill, stealing among the bushes.
He shook his head, as he sat down and gobbled up his breakfast.

"Black fellows here--no good--come again; horses gone too," and he
pointed to the north-east, the only outlet to the region, except by a
ford over the river.

"We must go after the horses at once, then," exclaimed Harry.

"No, I certainly would not," answered Paul; "our best plan will be to
remain where we are until we can learn what the blacks are about.
Should they attack us, we could not have a better place for defence than
the one we occupy.  If we find that they have driven off the horses, we
might follow and try to recover them; but if not, I again say we should
remain where we are."

Reggy thought Paul's plan the best, and Harry soon saw its wisdom.
Bendigo also approved of it, and said that he would set out again and
try to discover the whereabouts of the black fellows.

"There appear to be a good many birds on the knoll.  We shall probably
find some 'possums and other animals, so that we shall not want for food
if we can catch them; but we must not throw a shot away," observed Paul.
"We shall want our powder to keep the blacks in check."

Bendigo told them not to be anxious about food, as he could obtain as
much for them as they could require.  Having taken a survey round from
the top of the rock, he glided down the knoll, keeping among the bushes
so as not to be seen by any enemies who might be on the watch.

Although the three lads kept looking round on every side, they could
nowhere discover him.  Harry suggested that they should fortify their
rock with small trees and boughs, which they could easily cut down, and
which would keep off the spears of the natives.

"A very good idea," said Paul; and they all three set to work, trusting
to Bruce to give them timely notice should strangers approach.  They
chose only small trees, which quickly yielded to their axes, and they
were thus soon enabled to form a breastwork on the only accessible side
of the rock.  Although it was not capable of withstanding a determined
rush of the enemy, yet as long as their ammunition lasted the blacks
were not likely to come to close quarters.

They had made some progress in the work, when Bruce suddenly rushed
partly down the hill, uttering a loud bark.  The lads instantly sprang
behind the breastwork, ready for action; but directly afterwards Bruce
came back, wagging his tail, and, almost following him, Bendigo
appeared.

"Black fellows all about," he said, looking approvingly at the
fortification, the object of which he at once understood.  He told them
that they need not expect an attack for some time, though he was certain
that the black fellows would surround them should they venture down into
the plain on foot.

"But how are we to get back our horses?" asked Reggy; "and if we do not
get them back, how are we to return home?"

Bendigo said that he hoped to recover them, as they were not very far
off.

"If he does not, we must make up our minds to trudge back on foot.  It
will be a long journey, but he will not let us want for food," said
Harry.

Bendigo, faithful to his promise, again left them, and soon returned,
bringing a 'possum and several combs of honey.  He also filled their
water-bottles; so that they had sufficient provisions to stand a siege
of some hours, at all events.  He had gone on a second expedition, when
he was seen hurrying back up the hill.

"Black fellows come!" he exclaimed, as he sprang behind the breastwork.

The boys got their rifles ready.

"We must not fire unless the natives show a determination to attack us,"
observed Paul; "their blood will then be on their own heads if they do
so.  We must get Bendigo to tell them that we wish to be at peace; and
that if they will bring back our horses we will part on friendly terms."

Paul explained to Bendigo what he wished.  The black laughed, as if he
did not consider there would be any use in attempting to come to terms
with his countrymen but merely patted his rifle, as though he considered
that it contained the best argument they could employ.

They waited for some minutes.

"I don't think the blacks are coming at all," said Harry.

"Bruce seems of a different opinion," answered Paul.

The dog was stretching out his neck, and slowly creeping forward;
presently he gave a loud bark, and then bounded back into the fort.  At
the same instant the side of the hill below them appeared covered with
black forms, who kept flitting in and out among the trees, making their
way upwards.  Bendigo shouted to them, but they only replied with loud
and derisive cries and shrieks.  They had evidently made up their minds
to destroy the white men.  Flourishing their spears, they leaped from
behind their cover, and came springing up the hill.

"Must not we fire?" asked Harry.

"Wait; they may even yet think better of it," answered Paul.

A flight of spears came rattling against the breast-work; but,
fortunately, from the distance at which they were hurled, they either
flew over or fell against their fortification.

In return, the four rifles cracked at the same moment.  So well were
they aimed, that the same number of their assailants fell, and rolled
over down the hill, the rest scampering back, in evident alarm, to seek
for the nearest shelter.

The little garrison immediately reloaded.  Though so many of the natives
had been killed or wounded, they quickly regained their courage; and,
having received a lesson, took care as they advanced not to expose
themselves.  It was some time before Paul again gave the order to fire.
His bullet alone struck an enemy; the others glanced off against the
trees.  They all speedily reloaded, and were ready once more to fire
before the blacks threw their spears, which flew against the rock,
without wounding any of them, although they all had narrow escapes--
Paul's hat was pierced, a spear grazed Harry's shoulder, and another
flew close to Reggy's ear.  Notwithstanding this, they took good aim,
wounding two of the blacks, who--as they had done before--rushed down
the hill.

"Reload! quick! quick!" cried Paul.

They all fired at the retreating enemy.

In the excitement of the moment Paul had forgotten the necessity of
husbanding their ammunition.  On examining their powder, they found that
they had not two rounds apiece left.

In spite of the loss of their companions--two, if not three, of whom had
been killed outright--the blacks, after a short time, began again to
mount the hill.  Bendigo, without waiting for orders, fired, being
instinctively followed by Harry and Reggy.  Not one of the shots,
however, took effect; and, with shouts and shrieks, the blacks came on.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THEIR CONDITION APPEARS DESPERATE--THE CAPTAIN AND HIS PARTY TO THE
RESCUE--RETURN TO STRATTON--THE YOUNGER CHILDREN LOST IN THE SCRUB.

"Harry and Reggy, we must sell our lives dearly," exclaimed Paul, as he
prepared for a last desperate struggle with the blacks, who were
infuriated at the loss of so many of their companions.  The fact that
they had not taken to flight showed that they were a fierce and warlike
tribe, very different from most of those found in the southern parts of
Australia.  Harry had climbed to the higher part of the rock to take a
look round.  "Hurrah!" he cried, "I see some horsemen coming across from
the north-east, and driving some horses before them.  They must be ours,
and the people must be our father's party."

Paul and Reggy echoed Harry's shout.  "We must not give in, whatever we
do," said Paul, "we have our pistols loaded, and we must drive back the
black fellows with them.  Don't either of you miss your aim.  We must
not fire until they are close upon us.  As soon as they come near enough
I'll give their chief, if they've got one, the contents of my rifle, and
that will, perhaps, check them."

Harry had still kept his post at the top of the rock, and taking off his
jacket he waved it, pointing to the flag which flew just above them,
while he shouted with all his might, forgetting, in the excitement, that
the horsemen were too far off to hear him.  His action, however,
attracted the attention of the blacks, and they, looking round,
discovered the horsemen.  They immediately halted, and began jabbering
away in loud voices.  It was evident that they were alarmed at the sight
of the strangers.

If three lads and a black had been able to hold them in check for so
long a time, what chance would they have when encountered by a party of
well-armed men on horseback?

Such, probably, was the tenor of their remarks to each other.
Notwithstanding this their chief endeavoured to lead them up the hill,
apparently hoping to capture the fort before the arrival of the
horsemen.  He was flourishing his spear and shouting to his companions
to come on, when he got within range of Paul's rifle.

"It is his own fault," said Paul, taking aim.  His bullet struck the
right shoulder of the savage, who went spinning round down the hill, and
was soon in the midst of his followers, who now took to flight
helter-skelter, and were soon lost to sight among the trees.

Bendigo proposed sallying out and killing some more of them, but Paul
ordered him to remain quiet.

"We will hold our position until the white men come up," he said.
"Harry, do you think they are our father's party?"

"No doubt about it," answered Harry.

The defenders again raised a loud shout.  This time they were heard,
and, the captain leading, they were all soon mounting the hill.  All
that had occurred was briefly told.  The captain had observed the
beautiful run from the hill, and, fortunately turning back, had
descended, and found the only entrance which existed.  He had seen the
flag in the distance, and guessing by whom it was hoisted, was making
his way towards it.

He at once saw the necessity of teaching the blacks a lesson, and the
horses he had recovered being saddled, the whole party set off in
pursuit.  The blacks, however, had got the start of them, and swam the
river, having left their wives and children on the other side.

"I trust they have received a lesson they will not easily forget, and
that when we come here, as I hope to do, they will not venture to attack
us," said the captain.

Paul and Harry were delighted at hearing that their father had resolved
to apply for the run.  As no one else was likely to have made a claim
for it, there was every probability that it would be granted to him.
They were much surprised at the altered appearance and manners of
Hector, whose cheek was well browned, and who looked infinitely more
manly and fit for work than he had done before.  He seemed in good
spirits and greatly to have enjoyed the trip.  Indeed, as they sat round
the camp fire that evening, not a grumble did he mutter.

The captain was, of course, grieved to hear of Mr Hayward's illness,
though he hoped that they should find him perfectly recovered on their
return.  The next morning Bendigo went out to ascertain whether the
blacks had taken their departure, while the captain and his party rode
round the proposed run to notch the trees and make other marks for
identifying it.  The whole day was thus occupied, and on their return
Bendigo met them with the satisfactory intelligence that the blacks had
gone off to a distance, carrying their dead with them.  It was a sign
that they did not intend to come back.

The following morning, after a good night's rest, the whole party
commenced their journey homewards.  The captain, having been very
sparing of his ammunition had sufficient to enable them to obtain food,
though, during two or three days they were somewhat hard put to it for
water.  The hole in which they found the dead cattle contained a
sufficient supply for the horses and Bruce, but none of the rest of the
party, except Bendigo, felt inclined to taste it.

They found Mr Hayward quite recovered.  The shepherds had treated him
with all the attention they possibly could.  The captain had warned his
party not to speak of the new run in the presence of the shepherds, lest
they might mention it to their employers, and create some dispute.

Stopping on Sunday to rest, they travelled on for the remainder of the
week, performing nearly thirty miles a day, the horses all the time
obtaining no other food than the grass they could pick up, and often
having to go several hours without water; still they and their riders
got back to Stratton in very good condition.

The captain had, without loss of time, to go to Brisbane to obtain legal
possession of his new run.  As soon as possible after his return, he
intended to set out with his flocks, herds, and his family for the site
of the new station.

The children, in consequence of the out-door life they led, had got into
somewhat erratic ways.  Miss Saville had done her best to teach the
younger girls, as well as Tommy and Albert, but even they were apt to
break loose and to rebel against her authority, as well as that of their
elder sisters.

The season of wild fruit had come round, and raspberries were especially
plentiful.  Rob and Edgar determined that they must go off to the scrub
to obtain a supply for preserving, and Tommy and Albert insisted on
accompanying them.

"I go too," said Effie; "if we cannot reach the fruit high up, we can
pick that growing near the ground as fast as you can."

Without asking leave they all set off, having first provided themselves
with large baskets which Rob and Edgar had been busy in manufacturing.

They would certainly not have been allowed to go without Betty, but she
was watching over little Sybil, who was unwell, and was not aware that
they had set out.  They went along to the westward on the edge of the
scrub which the flood had not reached--indeed, its traces had even
disappeared from the surface which it had covered.  They were somewhat
disappointed at first in not finding fruit in the abundance they had
expected, and so they went on and on until they reached a part of the
scrub sufficiently open to enable them to penetrate into it.  Here Rob
and Edgar thought that they could without difficulty procure plenty of
fruit.  They were soon hard at work picking away with great delight.

"Keep together," cried Rob, "or we may chance to lose ourselves."

"No fear," answered Effie, "we will look where you go."

Edgar said the same.  Rob felt very proud of being the leader of so
large a party, but in his eagerness to pick a quantity of fruit, he did
not watch over them as carefully as he should have done.  On and on they
went, Rob making a remark every now and then to those near him.
Presently he heard Tommy shriek out, "A snake, a snake!" and throwing
down his basket, he ran off towards the more open part of the scrub.

"Come back!" cried Rob.  "It is only a paddy-melon, and won't hurt you
or any one else."

Tommy, however, would not stop.

"Come along, Edgar, and catch the child," cried Rob, forgetting Effie
and Albert, whom he had not seen for some minutes.

It was some time before Tommy could be overtaken.

"You stupid monkey!" cried Rob, when he caught him; "there are no snakes
here to do you any harm."

Tommy, however, was not easily persuaded, and still asserted that he had
seen the head of a big snake.  At length they got him to come back and
pick up his basket.

"Hulloa!  Where are Effie and Albert?" asked Rob.  "We left them close
here, I am sure."

They looked about in every direction; they shouted, but no answer came.

"This is provoking!" cried Rob.  "I expected those children to keep
close to us; see how obstinate they are!  I'll make them remember this
when we catch them."

Rob became very anxious when, after hunting about for some time, he
could find neither his little sister nor his cousin.  How they could
have got out of hearing seemed incredible.  Rob, though very clever in
his own opinion, was in a serious difficulty.  While he fancied that he
was going west, he had turned east; and thinking that he was just
getting out of the scrub, he found himself, to his surprise, close to
the river.

His first exclamation was, "Dear me! how could we have got over to the
other side?"  Then, after due reflection, he recollected that was
impossible; he must have gone in an opposite way to what he had
supposed.

Darkness came on.  Tommy began to cry, and Edgar felt very much inclined
to join him.  "Poor Albert! poor Effie!  Where can they have gone?"
They were a long way from home, they knew; but they dreaded going back
without their little brother and sister.  Indeed, in the dark they would
be unable to find their way, for they had no notion of steering
themselves by the stars.  The fruit, though very fit for making jelly,
was full of seeds, and not satisfying; but they had no other food, so at
last they sat down and ate enough to allay the cravings of hunger.

The alarm at Stratton became very great when the children did not
return.  No one knew in what direction they had gone, but the baskets
they had made had disappeared; consequently, it was supposed that they
had set off on an expedition to pick fruit.  At that hour it was
impossible to see their trail; even Betty could not do it.  However, Mr
Hayward, accompanied by the boys and Bruce, at once started in search of
the missing children.  They made their way along the edge of the scrub,
and penetrated into it whenever they could find an opening, cooing at
the top of their voices, and shouting loudly, "Rob, Tommy, Effie,
Albert! answer!  Where are you?"

No answer came.

"I trust that the black fellows have not got hold of them," said Mr
Hayward.

"We must pursue, and get them back," cried Harry.  "Savage as the
natives are, they would not dare to injure them."

Mr Hayward did not reply; he might have known more of the natives than
Harry did.

At length, having gone some distance, they heard a faint cooey in reply
to theirs.

"Hurrah!  That must be Rob's voice," exclaimed Harry; "though where it
came from I cannot tell.  I will cooey again."

Harry gave another loud cooey; again a distant answer was heard.

"Why, that must be behind us," said Harry; "it comes from the edge of
the scrub."

They had by this time made their way into the interior.  Bruce, on
hearing the second cooey, pricked up his ears and bounded forward.  They
turned back, guided by Rob's voice, and casting the light of their
lanterns about, they at length saw Rob standing up, with Tommy and Edgar
lying down near him.

"Oh, I am so thankful you have come!" exclaimed Rob.  "Have you found
Effie and Albert?"

The question alarmed Mr Hayward and the other boys.

"No; what has become of them?" asked Harry.

"We lost sight of them all of a sudden, and though we hunted about, we
have not seen them since; and then we could not find our way home in the
dark."

Mr Hayward saw that there was no use in scolding poor Rob, who was
already dreadfully alarmed, and fully conscious that he was to blame for
the loss of the two children.  Tommy and Edgar, who had dropped off
soundly asleep from fatigue, were now awakened.

"I will continue the search for the other children," said Mr Hayward,
turning to the boys; "but the rest had better return with Rob and the
little ones.  If I do not soon come back with the children, follow in
this direction in the morning with Bendigo and Betty, who will assist in
tracing them out better than we can.  Do not alarm your mothers more
than is necessary, and assure them that I have little doubt but that we
shall find the truants.  I will take Bruce with me."

"Go, good dog--go!" said Harry, patting him on the head.

Bruce understood his duty, and without hesitation accompanied Mr
Hayward; while Harry and Reggy, taking charge of the children, made
their way back to Stratton with the rest of the party, the younger ones
every now and then sobbing as they thought of their carelessness in
losing sight of Effie and Albert.

It is needless to describe the alarm which the disappearance of the two
children caused their mothers and sisters.  The elder boys were eager to
set off again at once, but were persuaded to wait until daylight; when,
accompanied by the two blacks, they immediately started off to commence
a search for the lost children.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

THE CHILDREN RECOVERED--JOURNEY INTO THE INTERIOR--ARRIVAL AT CASTLE
HILL--STATION ESTABLISHED--HOUSE ATTACKED BY NATIVES--CONCLUSION.

Poor Mrs Berrington's anxiety produced a succession of fainting fits;
she therefore required the constant attention of her sister and Mrs
Hugh, who was herself much alarmed at the disappearance of the children.
As soon as the girls had performed the necessary duties of the morning,
they all set out in the direction taken by their brothers, carrying with
them a supply of food, as the party, which had started early in the
morning, had gone away without breakfast.

It was noon before the girls heard the cooeys uttered by the
searching-party, which proved that the children had not yet been
discovered.

Hurrying along, they at last came in sight of Reggy, who was at the very
edge of the scrub.

"Have you seen anything of them?" asked Mary.  "Nothing: nor of Mr
Hayward either," was the unsatisfactory answer.

Poor Mary's heart sank.  She dearly loved little Effie, and his sisters
in their way were very fond of Albert; besides, they believed that it
would be the death of their mother if he were lost.

Reggy gave notice to the rest of the party, when they were within hail,
that the ladies had arrived with some provisions; and although they all
declared that they were too anxious to be hungry, they not unwillingly
partook of the food the thoughtful girls had brought with them.

Once more they resumed their search; but as hour after hour went by, and
neither the children nor Mr Hayward were found, the anxiety of the
searching-party became almost unbearable.  To abandon the search was not
to be thought of.  Bendigo and Betty had not hitherto discovered the
trail, for in so thick a wood, it was no easy matter, even for them.

At length they shouted out, "We have the trail! we have the trail!" and,
like two beagles, off they set, with their noses close to the ground.

The excitement of the party may be supposed.  The boys managed to follow
as quickly as they could, though their clothes were nearly torn from
their backs.  The rest of the party remained outside the scrub, keeping
up a communication with those within.  The day, however, was wearing on,
and no sign of the children had yet been seen.  The sun's rays, as he
sank towards the west, were glancing almost horizontally through the
trees, when a bark was heard.  Paul gave a loud cooey.  It was answered,
and greatly to their joy they saw Mr Hayward coming along with the
children in his arms.  The blacks had only just before discovered him
seated on the ground, and feeding them with some pigeon which he had
shot and some wild fruit he had collected.

Mary took Effie in her arms, Paul carried Albert on his shoulders, thus
relieving Mr Hayward, who was pretty well worn out.  He had gone on all
the previous night, and greater part of that morning, keeping up with
Bruce, who had been running before him, until he was nearly exhausted.
Suddenly Bruce, with a loud bark, bounded forward, and to his great joy
he discovered the children, who had evidently cried themselves to sleep.
On being awakened by the dog, the first thing they did was to ask for
food, which it had taken some time to obtain.

It was late at night before they got back, when they found Captain
Berrington, and the anxiety which the news he had received on his
arrival had caused was soon brought to an end.  He had secured the run,
and wished immediately to set out to take possession of it.  He expected
the drays soon to arrive with the various stores and provisions he had
purchased.  The elder ladies, Mrs Berrington especially, looked forward
with some alarm to this journey; although Mrs Hugh did not express her
feelings.  Aunt Emily and the girls were, however, in good spirits, and
expected to enjoy it.

At last the preparations were completed.  Three drays, each drawn by
four horses, to carry the ladies and children, were covered over and
fitted up internally as comfortably as circumstances would allow.  The
other drays, laden with stores, were to be drawn by oxen.  Reggy and
Hector rode on horseback, as they would assist in the arduous task of
driving the cattle.  The captain, Mr Berrington, and Mr Hayward drove
the three drays, while Paul and Sandy--with the assistance of three
shepherds and hut-keepers--took charge of the sheep.  There were three
spare saddle-horses that the young ladies might ride whenever they
wished.  Thus arranged, they started early in the morning.

When the party moved forward, they had the appearance of a large tribe
migrating.  The long line of drays, with the herds of cattle, the drove
of horses and flocks of sheep, with their numerous attendants, some
mounted, others on foot; the oxen lowing, the sheep bleating, the shouts
of the drivers, and the stockmen's whips sounding above all.  The huge
drays were each dragged by twelve bullocks, the two polers and leaders
being steady old stagers, as were those immediately in front of the
polers.

Thus they moved forward, resting only on Sunday.  The most difficult
part of their journey was surmounting the range, when even Mrs
Berrington preferred climbing up on foot to remaining in the dray.  The
bright fresh air, and the necessity of exerting herself, seemed to do
her good; and by the time she reached the top, though somewhat fatigued,
she appeared a different person, being not a little proud of her
performance.  Even the warmest admirers of the country, however, had to
confess that there was a great sameness in the scenery, and many of the
rivers and creeks they crossed had no water in them.

An ample supply of water was carried in the drays for the use of the
travellers; but often the horses, cattle, and sheep suffered greatly
from having to go a long way before a stream or a water-hole could be
reached.

The gentlemen's guns amply supplied the larder, so that it was necessary
only occasionally to kill a sheep, or one of the oxen.

"There's `Castle Hill,' mother!" cried Harry, riding up to the dray in
which Mrs Hugh and some of the girls were seated--pointing as he spoke
to the knoll which he and his companions had so bravely defended against
the blacks, and which could be seen below the range bounding the plain
on the west.

The whole party pushed forward, and by evening were encamped at the foot
of the knoll.  Every one was delighted with the situation, while they
felt sure the climate was superior to that of Stratton, although the
soil might not produce the tropical fruits which flourished nearer the
coast.  No time was lost in preparing the ground on which to build the
house.  To level this sufficiently for the purpose required two or three
days' hard work, but everybody set to with a will.  The house was to
face south, overlooking a long stretch of the river, and a boundless
plain beyond, with a view of the picturesque hill on the right.

We must not describe the house building, every one being engaged in it,
except the men absolutely required to herd the cattle and sheep, and
that was comparatively an easy task.  Only one outlet required watching,
and the animals were not inclined to stray from the rich pasture on
which they found themselves.  The blacks and dingoes had of course to be
looked after; but Bendigo reported that there were none of the former in
the neighbourhood, although it was impossible to say at what time they
might appear.

The house, when completed, was far larger than Stratton, and easily held
the two families; while, according to the captain's design, wings could
be put up on either side for the accommodation of any fresh comers.

Stock-yards and cattle-pens had then to be formed, the latter close to
the river, where the sheep, before shearing, could be washed, a very
important process.

The station being a large one, the gentlemen were often on horseback
from morning until night, going round to the different runs.  The huts
were put up in various directions for the accommodation of the stockmen
and shepherds; in some instances in imitation of Castle Hill, or with
small gardens near them, very unusual, it must be owned, in that part of
Australia.

On an Australian farm work never ceases, but at certain seasons there is
less than at other times, and on these occasions pleasant excursions
were made on horseback in various directions by the younger members of
the family.

A party had been formed to visit a waterfall farther off than they had
yet ridden.  Paul, Harry, and Reginald escorted Mary, Lizzie and
Gertrude, while Miss Saville, Janet, and Adela remained at home.  Mr
Hayward had gone out emu shooting, while the captain and Mr Berrington
had started off to visit a station at some distance.  Janet and Adela
were seated at their work in the verandah in front of the house, when
Albert, who was playing in the shade near them, exclaimed, "See! what
can those black things be floating in the river?"

"They must be fish," said Effie.

"Fish!  No, they are round and black."

Janet looked out.  She, too, could distinguish some black objects.  The
captain's spy-glass hung in the hall.  Getting it she saw at once that
the black objects were the heads of natives.  They quickly came to the
shore and began crawling along towards the house.  There were a
considerable number, armed with spears and clubs.  In another minute
they would have landed and have escaped her observation, had not it been
drawn to them by Albert's exclamation.  They could be coming with no
good intent.  All the gentlemen were away.  To obtain assistance in time
was impossible.  The blacks might attack and pillage the house, and be
off again, before any of the party could return.  Sandy, and perhaps
another man might be in the stock-yard near the hill, but how to summon
them in time was the question.

Janet called Rob, who, with Edgar, was in the carpenter's shop at the
back of the house.

Rob at once volunteered to go down and try and find Sandy.  She charged
him to be careful to keep out of the view of the savages.  The first
thing to be done was to shut the doors and windows.  Adela and Edgar at
once began to do so, while Janet hurried in to tell her mother, and
aunt, and Miss Saville.  The latter immediately assisted in preparing
the house for defence.

Though the savages, if they intended an attack, might ultimately force
their way in, it would take some time to tear down the shutters, which
were secured by strong bars.  The ladies were looking out eagerly for
the return of Rob with Sandy.  Scarcely had all the doors and windows
been made fast, than the natives appeared hurrying up the hill with
their spears and clubs in hand.

"What arms have we got?" asked Miss Saville.  "We must use them and
fight to the last, sooner than yield."

They found two rifles and three brace of pistols.

"Can you load them?" inquired Miss Saville.

"I have seen my brothers very often do so, and mamma can, but we will
not call her until it is necessary, she is attending to Aunt Augusta,
who is in a dreadful state of alarm."

"But where is the powder?"

"Here is a powder flask," cried Edgar, "but, dear me! there's nothing in
it."

In vain they searched about.  No one could tell where the captain kept
the powder.  It was in a safe place, that they knew, and he was certain
to have a store in the house, probably in some spot from whence he could
easily remove it in case of fire.

"The blacks have evidently been watching the house, and have seen all
the gentlemen go away," observed Miss Saville.  "If we could fire a few
shots at them, they would fancy that some of our friends have returned,
and would probably take to flight."

They hunted round and round; even Mrs Hugh could not tell where the
powder was to be found.  Not a moment was to be lost, and already the
blacks were almost at the top of the hill.  Up they came, about a
hundred of them.  Probably they were those who had attacked Paul and had
been so signally defeated.  They had now come to revenge themselves in a
terrible way.  The girls could hear them approaching.  They halted for
an instant on finding the doors and windows closed, and were consulting
together.  They were evidently disappointed, having expected to surprise
the house.  At any moment a fire might be opened on them.  Finding,
however, that they were allowed to remain with impunity in front of the
house, a party of them rushed up to the door and began battering away
with their clubs, hoping to break it open.  In addition to the bars, the
girls had placed the dining-room table and the heaviest articles of
furniture they could find against it.

"If they break in we must run for refuge to mamma's room, and barricade
the door as well as we can.  We may delay them, at all events.  Oh! if
we had but a charge of powder, one single shot might frighten the
savages."

All this time the search was continued for powder, but with the same
want of success.  Already the door was giving way.  It was strong and
heavy, being formed of thick slabs fastened to cross-pieces.  First one
slab was broken and beaten in, then another, and the blacks began to
thrust through the hole with their spears.

"We must fly!" cried Miss Saville, taking Effie and Sybil.  "Do, Janet,
do, Adela--come, come; do not venture to remain here longer.  Run, Edgar
and Albert! the savages will kill you if you remain."

"I will show them the muzzle of this rifle; it may keep them in check
for a few moments longer," exclaimed Janet.  Taking the weapon, she
thrust it through the gap made by the blacks' clubs.

It had the effect Janet expected.  Once more they retreated, but finding
that no shot was fired, the savages again came on.  Blow after blow
resounded on the door, the splinters flew about, when with a loud crash
the door gave way.  Two or three savages were on the point of springing
in, when a rifle-shot was heard, and one of them fell; the next instant
Janet, who was the last to leave the spot, saw Mr Hayward spring
forward and with the butt of his rifle strike down two more.  What was
her alarm, however, to find that instead of flying, the rest were
attacking him with their clubs, the blows of which he could with
difficulty parry.  Still he bravely kept his post in the verandah,
preventing the blacks from again stepping on to it.

Several minutes he waged the unequal fight, keeping the blacks at bay.
Already he had been struck more than once; his strength must fail at
last.  Some savages farther off, finding that the clubs of those in
front were of no avail, rushed forward with their spears, and in another
instant they would have pierced the white man, when a couple of shots
laid two of them low.  The shots were followed by the appearance of Rob,
Sandy, and Jock Andrews, one of the men, who furiously threw themselves
on the savages, Rob firing his pistol at the head of one of them.  The
blacks, not knowing how many white men might be following, took to
flight and rushed down the hill, allowing Mr Hayward and the rest time
to reload.  Janet, from behind the fragments of the door, handed out the
two rifles, which Sandy and his companion loaded and as quickly
discharged at the flying enemy, whom they then pursued down the hill,
uttering loud shouts, in which they were joined by Bruce's fierce bark,
he having at that instant been attracted to the spot.

The blacks made straight for the river, into which they plunged and swam
across, without even looking behind them; nor did they stop on landing,
but made direct for the "bush."  To follow them would have been useless
with so small a party.

Mr Hayward was anxious to get back, to ascertain if any of the ladies
had been injured, and to repair the damage caused by the savages before
the return of the party on horseback.  There was some risk that the
savages might fall in with the latter.

Brave little Rob offered to gallop off to warn them.  Jock Andrews
begged that he might go with Master Rob.  There were still two horses in
the paddock, though not very good ones.  They were quickly caught and
saddled, and Rob and his attendant set off.  They had to cross by the
ford some way down the river, in which direction the riding-party was
coming.  They would have to make a wide circuit, so as not to fall in
with the blacks.

Rob and Jock rode on as fast as their sorry steeds would allow, looking
out for the savages, who might, they feared, be on the watch for the
riding-party, to revenge themselves for the defeat they had suffered.
They had gone some distance, when Jock exclaimed--

"There they are, Master Rob, there they are!"

"What, the blacks!" cried Rob.  "We must keep clear of them, and gallop
on."

"No, sir, the captain and the ladies," answered Jock, who, standing up
in his stirrups, could obtain a wider view than his young companion.

"Hurrah!" cried Rob, and he dashed on to meet the party.

"What has happened, my lad?" exclaimed the captain in a tone of alarm,
on seeing him approach.

Rob briefly explained what had happened.

"Thank heaven that they have escaped," said the captain.  "We nearly
fell in with the blacks, but seeing a mob of them in the distance, I
thought it prudent to make a circuit, and so avoided them, or I don't
know what would have been the consequences."

The captain was, of course, anxious to reach home.  The remainder of the
distance was performed at a gallop.  They found Mrs Berrington greatly
recovered, and Mrs Hugh as calm as ever.  Janet and Adela received
their meed of praise.  They had proved themselves true heroines, for had
it not been for their courage and presence of mind--in all human
probability the whole family would have been destroyed by the savage
blacks.

Paul and Harry immediately volunteered to ride off and obtain the
assistance of the police, lest the blacks--as it was probable they would
do--might return.

While the lads were gone, the captain and his brother, with Mr Hayward,
the rest of the boys, and the men, employed themselves in repairing the
door and further fortifying the house.  Their labour was rendered
unnecessary, however, by the arrival of a strong party of police, led by
Paul and Harry, who had fortunately found them nearer than they had
expected.

Chase was immediately made after the blacks, who were overtaken and
severely punished for their unprovoked attack on Castle Hill Farm.
Several were made prisoners, and the captain begged not only that their
lives might be spared, but treated them so kindly that when set at
liberty they expressed their regret at having attempted to injure so
good a man, and promised that they and their tribe would henceforth be
friends with the whites.  Some of them indeed came back, and, under Mr
Hayward's instruction, became so far civilised as to make themselves
very useful, and two or three of their number imbibed the truths of
Christianity.

Hector, greatly to his delight, obtained a commission as an officer in
the police force; but he was very glad, after the experience of a year,
to return to the farm, where, wonderful to relate, he ultimately became
very useful.  Captain Berrington and his family worked steadily on, and
were rewarded for their industry by the success of most of their
undertakings.  They, of course, experienced the vicissitudes of settlers
in general; but, though they occasionally lost many of their cattle and
sheep, their flocks and herds increased, and were soon scattered far and
wide over the surrounding country.

Putting their trust in God, and applying themselves diligently to the
task they had undertaken, they were, on the whole, as successful as they
could desire, and their cousins from England had every reason to be
thankful that they had come out from the old country to become settlers
in Australia.

THE END.





