








[Frontispiece: "THE HEAVY ANIMAL TURNED TO FACE RAOUL."  _p_. 22.]





IN PATHS OF PERIL

A Boy's Adventures in Nova Scotia



BY

J. MACDONALD OXLEY


AUTHOR OF
  'DONALBLANE OF DARIEN,' 'A BOY OF THE BANKS,'
  'NORMAN'S NUGGET,' ETC.




_WITH SIX ILLUSTRATIONS_




TORONTO

THE MUSSON BOOK COMPANY LIMITED

1903




CONTENTS


IN PATHS OF PERIL

CHAP.

    I.  FROM THE OLD WORLD TO THE NEW
   II.  THE GREAT BEAR HUNT
  III.  SETTING A BAD EXAMPLE
   IV.  OFF TO THE WOODS
    V.  THE MOOSE HUNT
   VI.  IN THE NICK OF TIME
  VII.  AT CLOSE QUARTERS
 VIII.  A PERILOUS ENTERPRISE
   IX.  THE STOPPING OF THE SUPPLY SHIP
    X.  ADVENTURE IN BOSTON
   XI.  TRAITORS IN THE CAMP
  XII.  A GLORIOUS VICTORY

BEFRIENDED BY BRUIN




ILLUSTRATIONS


"THE HEAVY ANIMAL TURNED TO FACE RAOUL." . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

"THE PARTY SET FORTH."

"SUDDENLY, RAOUL RAISED HIMSELF UPON HIS KNEES."

"JOE LED THE WAY."

"RISING TO HIS FULL HEIGHT, JOE SWUNG THE PADDLE ABOVE HIS HEAD."

"SHE POINTED THE FIRST CANNON WITH HER OWN HANDS."




IN PATHS OF PERIL


CHAPTER I

FROM THE OLD WORLD TO THE NEW

The defence of the city of La Rochelle by the Huguenots, when for more
than a year they defied the whole power of France under the leadership
of Cardinal Richelieu, must ever remain one of the most heroic and
soul-stirring chapters in history.

For the sake of their faith these noble people endured the pangs of
hunger, the perils of battle, and the blight of pestilence, until at
last, their fighting men being reduced to a mere handful, with broken
hearts they were compelled to surrender.  It was a terrible time for
the weak and the young.  Nearly one-half of the population of the city
died during the siege, and those who survived formed a gaunt, haggard,
miserable band, more like scarecrows than human beings.

Among them were a maiden of twenty and a boy of twelve years of age,
whose fortunes we shall follow in these pages.  She was Constance de
Bernon, the only daughter of one of the most important families, and
he, Raoul de Bernon, her nephew, now an orphan, both his parents having
perished in the dreadful days of the siege.

Not all the horrors she had witnessed, nor the sufferings she had
borne, in the least degree shook Constance's fidelity to her faith.
She was of the stuff which makes martyrs, and would have died at the
stake rather than renounce her religion.  Right glad, therefore, was
she when her parents succeeded in effecting their escape from old
France, where only persecution awaited Protestants, and making their
way across the Atlantic Ocean to the new France, where it was possible
to be true to one's belief without having to suffer for it.

The de Bernons settled in what was then known as Acadia, now the
Province of Nova Scotia, and began life again amid the wildness of the
land which the Micmac and Melecite Indians had hitherto held as their
hunting-ground.  Raoul accompanied them.  Since the loss of his parents
his whole heart had gone out to Constance.  Never was aunt more beloved
by nephew.  It might indeed with truth be said that he fairly
worshipped her, and found in her companionship the chief solace for his
great bereavement.

While to the older people the change from the comfort and security of
their former life at La Rochelle to the crude and hard conditions of
their new home could not help being a very trying one, Raoul, on the
contrary, was rather pleased with it.  There was no going to school,
nor learning of lessons, except when his aunt could now and then spare
an hour to spend with him over the few books they had been able to
bring.  He lived out-of-doors for the most part, and had no difficulty
in finding plenty to occupy his time.

He was a sturdy lad, with a bright, strong countenance, which gave good
promise for the future if only he kept in the right path; and he made
many friends, not only among the settlers, but also among the Indians,
some of whose camps were always near at hand.

"It seems to me you do not miss La Rochelle very much, Raoul," said
Constance to him as they sat at the door of the house in the quiet of
the evening, when all the work of the day was over.  "You are quite
happy here, are you not?"

The colour came into the boy's face at his aunt's words, for although
she did not so mean it, her question seemed to imply that he was
forgetting his former home and the dear ones he had lost.

"I do like it here," he replied, lifting his big brown eyes to hers.
"It is very different from La Rochelle, I know, but----" and here he
hesitated so long that Constance with a smile took up the sentence.

"But you'd rather live in the woods than in the city--that's it, isn't
it, Raoul?  I quite understand, and I don't blame you in the least.
You're fond of adventure, and you're glad to be where there's apt to be
plenty of it.  How would you like to go with me to Cape Sable?"

"I'm ready to go with you anywhere, Aunt Constance!" was the prompt and
hearty response.  "But why are you going to Cape Sable?"

It was now Constance's turn to blush, and very charming she looked as
she answered in a low tone with her face turned away:

"I am to be married soon, Raoul, to Monsieur La Tour, and he is going
to take me to Cape Sable, where he has his fort."

Raoul sprang to his feet excitedly.  The idea of his beloved aunt
belonging to somebody else hurt him cruelly.  It filled his heart with
jealousy, and he exclaimed in a tone of passion:

"You're going to be married, Aunt Constance, and to leave us all!  What
is that for?  Why couldn't you stay with us?  We are so happy here."

Constance smiled with pleasure at the vigour of his speech, and putting
her arm about his neck affectionately, said:

"You surely would not have me live and die an old maid, would you,
Raoul?  And Monsieur La Tour will make such a good husband for me!"

Raoul sighed as he warmly returned his aunt's caress.  His protest was
foolish, of course, and, after all, if she was going to take him with
her to her new home, what would be the difference?

"Oh, yes, I suppose so," he answered.  "But I didn't know.  Please tell
me all about it."

So Constance went into particulars, Raoul listening with profound
interest.

Charles de la Tour, who was also a Huguenot, had now been for a number
of years in Acadia, carrying on an extensive business in fishing and
fur-trading, and had just built a strong fort at Cape Sable, which he
called Fort St. Louis.  Of this establishment he had invited Constance
to become the mistress, and she had given her consent.  Yet, although
she loved de la Tour, who was a handsome, genial, daring man such as
easily win a woman's heart, she did not want to part with her nephew,
and de la Tour made no objection to his accompanying her, especially as
he himself must needs be often absent from the fort on business
expeditions for months at a time, and Raoul would then be good company
for his wife.

So in due time it all came about as was arranged, and Raoul found
himself settled at Fort St. Louis with his new uncle, whom he greatly
admired and respected.  This fort, placed at the extreme south-east
point of what is now Nova Scotia, looked out over the restless waters
of the Atlantic, and kept an eye upon the ships passing by to the Bay
of Fundy or to the New England ports.  It was very strongly built of
stone, and mounted many cannon which Raoul longed to see in use.  A
snug harbour lay to the east, where de la Tour's vessels could anchor
in safety from any storm, and inland stretched vast forests, which
fairly swarmed with game, from the lively rabbit to the gigantic moose.
What with fishing, trapping and hunting, rowing, sailing and swimming
to his heart's content, Raoul was in no danger of finding the time hang
heavy on his hands.




CHAPTER II

THE GREAT BEAR HUNT

There were many tribes of Indians scattered over Acadia--Abenakes,
Etechemins, Micmacs, Openagos, and so forth, in whom Constance de la
Tour took a very deep interest.  She was full of zeal to teach them the
Christian religion, and how to improve their way of living; and she
went about from village to village, and from wigwam to wigwam, with
wonderful patience striving to reach the hearts of the pagans, and help
them to better things; so winning their love that she came to be
esteemed as the guardian angel of their children.

Raoul usually accompanied her on these journeys, and strange enough
were many of the places they visited.  Now it would be a mere huddle of
huts that looked like inverted wash-tubs, or again what seemed a
cluster of large-sized hen-coops, or perhaps a big shed a hundred feet
long with sleeping stalls below, and a loft above for the children,
having neither windows nor chimney, and inclosed by a heavy oak
stockade.

Whether big or little, these odd dwellings swarmed with squaws and
children, and while his aunt was speaking to the elder folk, Raoul
would always find amusement with the youngsters.

Many useful things did Madame de la Tour teach her dusky pupils--the
way to bake bread, how to raise corn, pumpkins, and melons, the mode of
preserving the fruit that was so plentiful in the autumn, and the art
of making maple-sugar, all of which helped to benefit them, no less
than the Gospel message she never failed to give also.  She was the
first missionary to these wild children of the forest in Acadia, and
her memory is still enduring and fragrant because of the good she
wrought amongst them.  Raoul, vastly as he admired his aunt's devotion,
could not of course be expected to share in it to any great extent, but
since his idea of life was to have as good a time as possible--and he
much preferred going on these expeditions to being cooped up in the
fort--it suited him all right that she should be so zealous as she was.

Tramping through the vast green forests, or paddling in birch canoes
over the clear water of smooth-running streams, there was always
something new to be seen, and at any time an adventure might happen.
In the autumn after their coming to Fort St. Louis, a great bear hunt
was arranged to take place at the Tusket River, and Raoul was full of
excitement about it.  The plan was certainly as daring as it was novel,
for the bears were not to be killed when found, but driven with clubs
and switches towards the village, where arrows and spears and sharp
appetites awaited them.

"I do hope there'll be plenty of bears," exclaimed Raoul to his aunt
the evening before the hunt.  "Won't it be exciting when they get them
started, and they try to escape?  I think I'll go out after the bears,
and not wait at the village for them to come--that will be too
tiresome."

"Whatever you do, Raoul, take good care of yourself," said Madame,
patting him upon the shoulder.  "You are my boy, you know, and I should
be very sorry if anything were to happen to you."

Raoul smiled confidently as he drew himself up to his full height.

"Oh, there's no fear of me.  I've had too much to do with bears to let
any of them hurt me."

Madame smiled fondly back at him as she responded:

"You certainly look as if you ought to be able to take care of
yourself.  You are a fine big fellow, Raoul, and I pray God your life
may be a long and happy and useful one."

The bear hunt was well organized under the direction of Madame, who had
a genius for command.  Raoul preferred going into the forest with the
beaters to remaining at the village, and set off in high glee, the
party being chiefly composed of the young men of the tribe.

It was the season of grapes, and the vines, which climbed in wild
profusion to the very tree-tops, were laden with the luscious fruit
which Bruin dearly loved.  The hunters, therefore, were in no doubt as
to where to seek their prey.  Armed only with light clubs and supple
switches, they dashed into the forest, darting this way and that, each
one eager to be the first to find a victim.  Raoul joined forces with
an Indian lad of his own age named Outan, and it was understood that
they were to stand by each other.  Beside his club Raoul had a good
hunting-knife in his belt, but he carried no fire-arms.

Pressing forward with reckless haste, they came to a place where the
grape-vines fairly smothered the trees which supported them.

"Ah-ha!" exclaimed Outan exultantly.  "Plenty bear here, for sure!" and
the words had but left his lips when he gave a cry of joy and pointed
excitedly to a tree, whose leaves were shaking, although there was not
a breath of wind.

Raoul gazed in the direction indicated, and his heart gave a bound when
he caught sight of a dark body that the leaves only half concealed.

"There he is!  I see him!" he cried; "a great big fellow, and he's
coming down!"

Running to the foot of the tree, the boys began to shout up to the
bear, calling him names, and daring him to come down.

But, instead of obeying them, the big black fellow, one of the largest
of his kind and in superb condition, turned about, and proceeded to
climb higher.

"Hullo! that won't do," said Raoul in a tone of disappointment.  "We'll
never get him down that way.  Let us throw stones up at him."

Accordingly they began to bombard the animal with stones, Raoul, who
was a capital shot, succeeding in hitting him more than once.  Yet this
did not help matters at all.  On the contrary the bear only climbed the
higher.  Then Outan proposed to climb an adjoining tree, taking some
stones with him, and then to drive the creature down.  Raoul thought
the idea an excellent one, and took up his station at the foot of the
tree with his club in readiness for immediate use.  Outan went up the
tree with the ease of a monkey, and gaining a good position above the
bear shouted fiercely at him, while he threw the stones with accurate
aim.  Thus assailed from this unexpected quarter, the bear was
panic-stricken, and started down the tree at utmost speed.

"Look out! bear's coming!" yelled Outan, and Raoul, with every nerve
quivering, and his muscles as tense as bow-strings, grasped his club
until his knuckles went white.

Tail foremost, the heavy animal shuffled down the tree-trunk with
astonishing agility, and, reaching the ground on all fours, turned to
face Raoul.




CHAPTER III

SETTING A BAD EXAMPLE

Up to this moment Raoul, carried away by the excitement of the hunt,
had not stopped to consider what he should do if the bear happened to
show fight instead of running away, but now he found himself face to
face with the creature, which was evidently in no very good humour at
having been so rudely disturbed while feasting on the grapes.

Growling fiercely the bear charged at Raoul, who darted off, shouting:

"Quick, Outan, quick!  Come, help me!"

By dodging in and out among the trees he could keep out of the bear's
clutches; but this complete change of programme was not at all what he
had counted upon, and it was with great relief that presently he saw
not only Outan, but several other Indians coming to his aid.  Shouting
and swinging their clubs they attracted the animal's attention from
Raoul, who was fast losing his breath, and from being the pursuer the
bear now became the pursued.

He was wise enough to see that the odds were against him, and made off
at a shambling gallop which the hunters found it difficult to keep up
with.  Their object being to drive the bear towards the village they
must needs keep him going in that direction, and this they found no
easy task.  It would almost seem as if he suspected their purpose, so
hard did he try to go off at a tangent instead of straight ahead; and
more than once Raoul well-nigh despaired of their succeeding in their
object, and regretted that he had not brought his musket with him.  But
the Indians were not to be fooled.  The bear was too fine a specimen to
lose, and they spared neither their lungs nor their muscles as they
kept up the pursuit with unflagging zeal.  It certainly was a curious
way of hunting bears, and if Bruin had only known how powerless his
persecutors really were, he would, no doubt, have freed himself from
them in short order.  He was too badly frightened, however, to perceive
the truth, and did his best to keep out of range of the menacing
cudgels, while all the time the village drew nearer, where his fate
awaited him.

Raoul would have liked very much to reach the village ahead of the
bear, but although he ran his very best, he was left well in the rear,
and when he came up the big black creature had already been dispatched.

"You poor fellow!" said Raoul as he passed his hand over the rich,
glossy black fur, a qualm of pity succeeding the lust of the chase now
that the excitement was over.  "You did your best to get away from us,
but we were too many for you.  It was not just a fair fight, was it?"

Several other bears had been secured, and when the hunt was over, and
the Indians had all gathered again, some strange ceremonies took place.
Into the mouths of the slain bears smoke from an Indian pipe was blown
by the hunters, and at the same time each lifeless creature was begged
not to hold any hard feelings because of what they had suffered.  Then
the bears' heads, painted and decorated, were set on high, and the
savages sang the praise of the Acadian king of beasts, after which the
well-cooked bodies were divided amongst the hungry people, who feasted
upon them greedily.  Madame and Raoul had their share of bear-steak,
and then the former took advantage of the quiet which followed the
feast, to talk to these heathens about the Great Spirit whom she was so
anxious they should learn to love.  She was listened to with great
attention by the Indians, because she had won their hearts, not only by
her lovely character, but also by her many generous deeds and gifts.

But they were, for the most part, slow learners of the new and better
way.  The grizzled old chief, to whom Madame with infinite patience was
teaching the Lord's Prayer, made a quaint objection.

"If I ask for nothing but bread," said he, "I shall have no more moose
nor sweet cakes," referring to some toothsome cake that Madame had
herself baked as a present for him.

After Madame had spoken, the young folks fell to sky-larking, while the
elders smoked their pipes, and Outan, who was fond of teasing, raised a
big laugh at Raoul's expense by telling how the bear had dropped from
the tree and put him to flight, and he mimicked Raoul dodging around
the tree-trunk.  This angered Raoul, and when his orders to Outan to
"shut up" passed unnoticed, he rushed at him and struck him in the face.

Now, although Outan looked upon both Madame de la Tour and Raoul as
superior beings, and would have endured a great deal at their hands
rather than displease them, still he had his own share of temper and
pride, and this sudden blow from Raoul, given in the presence of his
companions, filled him with fury.  He struck back with all his might,
and the next instant the two boys were rolling upon the ground in a mad
grapple.  At once they were surrounded by an eager circle of
spectators, who keenly relished what promised to be a lively fight, and
with excited cries urged on the youthful combatants.

So close were Raoul and Outan locked in each other's arms that they
could not use their fists, and the struggle was therefore in reality
not more than a wrestling-match.

But the more they strove the fiercer burned their rage, and the moment
that one or the other did succeed in getting a hand free, cruel use
would certainly be made of it.

While this was taking place Madame had been talking with some of the
women, little imagining how Raoul was engaged, and she might have
continued in her ignorance had not Outan's little sister run up to
them, sobbing out something which her mother at once understood, and
darted off with an exclamation of alarm.

This attracted Madame's attention, and more out of concern lest some
accident should have happened than from curiosity, she followed the
Indian woman.  When they reached the crowd that surrounded the
fighters, so densely packed was it that at first they could not get
within sight of what was going on.  But presently some of the men made
space for Madame in rather a shamefaced way, until she was quite close
to the struggling boys.

For a moment she thought it was only an innocent trial of strength, but
a second look at their inflamed faces and furious eyes told her the
truth, and in a horror-stricken voice she called out:

"Raoul!  Raoul! what's the meaning of this?  Stop it at once.  I
command you."

But Raoul was in too wild a fury to hear or heed, and, realizing this,
Madame, the grace of whose form concealed an unusual degree of strength
in a woman, laid hold of the boys and tore them apart.




CHAPTER IV

OFF TO THE WOODS

Raoul rose sullenly to his feet, and faced his aunt, who fixed upon him
a look of stern displeasure mingled with sorrow.

"Oh, my nephew," she said in a tone of profound reproach, "are you not
ashamed of yourself to be engaged in such an unseemly brawl?  What an
example to set those whom we are striving to teach better things!  Come
away, that I may have some talk with you in private."

Raoul, his anger now having in large part given place to shame, obeyed
her bidding without a word, and they passed through the crowd into the
forest.  Here Raoul found his tongue, and explained how the thing had
occurred.  Madame heard him with attention and sympathy.

"You certainly had good reason to be provoked, my boy," she said as she
tenderly patted his cheek.  "But you must not forget that these poor
people are heathens, and we are Christians, and that if we would win
them over to be Christians also, we must do very differently from what
they would do themselves.  Now you must confess that you did not act in
a Christian way, and I am very sorry.  Let us pray to God to give us
such self-control that we shall not fall into errors of this kind."

So they kneeled together upon the turf, and Raoul's heart was melted by
the fervent prayer that came from his aunt's lips for the help of God
in right living, and in the conversion of the Indians.  Then, without
delay, he sought out Outan, and, to the great surprise of the lad,
expressed his regret for his hasty blow and begged his forgiveness.

To Outan the situation was so utterly novel that he was bewildered what
to do, but obeying the impulse of his heart, he smiled broadly and gave
Raoul a hearty hug, which showed in the clearest way that all
ill-feeling had vanished from him.

The bear hunt having been successfully carried out, Madame and Raoul
returned to Fort St. Louis, where they found Monsieur La Tour, who had
got back from one of his trading expeditions, awaiting them in high
spirits, because his business operations had been very successful.

Charles La Tour thought more of wealth and power than anything else in
the world.  Not even his beautiful, devoted wife was dearer to him.
Yet he loved her after his own fashion, was very proud of her, and had
not the slightest objection to her missionary zeal, so long as it did
not cross any of his plans or ambitions.  In regard to Raoul, of whom
he was quite fond, he did think it rather a pity that he should be
filled with his aunt's religious notions, because it might spoil him
for the rough business of life; yet he made no protest against it,
although he did now and then let drop a cynical speech that touched the
boy's sensitive nature.

He had not been long at home before his restless spirit moved him to
start off again, and this time he proposed that Raoul should accompany
him.

"If your aunt can do without you for a few weeks, you'd better come
with me," he said in his off-hand way, which took consent for granted.
"You'll get some useful lessons in buying furs and trading goods, and
in how to make good bargains with the Indians, if you keep your eyes
and ears open."

Raoul, for his part, was quite eager to go.  He loved adventure and
excitement, and was very weary of the routine of life at the fort.  So
his response was no less hearty than prompt.

"Why, of course I want to go, uncle," he exclaimed, his face beaming
with pleasure, and then checking himself as he thought of his aunt, he
added in a more subdued tone, "If Aunt Constance is willing for me to
go."

In her heart Madame would have very much preferred to have Raoul remain
with her, but she was too unselfish to confess it, and smiled gaily
enough as she said:

"Oh, I think I can manage to get along without you for a while, Raoul,
although I shall of course miss you both greatly."

Winter was drawing near when the party set forth, and they must needs
be not only well-armed, but well supplied with blankets and furs to
resist the cold.

[Illustration: "THE PARTY SET FORTH."]

There were twelve of them in all, six whites, and as many red men,
stalwart fellows all of them, and thoroughly fitted to endure the
hardships of their undertaking.

Madame was left in charge of the fort, with trusty old Simon Imbert as
her lieutenant.

"My prayers will follow you every foot of the way, Charles," she said
as she gave her husband a parting embrace, "and I shall be a happy
woman when I see you safe back again."

La Tour's purpose was to go clear across the peninsula to the Bay of
Fundy, seeking out the Indian encampments, buying whatever furs they
had, and arranging for further supplies.  He accordingly took with him
a stock of goods such as pleased the Indian fancy.

Sufficient snow had already fallen to enable toboggans to be used, and
with their baggage loaded upon these the party made good progress
through the forest.

Raoul was in high spirits.  Neither the toilsome tramping all day, nor
the sleeping under the sky instead of in his own warm bed at night, nor
the rude though abundant fare counted anything in comparison with his
pride of filling a man's place, and, as far as was possible, doing a
man's work.

There was one thing that gave him some trouble at first, however, until
he solved the difficulty by being true to his best instincts.

His aunt had taught him to pray night and morning, and in the privacy
of his own snug chamber in the fort he never omitted doing so; but when
out in the forest in the company of men who took no thought for such
things, it was very different.

Although his conscience pricked him sharply he let several days go by
without prayers, just because he had not the courage to kneel down
before the others.

But one night it seemed as if he could not get to sleep, he felt so
conscience-stricken, and at last, unable to bear it any longer, he
rolled out of his blankets, and kneeled against a tree-trunk.

A minute later his uncle, who had been out with some of his men setting
traps, returned, and seeing Raoul, exclaimed in a tone of surprise:

"Hullo, my boy, what's the matter?  Have you had a scare while I was
away?"

Raoul, blushing deeply, rose to his feet, and with eyes fixed on the
ground, murmured:

"No, sir, I was just saying my prayers, as I ought to have done every
night, but I felt ashamed to."

It was on the tip of La Tour's tongue to say:

"Oh! leave that to your aunt.  She can pray enough for both of us."

But he kept the words back, and with an indulgent smile which implied
plainly that he thought the boy's occupation was of small consequence,
he said in a kindly tone:

"Well, you'd better get back into your blankets again.  We're going to
have a stormy night, if I am not greatly mistaken."

That he had not mis-read the weather signs became evident ere midnight,
for a snow-storm set in which grew in violence hour by hour, until by
daylight it was so furious that not even Charles La Tour had the
hardihood to brave it.




CHAPTER V

THE MOOSE HUNT

For several days the storm continued, and during that time no member of
the party dared to leave camp, except to gather wood for the fire,
which by great exertion and care was kept burning.

It was a miserable time for all.  La Tour fumed and fretted at the
delay, and the other whites shared his feelings, although the Indians
seemed stolidly content with the forced inaction.

Temporary tents had been hastily made out of spruce boughs, and these
being covered thickly with snow, afforded passable protection; yet they
were poor places in which to spend a long day, and their occupants soon
grew utterly weary of them.

Raoul was hard put to it to while away the dreary hours.  His uncle was
in too ill a humour to be pleasant company, and so the boy fell back
upon the society of the men, who were inclined to be rough in their
ways and coarse in speech.

On the evening of the third day of the storm La Tour called Raoul to
him, and said in a sneering tone:

"How much good can your prayers do, think you?  If you were to pray for
the storm to stop, would it have any effect?  You certainly couldn't
wish a better chance to show what you can do."

Raoul was sorely puzzled to reply.  He suspected that his uncle was
only seeking to make fun of him, and yet it did not seem right to
respond in the same spirit, thus making a jest of what was so sacred.

Looking very confused, he kept silence, until La Tour exclaimed
impatiently:

"Have you lost your tongue?  Why don't you answer me?"

"Because I don't know what to say," murmured Raoul.  "Aunt Constance
told me that we must not expect every prayer to be answered right away,
and maybe even if she were to pray for the storm to stop it would not
do it."

At this point La Tour's better nature asserted itself.  He began to
feel ashamed at thus teasing the boy, and to be impressed by his
evident sincerity, so patting him affectionately upon the shoulder, he
said:

"Don't mind my foolish words, Raoul.  I didn't mean to hurt your
feelings, or to weaken your faith.  Keep on doing what you feel to be
right, even if you are made fun of by those who ought to know better."

Raoul was deeply touched by these words, and thenceforward admired his
uncle more than ever.

Ere he closed his eyes that night he did pray fervently for the storm
to abate, and then curled up in his blankets to sleep as soundly as if
in his own snug bed in Fort St. Louis.

He was awakened next morning by his uncle giving orders to the men in
so cheery a tone that it was evident there had been a great change in
his spirits; and, in making his way out of the half-buried tent, Raoul
at once understood the reason, for the storm was all over, and the sun
shone dazzlingly upon a world of spotless white.

"Good!" cried Raoul joyously.  "Now we needn't stay here any longer.  I
am so glad," and he felt like dancing a little by way of expressing his
feelings.

In his delight at the return of fine weather he might have forgotten to
be thankful for the answer to his prayer, had not Monsieur La Tour
reminded him by calling out:

"Good-morning, Raoul.  You see the snow has ceased, and perhaps it was
your prayers that caused it to stop."

Raoul laughed, and shook his head in disclaimer of such being the case.

"And now, uncle, we can be off again, can't we?" he responded.  "I hope
we won't have any more such storms."

In their journey across country they presently came to the region where
huge moose, the grandest of all antlered animals, were to be found, and
La Tour, as their supply of food was running low, decided to halt for a
few days, in order that they might have a moose hunt.

This was good news to the whole party, and there was keen competition
among the members to be allowed to take part in the hunt, La Tour's
purpose being to have one-half of the men accompany him, while the rest
remained at the camp.

Raoul took it for granted that he was to go, and was quite dismayed
when his uncle let fall a remark which implied that he was to stay
behind.

"Why, uncle," he exclaimed, "am I not to go with you?"

"Well, I hadn't thought about it, Raoul," was the reply.  "Won't it be
rather hard work for you to keep up with us?  And then there may be
some danger, you know."

"Oh, but I don't mind either the hard work or the danger," Raoul
promptly responded.  "Please let me go too, uncle, I want to so much."

"Very well then," replied La Tour, good-naturedly.  "You can come
along, but you'll have to look after yourself, for I'm going to give my
whole attention to the moose."

Mounted upon broad snow-shoes, which enabled them to travel with ease
and speed over the deepest snow, the hunting-party set forth amid the
cheers of those who regretfully remained behind.  They were all in high
spirits, and the men made little boasts among themselves as to which of
them would be the first to sight a moose, and to get the first shot at
one.

"This heavy fall of snow will make things easier for us," Monsieur La
Tour said to Raoul, as they tramped along together.  "The big fellows
will not be able to run very fast through such deep drifts."

It was not until mid-day drew near that signs of moose were seen, and
then one of the keen-sighted Indians, who was in the van, came hurrying
back to announce that he had found fresh tracks in the snow.

After examining them La Tour consulted for a moment with his
companions, and then laid out his plan of campaign, which was that the
party should spread out in a wide line, so as to cover as much ground
as possible, and yet keep within hearing of signals, so as to be able
to gather together again at the proper time.

"As for you, Raoul, you had better follow me," he said.  "You'll not
miss any of the excitement, and you'll be less likely to get astray."

This suited Raoul perfectly, and having seen to it that his gun was
ready for instant action he followed his uncle's lead, although it was
no easy matter to keep pace with his rapid stride.

On they went through the forest, with every sense alert to detect the
proximity of their prey.

Presently La Tour stopped short, and bent his gaze intently to the
right.  Raoul looked in the same direction, but at first could not make
out anything, yet from his uncle's action, it was plain that he must
have sighted a moose, for he began to creep forward stealthily, with
his gun held in readiness to fire.

Raoul, holding his breath, kept close behind, and at last his eyes fell
upon a dark form scarcely distinguishable from the thick evergreen
against which it stood.

"There he is!  I see him!" he whispered to himself, while his heart
throbbed wildly.

Just then La Tour levelled his gun, and the silence was shattered by
its startling report.

A moment later the evergreens were violently agitated, and out of them
rushed a huge bull moose, made furious by the wound, which at once
charged fiercely down upon the hunters.




CHAPTER VI

IN THE NICK OF TIME

As it happened, the snow did not lie very heavily at this particular
place, and the great creature was able to move with tremendous speed.

"Look out, Raoul!" shouted La Tour, as he darted aside to evade the
moose's onset.  "Get behind a tree, and then fire at him."

This was precisely what Raoul had in mind to do, and he made a gallant
effort to accomplish it, but unfortunately in his haste he caught his
snow-shoes together, and over he went headlong into the snow with such
violence as to nearly bury himself.

Confused by the fall, and blinded by the snow, he lay there helplessly,
while the bull moose, infuriated by its wound, and seeing only the
prostrate boy to account for it, bore down upon him with murderous
intent.

He fully realized his danger, and yet felt powerless to avert it, for
to regain one's feet after a tumble with snow-shoes on is no easy
matter.

In the meantime La Tour had rushed out from behind the tree, and by
waving his arms and shouting, strove to attract the attention of the
animal to himself until Raoul should have time to get upon his feet
again, and find a place of safety.

But the moose was not to be thus diverted from its victim, and kept on
until it was within ten yards of Raoul, whose fate now seemed to be
sealed.

La Tour, quite forgetting himself in his anxiety for the boy, made a
desperate effort to get in between him and the animal, and groaned
aloud as he saw that it could not avail.

Then, suddenly, Raoul raised himself upon his knees, and pointing his
gun at the moose's head, pulled the trigger.

[Illustration: "SUDDENLY, RAOUL RAISED HIMSELF UPON HIS KNEES."]

At the report the big brute pitched forward upon its antlers, almost
turning a somersault, and La Tour with an exclamation of joy ran to
Raoul, and lifting him up clasped him to his breast, crying:

"Bravo! my nephew, bravo!  That was a splendid shot.  I never thought
you could do it."

But hardly had the words left his lips than his exultation changed to
alarm, for the moose, which had been only stunned by the bullet, and
not mortally wounded, rose to its feet again to renew the charge.

Happily the shock of the bullet had bewildered it so that it went off
at a tangent, and ere it could recover itself La Tour had hurried Raoul
to safe shelter behind a mighty tree.

Hastily reloading his gun, an action which Raoul lost no time in
imitating, La Tour watched his chance to give the great animal a final
shot.

After plunging about for a little it once more located its assailants,
and, looking very terrible in its rage, made another furious rush at
them.

This they both evaded without difficulty, and then La Tour got the
opportunity he sought, and sent a bullet into the heart of the mighty
creature, which brought its career to a sudden end.

"Phew!" he exclaimed in a tone of profound relief, as he took off his
fur cap and wiped the perspiration from his forehead.  "That was lively
work, wasn't it, Raoul?  What a grand fight the old fellow did make!
He pretty nearly had you under his hoofs.  You managed to fire in the
nick of time.  That was a clever shot, my boy, and I am proud of you
for it."

Raoul flushed with pleasure at his uncle's praise, which he appreciated
all the more because La Tour was far more prone to find fault than to
express approval.

"I thought it was all over with me, Uncle Charles," he said, "for the
snow had got into my eyes so that I could not see properly, but I did
the best I could."

"And a very good best it was, my boy.  No man could have done better.
You'll make a fine hunter when you're full grown.  Ah, ha! here come
some of the men.  I wonder what fortune they have had."

Attracted by the sound of the firing, the rest of the hunting party had
hurried to the scene, and La Tour was in his element as he proudly
displayed the fallen monarch.

"Raoul and I are partners in him," he said laughingly.  "Raoul hit him
in the head, and I hit him in the heart, but he came within an ace of
finishing Raoul first."  And he then proceeded to relate what had
happened.

Raoul was warmly congratulated upon his lucky escape, and upon the
excellence of his marksmanship, and everybody rejoiced over the
splendid prize which had been secured, for the moose was in superb
condition, and would supply them with savoury steaks and roasts for
many days.

After what had occurred at the moose hunt, it was evident that his
uncle regarded Raoul in a different light.  He dropped his bantering
tone toward him, and treated him more on an equal footing, and Raoul
fully appreciated the change.

During the remainder of their trip they were favoured with such good
fortune--the game proving plentiful all along the route, and the
Indians whose villages they visited being so well supplied with furs
and so eager to trade--that La Tour, in high good humour, told Raoul he
brought him good luck, and must accompany him again.

The whole party got back to Fort St. Louis without a mishap, and then
everybody settled down for the winter, as there were to be no more
trading expeditions.

But Madame La Tour did not suspend her missionary work because it was
winter time.  As soon as her husband had returned and relieved her of
the charge of the fort, she resumed her visits to the Indian
encampments.  This was the best season for what she sought to
accomplish, because the men were about the wigwams most of the time,
and she could get a hearing from them as well as from the women and
children.

Raoul usually went with her.  He liked the idea of being in some sense
her protector, and she was always such good company that the hours
never seemed long that were spent in her society.

He always carried his gun, not that there was anything to fear from the
Indians.  They were altogether to be trusted.  But some wild animal
might be encountered that would venture to attack, or that might be
worth having a shot at, any way.

Right glad he was that he did have his gun one afternoon when he and
his aunt were returning from a day spent at the Souriquois village,
where the good woman had been teaching the squaws, not only how to be
Christians, but also how to be better wives and mothers.

They were walking rapidly, and talking busily, when a horrible scream
that sent a chill of terror to their hearts, and caused them to stop
suddenly in the path, issued from the thick woods in front of them.

A stranger would have been at a loss to guess what sort of creature
could produce so frightful a sound, but Madame La Tour recognized it at
once, and she perceptibly shrank closer to Raoul as she said in a
startled voice:

"It is a _loup cervier_, Raoul, and right in our way!"




CHAPTER VII

AT CLOSE QUARTERS

Raoul knew the scream also, and something about the animal from whence
it came, and he first looked carefully at his gun to make sure that it
was ready for instant use, and then peered into the obscurity of the
thick evergreens, in the attempt to locate the fierce brute which had
thus challenged their passing.

What Madame meant by _loup cervier_ was what is now known as the
"Indian Devil," or catamount, a species of puma that could be very
dangerous when in a fighting humour, as this one evidently was.

"Don't be frightened, Aunt Constance," said Raoul sturdily.  "I'll
shoot him dead the moment I see him," and he brought his gun to his
shoulder as he spoke.

"Wait, wait until you can see him plainly," said Madame under her
breath.  "You must not miss."

There was a rustling among the branches, another blood-curdling scream,
and then the hideous face of the creature appeared, its eyes flaming
with fury, and its cruel teeth showing white among the rigid bristles
that protruded from its furry cheeks.

Now if Raoul had been alone, he would assuredly have been nervous
enough to make it a difficult matter to take good aim, but the presence
of his aunt made him forget himself utterly in his loyal determination
to protect her from the impending peril.  He felt as firm as a rock.
Not a nerve quivered, and, aiming straight between the baleful eyes, he
fired.

The report rang out on the still evening air, and was instantly
followed by a snarling shriek from the wounded animal, so charged with
fury that Raoul instinctively pressed his aunt back out of the path.

Just as he did so the puma sprang at them, for it was not killed, a
slight movement of its head as Raoul fired having caused the bullet to
strike too high, and plough through the fur on the forehead, instead of
burying itself in the brain.

Raoul's sudden movement caused the brute to fall short, and ere it
could gather itself to spring again the boy, clubbing his gun, struck
at it with the heavy butt.

It was the best thing to be done under the circumstances, and yet, when
the maddened catamount, squirming around as if it were made of rubber,
caught the stock in its teeth, and tore at the gun with its terrible
claws, there seemed small chance of Raoul being able to repeat the blow.

Happily this was not necessary on his part, for Madame, who had been
perfectly composed throughout, having picked up a stout stick, came to
his assistance, and, with a clever blow delivered just behind the
puma's ear, put an end to its existence.

"Bravo, Aunt Constance!" cried Raoul delightedly.  "You've done for
him, and just in time, too!  He was pulling the gun out of my hands."

There was the light of triumph in Madame la Tour's fine eyes as she
turned the dead thing over with her stick.

"He meant us mischief, Raoul," she said, "and he has paid dearly for
it.  If he had left us alone he would not be lying there now.  Let us
kneel down and thank God for our deliverance."

And so they knelt together, while Madame, in a few fervent sentences,
expressed their gratitude to Providence for having thus protected them
from injury.

As they hastened homeward, Madame said in a low tone, as if talking to
herself rather than to Raoul:

"This is a wild, dangerous country, and I grow very weary of it.  I
pray that I may be spared to get back to France some day."

Raoul heard these words with some surprise.  His aunt always seemed so
busy and content in the doing of her duty, that he did not suppose she
was not as happy as he was himself, but his quick sympathy inspired him
to ask:

"Shall we be going back to France some day, Aunt Constance?"

"Only God knows that, my dear," was the reply.  "I'm sure I cannot
tell.  We are in the hands of Providence, and whatever comes to pass
will be the best."

Raoul said no more at the time, but thenceforward his admiration for
his aunt was deepened by the knowledge that she would really prefer
being across the ocean, although she always seemed so serene and
satisfied with her lot in Acadia.

Monsieur La Tour was much interested in the account of the encounter
with the catamount.

"You deserve credit, both of you," he said warmly.  "As for you, my
dear wife," he added, with an unusually loving look, "there seems to be
no limit to your talents.  You can preach, teach, hunt, fish, and look
after the affairs of your own household better than any woman I ever
knew.  How fortunate I was to get such a wife!  Eh, Raoul?"

Madame's noble countenance was flooded with colour by her husband's
frank praise, which made her heart sing for joy, and going up to him,
she threw her arms about his neck and kissed his bronzed cheek, saying:

"Thank you, my dear Charles, for your kind words, which I am sure are
not empty ones."

With the return of spring, La Tour, whose enterprise and energy knew no
bounds, unfolded a new plan he had formed for the extension of his
power and the increase of his fortune.

This was the building of still another fort, and the site he had
selected was the mouth of what is now the St. John River, in the
province of New Brunswick, then known by the musical Indian name of
Ouangondy.

This place had many advantages over Fort St. Louis.  The river went far
inland, and was the highway for many Indian tribes who had precious
pelts to barter.  Not only so, but the whole New England coast could be
conveniently reached by canoe, or sailing shallop, and again, the lay
of the land was such that an exceedingly strong position could be
easily had.

Throughout the summer the building went on, and ere autumn came again
the new fort, which La Tour modestly called after himself, was
completed.  It stood upon a rise of ground commanding the harbour and
the sharp turn made by the river on entering, about half-a-mile below,
the famous falls, which then as now worked both ways, pouring up river
when the tide was high and down river when it was low.

Fort La Tour was solidly built of stone, and stood nearly two hundred
feet square, with four bastions at the angles, and twenty good cannon
frowning from the battlements.  Without were sturdy palisades as a
further protection, and within, two comfortable dwellings, a tiny
chapel, and the necessary storehouses, barracks for the garrison, and
other buildings.

Such was Raoul's new home, and he heartily approved of the change,
because the country round about Fort La Tour was far richer and finer
than that about Fort St. Louis, and the beautiful river held out
promise of many a pleasant canoe trip, when the warm days of summer
returned.

As for Madame La Tour, she felt sorry to leave her dusky charges when
they seemed to promise such good results, but she consoled herself with
the thought that there were plenty of others equally needing the light,
and that she could continue her good work from the new fort.




CHAPTER VIII

A PERILOUS ENTERPRISE

Hitherto all had gone so well with Charles La Tour that he could hardly
be blamed if he came to look upon himself as a favoured child of
fortune.  He had had the whole of Acadia to himself, so to speak, and
what with fishing, fur-trading, and farming, had greatly increased his
substance.

But now rumours of a rival came to disturb his peace.  Another Charles,
who was generally known as Charnace, had obtained from the French King
certain grants and privileges in Acadia, and, wrath at finding La Tour
already monopolizing the country, he let it be known that he proposed
to contest the field with him by force of arms.

He chose his time well for the attack upon Fort La Tour, coming when
the stock of provisions were lowest, the garrison smallest, and those
whose support could be counted upon were most widely scattered, and he
brought with him a strong force of soldiers in his four staunch vessels.

Stationing his two ships and the galiot so that they blockaded the ship
channels, and the pinnace to the north-east of Partridge Island, he
landed several hundred men so as to control the surrounding country,
and then settled down for a siege, feeling quite confident that the
capitulation of the fort was only a question of time.

In the meantime the commander of Fort La Tour had not been idle,
although the coming of Charnace had been like a bolt out of the blue,
for he did not expect to see anything of him that year.  He lost no
time in making preparations for a determined defence, in which his
stout-hearted wife gave him efficient help.  By means of spies, he got
full information as to his enemy's purpose, and laughed grimly at the
latter's threats.

"And so he has vowed that he will send me back to France in manacles,
has he?  Well, words are cheap.  It is easy to indulge in big talk, but
not always so easy to put it into deeds.  We shall see how Monsieur
Charnace will keep his word."

Raoul was not at all dismayed at being besieged.  On the contrary, he
was pleased by the prospect of exciting times, and promised himself to
take as active a part in the defence as his uncle would permit.

"What right has Charnace coming here to attack us?" he asked with fine
indignation at the insolence of the intruder.  "We were here first, and
he has no business interfering.  We must give him such a beating that
he will not dare to come near us again."

Keeping his ships well out of range of the cannon at the fort, and his
men safely disposed in the protection of the woods, Charnace sought to
cut off all supplies by sea or land, and thus let slow starvation win
the day for him.  Now La Tour was just then eagerly expecting the
arrival from La Rochelle of the armed ship _Clement_ with a full cargo
of supplies of all sorts, and a goodly number of soldiers and
colonists.  In fact, the vessel was overdue, and if she should come up
the bay without warning, she would assuredly be captured by Charnace's
ships, which would have no difficulty in overpowering her.

"We must stop her before she comes too far," he said, "and yet I hardly
know how it is to be managed.  Charnace's spies and scouts are all
around us.  Have you any notion how it can be managed, Constance?"
And, as was usually the case when in perplexity, he turned for counsel
to the shrewd woman who was so peculiarly his helpmate.

"Let us send for Joe Takouchen," was her reply.  "He may think of a
way."

Accordingly Joe was sent for, and promptly appeared, his usually
impassive countenance betraying curiosity as to the reason for the
summons.

Joe was a splendid specimen of the Souriquois, who worshipped Madame La
Tour as though she were divine.  She had been particularly kind both to
himself and his family, and he was ready to risk his life for her on
any occasion.  The situation was explained to Joe, while he listened in
silence, but with a comprehending expression.  Then, nodding his head
sagely, he said:

"Joe will take the message to the ship.  He will go to-night."

"And how will you manage it, Joe?" asked La Tour.

Joe smiled significantly, and explained that his plan was to steal out
of the fort at night, make his way to the headlands south-west, and
thence put off in a canoe, as soon as the supply ship came in sight.
La Tour's face lit up at the proposition.

"It's a big risk, Joe, but if any man alive can carry the thing out it
is you.  Whom will you take with you?"

Joe replied that Jean Pitchebat, a stalwart Frenchman, who was his
special friend, would be his choice, and La Tour approved.

Raoul, who had been a silent listener hitherto, now spoke up.

"May I go with Joe too, Uncle Charles?" he asked, in a tone whose
anxiety showed how fully he was in earnest.

La Tour looked at the boy with such manifest surprise that the latter
flushed hotly.  Yet, being full of his desire, he turned to Joe and
said entreatingly:

"You will not mind taking me, will you?"

Joe glanced inquiringly at his master and mistress.  He was very fond
of Raoul, and had no objection to taking him along, but he felt that
the matter was not one for him to settle.  La Tour had it on the tip of
his tongue to brusquely refuse Raoul's request, but the expression on
his wife's face made him pause, and before he spoke, she said in her
gentle way:

"You might let him go, Charles.  He will be in God's hands.  There is
danger everywhere now, and his heart is set upon going."

"Oh, very well, then, so long as Joe is willing.  What do you say,
Joe?" and La Tour turned to the taciturn Indian.

"Joe say all right," was the laconic response, at which Raoul clapped
his hands gleefully.

They set off the same night.  Fortunately it was both dark and windy,
so that there was all the less danger of their movements being seen or
heard.  But they must needs exercise the utmost caution, for Charnace
had many Indians in his service, and they would no doubt be acting as
scouts and sentinels in the neighbourhood of the fort.

Joe led the way with amazing dexterity, stepping over the ground as
silently as a serpent, and the other two followed, doing their best to
imitate him.  Several times he stopped short, peered eagerly into the
darkness, listened intently for a moment, and then, muttering something
which Raoul could not catch, changed his course to right or left.

[Illustration: "JOE LED THE WAY."]

Once the sound of voices came out of the night to them, and Raoul's
heart throbbed wildly.  He was not so much afraid of being captured as
he was that they should be balked in their purpose, and that the supply
ship, coming up without warning, would fall into Charnace's hands.
They were evidently passing through the line of their enemy's
sentinels, and in peril of being betrayed by the slightest sound.  Very
cautiously did Joe make his way, now turning this way and now that,
while Raoul and Jean kept so close that they could almost touch him.
It was trying work, that told upon muscles and nerve, yet Raoul held
his own with the men all right, and certainly moved as silently as
Jean, even if he could not quite equal Joe.

At last they seemed to be getting well away from the fort, and into
safer ground, when suddenly a dark form rose in front of them.




CHAPTER IX

THE STOPPING OF THE SUPPLY SHIP

Joe crouched low, preparing for a spring.  Jean and Raoul did likewise,
and not one of them breathed.

"Who goes there?" demanded a rough, stern voice, but the next instant
it was silenced, for Joe, throwing himself upon the speaker with a leap
like that of a panther, brought him to the ground with his hands at his
throat.

But the man lay so motionless in his grip that there was no need to
take his life.  In falling backward, his head had struck a stone, and
he was senseless.  As soon as Joe realized this he let go of him, and
whispering to his companions:

"Quick--quick--run!" he darted off with them at his heels.

Not trying to pick their steps, they plunged through the darkness as
fast as they could, slipping, stumbling, tripping, yet keeping on
desperately, for they knew not if the whole camp might not presently be
upon their heels.

There was a stir among Charnace's sentinels and a calling to one
another, but none of them knew in which direction the fugitives had
gone, and after some aimless scurrying about they gave up all idea of
pursuit, and settled down to quiet again.

Meanwhile, the three had continued their wild flight until their breath
was spent, and then they threw themselves down to recover it.

"All right now," said Joe, nodding complacently.  "We see no more of
them," and he was quite correct.  They were now beyond Charnace's
lines, and could pursue their way in a more leisurely fashion.  The
break of day found them far down the shore and drawing near an
encampment of friendly Indians.  From these Joe had no difficulty in
obtaining a good canoe, and a supply of provisions, and by noon they
were out on the Bay of Fundy, watching for the _Clement_.

The weather was fine, and Raoul keenly enjoyed dancing over the
white-capped waves in their buoyant craft, which Joe and Jean managed
with such matchless skill.  They did not expect him to paddle, and so
he stretched himself out in the bottom of the canoe and took his ease,
the excitement and exertion of the past night having pretty thoroughly
tired him.

For some hours no sign of the ship appeared, and then, as the afternoon
drew towards its close, Joe's keen eyes descried a sail showing above
the horizon to the southward.

"Good!" he grunted, and with a sweep of his paddle he turned the canoe
in that direction.

"You paddle now," he said to Raoul, and the latter obeyed.  Propelled
by the three blades, into which the paddlers put their strength, the
light craft bounded over the water towards the ship.

"Oh!  I hope it is the _Clement_" said Raoul.  "We shall be just in
good time."

Mile after mile they swept along, until Raoul's arms began to ache, and
his breath to become scant, but Joe and Jean were pegging away as
vigorously as at first, and he hated to give up.  They were nearing the
ship rapidly, and ere long would be close enough to hail her, when, to
their surprise, she came about, and went off on another tack, leaving
them rapidly astern.

"Hullo!" exclaimed Raoul in a tone of consternation.  "What did she do
that for?  We shall soon be farther away from her than we were at
first."

Joe stopped paddling for a moment, and looked very cross.  Then, rising
to his full height, he swung the paddle above his head, hoping to
attract the attention of some one on board the vessel.  But it had no
effect.  The ship continued in her course, and, there being plenty of
wind, her speed was so great as to make it useless for the canoe to
follow her.

[Illustration: "RISING TO HIS FULL HEIGHT, JOE SWUNG THE PADDLE ABOVE
HIS HEAD."]

The occupants of the canoe looked blankly at each other.  Even the
usually impassive Joe did not disguise his chagrin, while Jean sought
relief for his feelings in some strong language that would have brought
upon him a reproof from Madame La Tour had she been present.  The sun
had already set.  Night was drawing near, and unless they reached the
ship before darkness fell they might miss her altogether, and she would
go on to become a prize for the waiting Charnace.  Raoul clearly
realized their critical position, and while Joe and Jean discussed what
should be done, he lifted up his heart in earnest prayer that God would
guide them to the ship even through the darkness.

Rested by their brief halt, the paddlers resumed work, steering the
canoe straight up the Bay, so as if possible to intercept the vessel in
her next tack.  Meanwhile the daylight faded out of the sky, the wind
dropped, and the water became perfectly calm.  In almost complete
silence the canoe glided steadily forward, Raoul, who had paddled until
he was tired, once more taking it easy in the bottom.

Suddenly there came through the gloom the sound of a man's voice giving
a command, and it made the hearts of those in the canoe leap for joy.
Joe and Jean had been paddling listlessly, but now they went to work
with fresh energy.  Their light craft shot over the smooth water in the
direction of the voice, and, a few minutes later, the dark bulk of the
ship they sought loomed up before them.

Jean promptly hailed her, and was bidden to come alongside.  A rope was
thrown, whereby all three clambered up, and the next instant stood on
the deck of the _Clement_.  Very hearty was their welcome here.  The
Captain of the good ship felt deeply grateful for the timely warning,
and offered his wearied and hungry visitors the best at his disposal,
while the colonists and others crowded about, eager to be told about La
Tour and his forts, and how things were going in the new world to which
they had come.  Raoul was pleased to find himself a person of some
importance, and his tongue wagged merrily as he answered the many
questions poured upon him, or in his turn made inquiries on his own
account.  Ere he lay down that night in the Captain's cabin, he did not
forget to thank God for having answered his prayer by guiding the canoe
into the way of the _Clement_.

After consulting with Joe and Jean, the Captain of the _Clement_
decided that the best plan would be for him to keep the ship off for
the present, as it was not likely Charnace would break his blockade of
Fort La Tour to go after her, and, even if he did, she could easily
over-match any one of his vessels, and sail away from any of them.

In the meantime, Joe and Jean would make their way back to the fort,
leaving Raoul on board.  This arrangement was carried out successfully.
The messengers again passed through Charnace's lines and brought their
good news to La Tour, who at once decided that the best thing to be
done was for him to get on board the _Clement_ and sail on her for
Boston, to obtain reinforcements against the enemy.  So, on a dark,
still night a canoe, containing both Monsieur and Madame, glided unseen
past the blockading vessels, La Tour smiling grimly, and Constance
giving a shudder as they heard Charnace's own voice saying:

"The spy who just came from the fort says that his comrades will send
down La Tour in shackles at midnight," little knowing that the rascally
conspirators had been discovered, and were themselves now lying in
irons in the dungeon of the fort.




CHAPTER X

ADVENTURE IN BOSTON

The _Clement_ was found and boarded without much difficulty, and at
daybreak she was on her way to Boston, bearing the La Tours and Raoul.

They were well received at the quaint capital of the New England
Province, and, after a good deal of negotiation, for the shrewd
colonists knew how to drive good bargains, La Tour succeeded in
arranging for four ships, carrying nearly two score guns, and one
hundred and fifty men.  With this force he felt quite equal to getting
the better of his rival, and set sail from Boston in high spirits.  For
six weeks Fort La Tour had been silent as a tomb, the besiegers, who
were quite unaware of the La Tours having slipped away, trusting to
starvation to do their work for them, while the garrison, looking
forward to their commander's return in force, made no attempt at
sorties, but got along, as best they could, on the scanty rations left
them.  They kept a sharp and steady look-out, however, and one day
their eyes were gladdened by the sight of many sails in the offing.

"La Tour!  La Tour!" they cried joyously, and at once proceeded to
welcome him with a salute in which every cannon on the ramparts had a
part.  La Tour did his best to capture some of Charnace's vessels, but
both wind and tide favoured their escape, although he chased them as
far as the Penobscot.  There was great rejoicing at the fort, and
feasting followed famine for the remainder of the week.

"Will Monsieur Charnace come back again, do you think?" Raoul asked of
his aunt as they sat in her room, having grown weary of the revelling.

"I am afraid so," she answered with a sigh.  "He is a proud, determined
man, and this defeat will only cause him to try again with a stronger
force.  I fear there is trouble in store for us."

"But why can't he leave us alone?" Raoul cried petulantly.  "We have
never made any attack upon him."

"Because this world, big as it may seem, Raoul, is all too small for
such men as your uncle and Charnace," Madame replied.  "They cannot
brook a rival, and they must needs fight until one or the other is
overthrown," and she sighed again deeply, for her gentle heart shrank
from conflict, and she infinitely preferred teaching religion to the
Indians, to all her husband's grand plans for wealth and power.

Foiled in his first attempt, but not shaken in his purpose, Charnace
went off across the ocean to France to see if something could not be
done there to humble his rival, and La Tour was left to pursue his way
in peace.

Raoul now took an active part in what went on, and led quite a busy
life.  He accompanied his uncle in his trips up the River St. John,
where they met with Indians from the interior, who brought rich furs to
barter for goods.  Twice he crossed over to Fort St. Louis, and each
time congratulated himself on the move to Fort La Tour; and what
pleased him most of all, he was allowed to go on one of the ships to
Boston, for he had very pleasant recollections of his first visit
there.  His visit was made memorable by an experience which was
certainly of too exciting a nature to be soon forgotten.  Having a
leisure afternoon, he went off alone for a stroll along the river-bank,
where he felt sure he would find something to interest him.  And in
this he was not disappointed.

He had gone about half-a-mile from the town when, seeing a group of
boys evidently much interested in something, he hurried towards them.
To his surprise he saw that they were making sport of a strange-looking
lad of about his own age, who seemed to be only half-witted.  They
wanted him to go into the water, but he held back in a terror-stricken
way that ought to have caused them to desist, but only served to spur
them on.  Just as Raoul reached them, they had dragged the poor fellow
to the edge of a little point below which the water was fairly deep,
and, crying out: "Give him a dip; he needs a good wash!" were about to
shove him over the edge, when Raoul, stirred to such indignation that
he quite forgot that he stood alone against half-a-dozen, called out:

"Shame!  Shame!  Let the poor fellow be!  Why do you torment him so?"
and springing into their midst, he tore them away from their victim,
and set him free.

So sudden was his onset--for the boys, being intent upon their _fun_,
had not noticed his approach--that they were completely taken aback,
and the idiot boy, finding himself free, had sufficient sense to make a
break, whereby he got out of their reach ere they recovered from their
surprise.  Then they turned upon Raoul, and with coarse oaths demanded
who he was, and what business he had interfering with them.  Raoul
realized that he was in a pretty tight place, and had no idea just how
he was to get out of it, but he put on a bold front and replied:

"It's no matter who I am.  You had no right to be tormenting that poor
chap."

"Oh, ho! he's a Frenchie.  Let us put him in instead," was the cry
raised, and at once they threw themselves upon Raoul.

There were none of them larger than he, but they were six to one, and,
although he fought splendidly, they were not long in bringing him to
the ground.  Seizing him roughly by the arms and legs they bore him to
the edge of the bank, and in another instant they would have pitched
him over, when a commanding voice shouted:

"Stop!  Let that boy alone!" and again the young rowdies were checked
in their rough sport.  This time the interposition came from no less
important a personage than Governor Winthrop himself, who, chancing to
take his afternoon constitutional in that direction, had observed the
disturbance, and hurried up to ascertain its meaning.  He carried a
stout cane, and followed up his command by laying it upon the backs of
the boys nearest him with such good effect that they dashed off
howling, and in a moment Raoul was left free to pick himself up and
arrange his disordered dress.

"Pray, sir, what were they doing to you?" inquired Governor Winthrop
with grave concern.

"They were trying to throw me into the river," responded Raoul, "and
but for you, sir, they would have done it."  And then he went on to
explain what had taken place, while the Governor listened with an
approving smile; and when he had finished, he placed his hand upon
Raoul's shoulder, saying:

"You have borne yourself nobly, my son, and I feel ashamed that the
children of our own townspeople should behave in so unseemly a fashion.
And now tell me who are you and whence you come, for you are assuredly
a stranger here."

When he learned that Raoul was the nephew of Charles La Tour,
Lieutenant-General of Acadia, his interest manifestly deepened.

"Indeed, indeed," he said.  "I know your worthy uncle well, and hold
him in high esteem.  You must come and sup with me, and I shall see
that you return to your ship in due time."

Raoul was only too glad to accept such an attractive invitation, and so
the close of this eventful day found him the guest of the Governor, and
keenly relishing the excellent fare that his table afforded.




CHAPTER XI

TRAITORS IN THE CAMP

Madame La Tour greatly enjoyed Raoul's relation of his Boston
experience.

"You see, virtue is not always merely its own reward," she said,
smiling proudly upon her nephew.  "It is sometimes well rewarded in
other ways.  Be ever ready to champion the weak and the innocent,
Raoul.  They are God's children, and you are doing His work when you
take their part against the wicked and cruel people, of which, alas!
there seems to be too many in this world."

The summer passed into autumn, and the autumn into winter, without
bringing anything of special moment into the lives of those at Fort La
Tour, save somewhat disquieting rumours of the intentions of Charnace.

It was said that he had gone to France to obtain the revocation of La
Tour's commission as Lieutenant-General of Acadia, and authority to
take him prisoner, and send him back to be imprisoned in the Bastile.

Now Charnace was known to have great influence at Court, and in those
days, when the French kings so lightly valued their possessions in
America, and did pretty much what those who had most influence over
them advised, there was no telling how far Charnace might succeed in
his hostile plans.

Accordingly La Tour set himself to prepare for the danger then
threatening him, while his good wife prayed that, in some way, further
conflict might be averted.

With the coming of spring, the news was confirmed by the appearance of
Charnace in the ship _St. Francis_ and his sending a messenger to
demand La Tour's surrender.

To this La Tour defiantly replied that he would not give up either
himself or his fort, so long as he had a pound of powder left; and
Charnace, not being ready for an attack just then, withdrew to the
Penobscot, where he had a fort of his own, to prepare for another siege.

Great was the concern now at Fort La Tour, whose commander bestirred
himself in every way to meet the crisis.  Unfortunately, circumstances
were not in his favour.  His trading had not prospered of late, and he
had been compelled to mortgage his fort and all his real and personal
property to a merchant in Boston as security for a large loan, in order
to meet the demands upon him, and now he required a larger supply of
ammunition, and, if possible, some more men.  In this emergency he
decided to make a flying trip to Boston in quest of both, trusting to
get back ere Charnace reappeared.

Ere he left he called his wife, Raoul, Joe Takouchen, and Jean
Pitchebat to him, and explained his purpose.

"I know it's a risk," he said, "but there seems no help for it.
Without powder we cannot hold the fort, but with a good supply of it we
can beat off this villain Charnace.  Constance, I leave you in command.
You, Raoul, will be her lieutenant, and you, Joe and Jean, her
right-hand men.  I know that I can trust you all to the uttermost."
And, having thus spoken, he was about to dismiss them, when Madame,
whose beautiful countenance had of late worn an anxious expression, for
she fully realized the danger, said softly--

"Charles, let us kneel down and ask for God's protection from the
enemy, for without His blessing your best plans will be of no avail."

So they all knelt, while Madame prayed with profound fervour for divine
help, and, when they rose, her face had regained its wonted serenity.

Raoul felt quite flattered at being joined with his aunt in the charge
of the fort.  It seemed, in some sort, a recognition of his being more
than a boy, and he vowed in his heart that he would show himself worthy
of the confidence reposed in him.

Followed by his wife's prayers, and the anxious thoughts of the
garrison, La Tour set sail for Boston.

He had not been gone long before a startling discovery was made by
Raoul.  Although the majority of those connected with the fort were
Huguenots, the remainder were Catholics, and for their benefit La Tour
tolerated the presence of two Jesuit priests named Miraband and Oriani.

Towards these men Raoul held feelings of cordial dislike.  They had
done their best to change his faith, using in vain the sly and subtle
methods for which their Order has ever been notorious, but, instead of
winning him over they had only aroused his antagonism.

Now it chanced that Raoul had been out shooting in the afternoon, and
was returning to the fort, when, being weary, he sat down in a snug
nook near the Falls to rest, and, before he knew it, was asleep.

Presently he was awakened by the sound of voices engaged in earnest
talk, and, peeping through the thick foliage which hid him completely,
he saw Miraband and Oriani.

Suspecting that this secret meeting meant some mischief, he felt no
scruples about playing the part of listener.

The first few words confirmed his suspicions, and as they went on, his
heart grew hot with indignation and wrath, for it became clear to him
that these men, who had been so well treated at Fort La Tour, were in
reality Charnace's spies, and had been keeping him informed of all that
took place.

"The villains!" muttered Raoul under his breath.  "They deserve to be
hung, even if they are priests.  I must let Aunt Constance know at
once."

He did not stir until the two wicked plotters had finished their
conference and gone off, and then he made all haste to the fort.

Madame La Tour was not entirely taken by surprise at his information.
She herself had mistrusted these Jesuits, and had even warned her
husband against them, but he had laughed the matter off, saying she was
mistaken.

Now, she sent for her trusty Joe and Jean, to whom Raoul re-told his
story.

They were mightily enraged at this treachery, and cried out for the
hanging of the spies in the gate of the castle; and had La Tour himself
been present, this would undoubtedly have been done, despite their
sacred calling, which they had so dishonoured.

But Madame was too tender of heart to take such extreme measures.  Good
reason as she had to hate the whole Jesuit body, apart from the
villainy of these two members of it, she shrank from following the
advice of her counsellors, and to their frankly-expressed disgust did
no more than to summon Miraband and Oriani before her, upbraid them
with their treachery, adding some bitter words as to their being wolves
in sheep's clothing, and then ordered them to be set adrift in a light
canoe.

"Betake yourselves to your employer," she said with withering scorn,
presenting a splendid picture of righteous indignation, as she towered
above the cowering priests.  "He is fit company for you.  You have no
right amongst honest men."

Raoul saw them into the canoe.  He heartily agreed with Joe and Jean
that the punishment was altogether inadequate, but he was too loyal to
his aunt not to carry out her bidding; and as the Jesuits, who had
wisely kept silence through it all, paddled off, he called after them:

"You've got off with your lives this time.  But if my uncle ever
catches you, it will be different."




CHAPTER XII

A GLORIOUS VICTORY

It was not a wise, even if it were a womanly, step on Madame La Tour's
part to let the Jesuits go, for they, of course, made their way
directly to Charnace, and acquainted him with the true state of affairs
at the fort--La Tour absent in quest of reinforcements, only fifty men
in the garrison, and the supply of powder and shot unduly low.

"Ah, ha!" chuckled Charnace, rubbing his hands.  "You bring good news.
My time has come.  I would prefer not having to fight with a woman, but
since La Tour has seen fit to desert his post, he must take the
consequences."

Meantime, Madame La Tour, with her faithful supporters, strained every
effort to prepare for the assault that could not be long delayed.
Everything that could be secured in the way of food was packed into her
storehouses; the scanty stock of ammunition was carefully examined and
apportioned, so as to be used to the best advantage, and the little
garrison was divided up into four watches, of which Madame took command
of one, while Raoul, Joe and Jean captained the others, and then, as
Madame said:

"We have done all that we can.  We now leave ourselves in the hands of
God."

Many days of suspense followed, and then the report came from a watcher
on the headland, that three large ships were approaching.

Raoul received it first, and hastened to his aunt.

"It is Charnace," she said.  "The crisis has come.  God grant us
strength and wisdom according; to our need."

Confident of an easy victory, Charnace sailed right up within
cannon-range, and, having anchored, sent one of his captains ashore
under a flag of truce to demand the surrender of the fort, coupling the
demand with the threat that, if not immediately complied with, he would
level the fort to the ground.

Raoul intently watched his aunt's face as she listened to the message.
He devoutly hoped she would not surrender, but he knew better than to
volunteer his opinion.

Madame listened gravely to what the captain had to say, and then, after
a brief pause, replied:

"Be good enough to say to Monsieur Charnace from me that until he has
laid the walls of Fort La Tour level with the ground, it shall not be
surrendered."

"I cannot but admire your courage, Madame, although I beg to doubt the
wisdom of your decision," responded the captain, bowing low, while
Raoul gave a cheer in which the others joined.

The instant the captain returned to the ship the flag of truce was
lowered, and with the crash and roar of the first broadside the battle
began.

Now among Madame La Tour's many accomplishments, was skill in the
firing of big guns.  This she had acquired when a mere girl at La
Rochelle, and she had kept her hand and eye in by occasional practice
after coming to Acadia.

It was therefore but natural that she should direct the firing from the
fort, and so, posting herself in one of the bastions, with Raoul as her
_aide-de-camp_ to fly to and fro with orders, she pointed the first
cannon with her own hands.

[Illustration: "SHE POINTED THE FIRST CANNON WITH HER OWN HANDS."]

Charnace's own ship was her target, and the well-aimed shot went
straight to its mark, killing three men upon the crowded deck.  A
second shot was equally effective, and then the whole fort broke forth
into flame, the iron missiles hurtling across the eddying waters, and
smashing into the bulwarks of the ships, or carrying away their masts
and rigging.

Right gallantly did Charnace return broadside for broadside, but his
cannon balls had little more effect upon the massive stone walls of
Fort La Tour than they would have had upon the rocky cliffs near by,
and Raoul laughed triumphantly as the round shot rolled harmlessly back
into the moat.

"Charnace can keep that up as long as he likes," he cried.  "It won't
do us any harm, and it's wasting his powder."

The boy was in the highest spirits.  Not a whit dismayed by the roar of
the cannon or the crashing of the balls against the ramparts, he stood
beside his aunt in the bastion, where she directed the firing as calmly
as though it were only some household task, or sped away to the other
parts of the fort to see how Joe and Jean were getting on and to
encourage them with cheering messages.

The heroic spirit which animated Madame La Tour had communicated itself
to the whole garrison, and there was not a man who did not feel
prepared to fight to the last gasp rather than surrender to the hated
Charnace.

As the cannonading went on, the damage done to the fort was trifling,
while the ships were suffering severely.  The number of killed and
wounded grew rapidly, and the vessels themselves were becoming so
riddled with shot as to be in danger of sinking.

At last Charnace's situation became intolerable, and, consumed with
futile rage, he gave the order to retreat.

But this was not so easily carried out.  The wind had shifted during
the fight, and now blew strongly from the east, so that the ships could
not get out of range without warping, and while this slow method of
movement was being resorted to, the fort guns continued their
bombardment, inflicting further damage.

At last, with great difficulty, and the loss of many men, the three
vessels were got around Bruyeres Point, and there run aground to
prevent them from sinking.

Raoul, accompanied by Joe, set off from the fort to follow the ships as
soon as they withdrew, and shouted gleefully after them:

"Ho, ho! Monsieur Charnace.  Your spies did not do you much good, did
they?  Surely you've learned a lesson this time, and will mind your own
business in future."

When he saw the ships run aground, he hurried back to the fort, and
actually had the hardihood to suggest to his aunt that a party, which
he offered to lead, should be sent out at midnight to try and set the
ships on fire ere they were floated again.

But Madame wisely refused to sanction any such rash enterprise.

"Charnace will not trouble us any more for the present," she said.
"Let him alone; as soon as his ships are repaired he will depart."

And so it proved.  The holes having been hastily caulked, Charnace,
profoundly chagrined, yet grimly determined to try again, returned to
his stronghold at the Penobscot, and a few days after he disappeared,
Charles La Tour returned from Boston with an abundant supply of
munitions of war, and a strong party of men.

His joy at the successful defence of the fort, and his pride in his
heroic wife, was somewhat clouded by his disappointment at being too
late to complete Charnace's rout by capturing or burning his ships, but
Madame did not hesitate to reprove him for this.

"God has been very good to us all," she said, "and we cannot be
sufficiently grateful.  Let us unite in thanking Him for His great
mercy."

And so a thanksgiving service was held in which all joined heartily,
and then followed a feast, the like of which Fort La Tour had never
seen before.

A month later, La Tour, having set everything in order, and put Simon
Imbert in charge in his place, took ship for France, his wife and Raoul
going with him.  His purpose was to plead his own cause before the
French king, and to have Charnace enjoined from further hostility.  In
this he was not altogether successful, and there were dark days in
store for both him and Constance.

But in these Raoul did not share, because he remained in France, where
a career unexpectedly opened for him.  What befell him in the future,
his successes and failures, his joys and sorrows, his trials and his
triumphs, cannot be related here; but this must be told, that through
them he never was false to his Huguenot faith, and that he won for
himself a place of honour in the history of his country.


      *      *      *      *      *


BEFRIENDED BY BRUIN

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

One of the noble families of Lorraine has a curious crest.  It
represents a big black bear in an iron cage, and recalls the legend as
to the founding of the fortunes of the house, which runs somewhat in
this way.

Several centuries ago there lived in the city of Nancy a little
Savoyard named Michel, whose lot was certainly about as hard as a
ten-year-old boy could endure without giving up life altogether.  He
was a homeless orphan, dependent entirely upon the alms of the
charitable, for which he begged through the stony streets.  A more
pitiable appearance than he presented could scarcely be imagined.
Privation and hunger had blanched his cheeks and shrunken his form.
With his haggard face, half hidden by long disordered locks of a
slightly reddish tinge, his bones showing through the thin ragged
garments from which the sun and rain had taken all colour, he wearily
dragged himself barefoot from door to door, meeting with many a harsh
repulse, and but few kindly responses to his appeals.

His eyes alone showed any sign of spirit.  They were of a deep blue
tint, and in spite of his sufferings, held a strange sparkle that
sometimes startled those who caught it.

At night, in company with some other street arabs of his own age, he
found shelter in a wretched cellar kept by a villainous old hag, who
made her lodgers pay nearly all they had, with such difficulty, begged
during the day, for the privilege of sleeping upon mouldy straw
pallets.  The miserable place was draughty, damp and pestilential, but
it was the only lodging the poor boys could afford, and offered at
least some protection from the merciless cold of winter.

In that cellar there would only too often be heard through the hours of
darkness heart-breaking sobs that refused to be suppressed, or the
piteous moan, "I am so hungry, oh, I am so hungry!"

And sometimes in the morning, when the old hag would seek to clear her
cellar of its occupants, screaming at them and striking them with her
broom, there would be one who paid no heed to either screams or blows,
but remained motionless on his pallet, for he had passed into the sleep
that knows no waking.

Each day Michel grew paler, thinner, feebler, a cruel cough racking his
slender frame as he shivered in his rags and tatters.  Every limb
ached, and sometimes it seemed to him as if he must lie down on the
snow to die.

Late one afternoon, crouched in the corner of the doorway of the Duke's
palace, and waiting for some one to pass by of whom he might beg alms,
he wept bitterly.  He was starving and freezing, but nothing came his
way; yet to return to the cellar he did not dare.  The old hag had a
flinty heart which nothing save money could soften, and he was without
a sou.

Overcome with despair at his condition, and horror at the thought of
spending the night in the street, he fell on his knees and, lifting his
tear-filled eyes to the darkening sky, put forth this pathetic prayer:

"O God in Heaven, take me to my mother!"

Just then a deep growl came from somewhere behind him and interrupted
his prayer.  He sprang up and looked about him.

The street was silent and deserted.  The snow fell softly.  A grating
near the ground attracted his attention, and without stopping to
consider, he said to himself that possibly if he passed through it he
might find a good place to sleep.

He was exceedingly thin, and the bars of the grating widely placed, so
that he had no difficulty in squeezing through.  But imagine his
consternation on finding himself face to face with an enormous black
bear, into whose cage he had thus ventured to intrude.

"Oh, oh, what's the meaning of this!" demanded the astonished bruin in
his own language.

He had just disposed of a good supper, and was feeling in particularly
good trim, when poor Michel so unexpectedly tumbled into his presence.
Angered at being disturbed, he made ready to demolish the impertinent
intruder with his mighty paw.  The little Savoyard, pale and tearful,
kept perfectly still while he continued his prayer:

"O God in Heaven, take me to my mother, who went to you to beg for
bread for her boy----"

A hot breath played upon his cheek.

"O Lord..." he moaned.

He thought he was as good as dead, and yet it seemed to him that
something licked his face gently.

When, a few moments later, he realized that he was not being
devoured--that he was still unharmed--he opened his eyes wide and they
encountered those of the bear full of kindness and good humour.

This gave him courage.  He got up.  He patted the black muzzle of the
big creature, which received the caress with a murmur of pleasure.

The stress of the day had so exhausted Michel that the moment his
terror left him, he, with surprising unconcern, threw himself down to
sleep.

The bear, as if flattered by the confidence thus shown in him, regarded
him in a friendly fashion, then lay down beside him, almost completely
enveloping him with his warm fur, and so fell asleep in his turn.

Now this bear was no other than the famous "Mascot," who was maintained
at the palace as a representative of the Canton of Berne, in
recognition of the valuable services rendered by the Swiss to the
people of Lorraine in their struggle with the Duke of Burgogne.

Mascot was an important figure at the Court of Duke Leopold.
Everything possible was done for his comfort.  He had his own
attendant, whose sole duty was to care for his person and to minister
to his every want.  In his spacious cage he could move about freely and
swing at ease his heavy head.

Every afternoon he was visited by the courtiers, and sometimes even by
the Duke; but he troubled himself very little concerning the one or the
other.  Indifferent to everything, even the ducal smile, he gazed
stolidly upon the folk, who did not interest him in the least.  His
superb fur was greatly admired, but not his unsociable disposition.
And so he passed the days, promenading up and down his cage, swinging
his head to and fro for hours at a time, eating, drinking, and sleeping
in seemingly perfect content, and regarded with profound respect by his
numerous visitors.

On the morning after Michel made his way into the cage he awoke at
daybreak.  Bewildered at his strange situation, yet delighted because
of the comfortable night he had passed snuggled up in the bear's thick
warm fur, he made haste to get out in the same manner that he had
entered, not forgetting, however, to give his kind host a hearty hug
expressive of his gratitude.  He had no idea of losing so excellent a
sleeping-place by remaining in it too long and being discovered by the
bear's attendant.  That day fortune favoured him in his begging, and he
was able to obtain the food he so sadly needed.  As it was still very
cold he impatiently awaited the return of night in order to regain his
snug refuge.

On re-entering the cage the bear gave him a kinder welcome than the
first time, and henceforward the two were great friends.  Every morning
the little Savoyard slipped away unseen, and every night returned to
his shaggy benefactor.  Thanks to the comfort he then enjoyed, his
appearance began to improve.  His shrunken limbs rounded out again and
the colour came back to his cheeks.  But this could not go on
indefinitely.  One fine day the bear's attendant was filled with
astonishment at finding a small boy sleeping beside Mascot, who was
licking him softly.  He thought he must have lost his senses, when he
beheld the little fellow wake up and caress the fierce brute in his
turn without showing the slightest sign of fear.

His outcries attracted the attention of a groom, and he told the
strange news to a footman, who passed it on to the pages, and they
spread it about the palace so thoroughly that presently everybody,
including Duke Leopold himself, was hurrying towards the cage.

There they found poor Michel, weeping piteously and evidently in terror
of being harshly dealt with.  Having soothed him with a few kind words,
the Duke ordered him to come out of the cage and explain himself.  The
boy promptly obeyed, and, as best he could, told his story.

Touched by the recital of his sufferings, and animated by a worthy
determination not to be outdone in generosity by a bear, the Duke
offered Michel a place in his household.

The little Savoyard did not hesitate to accept, and presently found
himself in what seemed like paradise, after the miseries he had been
enduring.

Clothed in fine raiment and faring sumptuously every day, he soon
developed into a handsome lad.  His spirit grew with his body.  He took
an ardent interest in the sports and martial exercises of his
companions, and in due time he became the most expert of them all in
the use of bow and sword and lance.

Withal, remaining modest in manner, respectful to his superiors, and
devoted to the Duke, he rapidly rose in the latter's service through
the grades of squire, knight and count, until he came to be the second
person in the realm, and the founder of a family enjoying large
possessions and great influence.

Nor was he ungrateful to the animal which had befriended him in his
extremity.  So long as Mascot lived he visited him constantly.  Their
friendship never cooled, and when the one-time beggar was entitled to
choose a crest for himself, he gave orders that it should be a big
black bear in an iron cage.




LORIMER AND CHALMERS, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.










        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK IN PATHS OF PERIL: A BOY'S ADVENTURES IN NOVA SCOTIA ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

