generously made available by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/lessonsonmanner00wigggoog


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by equal signs was in bold face in the
      original (=bold=).





LESSONS ON MANNERS

For School and Home Use

by

EDITH E. WIGGIN


   "A beautiful behavior is the finest of the fine arts."--EMERSON.







Boston
Lee and Shepard Publishers
10 Milk Street

Copyright,
1884,
By Lee and Shepard.

All rights reserved.




CONTENTS.


          INTRODUCTION                                      5

          LESSON I.
          MANNERS IN GENERAL                                9

          LESSON II.
          MANNERS AT SCHOOL                                13

          LESSON III.
          MANNERS ON THE STREET                            19

          LESSON IV.
          MANNERS AT HOME                                  25

          LESSON V.
          MANNERS TOWARD THE AGED                          31

          LESSON VI.
          MANNERS AT THE TABLE                             39

          LESSON VII.
          MANNERS IN SOCIETY                               47

          LESSON VIII.
          MANNERS AT CHURCH                                57

          LESSON IX.
          MANNERS AT PLACES OF AMUSEMENT                   61

          LESSON X.
          MANNERS IN STORES AND SIMILAR PUBLIC PLACES      67

          LESSON XI.
          MANNERS IN TRAVELLING                            73

          LESSON XII.
          MANNERS IN BORROWING                             81




LESSONS ON MANNERS.




INTRODUCTION.


IT is true that good manners, like good morals, are best taught by the
teacher's example. It is also true that definite lessons, in which the
subject can be considered in its appropriate divisions, are of no little
value if we would have our children attain to "that finest of the fine
arts, a beautiful behavior."

Such lessons should be as familiar and conversational as possible. They
ought to be talks rather than lectures; and the children should be
encouraged to do a large part of the talking. Children that come from
homes where good manners are taught and practised, will be glad to
repeat the precepts of politeness learned in the home circle; and those
less favored will not want to be behind in this hitherto unstudied
branch. We must remember that many children hear no mention of
politeness outside the school-room, and are uncouth and rude, not so
much because they choose to be, as because they do not know how to be
otherwise.

I have used in my own schools of different grades a series of simple
lessons, varying both matter and method according to the age and
capacity of scholars. The good results have been marked, not only in
the school-room, but at home and in public places; and years afterwards
scholars have expressed their grateful appreciation of this instruction
and its value to them in every-day life. I have thought that the
publication of these outline lessons might be a help to other teachers
also, in the way of offering suggestions and saving time in preparing
lessons for their own classes.

For some classes the lessons as arranged in this little book may be too
long, for others too short. They are outlines merely, to be filled in
and supplemented by each teacher, adding to, taking from, and varying
them at her discretion.

It may seem unnecessary to touch upon such simple things as some that
are spoken of. The teacher, perhaps, cannot remember when these axioms
were not familiar to her; but let her put questions to the children
concerning them, and she will find in many schools that to half the
pupils she is talking in an unknown tongue. Matters are mentioned which
do not concern them now so much as they will a few years later; as, for
instance, conduct at places of amusement and in company; but in these
things, as in their school studies, boys and girls are learning now for
the future.

My plan would be to have a familiar talk with the children one day,
drawing from them, as far as it can be done, the rules of behavior which
the teacher wishes to impress upon them. When she can illustrate a point
by a story, the impression will be deepened. It is well also to speak
of acts which have come under the teacher's eye in the school-room, on
the play-ground, or on the way to school, and let the children decide
whether these were polite or impolite, and why. This will make the whole
matter more real to them, and, if they are encouraged to furnish
illustrations, they will open their eyes and find them in their own
little worlds. We want our children in school, from the youngest to the
oldest, to notice a breach of politeness as quickly as an error in
recitation. A little girl of five from a wretched family, who had proved
an apt scholar in the branch under consideration, one day performed some
trifling service for an awkward little new scholar. I shall never forget
her look and tone of amazement as she turned to her teacher with, "Why!
he didn't say 'Thank you.'"

At the time of the next exercise, I would have the children reproduce
from an outline placed upon the blackboard the precepts deduced from the
previous talk, not insisting upon any form of words, but encouraging
them to use their own. This will be also a good oral exercise in
language. If the scholars are old enough, this oral review can be put
upon paper, either at this time or for a composition exercise another
day. Nothing except practising the precepts will so fix these in their
minds.

If the teacher thinks best, a copy of this manual may be placed in the
hands of each scholar, and the lesson prepared like other lessons, from
the printed page. This course would diminish the amount of blackboard
writing.

Let the teacher, when it seems wise, commend acts of politeness in her
scholars. If they know she sees and appreciates their efforts, they will
redouble them.

It should be her constant aim to lead her scholars so to think on these
things that are lovely and of good report in the province of manners, as
well as in the higher one of morals, to which it is so closely allied,
that thinking may take the shape of doing, and doing may crystallize
into habit.




LESSON I.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS IN GENERAL.

          _Quotation about manners._
          _Golden Rule._
          _Need of constant practice._
          _Learning by observation._
          _Quotation._




LESSON I.

MANNERS IN GENERAL.


IT has been said, "Manners are something with every one, and everything
with some."

Strangers will judge us entirely by our manners, since they cannot know,
as our friends do, what is beneath this outward behavior.

The Golden Rule is the foundation of true politeness, which must spring
from kindness of heart. If we earnestly try to do to others what we
would have them do to us, though we may through ignorance disregard some
points of society etiquette, yet we can hardly be impolite.

Good manners cannot be put on at pleasure, like an outside coat, but
must belong to us. We have all seen veneering on furniture. At first the
cheap pine article may look as well as if it were made of the costly
wood with which it is covered; but in the wear and tear of every-day use
the veneering will come off in places, showing the common wood beneath.
So it will be with our manners. If they are not solid and real
throughout, the thin covering of politeness will break off here and
there, especially when exposed to hard usage, and the real stuff we are
made of will be revealed.

If we carefully observe persons of fine manners, we shall learn much
that can be learned in no other way. We must not think we are too well
informed to be taught on this or any subject, but keep our eyes and ears
open, and be always ready to learn a "more excellent way." The greatest
advantage to young people of being in good society is the opportunity to
learn by observation.

We began this lesson with a quotation, and we will close by another
worth remembering: "Politeness is like an air-cushion; there may be
nothing solid in it, but it eases the jolts of this world wonderfully."




LESSON II.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS AT SCHOOL.

          _Entering and leaving room._
          _Laughing at mistakes or accidents._
          _Conduct if accidents occur._
          _Treatment of new scholars._
          _Conduct when visitors are present._
          _Raising hand._
          _Rights of property._
          _Distributing and collecting materials._
          _Conduct at looking-glass and drinking place._
          _In relating occurrences, when to speak of one's self._




LESSON II.

MANNERS AT SCHOOL.


WE must not forget to say "Good morning" to the teacher when we first
see her before school; or, if we stop after school to speak to her,
"Good afternoon" when we leave. If a boy comes back into the room after
dismissal, he must remember to take off his hat.

It is rude to laugh at mistakes or awkwardness: nothing is more ill-bred
as well as unkind. If an accident occurs, we should not laugh, unless it
is so amusing that all can join without hurting the feelings of the one
concerned.

If an accident happens to the dress or property of teacher or classmate,
we should offer our assistance quietly, if we can be of use, or else not
appear to see it, and by no means call attention to it.

We ought to try to make a new scholar feel at home,--help him to become
acquainted with the others, tell him the rules and customs of the
school, and assist him at first in his lessons if he needs it. We ought
not to stare at him when he enters or rises to recite, or smile if he
makes a mistake. It is kind to draw him into games at recess until he
forgets he is a stranger. We should be especially careful to do all this
if the new scholar is poorly or peculiarly dressed, or is crippled, or
unfortunate in any way.

When visitors are present, we must be sure to behave as well as at other
times. If reading or singing is going on, we should pass them a book,
handing it properly, and should treat them as politely as if they were
at our houses. When the teacher is engaged with company, we should not
disturb her with unnecessary questions, but busy ourselves until she is
at liberty.

To raise hands when it can be avoided is an impolite interruption of
school work, and is as rude as talking too much in company. To raise the
hand when a teacher or scholar is speaking is the same thing as to
interrupt them with a remark or question.

We must respect the rights of property. It is wrong to take a garment,
book, or other article before or after school without asking permission.
If anything is borrowed, it should be returned promptly with thanks.

If we are distributing materials to the class, we should hand articles
quietly and politely to each in turn, and in collecting never snatch a
book or paper.

When a number of scholars are waiting for a drink at recess, we
sometimes see them crowd and push one another, each trying to serve
himself first. It makes us think of cattle at a watering-trough. The
cattle know no better, but boys and girls do. The polite way is for each
to stand back and wait his turn. This is not only the pleasantest but
the quickest way for all to be satisfied. If boys and girls are waiting
together, every gentlemanly boy will wait for the girls to drink first,
and the girls should accept his politeness in a polite manner.

The same remark applies to conduct in the dressing-room before school.
Scholars should quietly wait for others to hang up clothing and use the
looking-glass, instead of pushing forward to secure the first chance.

These early habits of courtesy or rudeness will cling to us through
life. When we see people rushing for the best seats in cars or
steamboats, and crowding others aside at counters and railroad
restaurants, we may be reasonably sure they are those who, when boys and
girls at school, pushed others away from the looking-glass and the
drinking place.

In speaking of occurrences, we must not say, "I and James went." We
ought to speak of ourselves last in all cases, except where mischief has
been done, when we should relate our own share first.





LESSON III.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.

MANNERS ON THE STREET.

          _Why especially important._
          _Noisy and boisterous conduct._
          _Calling to any one across the street._
          _Obstructing the sidewalk._
          _Meeting and passing persons, crossing over,
                and taking leave._
          _Returning salutations._
          _Carrying an umbrella._
          _Eating in the street._
          _Throwing things on the sidewalk._
          _Marking walls and fences._
          _Looking at windows of private houses and
                pointing at objects._
          _Staring at or laughing at infirmities._
          _Answering questions._
          _Offering assistance. Incidents._




LESSON III.

MANNERS ON THE STREET.


MANNERS on the street are especially important, because many see us
there who never see us elsewhere, and they will judge us and our home
and school training by our good or bad behavior there.

Noisy and boisterous conduct on the street is always unbecoming. No
well-bred boy or girl will ever try to attract attention there. To make
one's self conspicuous in public is a sure sign of ignorance and
ill-breeding.

If we wish to speak to a person on the other side of the street, though
it be only a schoolmate, the proper way is not to call to him, but to
cross over quietly and speak. If we wish to look behind us, we should
not twist the head around, but turn the whole body.

It is extremely rude to walk three or four together, unless in an
unfrequented street, or to stop on corners to talk.

In meeting persons, we must turn to the right, and never take more than
our share of the sidewalk, and give an old person or a lady more than
half. In passing people, we should be careful not to crowd or jostle
them; it is better to step off the sidewalk to pass an older person than
to do this. If we are walking with any one, and wish to take leave or
cross the street, we should step behind and not in front of our
companion. A boy should be as careful as a gentleman to give a lady the
inside of the walk.

When we meet an acquaintance we must not say, "Halloa!" but give or
return the proper salutation. Our tone and manner should be cordial to
all and respectful to older people. For a boy or girl to bestow upon a
teacher or any older person a patronizing nod instead of a courteous
bow, or a curt "Good morning" or "Good evening" with the rising
inflection on the last syllable, is an impertinence. Even little boys
should learn to lift their hats to ladies, and also to gentlemen
entitled by age or position to this mark of respect.

We must keep step with the person with whom we are walking, if we would
not make an awkward appearance. It is proper for a younger person to
accommodate his pace to that of an older, and a gentleman must keep step
with a lady.

If we see any one fall in the street, we should never be so rude as to
laugh, but should hasten to help if help is needed.

If we speak to a stranger by mistake, we should ask pardon; and if one
speaks to us, we should gracefully accept his apology, as if the mistake
were most natural, not adding to his embarrassment by our manner of cold
surprise.

If we have occasion to ask directions of a stranger, we should say,
"Will you please tell me if this is the road to Lynn?" rather than "Say!
is this the road to Lynn?" We should never fail to give cordial thanks
for information.

In holding an umbrella over any one, we must carry it high enough, give
more of it than we take, and in meeting other umbrellas give them their
share of room.

It is ill-mannered to eat anything in the street. No rubbish, such as
paper, nutshells, or orange-peel, should be thrown on the sidewalk:
there is a proper place for such things; and we ought to have too much
regard for the neat appearance of our streets to litter them.

In this connection, let us remember that to mark on walls or fences
anywhere not only violates the right of property, but is exceedingly
ill-bred. If we see names scrawled in public places, we may be sure the
persons thus making themselves conspicuous are not ladies or gentlemen.

We should never stare at windows of private houses, and never point at
any person. Another rude thing often done is to ask a ride of a
stranger, or, worse still, to steal one by jumping on his carriage
without asking.

If we see those who are lame or deformed, we should not call attention
to them, or look at them ourselves in a way to remind them of their
infirmities.

If strangers inquire the way of us, we should answer their questions
politely. We should give directions with clearness, and cheerfully go
out of our way to point out a street or building. Sometimes we see on
the street persons from the country, who seem bewildered by the noise
and bustle, and uncertain which way to go. In such cases, especially if
they are old or infirm, we should ask in a kind way if we can be of
service; and we should be glad to help them out of their difficulty,
even if it costs us time and trouble. The following incident illustrates
this street politeness:--

"As I was walking along a street of a large city," says the writer, "I
saw an old man, who seemed to be blind, walking along without any one to
lead him. He went very slowly, feeling with his cane, and was walking
straight to the curbstone. Just then a boy who was playing near the
corner left his playmates, ran up to the old man, put his hand through
his arm and said, 'Let me lead you across the street.' He not only
helped him over one crossing, but led him over another, to the lower
side of the street. Now this boy thought he had only done a kindness to
a poor old man, but in reality he had taught a lesson of true politeness
to his playmates and to every person who saw the act."




LESSON IV.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS AT HOME.

          _Why most important of all._
          _Politeness to parents._
          _Politeness between brothers and sisters._
          _Politeness to servants. Illustrated by story._
          _Treatment of company:--_
            _Grown-up company,--callers and
                visitors,--young company._




LESSON IV.

MANNERS AT HOME.


OUR manners at home are of more importance than our manners anywhere
else, for several reasons: we spend more time at home than elsewhere;
our own family have stronger claims upon us than strangers; they love us
best and do most for us, and they are entitled not only to our love but
to every courtesy and attention from us. It is a sad thing to see a boy
or girl polite and kind away from home and to strangers only, while at
home he is rude, selfish, and heedless of every law of good behavior. If
we are always polite in our own homes, we shall be sure to be polite in
other people's homes. If we do not forget to say "Good morning" and
"Good evening" to each member of our family, we shall not forget to say
them to others.

If a child has fruit or candy, he ought not to sit down by himself to
eat it, without offering some to his companions.

In olden times it was quite common for a young man in writing to his
father to address him as "Honored Sir." While these formal modes of
speech may be out of place in our time, we should so keep the
commandment to honor our parents that its spirit shall be seen in our
every-day conduct.

Children should in all things make parents first and themselves last. A
boy ought to show his mother every attention that he would to any lady.
He should remove his hat when coming to speak to her, let her pass
through a door before him, pick up any article she may drop, give her
the inside of the walk, help her into a carriage, show her into the pew
at church, and wait upon her everywhere. He has similar duties to his
sisters; but girls cannot expect politeness from, unless they give it
to, their brothers.

We should say "Please" when asking a favor from our own family. Children
should say "Please" and "Thank you" to servants, and should never laugh
at their mistakes or hurt their feelings.

Here is an illustration of two ways of treating a mistake. A
servant-girl who had been but a little while in this country had never
seen any radishes. When the dinner was sent home from market one day, a
bunch of radishes came with the other vegetables. She supposed they were
to be cooked like the rest, so she carefully cut off the tops and boiled
them, then dished them up on a small white platter, and placed them on
the table with a satisfied look. A boy in the family burst into a loud
laugh and exclaimed, "I guess you never saw any radishes before, Mary;
you've spoilt them." It was necessary then to explain the mistake, which
had better been done quietly after dinner; and the poor girl retired in
confusion to shed tears of mortification over her ignorance. After
dinner this boy's little sister said to a visitor, "The radishes did
look so funny and small on the dish that I thought I should laugh, but I
knew Mary would feel bad if I did, so I looked at my plate and tried to
think of something else."

It is easy to decide which of these children illustrated politeness to
servants.

If our parents are away when visitors come, or too busy to see them at
once, it is our place to show them in politely, take a gentleman's hat,
or a lady's wrappings if she wishes to remove them, offer a comfortable
chair, show them anything that we think will interest them, and
entertain them as well as we can until older people are at liberty. When
they are busy with company we should not trouble them with any request
that can wait.

If friends of our parents are visiting them, we should do all we can to
make the visit pleasant, and should help our mothers even more than
usual, that they may have more time for the visitors. If we can take
care of younger brothers or sisters, it will often be a great relief to
them and the company besides.

A lady once went to visit a friend whom she had not seen for years.
There was much to talk about, and both felt that the afternoon would be
all too short. Think how surprised and pleased the visitor was when her
friend's little daughter, instead of staying in the room and teasing her
mother with all manner of questions, as children often do in such cases,
took her baby brother upstairs and amused him until tea-time, so that
her mother might have a quiet afternoon with her friend. You may be sure
the lady will never forget that little girl's thoughtful politeness.

We should not enter visitors' rooms without knocking, or sit down
without being invited; neither should we take up anything belonging to
them, or ask questions about it. We should try not to be tiresome or
disagreeable.

When young people come to visit us we should remember that their
entertainment is our affair. We should treat them precisely as we would
want to be treated at their houses. It is rude to criticise their dress
or anything belonging to them, or to ask inquisitive questions about
their homes. We should talk about the things they are interested in,
play the games they like, show them our toys and books, and have regard
to their preferences in every occupation and amusement.

Home ought to be the happiest place in the world, and the daily practice
of genuine politeness toward each other will do much to make it so.
Every little seed of courtesy, kindness, and consideration for others
sown in the home circle will spring up and bear many more after its own
kind, which shall be scattered, like the seeds in nature, by winds and
waters, and shall be a blessing to the world wherever they may fall.




LESSON V.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS TOWARD THE AGED.

          _Respectful treatment at all times._
          _Mistakes in grammar and pronunciation._
          _Attention to remarks and questions._
          _Patience in repeating answers._
          _What to talk of and read to them._
          _Waiting upon them and saving steps._
          _Giving them the best seats._
          _Helping them first at table._
          _Giving up seats in cars and public places to them._
          _Never letting them feel in the way._




LESSON V.

MANNERS TOWARD THE AGED.


NO person, however high his position, is so entitled to respect and
attention as one with white hair and bent figure. No young person of
right feeling and good-breeding will ever fail in politeness toward the
old. The Bible commands us to reverence the aged, and in one place says,
"Thou shalt rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old
man." Even among the lowest races of men respect for old people is
almost universal.

There is a story of an Indian which illustrates this. The writer tells
us that many years ago, on the banks of the Kennebec River, he saw an
Indian coming across in his canoe. He had his wife with him and a very
old woman covered with a blanket. When he reached the shore he kindled a
fire, took out the old woman in his arms and laid her down tenderly by
it. He then cooked some food and gave it to her, while he and his wife
waited until she had finished eating. Seeing the gentleman observing
him, he pointed to the aged woman and said, "It is my mother."

In China disrespect to the aged is unknown, and disobedience to parents
has been punished with death.

We cannot expect to be honored when we are old, unless we honor the old
when we are young.

Almost every one has read the story of "The Wooden Bowl," which well
illustrates what has just been said.

An old man who had a home with his son had become so infirm that he
could no longer work. His son treated him unkindly, and grudgingly gave
him his scanty portion of coarse food, making the poor old man feel that
he was considered a burden by his own child. Matters grew worse until at
last he was not allowed to come to the table. His son made for him a
rude wooden bowl, from which he ate his food in the kitchen.

One day this son saw his own little boy at work with his jackknife on a
piece of wood. "What are you doing, my child?" he asked. "I am making a
wooden bowl like grandpa's, for you to eat out of when you are old,
father," said the child.

This answer made such an impression upon the son, showing him what
treatment he had a right to expect from his own children after the
example he had given them, that from that time he treated his old father
with the respect and kindness he himself wished to receive in his old
age.

We should never laugh at mistakes in speech. The old-fashioned
expressions that seem so queer to us may have been right when those who
use them were young. Some of our ways of speaking will probably seem as
strange to young people when we are old as theirs do now to us, so we
are laughing at ourselves beforehand. Then we should remember that
years ago school privileges were not so great as they are now. Children
then went to school but little in comparison with us, and their speech
was not watched and corrected by teachers as ours is. We ought never to
criticise mistakes in the aged as we would in our little brothers and
sisters: it is disrespectful; and besides they are too old to change
habits.

We should listen with attention and with no sign of impatience to all
they say, answer their questions kindly, and not contradict, even if
through forgetfulness the same question is often asked and mistakes are
made. If they are childish and sometimes fault-finding, we should treat
them with the gentleness we would show to a little child, together with
the respect that belongs to gray hairs.

If they are hard of hearing, we should repeat patiently and gently and
never shout an answer.

When we talk with them we should talk of what they care for, even if it
is what we are not interested in. If we try, we can generally become
interested for their sakes. We should be willing to read to them
articles and books that may seem prosy to us; we ought to think how long
the days must seem to those who are too feeble to go out as we do, and
we should be glad to do what we can to entertain them.

We should cheerfully wait upon old people, and let them feel that young
hands and feet are glad to take the place of theirs. There are countless
little services which we can perform for them: we can bring grandfather
his hat and cane, find a place in the paper for him with our bright
eyes, thread grandmother's needle, pick up dropped stitches in her
knitting, hunt for her glasses when she loses them, and run on errands
for them both.

They ought to have the most comfortable chairs, in winter the warmest
seats by the fire, and in the evening the place where their failing eyes
shall have the best light.

If we are sitting in the only rocking-chair in the room, or in the
easiest one, and an old person enters, we should immediately _rise_ and
offer it to him, not simply ask if he would not like it.

At the table we should see that old people are helped first and their
wants carefully attended to.

In cars or public places, a boy or girl should never allow an old man or
woman to stand, but should hasten to give up a seat and insist on its
being taken, especially if the person is poorly dressed.

The following story of what happened long ago in the famous old city of
Athens well illustrates this point:--

A play was to be performed at the principal theatre of Athens, and the
seats were soon taken. When the theatre was full, an old man came in and
looked around for a seat. He was quite infirm and could not stand long.
He looked first one way and then another. At length he saw a party of
young Athenians beckoning to him. He tried to get to them, which he had
to do by climbing over seats and pushing through the crowd; and, when
at last he reached them, they sat down, and, instead of giving him the
seat he had expected, took up all the room, leaving the old man
standing.

In this theatre were some seats fitted up for strangers. These were
filled by young Spartans, who, when they saw the behavior of the
Athenians, were much displeased, and beckoned to the old man to come to
them. When he was near them they all rose and received him with the
greatest respect. The whole assembly, seeing this, could not help
bursting into a shout of applause.

The old man then said, "The Athenians know what is right, but the
Spartans practise it."

Above all things, we should never let the old feel that they are in the
way, or that it is a relief when they leave the room. They are usually
sensitive to anything like a slight, and their feelings are quickly hurt
by real or seeming neglect.




LESSON VI.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS AT THE TABLE.

          _Promptness in coming to the table._
          _When to be seated._
          _Waiting one's turn to be helped._
          _Beginning to eat before others._
          _Asking for articles of food,--how, when,
                and where._
          _Criticism of food on the table._
          _Use of napkin, knife, fork, and spoon._
          _Haste in eating._
          _Attention to wants of others._
          _Conduct in case of accidents._
          _Mention of unpleasant subjects._
          _Use of toothpick._
          _When and how to leave the table._
          _Quietness of movement._
          _Observance of table manners in others._




LESSON VI.

MANNERS AT THE TABLE.


IT is not polite to linger after being called to the table. When the
bell is rung, or any other summons given, it is to be supposed that the
meal is ready, and the call should be promptly obeyed. Food does not
improve by waiting, and unnecessary delay is rudeness to the persons at
whose table we sit, whether our own parents or strangers. When we know
the hours for meals we should plan to be ready for them.

Until the lady of the house takes her seat, other persons should not
take theirs. In taking our seats we should be careful not to jar the
table.

Each one should quietly wait his turn to be helped. Children sometimes
pass their plates as soon as they are seated, or begin to handle knife,
fork, and spoon as if they were in hungry haste. They should wait for
visitors and older persons to be helped first, and brothers should wait
for their sisters. A story is told of a little girl, five years old, who
at a large dinner party was overlooked until the company had finished
the first course. She waited before her empty plate in perfect quietness
until some one noticed her,--bravely trying to keep back the
tears,--because she thought it was the polite and proper thing to do.
This was carrying polite waiting further than was necessary, but was
much better than the rude haste too common among children.

It is polite to wait until all or nearly all are helped before beginning
to eat; and children should never begin before older people.

It is not polite to ask for things at other tables than our own or those
of intimate friends who expect it of us. The persons at whose table we
sit are expected to supply our wants without our making them known. In
asking we must not forget to say, "Please pass the bread," or whatever
we wish for, and to say, "If you please," "Yes, thank you," or "No,
thank you," when we accept or decline what is offered. We should ask for
any article by name, and never point at the dish. Ill-mannered children
sometimes ask for pie or pudding or oranges before they are brought on,
instead of waiting for the courses in their proper order, and even have
been known to make their entire dinner on the dessert. One is apt to
think such children are not accustomed to dainties in their own homes,
or they would not be so greedy for them.

We should never say, "I don't like that," if something is offered we do
not wish to eat, but simply decline it beforehand or leave it upon our
plates without remark; and under no circumstances should we criticise
what is on the table.

There is a proper, graceful way to handle napkin, knife, fork, and
spoon, and we should study to learn this way and to avoid the clumsy
awkwardness in these little things that marks the person unused to good
society.

To eat fast is one of the bad habits of American people which we ought
to avoid. If acquired in childhood, it will be hard to overcome, and
will cause us much mortification when, later in life, we find ourselves
with empty plates long before well-bred people in the company have
finished theirs. Since we do not leave the table before others, there is
nothing gained, even in time, while much is lost in health and in good
manners.

We should be attentive to the wants of others, particularly at our own
table, and quietly supply them when it is proper to do so, especially in
the case of old people and little children. In passing a knife, fork, or
spoon to others, we must offer them the handle, not the blade or point,
and pass a pitcher with the handle toward them.

If an accident occurs, such as breaking a dish, overturning a glass of
water, or dropping food upon the cloth, we should take no notice of it
by look or word unless we can repair the mischief, which we should do in
a way not to attract attention to the unlucky person.

We should never speak of what is unpleasant at the table. If we have bad
news to tell, this is not the place to tell it. Sickness, accident,
death, and whatever is painful to hear, should not be discussed any more
than what is disagreeable. Neither is the table the place to talk of
work or business details, but subjects should be chosen that all are
interested in. No one should be allowed to scold or find fault at meal
time. Cheerful conversation is good for digestion as well as enjoyment.
Each one should be in his best mood at the table, and the hours which
families spend together there ought to be among the happiest of the day.

Solomon understood this matter when he said, "Better is a dinner of
herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and hatred therewith."

No well-bred person would for a moment think of using a toothpick at the
table, still less a fork or a pin in place of a toothpick.

No one, either a grown person or a child, should leave his seat until
the lady of the house rises, unless there is good reason for doing so,
when he should politely ask her to excuse him. In rising, the chair
should not be pushed back from the table, but lifted quietly with the
hands, and left in its proper position. Every movement at the table
should be made with as little noise as possible. All moving of feet,
leaning upon the table, jostling of dishes, or clatter of knives and
forks, shows ignorance of table manners.

If we observe the manners and customs of others in society to which we
have not been accustomed, we shall be often saved from blunders. If
those in company with us make mistakes, we should be governed by the
same rule as in case of accidents,--not take notice unless we can undo
or cover the mistake. An incident is related of a certain king which
illustrates this true politeness.

At the royal table on one occasion were two ladies from an obscure
provincial town who were unused to the customs of city and court. When
tea was brought in they poured some from the cup into the saucer to cool
it. The king saw a smile go around the table at their expense, and, with
politeness worthy of a king, he hastened to pour his own tea into the
saucer, upon which every person at the table felt obliged to follow the
royal example, and the two strangers were spared the mortification of
discovering that they had done anything unusual.




LESSON VII.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS IN SOCIETY.

          _Entering and taking leave._
          _Removal of hat and care of wrappings._
          _Various courtesies._
          _Staring at or speaking of defects and infirmities._
          _Treatment of accidents and mistakes._
          _Whispering, laughing, and private conversation._
          _Attention to one's dress or matters of toilet._
          _Sitting still gracefully._
          _Inattention to the company we are in._
          _Introductions._
          _Giving proper titles._
          _Attention in conversation,--illustration._
          _Attention to reading or music._
          _Looking over another's shoulder._
          _Reading letters._
          _Interest in what is shown us._
          _Asking questions of strangers._
          _Contradicting statements._
          _Doing our part._




LESSON VII.

MANNERS IN SOCIETY.


WHEN we make a call upon a friend, we should speak to each person in the
room when we enter and when we leave, but at a party or other formal
gathering it is not necessary to take leave of any except the host and
hostess, to whom we must also speak as soon as we arrive. A visit is a
more important matter than a call, and at its close, we should take
pains to bid good by to each one of the household, expressing to those
who have entertained us, when we can do so with truth, our enjoyment of
the visit, and our wish to have them visit us.

It is polite to write as soon as possible to those whom we have been
visiting: they wish to know of our safe arrival at home; and a letter
also gives us opportunity to say any pleasant thing about the visit that
we may have forgotten or omitted.

Upon entering any house a gentleman or gentlemanly boy will remove his
hat, and never allow it upon his head inside the door.

When the streets are muddy or snowy, we should carefully wipe our feet
or remove our overshoes at the door; and in stormy weather we must take
care that dripping waterproofs and umbrellas are put where they will not
injure carpets or paper.

When the company are putting on their wrappings to go home, it is polite
to offer assistance, particularly to those older than ourselves.

A gentleman should allow a lady to pass through a door before him,
holding it open for her. We ought not to pass in front of others if we
can go behind them; but if it is necessary to do so, we should ask them
to excuse us. A gentleman should go upstairs before a lady, and behind
her coming down, taking care not to step on her dress.

If a handkerchief or other article is dropped, we should hasten to pick
it up and restore it to the owner. In handing a pair of scissors, a
knife, or any pointed article, we ought to turn the point toward
ourselves.

It is rude to stare at people in company, especially if they are
unfortunate in any way or peculiar in appearance; neither is it polite
to allude to a personal defect or ask a question about its cause, even
in the kindest manner. The same rule applies here as in case of family
misfortune or bereavement, that if persons suffering the affliction wish
it mentioned, they will speak of it first themselves. To do as we would
be done by is the rule of real politeness in all these cases.

If an accident happens to persons or their dress, or if their dress is
out of order, if we can give assistance we should do so in a quiet way
without attracting attention; if we cannot be of use, we should take no
notice of the misfortune. The same principle of good-breeding will keep
us from laughing at mistakes or accidents.

To exchange glances with another, to whisper, or to laugh unless others
know what we are laughing at, is even ruder than to stare, and no one
who is polite will do these things. In company is not the place to tell
secrets or carry on personal or private conversation.

We should see that our dress is in order before we enter the room, and
then neither think nor speak of it. To look in the glass, smooth one's
gloves and laces, or play with rings or chain, seems like calling
attention to our dress, and is in bad taste. It would seem unnecessary
here or anywhere to say that attention to finger-nails, which is a
matter of the toilet for one's chamber, is inexcusable, if we did not
sometimes see persons in the presence of others take out pocket-knives
for this purpose.

It is a common saying that people unused to society do not know what to
do with their hands and feet. The best direction that can be given is to
do nothing. Let them take easy positions of themselves, and think no
more about them. To sit still gracefully is an accomplishment worth
acquiring, and it should be studied by boys and girls as well as grown
people. The necessity for it comes so often in life that we should learn
to do it well. We should not sit on the edge or corner of a chair, or
tilt it backward or forward.

Drumming with the fingers on tables or chairs, rocking rapidly back and
forth, or looking out of the window, as if we were more interested in
things outside than in those in the room, should never be done. It is
well said that "if in company we are absent in mind, we had better be
absent in body." "Forget yourself" is one of the best and broadest
precepts of good behavior; but we should never forget others.

It is often our duty in society to introduce persons to each other, and
we should study to do this gracefully. It is said of Alice Cary that she
had such a happy way of giving introductions as to make each person feel
specially honored. We should introduce a gentleman to a lady, saying,
"Mr. Smith, Miss Jones," if we use this simplest form of introduction,
and not "Miss Jones, Mr. Smith," as is often done. We should introduce a
younger person to an older, unless it be one of our own family, when,
"My aunt, Mrs. Brown, Miss Jones," is proper. We should introduce
strangers to each other at the table and elsewhere before they have time
to feel awkward at not being able to speak. Great pains should be taken
to pronounce distinctly the names of those introduced. Too often each
person hears only his own.

We should speak of people as Mr., Mrs., or Miss, except with intimate
friends, giving particular titles when proper, and never allude to any
one as "Old Smith," or "Old Miss Jones."

To make ill-natured remarks about the absent shows a want of
good-breeding as well as good feeling.

No one should make himself conspicuous in company by loud laughing and
talking. To make remarks intended to be overheard, especially remarks
meant to be funny, is clownish,--and to be a society clown is a very low
ambition.

We must not interrupt one who is speaking, and must pay attention to
remarks addressed to the company. If a person is speaking to us we ought
to listen attentively, even if we are not interested, and not hurt his
feelings by letting our eyes wander from him or showing other signs of
impatience. A good listener is as welcome in society as a good talker,
and often more so, because every one who talks likes to be listened to
with appreciative attention.

Those who have read "The Wide, Wide World" will remember an instance of
little Ellen Montgomery's good-breeding in this respect, when she was
visiting at Ventnor.

"Ellen is a fascinating child," said Mrs. Gillespie, "I cannot
comprehend where she gets the manners she has. I never saw a more
perfectly polite little girl."

"I have noticed the same thing often," said Miss Sophia. "Did you
observe her last night when John Humphreys came in? You were talking to
her at the moment. Before the door was opened, I saw her color come and
her eyes sparkle, but she did not look towards him for an instant till
you had finished what you were saying to her, and she had given, as she
always does, her modest, quiet answer, and then her eye went straight
as an arrow to where he was standing."

When any one is reading aloud, playing, or singing, we ought to give him
the same close attention we would wish to receive if we were in his
place. Talking or moving about at such times is unpardonably rude, and
also looking at the clock as if we were impatient for the performer to
finish.

We should never interrupt with questions or remarks a person engaged in
reading or writing, and to look over the shoulder of one so employed is
impertinent.

If letters are brought to us, we should not open and read them in
company unless they require immediate attention, when we should ask to
be excused for doing so.

We should give interested attention to books, pictures, views, or games
shown us for our entertainment, and express pleasure and admiration when
we can with truth. If an article or a letter is given us to read, we
should not hand it back without remark, or begin to read something else,
as is often done by people who ought to know better, but we should thank
the one who showed it to us, speak of it politely, and if there is
anything about it we can commend, do so.

If we have occasion to make an inquiry of a stranger, we should preface
it with, "Excuse me," "Pardon me," or, "I beg your pardon," unless we
use the simpler form, "Will you please tell me," in beginning our
question.

It is ill-bred to contradict, especially if the one addressed be an
older person. If a person says in our hearing that the lecture was given
Thursday evening, when it was really Wednesday, or that Miss Green was
at the concert with Miss White when we know that Miss Gray was her
companion, it is not our place to embarrass the speaker by setting him
right. If we are appealed to, or if there is good reason why we should
correct the statement, we should do so politely, with an apology for the
correction.

We ought to be willing in company to contribute our share to the general
entertainment. Unless we are willing to give as well as receive, we had
better stay at home. It is ill-mannered to read aloud, sing, or play to
others unless we are invited to do so; but if a request is made, it is
much more polite and agreeable to the company for us to comply
cheerfully, and do the best we can, than to wait for much urging and
then to burden the listeners with apologies before we begin. If we do
not feel able to do what is asked of us, we should politely but
positively decline at first.

If games are proposed, unless there is some good reason for our doing
so, it is not polite to decline taking part, saying, "I will see the
rest play." If all did this, nobody would be entertained. It is much
more the part of good manners to enter heartily into the amusement of
the hour, and do our best to make it a success.

It is this spirit of readiness to help on things that makes useful
members of society, and the more earnestly boys and girls cultivate it
the more fit they will be for their duties as citizens. We ought not to
be content to be ciphers anywhere. As significant figures, we shall be
of more value in the world, be happier ourselves, and make others
happier.




LESSON VIII.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD


MANNERS AT CHURCH.

          _Punctuality._
          _Manner of entering._
          _Courtesy toward ladies._
          _Courtesy toward strangers._
          _Whispering, laughing, and moving about._
          _Dress at church._
          _Turning the head to see who comes in._
          _Attention to the service._
          _Dropping hymn-books._
          _Manner of leaving._




LESSON VIII.

MANNERS AT CHURCH.

WE should try never to be late at church; it is a disrespect to the
place and the worship; it breaks in upon the service, takes the
attention of people from it, and disturbs the minister. If we are late,
we must not go in during prayer time, but wait near the door.

We should enter a church quietly and soberly. Boys should be as
particular as gentlemen to remove their hats at the door, not half-way
up the aisle, and to open the pew door for ladies to pass in first. If
they are in the pew beforehand, they should rise and pass out for ladies
to enter.

When a seat is given us in a strange church, we should not take it
without acknowledgment. We should welcome strangers to our pew, hand
them a book with the place found, and invite them to come again. If we
notice any one near us who cannot find the hymn or place to read, we
should quietly pass him our open book.

It is worse to whisper or laugh in church than anywhere else, for it is
not only ill-bred but irreverent. We should avoid moving about in our
pews, looking around at people, opening or shutting books, and whatever
disturbs the quiet of the place.

It is not in good taste to wear much jewelry at church, or showy
articles of any kind that will attract attention. A house of worship is
no place for striking effects in costume, such as might be proper at a
party or place of amusement.

We often see persons in church turn their heads whenever the door is
opened, to see who is coming in. Such a disregard of good manners well
deserved the rebuke it received once from a Scotch minister, who,
annoyed by this habit, astonished his congregation one Sunday morning by
announcing to them the name of each late comer as he entered.

If we cannot give respectful attention to the service, we had better
stay at home, and not disturb those who go to church to worship.

The clergyman is often annoyed by the dropping of hymn-books or
prayer-books noisily into the rack, especially at the close of the last
hymn, when he is waiting to pronounce the benediction. This might be
done as well and better without any noise whatever.

It is rude in the extreme to seize hats and rush for the door as soon as
the last word is said, or to engage at once in idle chatter and
laughter. There should be a reverent pause, and then we should pass
slowly and quietly down the aisle. It is ill-bred to seem in haste to be
gone. Unless we can sit through the service with patience, we should not
attend it. Looking at the clock or taking out one's watch during service
comes under the same condemnation as leaving with unbecoming haste at
the close.




LESSON IX.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS AT PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.

          _Punctuality._
          _Finding seats._
          _Waiting with quietness._
          _Gazing about and making criticisms._
          _Talking and laughing,--story._
          _Looking at watches and clocks._
          _Applause._
          _Doing fancy work._
          _Courtesy to others._
          _Time and manner of leaving._




LESSON IX.

MANNERS AT PLACES OF AMUSEMENT.


WHEN we attend a lecture, concert, or other entertainment, we should go
in season: to enter after the performance begins is a discourtesy to the
performers and an annoyance to every person in the audience. If we are
obliged to be late, we should wait for a favorable time, and then be
seated quickly and quietly.

When there is a choice of seats we have a right to take the best that
remain when we arrive; but this right offers no excuse for us to push
and elbow other people, or to obtain such seats by crowding others
aside. It is better to have the poorest seat in the house or none at all
than to sacrifice good manners and self-respect. We often see
disgraceful exhibitions of selfishness at entertainments on the part of
people who pride themselves at home and in company on their politeness.

If we are too early, or if there is delay in commencing, we should wait
with well-bred quietness. Nothing marks more surely the ill-bred person
than noisy demonstrations of impatience at waiting. This is one of the
occasions to practise the graceful sitting still which has been spoken
of in the lesson on manners in society.

It is not polite to gaze at those around us, still less to make remarks
about them or their dress.

Loud talking and laughing, and all conduct calculated to make ourselves
conspicuous, should be avoided. The people who attract attention in
these ways will be likely to eat candy, nuts, and popped corn while the
exercises are going on, and to violate propriety in other ways.

Whispering during a performance is an offence against good manners; yet
it is surprising how common the offence is. School children know how the
visitors on examination days often talk to each other throughout the
exercises, to the great disturbance of the whole school as well as the
teacher, and this recollection ought to make them more careful to avoid
the impoliteness themselves. Many people seem to attend places of
amusement for the sole purpose of talking with their friends. They will
hold long discussions upon dress, cooking, and family matters, as if no
music or speaking were in progress, and as if no one else cared to hear
more than they. If we do not go to a concert to hear the music, we have
no right there; and the same is true at all public entertainments.

It is related of Margaret Fuller that at one of Jenny Lind's concerts
her evening's enjoyment was destroyed by some rude young people who
whispered incessantly, laughed at each other's foolish jokes, and paid
no attention to the wonderful music. At the close of the concert she
sent for the young girl whose behavior had been most noticeable to come
to her. The girl was much flattered by the request from so distinguished
a person, though she was at a loss to account for it. As she appeared
with an air of pleased curiosity, Margaret Fuller said to her, "I hope
that never again in your life will you be the cause of so much annoyance
and pain to any one as you have been to me this evening."

It is to be hoped that this rebuke, with the good advice given with it
to this thoughtless girl, was a lesson in good manners which she and her
companions never forgot.

To take out one's watch or to turn the head to look at the clock is like
saying we are impatient to go, and must be disturbing to the speaker. If
it is necessary for us to look at a watch, we should do so without its
being seen, and should stifle in our pockets the click of shutting it.

It is rude to applaud noisily: we can be enthusiastic in applause
without being boisterous.

Some ladies have a habit of carrying fancy work to places of amusement.
If they knit or crochet before the performance begins, it is a foolish
parade of industry which is probably not carried out at home; but if
they continue the occupation after one begins to sing or speak or read,
it is impertinent, and extremely annoying to the speaker. It seems like
saying that his words are not worthy of undivided attention, but are of
so little consequence that one can take in their meaning and beauty
while counting stitches and studying patterns.

We should be mindful of little courtesies to those near us, such as
handing our programme or opera-glass to one who has none. If a question
is asked about the performance, we should answer with cordial politeness
and cheerfully give any information we can.

We should never leave the hall while the performance is going on. It is,
like coming in late, an affront to the performers and to the audience.
Usually, if we cannot stay until the close, we should stay away. If
there is any urgent reason, such as taking a train, for our leaving
before the close, we should do so between the parts of a performance,
and as noiselessly as possible. When we stay to the end we should remain
seated and give our attention until the last word is uttered. The
speaker usually keeps his best effort for the close, and he should not
be embarrassed, or those listening be disturbed, by the confusion of
preparations for departure. To reach the door a minute or two sooner, or
to get the best seats in a car, is not worth the rudeness it requires.
We shall never be guilty of it if we only apply the Golden Rule and
consider how we should feel in the speaker's place.




LESSON X.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS IN STORES AND SIMILAR PUBLIC PLACES.

          _Shutting doors._
          _How to ask for articles in stores._
          _Making trouble for clerks._
          _Handling goods._
          _Finding fault with articles or prices._
          _Courtesy to other customers._
          _Courtesy to clerks._
          _Conduct in the post-office,--entering in crowds,
                not waiting for others, noise and rudeness._
          _Visiting railroad stations._
          _Two things to consider._




LESSON X.

MANNERS IN STORES AND SIMILAR PUBLIC PLACES.


ON entering or leaving a store in cold weather we should consider the
comfort of those behind the counters and shut the door, if there is no
one whose business it is to do it for us. We ought to state clearly and
definitely what we want to buy, and patiently explain if the clerk,
through inexperience or dulness, does not at first understand our
request.

A good supply of patience and politeness is needed in shopping, and a
true lady or gentleman will not lose temper or forget good manners, even
if a clerk is impertinent or disobliging.

We should not make unnecessary trouble for clerks by asking them to take
down and unfold piece after piece of goods for us to examine, if we have
no intention of buying. Many ladies do this habitually, because they
enjoy it, and then wonder that the clerks are not more polite. If we
wish merely to examine before buying at some future time, it is better
to say so, and then the merchant or clerk will not be disappointed if we
do not purchase.

We should handle delicate fabrics in stores as carefully as if they were
our own, and not tumble them over, leaving ribbons and laces in tangled
heaps, especially if we do not buy.

We should not find fault with the quality of articles. If we are not
satisfied, it is enough to say that the goods do not suit us, without
making disparaging remarks to the clerk, who has no responsibility in
the matter.

It is a sign of ignorance and ill-breeding to haggle over the price of a
thing and try to induce the seller to take less for it. In Oriental
countries, it is said, the dealer always asks at first four times the
price he expects to receive, but in our country this is not customary,
and the price stated is supposed to be fair and final. If we think the
article is not worth the price, or if it is beyond our means, it is best
to say we do not wish to pay so much and leave it. If the dealer can
afford to sell it cheaper, and will do so for the sake of our buying, it
is his place to offer it for less, not ours to ask. If he asks more than
a thing is worth, hoping to take advantage of our need of it or our
ignorance, he ought to be punished by our refusal to buy.

We should wait our turn at a counter and regard the convenience of
others as well as ourselves. It is not polite to demand the attention of
a clerk who is waiting upon another customer, or to take up what another
is looking at. If we are in great haste, and customers who seem to have
plenty of time are at the counter before us, we may sometimes ask their
permission to be waited on while they are looking at goods, apologizing
for doing so. If we are sitting at a counter, we should politely give
our seat to an older lady, or to one who looks weary.

If a clerk takes uncommon pains to please us, or puts himself to more
trouble than we have a right to expect, we must not forget to thank him.
If customers are polite and considerate, they seldom have reason to
complain of those behind the counter. The same is true at post-offices,
railroad stations, and wherever we are served by others.

These general principles of politeness in stores can be applied in all
similar public places.

The post-office is often the scene of most unmannerly conduct on the
part of boys and girls, especially just after the close of school, when
they all rush in for letters. Instead of quietly walking up to the
window, one at a time, the boys giving way to the girls when there is
but one place of delivery, and both boys and girls waiting for older
people, they are apt to go in by dozens, crowding to the window and
clamoring for their letters, making themselves extremely annoying to all
grown people present.

We should say, "I would like a dozen stamps, if you please," or, "Please
weigh this letter," rather than, "I want a dozen stamps," or, "Weigh
this letter, will you?"

The post-office is a place of business, like a store or a bank. Our only
object in going there is to mail or receive letters, which we should do
like any other business,--in a quiet, respectable manner. No one has a
right to stand around in the way of others, or to make it a place of
idle resort. No well-bred person, even a child, will indulge in loud
laughing and talking, staring at or making remarks about people, or
other conspicuous behavior here or in any public resort.

A railroad station is also a place of business, and unless it is
necessary for us to go there, we had better stay away. In small towns it
is quite a fashion for boys and girls to go to the station "to see the
cars come in"; but it is not improving to their manners or morals. If
they could realize, especially the girls, how out of place they appear
standing on platforms, where they have no occasion to be, jostled by
passengers and baggage-men, and exposed to the rude remarks of
passers-by, they would never go there unnecessarily.

In all public places we should consider, in reference to our conduct,
two things: first, the courtesy we owe to others; and second, the
respect we owe to ourselves.




LESSON XI.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS IN TRAVELLING.

          _Politeness in the waiting-room._
          _Buying a ticket._
          _Getting on and off the cars._
          _Obtaining and occupying seats._
          _Offering seats to ladies._
          _Leaving seats temporarily._
          _Talking, laughing, and eating._
          _Taking a seat with another._
          _Courtesy toward officials._
          _Courtesy toward fellow-travellers._
          _Conduct if delays occur._
          _Behavior at places for refreshment._
          _A French boy's politeness in travelling._




LESSON XI.

MANNERS IN TRAVELLING.


BEFORE we fairly begin the journey we want to consider what belongs to
good manners at the station.

If the waiting-room is crowded, and there are not seats for all, the
young ought cheerfully to give place to older people, especially to old
ladies and to mothers with little children in their arms. There is often
opportunity here to show little courtesies to others which may brighten
their whole day.

To amuse a fretful child for a few moments, or bring it a glass of water
when the mother cannot leave other children to do it, or to find the
baggage-master and get a trunk checked for a nervous old lady, is a
small thing in itself, but it may be more welcome to the receiver under
the circumstances than a far greater favor at another time. The comfort
or discomfort of a journey is made up of just such small things.

When the ticket window is opened there is no need for us to rush to it
or to push aside any one else. Time is given for all to buy their
tickets comfortably. We ought, if possible, to hand the exact price of
the ticket, and not take the ticket-seller's time to change large bills.
For the same reason we should ask for the ticket in the briefest
sentence we can frame, and if a question is necessary, put it in the
most business-like manner, and thank him for the information given.

We should not attempt to get on the cars while others are getting off:
it hinders them and ourselves, and nothing is gained by such unbecoming
haste. The much-ridiculed American hurry is well illustrated by a
company of people crowding up the steps while another company is
crowding down. When we leave the cars it is better to wait until they
come to a full stop before rising from our seats. We shall be likely to
get out as soon as if we went swaying down the aisle, crowding other
people, and in danger of falling headlong when the train finally stops.

What has been said about obtaining seats at places of amusement applies
to seats in cars as well. Those who come first have the first choice;
but we should not forget good manners in the choosing. We have no right
to more room than we pay for, and, unless there are plenty of unoccupied
seats, it is rude and selfish to spread out our parcels and wraps so as
to discourage any one from asking to sit beside us; yet a well-dressed
woman, with her possessions unconcernedly arranged on a seat facing her,
ignoring the fact that others are standing in the aisle, is not an
uncommon spectacle.

Courtesy in the cars or in a coach is as binding on us as courtesy in
the parlor, and never, perhaps, is it better appreciated than by tired
travellers.

Good-breeding does not require a gentleman or a boy to offer his seat to
any lady who is standing, but he should never fail to do it to an old
lady or one with a child in her arms, or one with an inconvenient
package; and it is pleasant to see that fine politeness which prompts
its possessor to treat every lady as he would wish his mother or sister
treated. A lady should not accept such a civility in silence. We too
often see her drop into a seat which a gentleman rises to offer as if it
were her right, without a word or even a bow of acknowledgment. Such a
person has no right to expect a similar courtesy the second time.

If any one leaves his seat for a time without leaving any piece of
property in it to show that it belongs to him, he cannot lawfully claim
it on returning; but civility should prevent any one from taking it, if
he knows it belongs to another.

In travelling, as everywhere in public, noisy conversation and the "loud
laugh that speaks the vacant mind" are offensive to good taste. Constant
eating of fruit and peanuts is bad manners, and, as has been said
before, it is generally associated with loud talking and laughing and
other rude behavior.

On long journeys it is necessary to eat luncheons or even regular meals,
but this, done in a well-bred way, is a very different thing from the
continual eating indulged in by a certain class of travellers.

We should not sit down beside another without asking if the seat is
engaged. If a person asks to sit beside us, we should assent with
cordiality, not sullenly gather up our bundles, as we often see people
do, impatient at having their selfish ease disturbed. It is polite for a
gentleman to offer a lady the seat next the window.

We ought to have our ticket ready when the conductor comes around, and
not keep him waiting while we hunt for it in bag or pocket.

If a brakeman raises a window or shuts a door for us, we should thank
him; and it is polite to thank the train boy who passes us water. We
need not be ill-natured because he puts a magazine or prize package in
our lap every half-hour. It is not an uncivil thing to do, and it is
just as easy for us to receive it civilly, and say in a pleasant tone
that we do not care for it, as to add one more snappish answer to the
many given him in the course of a day.

We should be watchful of occasions to show politeness to our
fellow-travellers. There may be an old lady not accustomed to
travelling, anxious and uneasy, to whom we can be of use. We can ask
where she is going, and take the burden off her mind by saying, "I will
tell you when we come to it."

A gentlemanly boy will not see a lady trying to open or shut a window or
reverse a seat without offering to do it for her, any more than a
gentleman would.

We should be patient in answering questions, especially from old people.
If we are passing objects of interest with which we are familiar, it is
polite to speak of them to a stranger sitting near. If we were
journeying in the White Mountain region and were well acquainted with
it, a stranger by our side would like to know the names of the different
peaks, and to have the historic Willey House pointed out to him. One
cheerful, obliging person will add to the comfort of the whole company.

If delays occur on the way, and long periods of waiting, as often
happen, we should be patient and cheerful over the matter ourselves, and
thus help others to be so. Good-nature is contagious at such times. It
is of no use to tire the conductor and brakemen with repeated questions:
they are rarely responsible for the delay, which is more vexatious to
them than to us.

Places for refreshment on a journey, with the brief time usually
allowed, afford opportunities to show one's good or ill breeding. It
would be better to have no lunch than to struggle for the best place and
loudly demand attention, to the exclusion of others. To bring a cup of
tea to an old lady, or to the mother who cannot leave her baby to get it
herself, is a slight thing for us to do, but it may be a great favor to
them.

In an article on the politeness of French children as compared with boys
and girls in America, the writer illustrates what he is saying in this
way:--

"I was travelling in a compartment with a little French boy of twelve,
the age at which American children, as a rule, deserve killing for
their rudeness and general disagreeableness. I sat between him and the
open window, and he was eating pears. Now most boys in our country of
that age would either have dropped the cores upon the floor or tossed
them out of the window, without regard to anybody. But this small
gentleman, every time, with a 'Permit me, sir,' said in the most
pleasant way, rose and came to the window and dropped them out, and then
with a 'Thanks, sir,' quietly took his seat. French children do not take
favors as a matter of course and unacknowledged. And when in his seat,
if an elderly person came in, he was the very first to rise and offer
his place, if it were in the slightest degree more comfortable than
another; and the good-nature with which he insisted on the new-comer's
taking it was delightful to see."

The writer goes on to say that this was not an exceptional boy, but a
fair type of the average French child, and his conduct was a sample of
what might be seen anywhere, even among the ragged boys of the street.
The reason for this state of things is given in the opening sentences of
the article:--

"Politeness, with the French, is a matter of education as well as
nature. The French child is taught that lesson from the beginning of its
existence, and it is made a part of its life. It is the one thing that
is never forgotten, and the lack of it never forgiven."




LESSON XII.




OUTLINE FOR BLACKBOARD.


MANNERS IN BORROWING.

          _Care of borrowed articles._
          _What not to borrow._
          _How to return a book._
          _Returning an equivalent._
          _Promptness in returning,--anecdote._




LESSON XII.

MANNERS IN BORROWING.


IT is an old saying, "He that goes borrowing goes sorrowing"; but it
might often be more truly said of the one to whom the borrower goes.

We should be more careful of a borrowed article than if it were our own.
If we are so unfortunate as to injure or lose it, we should replace it,
if it can be done; if not, make the best possible apology. We have no
right to lend a borrowed thing to an other without the owner's
permission. Perhaps nothing is treated in this way oftener than a book.
People who consider themselves honest and just will lend a borrowed book
to half a neighborhood, and if it is defaced or lost will give
themselves no concern about it.

It is not polite to borrow a garment to wear except of a relative or
intimate friend. Neither is it good manners to ask for a garment or
pattern to cut one by for ourselves: the owner may prefer not to have it
copied. If a person admires a garment or pattern belonging to us, and we
are willing to lend it, it is our place to offer it without its being
asked for.

If a book or article to read is lent us, we should read it promptly, and
when we return it say whatever pleasant things we can of it with truth.
To send it back without expressing an opinion, or making acknowledgment
of the kindness, is inexcusable.

If we borrow something which is not to be returned itself, but its
equivalent, we should be careful to return what is of as good or better
quality, and as much in quantity, if not a little more, to make up for
the trouble of the one who lends to us.

It is not polite to keep a borrowed article long; and if a time for
returning it is specified, we should be careful not to neglect doing it
when the time comes. If possible, we should return it ourselves, not
give it to the owner to carry home or send it by another; and we should
never omit to thank the lender. To compel the owner to send for his
property is a gross violation of good manners on the part of the
borrower. The owner should not send unless he feels that he can wait no
longer, or unless the borrower is habitually careless and needs to be
taught a lesson.

"I never ask a gentleman to return money he has borrowed," said one man
to another.

"How then do you get it?" asked his friend.

"After a while," was the answer, "I conclude he is not a gentleman, and
then I ask him."

This reasoning will apply in case of lending other things as well as
money.

When we lend we should do so with cordial politeness and not spoil the
favor by the half-hearted way in which we offer or grant it; but
borrowing should be regarded as a necessary evil, to be resorted to only
when it cannot well be avoided. The habitual borrower is a burden to
society.




HISTORICAL BOOKS * * * * * * * * FOR YOUNG PEOPLE


_=Young Folks' History of the United States=_

          By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON. Illustrated. $1.50.

The story of our country in the most reliable and interesting form. As a
story-book it easily leads all other American history stories in
interest, while as a text-book for the study of history it is
universally admitted to be the best.


_=Young Folks' Book of American Explorers=_

          By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON. Uniform with the
          "Young Folks' History of the United States." One
          volume, fully illustrated. Price $1.50.

"It is not a history told in the third person, nor an historical novel
for young folks, where the author supposes the chief characters to have
thought and said such and such things under such and such circumstances;
but it is the genuine description given by the persons who experienced
the things they described in letters written home."--_Montpelier
Journal._


_=The Nation in a Nutshell=_

          By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE, author of "Heroes of
          History," "Young Folks' History of England,"
          "Young Folks' History of Ireland," etc. Price 50
          cents.

"To tell the story of a nation like ours in a nutshell, requires a
peculiar faculty for selecting, condensing, and philosophizing. The
brevity with which he relates the principal events in American history,
does not detract from the charming interest of the narrative
style."--_Public Opinion._


_=Young People's History of England=_

          By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE. Cloth, illustrated.
          $1.50.

"The whole narrative is made interesting and attractive--in every way
what a book of this kind should be in its clearness of statement,
freshness of style, and its telling of the right ways."--_Critic._


_=Handbook of English History=_

          Based on "Lectures on English History," by the
          late M. J. GUEST, and brought down to the year
          1880. With a Supplementary Chapter on the English
          Literature of the 19th Century. By F. H.
          UNDERWOOD, LL.D. With Maps, Chronological Table,
          etc. $1.50.

"It approaches nearer perfection than anything in the line we have seen.
It is succinct, accurate, and delightful."--_Hartford Evening Post._


_=Young People's History of Ireland=_

          By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE, author of "Young
          People's History of England," "Young Folks' Heroes
          of History," etc. With an introduction by JOHN
          BOYLE O'REILLY. Cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"The history is like a novel, increasing in interest to the very end,
and terminating at the most interesting period of the whole; and the
reader lays down the book a moment in enthusiastic admiration for a
people who have endured so much, and yet have retained so many admirable
characteristics."--_N.Y. World._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




=BOOKS FOR GIRLHOOD BY POPULAR AUTHORS=


=AN AMERICAN GIRL ABROAD.=

          By ADELINE F. TRAFTON. 16mo, cloth, illustrated.
          $1.50.

One of the most bright, chatty, wide-awake books of travel ever written.
It abounds with information, is as pleasant reading as a story book, and
full of the wit and sparkle of "An American Girl" let loose from school
and ready for a frolic.


=ONLY GIRLS.=

          By VIRGINIA F. TOWNSEND, Author of "That Queer
          Girl," &c., &c. 12mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"It is a thrilling story, written in a fascinating style, and the plot
is adroitly handled."

It might be placed in any Sabbath School library, so pure is it in tone,
and yet it is so free from the mawkishness and silliness that mar the
class of books usually found there, that the veteran novel reader is apt
to finish it at a sitting.


=THE DOCTOR'S DAUGHTER.=

          By SOPHIE MAY, Author of "Our Helen," "The Asbury
          Twins," &c. 12mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"A delightful book, original and enjoyable," says the _Brownville Echo_.

"A fascinating story, unfolding, with artistic touch, the young life of
one of our impulsive, sharp-witted, transparent and pure-minded girls of
the nineteenth century," says _The Contributor_, Boston.


=SALLY WILLIAMS.=

          The Mountain Girl. By Mrs. EDNA D. CHENEY, Author
          of "Patience," "Social Games," "The Child of the
          Tide," &c. 12mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

Pure, strong, healthy, just what might be expected from the pen of so
gifted a writer as Mrs. Cheney. A very interesting picture of life among
the New Hampshire hills, enlivened by the tangle of a story of the ups
and downs of every-day life in this out-of-the-way locality. The
characters introduced are quaintly original, and the adventures are
narrated with remarkable skill.


=LOTTIE EAMES.=

          =Or, do your best and leave the rest.= By a
          Popular Author. 16mo, illus. $1.50.

"A wholesome story of home life, full of lessons of self-sacrifice, but
always bright and attractive in its varied incidents."


=RHODA THORNTON'S GIRLHOOD.=

          By Mrs. MARY E. PRATT. 16mo, cloth, illustrated.
          $1.50.

A hearty and healthy story, dealing with young folks and home scenes,
with sleighing, fishing and other frolics to make things lively.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The above six volumes are furnished in a handsome box, for $9.00, or
sold separately by all booksellers, or sent by mail, postpaid, on
receipt of price by_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD=, Publishers        Boston




BOOKS FOR YOUNG LADIES BY POPULAR AUTHORS


=SEVEN DAUGHTERS.=

           By Miss A. M. DOUGLAS, Author of "In Trust,"
         "Stephen Dane," "Claudia," "Sydnie Adriance," "Home
         Nook," "Nelly Kennard's Kingdom." 12mo, cloth,
         illustrated. $1.50.

"A charming romance of Girlhood," full of incident and humor. The "Seven
Daughters" are characters which reappear in some of Miss Douglas' later
books. In this book they form a delightful group, hovering on the verge
of Womanhood, with all the little perplexities of home life and love
dreams as incidentals, making a fresh and attractive story.


=OUR HELEN.=

          By SOPHIE MAY. 12mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"The story is a very attractive one, as free from the sensational and
impossible as could be desired, and at the same time full of interest,
and pervaded by the same bright, cheery sunshine that we find in the
author's earlier books. She is to be congratulated on the success of her
essay in a new field of literature, to which she will be warmly welcomed
by those who know and admire her 'Prudy Books.'"--_Graphic._


=THE ASBURY TWINS.=

         By SOPHIE MAY, Author of "The Doctor's Daughter,"
         "Our Helen," &c. 12mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"Has the ring of genuine genius, and the sparkle of a gem of the first
water. We read it one cloudy winter day, and it was as good as a Turkish
bath, or a three hours' soak in the sunshine."--_Cooperstown
Republican._


=THAT QUEER GIRL.=

         By Miss VIRGINIA F. TOWNSEND, Author of "Only
         Girls," &c. 12mo, cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

Queer only in being unconventional, brave and frank, an "old-fashioned
girl," and very sweet and charming. As indicated in the title, is a
little out of the common track, and the wooing and the winning are as
queer as the heroine. The _New Haven Register_ says: "Decidedly the best
work which has appeared from the pen of Miss Townsend."


=RUNNING TO WASTE.=

         The Story of a Tomboy. By GEORGE M. BAKER. 16mo,
         cloth, illustrated. $1.50.

"This book is one of the most entertaining we have read for a long time.
It is well written, full of humor, and good humor, and it has not a dull
or uninteresting page. It is lively and natural, and overflowing with
the best New England character and traits. There is also a touch of
pathos, which always accompanies humor, in the life and death of the
tomboy's mother."--_Newburyport Herald._


=DAISY TRAVERS:=

         =Or the Girls of Hive Hall.= By ADELAIDE F.
         SAMUELS, Author of "Dick and Daisy Stories," "Dick
         Travers Abroad," &c. 16mo, cloth, illustrated.
         $1.50.

The story of Hive Hall is full of life and action, and told in the same
happy style which made the earlier life of its heroine so attractive,
and caused the Dick and Daisy books to become great favorites with the
young. What was said of the younger books can, with equal truth, be said
of Daisy grown up.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The above six books are furnished in a handsome box for $9.00, or sold
separate, by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price._

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




LEE AND SHEPARD'S "CLASSICS FOR POPULAR * THIRTY CENT * HOME AND SCHOOL"

Price 30 cents net By mail 35 cents


FOR THIRD, FOURTH AND FIFTH YEARS IN SCHOOL

          =Miss West's Class in Geography= By Miss SPARHAWK
          =Lessons on Manners= By Miss WIGGIN
          =Natural History Plays= By LOUISA PARSONS HOPKINS


Young Folks' Pictures and Stories of Animals

  =Pictures and Stories of Quadrupeds=             } By
  =Pictures and Stories of Birds=                  }      Mrs.
  =Pictures and Stories of Fishes and Reptiles=    } Sanborn Tenney
  =Pictures and Stories of Bees and other Insects= }
  =Pictures and Stories of Sea and River Shells=   } With 500
  =Pictures and Stories of Sea-urchins and Corals= }  illustrations
    =I. Simple Poems and Easy Rhymes=       } Edited by Professor
   =II. Select Poetry for School and Home=  } CAMPBELL   Paper 20c
  =III. Choice Poetry for School and Home=  } _net_, boards 30c. _net_
  =A Kiss for a Blow= By HENRY CLARKE WRIGHT
  =Child's Book Of Health= By Dr. BLAISDELL


FOR FOURTH AND FIFTH YEARS IN SCHOOL

          =Robinson Crusoe= Arranged for Schools by W. T.
          ADAMS

          =Arabian Nights' Entertainments= (=Selections=)
          Arranged for Schools by Dr. ELIOT, formerly
          Superintendent Boston Schools

          =Stories from American History= By N. S. DODGE

          =The Boston Tea-Party and other Stories of the
          Revolution= Relating many Daring Deeds of the Old
          Heroes By H. C. WATSON


FOR FIFTH AND SIXTH YEARS IN SCHOOL

          =Noble Deeds of our Fathers= as told by Soldiers
          of the Revolution gathered around the Old Bell of
          Independence By H. C. WATSON

          =The Flower People= (Child's Talk with the
          Flowers) By Mrs. HORACE MANN

          =The Nation in a Nutshell= By GEORGE MAKEPEACE
          TOWLE

          =Short Studies of American Authors= By T. W.
          HIGGINSON

       *       *       *       *       *

These books are well made, good print and paper, strongly bound in
boards, with many illustrations, and of an exceedingly interesting
character. They are in use for supplementary reading in hundreds of
schools in various parts of the country. New volumes will be added to
this list from time to time, the object being to furnish good reading
for home and school at a low price.

For other supplementary readings see the page headed "Popular Reading
for Home and School by Popular Authors."

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




BRIGHT AND BREEZY BOOKS OF TRAVEL

BY SIX BRIGHT WOMEN


=A WINTER IN CENTRAL AMERICA AND MEXICO=

          By HELEN J. SANBORN. Cloth, $1.50.

"A bright, attractive narrative by a wide-awake Boston girl."


=A SUMMER IN THE AZORES, with a Glimpse of Madeira=

          By Miss C. ALICE BAKER. Little Classic style.
          Cloth, gilt edges, $1.25.

"Miss Baker gives us a breezy, entertaining description of these
picturesque islands. She is an observing traveller, and makes a graphic
picture of the quaint people and customs."--_Chicago Advance._


=LIFE AT PUGET SOUND=

          With sketches of travel in Washington Territory,
          British Columbia, Oregon, and California. By
          CAROLINE C. LEIGHTON. 16mo, cloth, $1.50.

"Your chapters on Puget Sound have charmed me. Full of life, deeply
interesting, and with just that class of facts, and suggestions of
truth, that cannot fail to help the Indian and the Chinese."--WENDELL
PHILLIPS.


=EUROPEAN BREEZES=

          By MARGERY DEANS. Cloth, gilt top, $1.50. Being
          chapters of travel through Germany, Austria,
          Hungary, and Switzerland, covering places not
          usually visited by Americans in making "the Grand
          Tour of the Continent," by the accomplished writer
          of "Newport Breezes."

"A very bright, fresh and amusing account, which tells us about a host
of things we never heard of before, and is worth two ordinary books of
European travel."--_Woman's Journal._


=BEATEN PATHS; or, A Woman's Vacation in Europe=

          By ELLA W. THOMPSON. 16mo, cloth. $1.50.

A lively and chatty book of travel, with pen-pictures humorous and
graphic, that are decidedly out of the "beaten paths" of description.


=AN AMERICAN GIRL ABROAD=

          By Miss ADELINE TRAFTON, author of "His
          Inheritance," "Katherine Earle," etc. 16mo.
          Illustrated. $1.50.

"A sparkling account of a European trip by a wide-awake, intelligent,
and irrepressible American girl. Pictured with a freshness and vivacity
that is delightful."--_Utica Observer._


_=CURTIS GUILD'S TRAVELS=_

=BRITONS AND MUSCOVITES; or, Traits of Two Empires= Cloth, $2.00.


=OVER THE OCEAN; or, Sights and Scenes in Foreign Lands=

          By CURTIS GUILD, editor of "The Boston Commercial
          Bulletin" Crown 8vo. Cloth, $2.50.

"The utmost that any European tourist can hope to do is to tell the old
story in a somewhat fresh way, and Mr. Guild has succeeded in every part
of his book in doing this."--_Philadelphia Bulletin._


=ABROAD AGAIN; or, Fresh Forays in Foreign Fields=

          Uniform with "Over the Ocean." By the same author.
          Crown 8vo. Cloth, $2.50.

"He has given us a life-picture. Europe is done in a style that must
serve as an invaluable guide to those who go 'over the ocean,' as well
as an interesting companion."--_Halifax Citizen._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




POPULAR READING FOR HOME AND SCHOOL

BY POPULAR AUTHORS


JANE ANDREWS' BOOKS

=THE STORIES MOTHER NATURE TOLD HER CHILDREN=

          Illustrated School edition cloth 50 cents Library
          edition cloth 80 cents


=THE SEVEN LITTLE SISTERS WHO LIVE ON THE ROUND BALL THAT FLOATS IN THE
AIR=

          New edition, with an introduction by LOUISA
          PARSONS HOPKINS Illustrated School edition cloth
          50 cents Library edition cloth 80 cents


=THE SEVEN LITTLE SISTERS PROVE THEIR SISTERHOOD=

=(Former title EACH AND ALL)=
          Illustrated School edition cloth 50 cents Library edition
          cloth 80 cents


=TEN BOYS WHO LIVED ON THE ROAD FROM LONG AGO TO NOW=

          20 illustrations Cloth 80 cents


=GEOGRAPHICAL PLAYS FOR YOUNG FOLKS AT SCHOOL AND AT HOME=

          Price each play in paper 15 cents postage paid 1
          United States 2 Europe 3 Asia 4 Africa and South
          America 5 Australia and Isles of the Sea 6 The
          Commerce of the World

          The above bound in one volume Cloth $1.00 postage
          paid

       *       *       *       *       *

=GRADED SUPPLEMENTARY READING=

          For use in schools By Professor TWEED, late
          Supervisor of Boston Public Schools 12 parts
          ready: Nos. 1, 4, 7 and 10, 1st year primary; Nos
          2, 5, 8 and 11, 2d year primary; Nos. 3, 6, 9 and
          12, 3d year primary In brown paper covers 4 cents
          each; by mail 5 cents The four parts for each year
          bound together in boards 20 cents each First year
          primary in one volume boards 20 cents Second year
          primary in one volume boards 20 cents Third year
          primary in one volume boards 20 cents


HISTORICAL READINGS

=YOUNG FOLKS' HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES=

          By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON With over 100
          illustrations $1.20


=YOUNG FOLKS' BOOK OF AMERICAN EXPLORERS=

          By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON Illustrated $1.20


=HANDBOOK OF ENGLISH HISTORY=

          Based on Guest's "Lectures on English History,"
          and brought down to the year 1880 With a
          Supplementary Chapter on the English Literature of
          the 19th Century By F. H. UNDERWOOD, LL.D. With
          maps, chronological tables etc. School edition 90
          cents


=YOUNG PEOPLE'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND=

          By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE Illustrated School
          edition 60 cents


=YOUNG PEOPLE'S HISTORY OF IRELAND=

          By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE With introduction by
          JOHN BOYLE O'REILLY Illustrated School edition 60
          cents


=HEROES OF HISTORY= By GEORGE MAKEPEACE TOWLE Illustrated

          Vasco de Gama: his Voyages and Adventures School
          edition 60 cents

          Pizarro: his Adventures and Conquests School
          edition 60 cents

          Magellan: or The First Voyage Round the World
          School edition 60 cents

          Marco Polo: his Travels and Adventures School
          edition 60 cents

          Raleigh: his Voyages and Adventures School edition
          60 cents

          Drake the Sea King of Devon School edition 60
          cents

=THE STORY OF OUR COUNTRY= By Mrs. L. B. MONROE 80 cents

_Net prices_ Ten per cent additional by mail or express prepaid

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=



ENGLISH AS IT SHOULD * * BE WRITTEN * *

Handbooks for All Lovers of Correct Language

          Neatly bound in cloth  50 cents each


=_MISTAKES IN WRITING ENGLISH AND HOW TO AVOID THEM_=

          For the use of all who teach, write, or speak the
          language. By MARSHALL T. BIGELOW, author of
          "Punctuation and other Typographical Matters."


=_PUNCTUATION AND OTHER TYPOGRAPHICAL MATTERS_=

          For the use of Printers, Authors, Teachers, and
          Scholars. By MARSHALL T. BIGELOW, Corrector at the
          University Press, Cambridge.


=_1000 BLUNDERS IN ENGLISH_=

          A Handbook of Suggestions in Reading and Speaking.
          By HARLAN H. BALLARD, A.M., Principal of Lenox
          Academy, Lenox, Mass.


=_HINTS AND HELPS_=

          For those who write, print, or read. By BENJAMIN
          DREW.


=_ENGLISH SYNONYMES DISCRIMINATED_=

          By Rev. RICHARD WHATELY, D.D., the Archbishop of
          Dublin. A new edition.


=_SOULE & CAMPBELL'S PRONOUNCING HANDBOOK_=

          Of Words often mispronounced, and of words as to
          which a Choice of Pronunciation is allowed. 3,000
          Mistakes in Pronunciation corrected.


=_CAMPBELL'S HANDBOOK OF ENGLISH SYNONYMES_=

          With an Appendix showing the Correct Uses of
          Prepositions.


=_HINTS ON LANGUAGE_=

          In connection with Sight Reading and Writing in
          Primary and Intermediate Schools. By S. ARTHUR
          BENT, A.M., Superintendent of Public Schools,
          Clinton, Mass.


=_FORGOTTEN MEANINGS_=

          Or, An Hour with the Dictionary. By ALFRED WAITES,
          author of "Student's Historical Manual."


=_SHORT STUDIES OF AMERICAN AUTHORS_=

          By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON, author of "Young
          Folks' History of the United States," "Young
          Folks' American Explorers," "Malbone," "Outdoor
          Papers," "Oldport Days," "Army Life in a Black
          Regiment," "Atlantic Essays," etc.


=_HINTS ON WRITING AND SPEECH-MAKING_=

By THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON.


=_UNIVERSAL PHONOGRAPHY_=

          Or, Shorthand by the "Allen Method." A
          Self-instructor, whereby more Speed than Long-Hand
          Writing is gained at the First Lesson, and
          additional Speed at each Subsequent Lesson. By G.
          G. ALLEN, Principal of the Allen Stenographic
          Institute, Boston.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




ADVANCED ELOCUTIONARY BOOKS


          =ADVANCED READINGS AND RECITATIONS= By AUSTIN B.
          FLETCHER A.M. LL.B. late professor of oratory
          Brown University and Boston University School of
          Law. This book has been already adopted in a large
          number of universities, colleges, post-graduate
          schools of law and theology, seminaries, etc.
          $1.50

"Professor Fletcher's noteworthy compilation has been made with rare
rhetorical judgment, and evinces a sympathy for the best forms of
literature, adapted to attract readers and speakers, and mould their
literary taste."--Professor J. W. CHURCHILL, _Andover Theological
Seminary_.


          =THE BOOK OF ELOQUENCE= A collection of extracts
          in prose and verse from the most famous orators
          and poets By CHARLES DUDLEY WARNER $1.50

"What can be said that is more eloquent praise than that Charles Dudley
Warner has carefully selected three hundred and sixty-four specimens of
the choicest things from the world's literature? If there is any subject
untouched, we fail to discover it. It is a compendium of the world's
eloquence. It is useless to tell who is in here, for everybody is; and
it is clear that Mr. Warner has made his extracts with great care. It
has the most eloquence ever packed into twice as many pages."


          =VOCAL AND ACTION LANGUAGE, CULTURE AND
          EXPRESSION= New edition By E. N. KIRBY instructor
          in elocution in Boston University By mail 83
          cents.

"This is a treatise, at once scientific and practical, on the theory and
art of elocution. It treats of the structure of the vocal organs, of
vocal culture and expression, of action-language, gesticulation, the use
of the body and hands in oratory, etc. There is also a well-arranged
collection of extracts for elocution. The work is well adapted for use
as a text-book on elocution, and for study by professional
students."--_Indianapolis Journal._


          =FIVE-MINUTE READINGS= Selected and adapted by
          WALTER K. FOBES 50 cents

          =FIVE-MINUTE DECLAMATIONS= Selected and adapted by
          WALTER K. FOBES teacher of elocution and public
          reader 50 cents

          =FIVE-MINUTE DECLAMATIONS= _Second Part_ Selected
          and adapted by WALTER K. FOBES Cloth 50 cents.

          =FIVE-MINUTE RECITATIONS= By WALTER K. FOBES 50
          cents

Pupils in public schools, on declamation days, are limited to five
minutes each for the delivery of "pieces." There is a great complaint of
the scarcity of material for such a purpose, while the injudicious
pruning of eloquent extracts has often marred the desired effects. To
obviate these difficulties new "Five-Minute" books have been prepared by
a competent teacher.

"We have never before seen packed in so small a compass so much that may
be considered really representative of the higher class of
oratory."--_Boston Transcript._

          =ELOCUTION SIMPLIFIED= With an appendix on
          Lisping, Stammering and other Impediments of
          Speech By WALTER K. FOBES graduate of the "Boston
          School of Oratory" Cloth 50 cents. Paper 30 cents

"The whole art of elocution is succinctly set forth in this small
volume, which might be judiciously included among the text-books of
schools."--_New Orleans Picayune._

_Sold by all booksellers or sent by mail postpaid on receipt of price_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




YOUNG FOLKS' BOOKS OF TRAVEL


          =DRIFTING ROUND THE WORLD; A Boy's Adventures by
          Sea and Land=

          By CAPT. CHARLES W. HALL, author of "Adrift in the
          Ice-Fields," "The Great Bonanza," etc. With
          numerous full-page and letter-press illustrations.
          Royal 8vo. Handsome cover. $1.75. Cloth, gilt,
          $2.50.

"Out of the beaten track" in its course of travel, record of adventures,
and descriptions of life in Greenland, Labrador, Ireland, Scotland,
England, France, Holland, Russia, Asia, Siberia, and Alaska. Its hero is
young, bold, and adventurous; and the book is in every way interesting
and attractive.


_EDWARD GRÉEY'S JAPANESE SERIES_

          =YOUNG AMERICANS IN JAPAN; or, The Adventures of
          the Jewett Family and their Friend Oto Nambo=

          With 170 full-page and letter-press illustrations.
          Royal 8vo, 7 x 9½ inches. Handsomely illuminated
          cover. $1.75. Cloth, black and gold, $2.50.

This story, though essentially a work of fiction, is filled with
interesting and truthful descriptions of the curious ways of living of
the good people of the land of the rising sun.


          =THE WONDERFUL CITY OF TOKIO; or, The Further
          Adventures of the Jewett Family and their Friend
          Oto Nambo=

          With 169 illustrations. Royal 8vo, 7 x 9½ inches.
          With cover in gold and colors, designed by the
          author. $1.75. Cloth, black and gold, $2.50.

"A book full of delightful information. The author has the happy gift of
permitting the reader to view things as he saw them. The illustrations
are mostly drawn by a Japanese artist, and are very unique."--_Chicago
Herald._


          =THE BEAR WORSHIPPERS OF YEZO AND THE ISLAND OF
          KARAFUTO; being the further Adventures of the
          Jewett Family and their Friend Oto Nambo=

          180 illustrations. Boards, $1.75. Cloth, $2.50.

Graphic pen and pencil pictures of the remarkable bearded people who
live in the north of Japan. The illustrations are by native Japanese
artists, and give queer pictures of a queer people, who have been seldom
visited.


_HARRY W. FRENCH'S BOOKS_

=OUR BOYS IN INDIA=

          The wanderings of two young Americans in
          Hindustan, with their exciting adventures on the
          sacred rivers and wild mountains. With 145
          illustrations. Royal 8vo, 7 x 9½ inches. Bound in
          emblematic covers of Oriental design, $1.75.
          Cloth, black and gold, $2.50.

While it has all the exciting interest of a romance, it is remarkably
vivid in its pictures of manners and customs in the land of the Hindu.
The illustrations are many and excellent.


=OUR BOYS IN CHINA=

          The adventures of two young Americans, wrecked in
          the China Sea on their return from India, with
          their strange wanderings through the Chinese
          Empire. 188 illustrations. Boards, ornamental
          covers in colors and gold, $1.75. Cloth, $2.50.

This gives the further adventures of "Our Boys" of India fame in the
land of Teas and Queues.


_Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




=EVERY-DAY BUSINESS NOTES ON ITS PRACTICAL DETAILS=

    =Arranged for Young People by M. S. EMERY=

    Price, boards, 30 cents net. By mail, 35 cents.


AN accurate knowledge of how to attend to the every-day affairs of a
business life is, indeed, a most valuable possession. The requirements
of modern business life are manifold and exacting, demanding technical
information, and, besides, quite a degree of what may justly be termed
"cultivation." This valuable and indispensable book covers a wide range
of information of much importance, and is designed as a text-book for
schools, and for ready reference for young people and those who need
such instruction as it contains. It treats in an attractive and clear
manner subjects which bear on every-day callings, like "Letter-writing,"
by which so large a percentage of business is conducted; "Bills,
Receipts, and Accounts;" "Post-Office Business," with instructions
regarding late advantages and scope of accommodation; "Telegrams,"
"Express Business," "United States Money," "Savings Banks," "National
Banks," "Bank Checks," "Notes and Drafts," "Mortgages," "Investment and
Speculation," "Taxes," "Fire Insurance," and "Life Insurance." These are
topics conveying a general idea of the worth of the book--topics about
which business men must know, and covering that which they who would be
business men must learn. Keeping relatively abreast of modern methods,
the educators of our day see the necessity of imparting _business
knowledge_, as well as that which is purely scientific, historical, or
literary in its nature; hence, the adaptability of "Every-Day Business"
to the necessities of American schools and our progressive ways of life.




=MISS WEST'S CLASS IN GEOGRAPHY=

    =By FRANCES C. SPARHAWK   Boards 30 cts   By mail 35 cts=


"After making child-nature a special study, Miss Sparhawk offers this
little book as its result. It is designed to be used as a supplementary
reader for classes in geography, and in cases of very young children as
preparatory to the definitions and statements of text-books, which to
children so often mean nothing. Still, the author does not intend that
because this book is used all verbal explanations should be done away
with; and while it is designed to take the place of aimless and weary
work, it is not at all intended to do away with work and substitute play
in its stead. The subjects treated preclude that idea. Such topics as
the following require study and work on the part of both teacher and
pupil: 'The Horizon,' 'Trees,' 'Vegetation,' 'Heat and Moisture,'
'Water-sheds,' 'Sun and Rain,' 'Highways and Barriers,' 'From the Lakes
to the Gulf,' 'Cities,' 'Mountains and Rivers,' and many more important
topics, including the continents."--_School Journal._


_Sold by all booksellers and sent by mail postpaid on receipt of price_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




NARRATIVES OF NOTED TRAVELLERS


          =GERMANY SEEN WITHOUT SPECTACLES; or, Random
          Sketches of Various Subjects, Penned from
          Different Standpoints in the Empire=

          By HENRY RUGGLES, late United States Consul at the
          Island of Malta, and at Barcelona, Spain. $1.50.

"Mr. Ruggles writes briskly: he chats and gossips, slashing right and
left with stout American prejudices, and has made withal a most
entertaining book."--_New York Tribune._


          =TRAVELS AND OBSERVATIONS IN THE ORIENT, with a
          Hasty Flight in the Countries of Europe=

          By WALTER HARRIMAN (ex-Governor of New Hampshire).
          $1.50.

"The author, in his graphic description of these sacred localities,
refers with great aptness to scenes and personages which history has
made famous. It is a chatty narrative of travel."--_Concord Monitor._


=FORE AND AFT=

          A Story of Actual Sea-Life. By ROBERT B. DIXON,
          M.D. $1.25.

Travels in Mexico, with vivid descriptions of manners and customs, form
a large part of this striking narrative of a fourteen-months' voyage.


=VOYAGE OF THE PAPER CANOE=

          A Geographical Journey of Twenty-five Hundred
          Miles from Quebec to the Gulf of Mexico. By
          NATHANIEL H. BISHOP. With numerous illustrations
          and maps specially prepared for this work. Crown
          8vo. $1.50.

"Mr. Bishop did a very bold thing, and has described it with a happy
mixture of spirit, keen observation, and _bonhomie_."--_London Graphic._


=FOUR MONTHS IN A SNEAK-BOX=

          A Boat Voyage of Twenty-six Hundred Miles down the
          Ohio and Mississippi Rivers, and along the Gulf of
          Mexico. By NATHANIEL H. BISHOP. With numerous maps
          and illustrations. $1.50.

"His glowing pen-pictures of 'shanty-boat' life on the great rivers are
true to life. His descriptions of persons and places are
graphic."--_Zion's Herald._


          =A THOUSAND MILES' WALK ACROSS SOUTH AMERICA, Over
          the Pampas and the Andes=

          By NATHANIEL H. BISHOP. Crown 8vo. New edition.
          Illustrated. $1.50.

"Mr. Bishop made this journey when a boy of sixteen, has never forgotten
it, and tells it in such a way that the reader will always remember it,
and wish there had been more."


=CAMPS IN THE CARIBBEES=

          Being the Adventures of a Naturalist Bird-hunting
          in the West-India Islands. By FRED A. OBER. New
          edition. With maps and illustrations. $1.50.

"During two years he visited mountains, forests, and people, that few,
if any, tourists had ever reached before. He carried his camera with
him, and photographed from nature the scenes by which the book is
illustrated."--_Louisville Courier-Journal._


          =ENGLAND FROM A BACK WINDOW; With Views of
          Scotland and Ireland=

          By J. M. BAILEY, the "'Danbury News' Man." 12mo.
          $1.00.

"The peculiar humor of this writer is well known. The British Isles have
never before been looked at in just the same way,--at least, not by any
one who has notified us of the fact. Mr. Bailey's travels possess,
accordingly, a value of their own for the reader, no matter how many
previous records of journeys in the mother country he may have
read."--_Rochester Express._


_Sold by all booksellers, and sent by mail, postpaid, on receipt of
price_

          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




THE YOUNG FOLKS' BOOK OF POETRY

CONTAINING A COLLECTION OF THE BEST SHORT AND EASY POEMS FOR READING AND
RECITATION IN SCHOOLS AND FAMILIES


          SELECTED AND ARRANGED BY

          LOOMIS J. CAMPBELL

          AUTHOR OF "PRONOUNCING HANDBOOK," "COLUMBIAN SPEAKER," ETC.

COMPRISING

          =Part 1. Simple Poems and Easy Rhymes=
          =Part 2. Select Poems for School and Home=
          =Part 3. Classic Poems for School and Home=

  Complete in one volume, illustrated, 80 cents net. By mail 85 cents
  Separate parts in paper covers, 20 cents each, net. By mail 22 cents
  Separate parts in board covers, 30 cents each, net. By mail 35 cents

CONTAINS upward of two hundred and seventy short poems, which are, or
should be, favorites with children from seven or eight to fourteen or
fifteen years of age. All the selections are well adapted for reading
aloud and for paraphrasing; as an aid in practical composition, they may
be made of great use.




SPEAKING PIECES FOR LITTLE SCHOLARS AND OLDER PUPILS

BY ELLEN ORTENSIA PECK


          Price, boards, 50 cents

THIS, in very truth, is a "rare gem of a book" of its character. In
common phrase, it "fills the bill" for the exceedingly useful purpose
for which it was designed. The book includes within its pages original
recitations and dialogues, charades and entertainments for school
exhibitions and home pleasure, with pieces for birthday and wedding
anniversaries, Decoration Day, and other occasional celebrations. The
foundation purpose of the book is grand,--the many varieties of
composition, which include almost numberless methods of expressing
beautiful and valuable thoughts and sentiments; the remarkable
adaptability of the pieces to elevate the mind, attract the quick and
abiding interest of the reader; the noble spirit; the persuasive and
gentle rhythm; rich, yet plain language,--render this little volume one
of substantial merit and permanent worth; and as the simple expression
of great thoughts appeals to young and old alike, so "Speaking Pieces"
will find admirers other than "little scholars and older pupils."


          =LEE AND SHEPARD Publishers Boston=




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

"Synonymes" is the correct spelling in the title of the book, "A Book of
English Synonymes."

Obvious punctuation errors were corrected.

Page 83, "acknowledgement" changed to "acknowledgment" (or making
acknowledgment)




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LESSONS ON MANNERS FOR SCHOOL AND HOME USE ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

