



The Two Whalers; or, Adventures in the Pacific, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________
Jack is a young teenager, who is being prepared for the sea. He lives in
Deal, a busy port in East Kent, and several well-found boats with good
skippers hail from there.  After attending a nautical college, and
obtaining first prize there, he goes to sea with Captain Hake in the
"Eagle".  He has already met Medley, another apprentice in the same
vessel.

They have difficulty getting out of the Thames Estuary and into the
Channel, on account of the weather, but eventually they reach southern
latitudes where again they have difficulty in rounding Cape Horn and
getting into the Pacific.  Here begin a series of difficulties despite
which they manage to catch some whales, and boil down the blubber, for
its oil.  The difficulties include weather, mutineers, pirates, and
separation of whaling boats from the mother ship.

Eventually of course all problems are overcome, and they return to
England, no doubt to go back to sea again soon after.

________________________________________________________________________

THE TWO WHALERS; OR, ADVENTURES IN THE PACIFIC, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.



CHAPTER ONE.

I hail from Deal, where my father was highly respected, not on account
of his worldly wealth, for of that he had but small store, but because
he was an honest, upright, God-fearing man, who did his duty to his
neighbour, and ruled his family with discretion.

And my mother--she was a mother!--so loving and gentle and considerate;
she kept us, her children, of whom there were nine, I being the third,
in excellent order, and yet we scarcely discovered the means she
employed.  We trusted her implicitly; we knew that she entered into all
our sorrows as well as into our joys and amusements.  How carefully she
bound up a cut finger or bathed a bruised knee; or if we were trying to
manufacture any toy, how ready she was to show us the best way to do the
work; how warmly she admired it when finished, and how proudly she
showed it to father when he came in.  I was accustomed from my earliest
days to the sight of ships coming into or going out of the Downs, or
brought up before our town, and I used to listen with deep interest to
the account of his adventures in all parts of the world with which our
neighbour, Captain Bland, was wont to entertain us when he came to our
house, or when we went in to take tea with him and Mrs Bland and their
daughter Mary.  I can, therefore, scarcely remember the time when I did
not wish to become a sailor, though as my eldest brother Bill was
intended for the sea, and indeed went away when I was still a little
fellow, my father had thoughts of bringing me up to some trade or other.
I should have been content to follow my father's wishes, or rather to
have done what he believed best for me, had I been sent away inland,
where I could not have heard nautical matters talked about, and where
the sea and shipping would have been out of my sight.  While I remained
at home the desire grew stronger and stronger to become like the
seafaring men I was constantly meeting--pilots, masters and mates, and
boatmen--and I may venture to say that a finer race of sailors are
nowhere to be found than those belonging to Deal.

Captain Bland was a thorough sailor.  He dearly loved the sea, and the
ship he commanded, and his crew--at least he took a warm interest in
their welfare--but he loved his wife and daughter more, and for their
sakes he remained on shore longer than he would otherwise have done.
Still, he made three or four voyages while I was a youngster, and he
always spoke as if he had no intention of abandoning the sea until he
had laid by a competency for old age.  How many a master says the same,
and goes on ploughing the ocean in the delusive hope of reaping a
harvest till the great reaper gathers him into his garner.

Notwithstanding my predilections in favour of a sea life, I was still
undecided as to my future career, when one winter's day, after school
hours, as I was taking a run out on the London Road, I saw coming along
towards me a fine broad, well-built lad, with a sun-burnt countenance,
and a stick having a bundle at the end of it over his shoulder.  His
dress, and the jaunty way he walked, with a slight roll, as if trying to
steady himself on a tossing deck, showed me that he was a sailor.  We
were going to pass each other, when he looked hard at me, and I looked
hard at him.  Suddenly it struck me that I knew his features; so I
stopped, and he stopped, and we gazed into one another's faces.

"Can you be brother Bill?"  I exclaimed.

"Bill's my name, my hearty.  And you!--are you brother Jack?  Yes, I'm
sure you are!"  And grasping my hand he wrung it till I thought he would
have wrung it off, while, half-laughing, half-crying for pleasure, he
asked, "How's father and mother, and Susan and Jane, and Mary and Dick,
and the rest of them; and little Tommy?"

He was the youngest of us, and could just toddle when Bill went away.
Thus he ran on, asking question after question, which I answered as well
as I could, while we went towards home at a pretty round trot--he eager
to get there and see them all again, and I almost as eager to have the
satisfaction of rushing in and shouting out, "Here's Bill come back
again!"

I need not describe the way Bill was received.  No one seemed to think
that they could make enough of him.  Mary, a small girl, sat on his knee
at supper, with one arm round his neck, and ever and anon gave him a
kiss and a hug, exclaiming, "Dear Bill, we are so glad you're come
back;" and Susan and Jane placed themselves one on each side that they
might the better help him to what was on the table; and we bigger boys
listened eagerly to all he said; and father watched him with pride, and
the light shone brighter than ever from mother's eyes as she gazed at
him; and little Tommy came toddling into the room in his night-gown
(having scrambled out of his crib) saying, "Tommy want see dat brodder
Bill really come home--all right--dere he is--hurrah!" and off he ran
again with Susan at his heels, but he had nimbly climbed into his nest
before she caught him.

As to myself, I looked at Bill with unbounded admiration, and eagerly
listened to every word which dropped from his lips.  He had plenty to
talk about, and wonders of all sorts to describe, for he had been in the
Indian Sea, and visited China, and the west coast of America, and
several islands in the Pacific, and gone round the world.  How he
rattled on!  I thought Drake, Cavendish, and Dampier, Lord Anson and
Captain Cook were nothing to him--at all events, that I would far rather
hear the narrative of his adventures than read theirs.

I was almost vexed with Captain Bland for coming in one evening, even
though Mary accompanied him, because Bill became suddenly far more
reticent than usual in his presence, if not altogether dumb, and when he
did speak, merely described in a modest tone some very commonplace
occurrences.  I could not make it out.  After some time, when Bill was
out of ear-shot, I heard Captain Bland remark to father that he liked
lads who did not speak about themselves.  It was a pretty sure sign that
they were better doers than talkers.  "He'll succeed, will that lad of
yours; he's kept his eyes open wherever he's been; he'll make a smart
officer one of these days," he added.

I was much pleased when Captain Bland thus spoke of Bill, and I thought
to myself, what would he have said if he had heard him describe some of
the wonderful adventures he had narrated to us.  When I afterwards told
Bill what the old captain had said, and my ideas on the subject, he
laughed heartily.

"Why, Jack, he would have shut me up pretty smartly," he answered.  "Old
cocks don't allow young ones to crow in their presence."

Bill made ample amends for his previous silence when we were together,
knowing that I was never tired of listening to him.  I could think about
nothing else but what he had told me, and I made up my mind that I would
far rather become a sailor than follow any other calling.  I told him
so.

"Well, Jack, I think you're right," he said; "I wouldn't change if I had
the offer--no, not to become Prime Minister of England or the first
merchant in the land.  Remember, though, it isn't all smooth sailing.
You must expect rough weather as well as fine; but if you're determined
to go I'll speak to father, and I don't think that he'll refuse you."

Bill fulfilled his promise, and father, after consulting Captain Bland,
agreed to let me go, provided I was of the same mind when I was old
enough to be apprenticed.  Neither our mother nor our sisters had a word
to say against my wishes; nor had Mary Bland.

"I wish that I was a boy, Jack, that I might go also," she exclaimed.
"We shall be very, very sorry to lose you," she added after a short
silence; "but then, you know, you will come back, and how glad we all
shall be to see you again."

Bill told me how well pleased he was that father had given me leave to
go to sea.  "But I want you to study navigation at once, so that you may
become an officer as soon as possible.  You'll never get on without
that," he said, and producing an old, well-thumbed edition of Hamilton
Moore's "Epitome of Navigation," he added, "I'll give you this, Jack.
It has served me, and will serve you well if you master it as I've
done."  How I did prize that book!  I doubt if I ever valued anything
more in my life.  My brother, I should have said, had been at an
excellent nautical school in Deal, established a few years before by
several officers of the Royal Navy, where he gained much credit by his
intelligence and attention to his studies.  As soon as it was finally
settled that I was to go to sea I was sent to the same school on the day
my brother left home to go on his next voyage.  I easily passed in, as I
knew all the simple rules of arithmetic thoroughly, and was pretty well
up in decimals.  Having learned from my brother that the use of
logarithms and the first principles of geometry would soon be taught me
at school, with his help I had at once set to work on them, and after he
went away I continued my studies in the evenings when other boys were at
play, so that I quickly mastered all those necessary preliminaries.  I
consequently got over them at school with a rapidity which astonished
the master, and with no little pride I heard the inspector, a naval
captain, remark, "First-rate boy--beats his brother--be a master in a
jiffy."

The result of my working so hard out of hours was that at our annual
examination I took the first prize, and was shortly afterwards
pronounced fit to be sent to sea.  As I still held to my wish to go, my
father at once wrote to the owners of several first-class South Sea
whalers, who immediately agreed to send me as an apprentice on board one
of their ships, the "Eagle," Captain Hake, just about to sail for the
Pacific.

On the night before my departure I slept but little for thinking of the
novel and wonderful scenes I expected to go through, and I am pretty
sure that my kind mother did not close her eyes, but from a different
cause.  She was thinking of parting from me, and of the dangers to which
I was to be exposed.  She was praying that I might be preserved from
them I know, for she told me so.  At three o'clock in the morning she
called me up, that I might be ready to start with my father by the mail
coach for Margate, whence we were to go up the river to London by
steamer.  How earnestly did my pious father at family prayers, which he
never omitted, commend me to the care of Him who watches over all the
creatures of His hands!  I felt that there was a reality in that prayer,
such as I had never before comprehended.

Breakfast over, and parting embraces given, we started, and rattling
away to Margate, were soon on board the "Royal Adelaide" on our way up
the Thames.  Bitter as was the cold, I was too much occupied in running
about and examining everything connected with the steamer to mind it.
The helm, the machinery, the masts and rigging, the huge paddle-wheels,
the lead and lead-line, all came under my notice.  As I was in no ways
bashful I made the acquaintance of several persons on board, and among
others I spoke to a lad considerably my senior, whose dress and
well-bronzed face and hands showed me that he was a sailor.

"Are you going to sea, youngster?" he asked, looking me over from head
to foot, as if to judge how far I was cut out for a nautical life.

"Yes, in a few days, I hope, on board the `Eagle,'" I answered.

"That is curious; she is the ship I belong to," he remarked.  "You're in
luck, for she's a smart craft, and, as things go, we are tolerably
comfortable on board; but you must be prepared to take the rough with
the smooth, mind you; there are a good many things to rub against afloat
as well as ashore, you'll find."

"And what sort of man is the captain?"  I asked somewhat eagerly,
anxious to know the character of my future commander.

"The captain is the captain, and while you are on board his ship you'd
better not rub against him, but listen to what he tells you to do, and
do it; sharp's the word with him."  I was not much the wiser from this
information, but I gathered from it that Captain Hake was a man who
would stand no nonsense.  I determined at all events to learn my duty,
and to try and perform it to the best of my power.  I next asked my new
friend his name, supposing that, though he looked young, he might be one
of the mates.

"Andrew Medley," he answered.  "I am still an apprentice, as you are
about to become, so we shall be messmates; and if you are wise, I hope
that we shall get on well together."

"I hope so," I replied, with confidence, liking his looks.  Just then my
father came up, and hearing that Medley was to be my messmate, shook
hands with him.  Presently he sent me off on some excuse or other, and
drawing Medley aside, had a short, earnest talk with him.  What it was
about I did not at the time know.

"I am thankful that you have got so right-minded a young man for a
messmate," observed my father shortly afterwards.  "He will, I hope,
prove a true friend to you."

I must not stop to describe my astonishment at the crowded thoroughfares
we passed along on our way to the inn where we lodged for the night.
The next morning we went to the office of the owners in Old Broad
Street, where I was, by the signing of certain papers, bound apprentice
for four years on board the good ship "Eagle," South Sea whaler, Captain
Hake commander.  This done, we made our way to the river, and getting
into a wherry proceeded in her to the dock, in which my ship lay getting
ready for sea.  On going on board I looked round for Medley, but could
nowhere see him, and presently my father took me up to Captain Hake, who
was standing aft, giving his orders in a sharp, ringing voice, which
showed that he was accustomed to be obeyed.

"If he is the man his appearance betokens, he is a very fine fellow
indeed," I thought to myself.  He was of good height, with broad
shoulders, an open countenance, well-bronzed, large blue eyes, and a
thick bushy beard.  I don't know if he formed as good an opinion of me
as I did of him, but he looked down good-naturedly as he said, "I'll do
my best to make a seaman of the lad, Mr Kemp, and I'll keep an eye on
him, as I do on all the youngsters under my charge."

He then invited us into the cabin and gave us some luncheon, after which
my father took his leave.  I accompanied him to the side.  Pressing my
hand, with a trembling voice he said, "We may never meet again, Jack.
You have chosen a perilous profession, and may at any moment be called
away; but, my dear boy, seek always so to live that you may be ready to
go when summoned."

I watched him as he pulled away till his wherry was lost to sight among
the shipping, and at first felt very sad; but I soon recovered my
spirits, and having got one of the few seamen who had joined to stow my
chest away for me on the half-deck, where he told me the apprentices
slept, I set out to make an exploring expedition round the ship.  I
should have been wiser had I waited for Medley, or, at all events,
avoided touching anything with the use of which I was not acquainted.

Among other novelties which I examined was the windlass, which had the
handles shipped, but I did not observe that on the top of it was coiled
a large quantity of iron chain out of the way to allow of the deck being
scraped.  I saw that the big thing was intended to go round, so I
thought that I would try if I could move it by myself.  I pressed with
all my force against one of the handles, when, to my infinite
satisfaction, the windlass began to revolve, but as it did so, to my
still greater dismay, down came the chain rattling on to the deck.  In
vain I tried to stop it.  I then made a desperate effort to replace it,
but as it had taken probably two men some time to put it up I had not
the slightest chance of succeeding.  My task was something like that of
Sisyphus, a man of ancient days, who had to roll a huge stone to the top
of a mountain, but which always came down again as soon as he got it
there.

I had not been long engaged in my hopeless undertaking when my ears were
assailed by such a volley of abuse as I had never before heard in my
life.  As I turned round, letting go the chain, which came rattling down
again on deck, I discovered that it proceeded from a head that had
suddenly appeared above the combings of the fore hatch.  It might have
been a picturesque head, but was not pleasant-looking to my eyes.  On
the top was an old party-coloured nightcap, beneath which stuck out on
all sides a mass of reddish hair resembling oakum or shavings, as
untwisted rope is called at sea; a pair of ferrety eyes, a snub nose,
and a huge mouth half concealed by a bushy beard, completed the
countenance of the individual who was addressing me.  I need not repeat
what he said, but if his remarks were true I was among the greatest
reprobates this evil world has ever produced.  I stood with my hands by
my side mutely gazing at him, for I had nothing to say for myself.  I
was conscious that I had done something wrong, though not meriting the
remarks to which I was listening.

"Arrah, now spake, youngster, if you've a tongue belonging to you,"
cried the head.  Still I said nothing.  Presently, below the head a pair
of broad shoulders covered with a red shirt emerged from the hatchway,
and I had an unpleasant vision of a bear-like hand grasping a short
piece of knotted rope.  The next instant a short thick-set man in tarry
trousers springing on deck advanced towards me, ominously flourishing
the piece of rope.  I did not think of running, for I had nowhere to run
to, so I stood stock still.  Down came the rope on my shoulders.  I
tried hard not to cry out.  A second and a third blow followed.  I had
on a pretty thick jacket on account of the cold, so that I was not so
much hurt as I might have been; still, as I did not like the treatment I
was receiving, I tried to get out of my tormentor's way, and in doing so
fell over the chain flat on the deck, striking my nose in a way which
made the blood flow pretty quickly.  He not noticing this gave me
another whack, which hurt more than all the others, as it was on the
part most exposed, and was about to repeat it, when I heard a voice say
"Hold fast there, Dan; enough of that.  The boy hasn't been on board an
hour and you must needs get foul of him."

"Who are you that's afther spakin' to me in that way?  Sure, if, I'm not
mighty mistaken, you're only an apprentice yourself," exclaimed Dan, in
an angry tone.

While he was speaking I crawled along the deck out of his way, and
looking up, I recognised my acquaintance on board the steamer, Andrew
Medley, who replied calmly, "Whether or not I am only an apprentice,
I'll not stand by and see a young boy ill-treated who hasn't strength to
defend himself."

The ruffian laughed hoarsely, but when he saw the blood streaming down
my face as Medley assisted me to get up, he looked somewhat alarmed, for
he remembered that we were not yet at sea, and that although he might
then treat me much worse with impunity it would be prudent to avoid the
risk of being summoned before a magistrate for an assault.

"Are you much hurt, Jack?" asked Medley, as he led me aft.

"Only my nose bleeds; though the last cuts that man gave me were not
pleasant," I replied.

"If that's all, come below and we'll soon get you set to rights with
some cold water," said Medley.  "I am glad I came in time to save you
from tasting more of Dan Hogan's colt.  Though a bully, he is a good
boat-steerer, so the captain keeps him on, but, for my part, I think the
ship would be better without him."

"I should have been so, at all events, just now," I remarked, and I went
down with Medley to the half-deck.

With the help of a sponge and some cold water I was soon put to rights,
and except that I felt an unpleasant sensation in the back I was not
much the worse for the beating I had received.  The first mate, Mr
Renshaw, however, who had heard of my performance from Hogan, quickly
sent for me, and after scolding me for my carelessness, ordered me to
draw a bucket of water.  "I'll find something for you to do, depend on
that, youngster," he observed, and he was as good as his word.

I was not over successful in carrying out this my first piece of duty,
for in attempting to secure a rope to the bucket that I might lower it
over the side, I made a slippery hitch.  To my dismay when I hauled in
the rope the bucket was not at the end.  It had gone to the bottom.  I
fully expected to get another taste of Dan Hogan's colt, but Medley, who
at that moment came on deck, seeing what had happened, lowered a hook
and fished up the bucket.  He then showed me how to make a proper hitch,
and the mate kept me drawing water till my arms ached.

I was feeling very hungry, and was wondering if I should get any dinner,
when Medley told me that no fires were allowed to be lighted on board,
and consequently that no cooking could be carried on while the ship was
in dock.  I was thinking of petitioning the steward for some bread and
cheese, when the captain came out of his cabin and told me to accompany
him on shore.  Before long we stopped close to the dock entrance, at the
well-known inn, "The Dog and Duck," and taking me to the landlady told
her to supply me with whatever I wanted to eat and drink.  I thanked him
very much as he left me there, and the hostess asking me if I should
like something at once, to which I replied, "I should think so indeed,"
speedily placed a capital dinner before me.  I did not fail after this,
whenever I felt hungry, to pay a visit to "The Dog and Duck," not being
particular as to hours, and mine hostess always looked glad to see me.

I had learned the names of the masts and yards and ropes, and a good
deal besides, thanks to Medley's assistance, by the time the ship was
ready for sea.  Even Dan Hogan readily told me anything I wanted to
know, and seemed as pleased as his rough nature would allow that I did
not show any ill-feeling towards him on account of the drubbing he had
given me.  In about a week after I went on board we hauled out of dock,
and a tug towed us down to Gravesend.  Here the owner paid us a parting
visit, followed by the Jew slop-sellers, with whom the men spent most of
their advanced wages in the purchase of all sorts of articles, the more
prudent furnishing themselves with warm clothing, and also with knives
and trinkets to barter with the natives of the islands we were likely to
visit.

The following day we reached the Nore lightship, where, the weather
looking dirty, by the orders of the pilot who had charge of us we
brought up.  Scarcely was the anchor at the bottom and the hands were
aloft furling sails than down came the gale upon us.  The pilot, a jolly
old fellow, kept singing out, "More yet, more yet," meaning that we were
to veer away more cable, and he did not seem satisfied till the whole of
it was out.  From this circumstance the men called him "Old More Yet."
I forget his real name.  I was thus early in my sea life to learn what a
real gale of wind is like.



CHAPTER TWO.

We lay at the Nore for several days with our bows pitching into the sea
and the spray flying over us, and after all, having lost both
anchor-stocks, and received other damage, we were obliged to return to
Gravesend to get them repaired.  This done, we again sailed.

Light winds prevailing, we were some time getting clear of the river.
We thought that we should at once stand down channel, but as we rounded
the North Foreland the weather looked more threatening than ever, and we
found that we were to bring up in the Downs.  I by this time had not
only got my sea legs, but was pretty handy aloft.  The winds being
contrary we had to tack ship very frequently.  I saw the first mate
looking up, when just then he sang out to me, "Away there, Jack, and
clear that rope from the lee fore-yard arm."  I knew what he wanted me
to do, so running up the rigging, lay out on the yard, and quickly
performed the duty required of me.  Instead, however, of returning at
once on deck, I sat watching several other ships beating up to an
anchorage, as we were, while I did not hear "Old More Yet," the pilot,
give the order "about ship."  Suddenly I felt the yard beginning to
swing round.  In another instant I should have been hurled off as from a
catapult into the seething ocean, or been dashed on the deck.

There was but one thing to do.  Retaining my presence of mind, I made a
desperate spring and caught hold of the topmast backstay, down which I
was sliding to the rail, when I saw the first mate rushing forward to
try and catch me as I fell, he having just recollected that he had sent
me aloft.  His countenance expressed the greatest alarm, for he was a
kind-hearted man, and fully believed that I should have been killed or
terribly injured.  When he saw that I was safe he rated me soundly for
my carelessness, and told me never to play the same trick again.  I saw,
however, that he was not really angry, and I fancy that I gained some
credit with him by the way I had sprung on to the backstay.  Had I
missed it I should have been dashed to pieces.

At length we brought up in the Downs, with two anchors down, the wind
blowing a heavy gale at south-west.  The sea was the colour of pea-soup,
tumbling and foaming and hissing, the wind roared and whistled through
the rigging, and ships were driving in all directions--some threatening
to come down upon us.  To be ready for any emergency the hands were kept
on deck, and "Old More Yet" stood with his keen eyes watching them,
prepared to give the order to veer away the cables should it be
necessary.  We escaped all accidents, however, and the weather began to
moderate.

The captain or the mates found employment for me from morning till
night.  I was indeed, as the youngest on board, at every one's beck and
call; but I did not complain.  I had come to sea to do my duty, and I
knew that that was to obey those over me in all things lawful.  One of
my tasks was to keep the captain's cabin in order.  I was one day
engaged in sweeping it when I heard outside a voice I knew.  It was my
father's.  He looked somewhat surprised at finding me thus employed, but
at once saw that I took it as a matter of course, and was in good heart.
My younger brother Dick was with him.  I was very glad to see them, and
having finished my job I asked them to come down on the half-deck,
where, while they were seated on Medley's and my chests, I regaled them
with bread and cheese.

"Won't you give it up and come on shore with us?" asked Dick, thinking
that I must be leading a very hard life.

"No, thank you," I answered.  "Matters are improving.  I got a thrashing
the first day and have never had one since.  It has been blowing pretty
hard till now, but we shall have fine weather in time, and I shall like
the life very well.  It is better to begin with the rough and to end
with the smooth than the other way."

"Rightly said, Jack," observed my father, well pleased to see me so
contented.

I sent many loving messages to my mother and sisters, not forgetting
Mary and Captain Bland, and after he had had a short conversation with
Medley and another with the captain he returned on shore.  I felt
somewhat sad while I watched him and Dick as they pulled away, and had I
then been asked to go with them I should have said yes; however, the
feeling soon wore off and I went on with my ordinary duties as if home
and all I held dear were not almost in sight.

Again we were under weigh, but it came on to blow as hard as ever from
the old quarter.  Still we kept at it, beating down channel with the
seas breaking over our bows.  I was just going along the deck with some
of the cabin dinner when, the ship diving into a heavier sea than usual,
I found myself washed clean over the windlass, a piece of boiled beef
flying in one direction, a dumpling in another, and potatoes and turnips
scattered on every side.  I rushed here and there to save as many as I
could, and, helped by the cook and Medley, I collected the greater
portion, but the captain looked very blue when I placed the food all
cold and sodden on the table.  It spoke well for him that he did not
blow me up; but he knew that it was not from my fault that his dinner
was spoilt, and I dare say that the same thing had occurred to him when
he was a youngster.

I had just returned on deck, where the first mate, shouting "Helm's
alee!" was in the act of putting the ship about, when, as I was going
forward, I saw Medley with two other men, one of whom was John Major, an
ordinary seaman, standing a short distance from me.  Suddenly I heard a
dull thud as if a heavy blow had been struck, followed by a piercing
shriek.  The clew of the mainsail was lashing about wildly in the gale.
I saw a body lifted from the deck and carried over the bulwarks.  It was
but a momentary glimpse.  I could scarcely have told whether or not it
was a human being I had seen till I looked towards where the three
persons had been standing.  One was gone.  The mate instantly hove the
ship up into the wind, a grating and some spars were thrown overboard,
and the captain, rushing on deck, ordered a boat to be lowered.
Notwithstanding the dangerously heavy sea running, a willing crew, with
the second mate, jumped into her.  Not seeing Medley I ran to the side,
fearing that he was the victim.  I saw the grating and spars, but could
nowhere perceive a man's head amid the foaming billows.  I expected
every moment as I watched the boat tumbling and tossing about that she
would be swamped.  The captain and first mate were looking anxiously
towards the place where the poor fellow must have fallen, but their
countenances showed that they did not see him.

"He's lost, I fear," said a voice near me.  I turned and saw Medley by
my side.  I was greatly relieved.

"Who has gone?"  I asked.

"John Major," he answered.  "He was speaking to me at the moment."

"Very awful," I remarked, "so suddenly to be called out of the world."

"Remember, Jack, that either you or I may be as suddenly summoned to
meet our God.  We must so live as to be prepared," he answered solemnly.

The boat, the search in vain, now coming alongside was hoisted up, and
the ship kept on her course.  Scarcely, however, had the yards been
braced round than down came the gale upon us with far greater force than
before.  There was no use longer contending against it.  The helm was
put up and we ran--tearing through the water--back again into the Downs.
Here we lay day after day waiting for a fair wind.  It was much the
same to me, but a severe trial of temper to the captain and most of the
ship's company, who wanted to be in the Pacific catching whales.

I have not yet described the crew of the "Eagle."  There was the
captain, three mates, the carpenter and his mate, the cooper and his
mate, the armourer, steward and cook, four boat-steerers, four able
seamen, eight ordinary seamen, the doctor, and two apprentices--namely,
Medley and I.  The ship was thus strongly manned for her size, but in
the whaling service, when sometimes four boats are away at a time, a
large number of hands are required.

By the time we had been a week in the Downs a fleet of some hundred
merchantmen were collected there, driven in by the long continuing
south-westerly gales.  We had very little communication with the shore,
though I managed to send a letter home, and Medley wrote to his friends.

"Never miss an opportunity of writing home, Jack," he said to me; "I
know the pleasure it gives to those who love us to receive a letter, and
the anxiety they suffer when they have to go long without hearing from
us."

I followed his advice, and wrote by every homeward bound ship we fell in
with, though many of my letters did not reach their destination.  We
also got a man, Eben Dredge, in place of poor John Major lost overboard.
Still the south-wester blustered and roared.  Some of the men declared
that it had set in for good, and that there never would be any other
wind as long as the world lasted.

At length one morning when Medley and I were below, we heard the first
mate shouting, "All hands up anchor!  Fair wind, boys!  Be smart there,
all of you."  We sprang on deck.  The watch below came tumbling up with
eager looks.  The wind had suddenly veered round to the east-north-east.
Every man, including the cook and steward, set to work with a will;
while some with a cheery song hove round the windlass, others flew aloft
to loose sails.  Hundreds of ships were setting sail at the same time,
their white canvas rapidly expanding to the breeze.

We were among the first to get under weigh, and running past numerous
ships we took the lead and kept it, closely pressed, however, by another
whaler, the "Fair Rosamond," but we lost sight of her off the Isle of
Wight.  As if the "Eagle" was eager to make up for lost time she ran
under every stitch of canvas she could carry at the rate of nearly
twelve knots an hour to the Lizard, when the wind fell; but it breezed
up again when we were in the Bay of Biscay, and blew great guns and
small arms, as sailors say, or in other words, very nearly a hurricane.
I own that I did not like it.  Our stout ship looked like a mere
cockle-shell amid the mighty billows, which in huge watery walls rose
half-way up the masts, threatening every instant to overwhelm her.
Though I tried to conceal my fears Medley detected them, but he did not
laugh at me.

"I once should have felt as you do, Jack, but I know that we are as safe
here in God's hands as on shore," he observed.  "Our ship is well-built,
well found, and well manned, and I trust that we shall weather this
gale, and any others we may have to encounter."

We did weather it without carrying away a rope-yarn, and having sighted
Madeira steered for the Cape de Verde Islands, at one of which, Brava,
we called to obtain fresh provisions and to ship several tall Kroomen to
pull the midship oars in the whale boats.  Very fine fellows they were,
with gentle, happy dispositions, never grumbling or complaining, and
they were consequently much liked by the officers and all the best men
of the crew.

After crossing the line "Sail ho!" was shouted from the masthead.  We
steered towards her.  The stranger proved to be an English brig bound
from Brazil to Liverpool.  The wind being light our captains exchanged
visits, and Medley, I, and others wrote home by her.  When in the
latitude of the River Plate preparations were made for bad weather, as
the winter of that region was approaching.  The long royal-masts were
sent down and replaced by stump topgallant masts, the flying jib-boom,
and the studding-sail booms were also sent down, and all the boats,
except one, were got in and secured, and the hatches were battened down,
and everything else was done to make the ship light aloft.  Some of the
men thought the captain over careful, but it was soon shown that he was
right.

"We shall have it before long, thick and strong," I heard him remark to
the first mate, though at the time there was scarcely a breath of wind.
"We'll stow the mainsail, and close reef the topsails."

"Ay, ay, sir," answered the mate, and the hands were sent aloft to
perform the operation.  Still an hour or more passed away, and we
continued on our course.

"The old man is croaking again," growled out Dan Hogan.

"Belay the slack there, mate.  The captain keeps his weather eye open,
which is more than some aboard this ship do," said Eben Dredge.  "What
do you think of those black clouds out there?"

"Maybe there's a little wind in them," answered Hogan.

"A little do you say!" exclaimed Dredge.  "See, here it comes to show us
whether there's a little or not."

As he spoke the wind struck the ship like the blow of a mighty hammer
right ahead.  She gathered stern way and some of the after dead-lights
being open the cabin was half filled with water.  Had we been under more
sail, the ship might possibly have gone down or her masts would have
been carried away.  I rushed forward to call the carpenter and his mate,
and we soon had the dead-lights closed.  While I was afterwards engaged
with the steward in swabbing up the cabin and putting things to rights
we felt the ship give some tremendous rolls.

"Hillo! what for come ober her now?" exclaimed Domingo, my companion,
who was a black.

On going on deck I found that she had fallen off into the trough of the
sea, and was being sent from side to side in away which seemed
sufficient to jerk the masts out of her.  The rigging was well set up,
or they would have gone to a certainty.  We had not seen the worst of
it.  The gale blew harder and harder, and presently down came the rain
in a way I had never seen it fall before, in regular torrents, as if
some huge reservoirs had been emptied out on us in a moment, flooding
the decks, and wetting us through our pea-coats to the skin.

Though several accidents happened we weathered this our first real gale,
and I found that the one we had encountered in the Bay of Biscay was
scarcely worthy of the name of a gale.  Sail being again made, we stood
southward, till at the end of April we sighted Cape Horn, and the hopes
of all were raised that we should soon be round it; but not half an hour
afterwards, the wind shifting to the west and blowing with tremendous
force, a mountainous sea getting up drove us back into the South
Atlantic.

The moment the wind abated we again made sail, and endeavoured to regain
our lost ground.  It was trying work.  The weather was bitterly cold--
the days little more than seven hours long--we scarcely ever had a dry
rag on our backs, for when the rain was not falling the sea was
continually breaking over us, knocking away our bulwarks, and
threatening to carry off those on deck to destruction.  Scarcely had we
made good forty or fifty miles to the westward, than the wind increasing
we had again to heave-to under a close-reefed fore-topsail.  Here we lay
day after day, drifting rapidly back from the point it had taken us so
long to gain.  Each day, too, saw our bulwarks more and more shattered
by the furious seas constantly breaking on board.

During this time I was one forenoon in the pantry, just outside the
captain's cabin, when Domingo, handing me a wooden bowl containing the
ingredients for a plum pudding, said, "Here you, Jack, carry dis to de
galley, and tell de cook to boil him well."

I was bound to obey the steward, black though he was, and away I sped on
my errand.  Just as I reached the deck the ship gave a lurch and sent me
down to leeward, when instead of, as I ought to have done, making my way
up to windward, to save the distance, I ran along on the lee side of the
deck.  Before, however, my destination was reached I saw rising up right
ahead a high, dark, foam-crested sea.  On it came.  With a crash like
thunder it broke on board, and rushed roaring and hissing along the
deck.  Letting go the bowl, I frantically clutched a handspike sticking
in the windlass, the nearest object to me.  The fierce water surrounded
me, the handspike unshipped, and, still grasping it, I felt myself borne
away into the seething, hissing ocean.  At that instant the ship gave
another lee-lurch--all hope was gone--every incident of my life passed
through my mind--when I caught a glimpse of the cook darting out of his
galley; seizing me by the collar he dragged me in, dripping wet and half
stunned.  It was the work of a moment.

Directly afterwards the watch on the quarterdeck came hurrying forward
with the third mate, who sang out, in a tone of alarm, "Where is that
boy?" making sure that I had been carried overboard, he not having seen
the cook lift me into the galley.  When he found me there--though I
fancied that I deserved commiseration, for my teeth chattered with cold
and fright, and I looked like a drowned rat--he rated me soundly for
having gone along the lee side.  Medley, however, who had come with the
rest, took me down below and made me shift into a dry suit of his
clothing.  He then persuaded Domingo to mix a fresh pudding, which he
took to the cook to boil, so that I was saved from the captain's anger,
which would have fallen on my head had it not been forthcoming at
dinner-time.

On his return to the half-deck, Medley said to me, "Now, Jack, let us
thank our merciful Father in heaven that you have been preserved from
the greatest danger you were ever in during your life.  Had the cook not
been looking your way in another moment of time you would have been
overboard, and it would have been impossible to pick you up."

I was willing to do as he proposed, and no one being below we knelt down
by the side of our bunks, and I prayed more earnestly than I had ever
prayed before.  We were just about to rise from our knees when I heard
Dan Hogan's voice exclaim, "Arrah now, you young psalm singers, what new
trick are you after?"

"Not a new trick, but an old custom, Dan," answered Medley, boldly
confronting him.  "If your life had just been saved I hope that you
would thank God for it, otherwise I should say that you were a very
ungrateful fellow."

"I'm shut up," answered Hogan, and taking the article he had come for he
returned on deck.

I expected that he would tell the men how he had found us employed, but
I could not discover that he had spoken about it to any one, and after
that he appeared to treat Medley with more respect than heretofore.
When a person is doing a right thing the proper way is to confront his
opponent boldly.

All this time we were suffering from the bitter cold, the sleet and
snow, the long, long hours of darkness with seldom a gleam from the sun
during the short period he was above the horizon.  At length, the
weather moderating, we again stood on our course to the westward.

About five weeks after we first sighted the Horn we managed to weather
it, and finally steering northward with a favourable breeze soon ran
into a more temperate atmosphere than we had enjoyed for many a day.



CHAPTER THREE.

We were now fairly in the Pacific.  I have said little about our crew.
There were some good men, not a few indifferent ones, and others as bad
as could be.  Dan Hogan was not by a long way the worst.  It required
the greatest strictness and vigilance on the part of the officers to
keep them in order.  Medley and I kept pretty clear of them, except when
on duty, and we were then compelled to lend a hand to any one of them
who might summon us.  This we did cheerfully, though I, being the
youngest, had all sorts of odd jobs to perform, not all of the
pleasantest description.  I thus had opportunities of hearing what the
men were talking about without intending to be an eavesdropper, and I
was before long convinced that some of them, if they had the
opportunity, would not scruple to mutiny, to knock all who opposed them
on the head, and take possession of the ship, or to run off themselves.
I told Medley of my suspicions.

"It's all brag, Jack," he answered.  "Don't trouble yourself about the
matter.  They might very probably like to do that, or any other piece of
villainy, but they dare not.  They are cowards at heart, let them talk
ever so boastfully."

I was not convinced, and determined to watch them.  While we were
engaged in the chase of whales, in towing them alongside, and in cutting
out and trying in, or, in other words, in taking off the blubber and
boiling it down into oil, they were too actively employed to plot
mischief.  They were also then separated, some being in the boats and
others on board; but while the ship was at anchor off some savage
island, away from all constituted authority, was the time when they were
likely to carry out their evil designs.

I am sorry to say it, that though Captain Hake was a bold seaman,
generous and kind-hearted, he was influenced by no religious principle;
he objected to what he called Methodism on board, and so did the mate
and doctor.  Not a chest except Medley's and mine contained a Bible, and
we had to read ours in secret to avoid the risk of being ordered to
throw them overboard.  If we had had merely to endure the sneers and
laughter of our shipmates, we should not have minded.  How I should have
acted if left to myself, or with a different sort of companion, I do not
know; but he encouraged me to read and pray, and refrain from evil
habits, for which I owe him a deep debt of gratitude.

The first land we made was Juan Fernandez, or, as we called it, Robinson
Crusoe's Island, where he, or rather Alexander Selkirk, lived so long
till rescued by the ship in which the veteran Dampier sailed as pilot.
It is about three hundred miles west of Valparaiso, on the coast of
Chili, very mountainous and rugged, but richly covered with vegetation.
We hove-to off the bay in which Drake, Cavendish, Dampier, and Lord
Anson anchored.  Three boats were immediately sent on shore.  I went in
one with the doctor, who wanted to collect a species of mint, an
excellent preventive against scurvy.  It was found in such abundance
that two boats loaded with it were sent back to the ship.  We made tea
of it, which we much enjoyed, after having had only pea-coffee to drink
for so long.  I half expected to meet Robinson Crusoe himself coming
down to welcome us to his island, for we saw numbers of his goats among
the craigs, though we in vain tried to catch one of the patriarchs of
the flock, to ascertain whether its ears were nicked.  Anson's men
discovered several venerable animals with long beards, which had
evidently been so treated by Selkirk himself, but that generation must
have long since died out.  The dogs Anson saw have also disappeared,
being more easily shot than the goats.

Pulling a short distance from the shore, we got out our fishing-lines.
So beautifully clear was the water as the sun shone down into it, that
we could actually see the fish take the hook.  They bit with wonderful
avidity, and in a short time we caught as many rock-cod and other fish
as we required.  After this we stood along the coast, seldom within
sixty miles of it, yet in sight of the snowy summits of the towering
Andes.  This part of the ocean is called by whalers "the off-shore
fishing ground," extending from Valparaiso to Panama, and about four
hundred miles westward from the land.  We were tolerably successful,
having killed four whales.

I shall not forget the scene the deck presented to my eyes the night
after the blubber from our first whale had been stripped off and cut up
while the crew were engaged in "trying out," that is, boiling it down
into oil, to be stowed away in casks below.  Along the deck were
arranged the huge "try-pots," with brightly blazing fires beneath them,
the fuel being the crisp membrane from the already used blubber.  On
each side of the "try-works" were copper tanks or coolers to receive the
oil as it flows over the sides of the pots with the rolling of the ship,
or is ladled into them when sufficiently boiled.  Some of the men
stripped to the waist, and, begrimed with smoke and oil, were working
away with forks or ladles, either throwing in the blubber, chopped into
small pieces, or skimming off the scraps, or baling out the oil; others
of the men were in the blubber-room, heaving on deck the horse-pieces,
of about thirty pounds weight each, to be minced fine before being
thrown into the try-pots.  The whole watch were thus engaged, and what
with the blazing fires, the wreaths of black smoke, the dark figures
flourishing their implements, and ever and anon giving vent to horrible
oaths and shouts and shrieks of savage laughter, the spectacle I beheld
was more weird and wild than anything I could have imagined--like one of
those dreadful scenes I have read of where spirits of darkness are
described holding their midnight revels.

My share of the work on such occasions when the watch to which I
belonged was on deck was to turn the grindstone for the carpenter, whose
business it was to sharpen the spades for the men.  In the intervals
during daylight I amused myself, armed with one of the spades, the pole
of which was twenty feet long, in killing the sharks swarming alongside.
One deep cut on the back of the neck or tail was sufficient to destroy
the largest of the savage creatures.  I must not be accused of cruelty
to animals.  Of all the fierce creatures of land or sea the sailor most
dreads and detests the cruel shark, for there are few who have not heard
or seen some thing of his depredations.

About a month after leaving Juan Fernandez we reached the Galapagos, a
group of volcanic islands lying under the equator, their black and
rugged shores having a most uninviting appearance.  In one only, Charles
Island, is water to be found, though in another of considerable extent
there are hills and valleys with groves of trees; but the chief
vegetation on all of them is the prickly pear, which in most parts
covers the ground.

We cruised off the Galapagos for upwards of two months, sometimes in
company with other whalers, but more frequently alone, meeting with fair
success.  At last many of the men began to grumble at being kept so long
at sea; those especially who had before shown a mutinous disposition
taking no pains to conceal their discontent, for we had been ten months
from the Thames, and according to the articles we were bound to anchor
in a civilised port at least once in every six months.  I felt sure from
what I overheard that mischief was brewing; and one day when Domingo,
whom I could not trust, was out of the cabin, I told the captain my
fears.  He only replied by a scornful laugh, but before he went on deck
he put a brace of pistols in his belt, and I observed shortly afterwards
that the mates had also armed themselves, while the muskets, cutlasses,
tomahawks, and boarding-pikes were placed in a side cabin kept locked.
The captain, however, knowing that the men had the right to put into
port, informed them, after we had finished stowing the oil from the last
whale caught, that he was about to steer for the coast of South America.

In about a week we made the land near the Gulf of Guayaquil, and thence
ran down to Tumbez, an open roadstead, in which we brought up about a
mile from the mouth of a river with a bar across it.  Here the crew,
instead of enjoying the rest they expected, were employed in towing off
rafts of wood and water through the heavy surf setting on the shore.  It
was very hard work under a blazing sun, but still necessary, and the
true men did not complain, though the others did pretty loudly,
notwithstanding that few captains were more considerate in not
overworking their crews than was ours.  I heard him tell the first mate
that as soon as the task was performed he intended to let them all go on
shore, a watch at a time, to amuse themselves.

The first day's work was over, the boats hoisted up, and the anchor
watch set, when I turned into my bunk.  It seemed but a moment
afterwards that Medley called me to keep the middle watch.  I had just
got on deck and was looking aft when I saw four figures lowering, as it
seemed to me, the starboard quarter boat.  Suspecting that something was
wrong I looked round for the officer of the watch, but could nowhere see
him.  He must, I guessed, have gone below.  I was about to hurry into
the cabin, but before I could make many steps aft I was seized, gagged,
and dragged forward, where I was lashed to the windlass.  I could just
make out through the gloom that the boat was no longer in her place, and
presently I saw several figures carrying some bags go forward and
disappear from the spritsail yard.  I knew, therefore, that the men I
had seen intended to run away, and that they were probably some of the
fellows whose complaints I had overheard.  In vain I struggled to get
free that I might give the alarm.  These very men must have formed the
watch, for no one came near me.

Daylight came at last, and the morning watch appearing on deck, I was
released and taken to the captain, to whom I gave an account of what I
had seen.  Two boats were instantly sent in chase of the fugitives, who
were the armourer, two boat-steerers, and three seamen.  After some time
the boats returned unsuccessful.  The captain took, the matter very
quietly: "A good riddance, more thorough scoundrels I never had under
me," he observed.  To show his confidence in the rest he allowed the
whole crew to go on shore, first one watch and then the other, for three
days each, but as most of them were drunk all the time they would have
been better on board.  Sailing for the Marquesas, instead of the
runaways we shipped six Kanakas, or natives, an Englishman, a
beachcomber, or runaway sailor, who had been living on the island for
several years, a Portuguese, and a Sandwich Islander.  I mention them to
show the heterogeneous materials of which the crews of English whalers
were composed.

Touching at Dominica we sailed for Samoa, where we remained for some
time, and thence proceeded off the Kingsmill group, and from this to the
Japan whaling ground.  While on this station we got so damaged in a
typhoon that we had to make the best of our way to Honolulu, in the
Sandwich Islands, to refit.  This accomplished we returned to the
Marquesas to land the natives we took from thence, having obtained as
many hands as we required at Honolulu.  Another season having come
round, we again cruised for nearly two months in the neighbourhood of
the Galapagos.  By this time Medley, having been long out of his
apprenticeship, was rated as an able seaman, and young as I was I could
do the duty of one as well as any of the old hands, and better than
those we had shipped to supply the places of the deserters and
mutineers; besides which I had as good a knowledge of navigation as any
of the mates.  I had no longer to turn the grindstone or to sweep out
the cabin, those and similar duties being performed by a young Sandwich
Islander, but still the captain declined to give me up my indentures, or
rather to have my name placed on the articles as an able seaman.  Of
course I could not demand what I asked, so I had to submit; indeed the
captain probably thought me unreasonable.

Calm as is in general this part of the Pacific, there are occasionally
storms of terrific violence.  We experienced one when cruising some way
to the southward of the Galapagos, but as we had plenty of sea room and
were prepared for it we escaped without material damage.  Two days
afterwards, while the boats were away in chase of a whale, and I was
aloft looking out for the appearance of others, I sighted a sail to the
south-west standing towards us.  I announced the fact by the usual cry
of "Sail ho!" but as we had to follow our boats we could not go to meet
her.  As she drew nearer, I observed that her fore-topmast, her
main-topgallant-mast, and main-topsail yard were gone, and that she was
evidently in other ways much damaged.  The stranger passing within hail,
a voice inquired, "What ship is that?"  The third mate, Mr Reece,
answered, and put the usual questions in return, but before these could
be replied to, gliding by she had rounded to a short distance off.  As I
watched her I saw two females, who had apparently just come on deck to
look at us.  Presently a boat was lowered which soon came alongside,
when who, to my surprise, should step on board but my old friend Captain
Bland.  I at once concluded that the two females I had seen were Mary
and her mother, and my heart gave a bound at the thoughts of meeting
them.  Our visitor first inquired for Captain Hake, and hearing that he
was away in one of the boats his eye ranged along the deck as if in
search of somebody.  Though I was near him he did not recognise me till
I advanced, when his eye brightened, and putting out his hand he shook
mine cordially.

"Mrs Bland and Mary will be right glad to see you, Jack, and to give
you all the news from home, and you must try to cheer them up by telling
them all you have been about, for they have had a trying time of it for
some months past.  As soon as Captain Hake returns I will get him to
allow you to accompany me on board the `Lady Alice.'"  He then addressed
Mr Reece: "Your ship and mine belong to the same owners, and I want as
many of your men as can be spared to assist my people in repairing our
damages, for we are terribly short-handed.  We encountered fearful
weather in coming round Cape Horn, when we had the misfortune to lose
four men overboard, three more were killed by the only whale we have yet
taken, two deserted at Juan Fernandez with the idea of playing Robinson
Crusoe, though they'll very soon get sick of that, and five others are
too sick to come on deck.  Three days ago we were caught in a gale, and
before the hands could shorten sail the topmasts were carried over the
side, so you'll understand that we want all the help we can get."

"I've no doubt that the captain will afford it, sir," answered Mr
Reece; "but we ourselves are sadly wanting in able seamen--we haven't
more than three hands who can be trusted to take the helm with any sea
on."

Medley and I smiled at the mate's remark, for we believed that we could
steer as well as he could, and that there were several others who could
do so.  A shout from the look-out aloft announced that a whale was
killed, and we bore down to meet the boats towing it towards us.  The
captured whale was nearly eighty feet long, and worth a thousand pounds
at least.  Our captain was, therefore, in very good humour, and
cordially greeted Captain Bland, promising to do all he could to help
him, but, of course, till the oil from the whale alongside was stowed
away he could spare no hands.

"But you will let my young friend, Jack Kemp, and your other apprentice,
Medley, go with me?" said Captain Bland.  "They can best be spared at
present, and I can trust them to assist my mates in superintending the
work."

The captain demurred to this, as I was especially useful to him.  I used
to work all his observations, make out his bills for the men, keep the
slop-locker in order, serve out the stores, and besides many other
duties, act as his barber.  My kind friend, however, pressed the point,
and at length the captain consented to let us go, accompanied by two of
the Kroomen, promising shortly to follow the "Lady Alice" to Charles'
Island, one of the Galapagos.

Medley and I were not long in cleaning ourselves and putting on our
Sunday best, and with our working clothes in our bags we stepped into
Captain Bland's boat.  By this time the two vessels were some way apart,
so that we had a long pull.  As we got near the "Lady Alice" I saw Mrs
Bland and Mary looking over the side, but they made no signal of
recognition, so that it was evident they did not know me; they did not
do so even when I stepped on deck.  Perhaps I might not have known Mary,
for she had grown from a little girl into almost a young woman, and very
bright and pleasant she looked, which is better to my mind than what
some people call beautiful.  I saw her eyes as they turned towards me
brighten, while a smile rose on her lips.

"What! haven't you brought Jack Kemp with you?" asked Mrs Bland of her
husband.

"Yes, there he is; I knew him," cried Mary, springing forward and taking
my hand.

Mrs Bland embraced me, as if she were my mother.  "I told her I would,
Jack," she said.  "She often felt very anxious about you for fear you
should get into the rough ways of your shipmates, and be no longer what
you once were, a good, affectionate lad.  You are not changed, Jack, I
hope, though you have grown so big and manly."

I could nearly have cried, I felt so happy, as I answered, "I hope not,
Mrs Bland, and I have to thank my friend Medley here for assisting me
to act rightly."

"A Christian friend is a valuable help on board ship, as well as
everywhere else," observed Captain Bland.  "I am truly glad that you
have found such an one in Andrew Medley, whose father I have the
pleasure of knowing.  It will do his heart good to hear this account of
his son.  I wish there were more like you two young men at sea."

The ladies now invited us into the cabin to have some tea, and as we sat
there, helped by Mary, we felt quite like different beings to those we
had been for so many months past.

I heard some of the news from home, which I need not repeat, but we had
not much time for conversation, as, having shifted into our working
clothes, we had to hurry on deck to assist the crew in getting the ship
to rights.  We and our two Kroomen set to with a will, and three of the
sick men turned out of their bunks to help.  It was heavy work though,
and in addition during two hours in each watch we had to keep the pumps
going.  While daylight lasted Mary remained on deck, and her presence
incited us to exertion.  I thought of the danger to which she would be
exposed should bad weather again come on, and the ship not be prepared
to encounter it.  At length we entered the harbour, a gloomy enough
looking place, surrounded by high, black, rugged cliffs, yet being well
protected from all winds, we were glad to find ourselves safe in it.  I
almost dreaded the arrival of the "Eagle," as I feared that I should
have to return to her and my rough associates.  It was not the hard work
I disliked, but the utter want of humanising influences on board the
"Eagle," whereas, independent of the effect produced by Mrs Bland and
Mary, a far higher moral tone prevailed on board the "Lady Alice"; the
mates were well-conducted men, and several among the crew were real
Christians, who made the Bible the rule of life.  I do not mean to say
that the ship was a perfect Paradise; there were some bad, wild
characters, but they were kept in check by the rest.  We were too busy
to escort the ladies on shore, and they had no fancy to go by
themselves, although there were neither wild beasts nor savages to be
feared.  We were waiting, however, for the arrival of the "Eagle" to
heave the ship down, so as to get at the leak; and as the position she
would then be in would make the cabin a very uncomfortable habitation,
Captain Bland proposed rigging a tent on the beach under the cliffs in
which his wife and daughter might live till the work was accomplished.

As soon, therefore, as Medley and I with two of the men could be spared,
we accompanied the captain on shore, taking with us some spars, rope,
sails, and spare canvas.  It was evident that the spot the captain first
thought of would be too hot, as not a breath of air reached it, so he
selected another further from the ship in a more open situation.  Here,
having beaten smooth the black lava-like soil, we soon had up a
good-sized tent with three compartments--one for the captain and Mrs
Bland, one for Mary, and a third for a sitting-room.  This done, while
the boat returned for some furniture and cooking utensils, the captain
sent me to the top of a cliff overlooking the ocean to the southward to
ascertain if the "Eagle" was in sight.  I had not been long looking out
when I saw a sail standing for the island, but after watching her for
some time I was convinced that she was not the "Eagle," but a much
smaller craft.  As she drew still nearer I perceived, indeed, that she
was a schooner, apparently a Spanish vessel, though she showed no flag.
Instead, however, of steering for the harbour where the "Lady Alice"
lay, she kept round the island to another on the other side.  What she
was, or why she had come to the island, I could not conjecture, I was
about to return when I caught sight of a speck of white canvas above the
horizon.  "That probably is the `Eagle,'" I thought.  "In a few days I
shall have to bid my kind friends farewell and go back to my duties on
board her."

As there was a fine breeze the ship rapidly approached, and as I had no
doubt that she was the "Eagle," I went back to the tent to tell Captain
Bland that she was in sight, as also to describe to him the schooner I
had seen.

"She has probably come across from Payta to catch turtle or fish," he
observed.  "We are not likely to see any of her crew, unless they think
that they can get a good price from us for what they bring."

We now returned on board to describe to the ladies the preparations we
had made for them.  Captain Bland then had all the boats manned to
assist in towing in the "Eagle" should the wind fall light, as it
frequently did towards evening.  At length Medley, who had landed and
gone to the top of the cliff, made the signal that she was near, on
which all the boats, with flags flying in the bows, pulled out of the
harbour.  We saw her about two miles off already nearly becalmed.  As we
got near her crew greeted us with a cheer, and without stopping to ask
questions we took hold of the tow ropes, when, giving way with a will,
joined by her boats already lowered, we made the big ship glide through
the water at the rate of nearly three miles an hour.  We thus soon
brought the ship to an anchor in the harbour, when Captain Hake came on
board the "Lady Alice," and undertook to do all his brother captain
required.  He was in high good humour at having captured another whale,
which had caused the "Eagle" to be so much longer in making her
appearance than we expected.  I thought that now would be the time to
get Captain Bland to beg him to allow me to remain on board the "Lady
Alice."  The same idea occurred to Mary, who I saw whispering to her
father.  Captain Bland kindly pressed the point.

"What am I to do without my barber and clerk and storekeeper, I should
like to know?" exclaimed Captain Hake.  "Why the young fellow works all
my observations for me.  No, no.  Be reasonable, Bland; he is bound to
me, remember.  I will lend him to you now, but when the `Eagle' leaves
this harbour he goes in her."

I thought that it was my captain who was not reasonable.  I felt
dreadfully disappointed, but I was his slave, and compelled to submit.



CHAPTER FOUR.

Captain Hake invited Mrs Bland and Mary to take up their abode on board
the "Eagle" while the Lady Alice was hove down, and looked much
disappointed when he heard that a tent had been put up for them on
shore.  I need not describe the operation of heaving down further than
by saying that the topmasts being struck, the cargo landed, and the
ballast shifted, the ship is heeled over on one side, till her keel can
be seen, then stages are slung, so that every part may be easily
reached.  When one side is repaired she is turned over, and the other is
treated in the same way.

Before commencing operations Medley and I were engaged for some hours in
securing all the things in the cabins, so that nothing might be broken,
while the bedding and many other articles were carried on shore.  I
suggested to Captain Bland that it would be prudent to have a guard near
him at night, and begged that he would allow Medley and me, with our
faithful Kroomen, Pepper and Salt, and four of his own most trustworthy
men, to put up a couple of rough tents, which would afford sufficient
shelter to us in that warm climate.

"Do as you like, Jack," he answered.  "We shall be glad of your company
in the evening, but I do not apprehend the slightest risk by our
remaining on shore alone."

I carried out my proposal, each of us having a musket and ammunition,
and a very pleasant evening Medley and I spent in the tent, Captain Hake
not making his appearance, as we feared he would.  Of course we went off
at daybreak to the ship, as we had to work as hard as the rest.  Having
knocked off, however, an hour or so before nightfall, we hurried on
shore, when Mary asked us to escort her on an exploring trip into the
island.

"I should like to climb to the top of yonder high hill," she said; "we
may get there and back before dark, I am sure."

"If you don't mind our being in our working suits, Miss Bland," observed
Medley.  "It would take us some time to polish up."

"I quite forgot how you were dressed," she answered, laughing; "I only
knew that you had been engaged in a necessary duty, which has, now I
come to look at you, certainly made you unusually tarry and grimy.
However, we are not likely to meet anybody else who will mind how you
look, so pray let us set off."

We started, Medley and I carrying our muskets, in case we should meet
with any strange creature we might wish to shoot--though we knew that
there were no alligators or pumas, or other savage beasts such as are
found on the neighbouring continent.  The scenery was certainly not
picturesque.  Out of the black tufa-formed soil on the lower ground grew
numerous curiously-shaped cacti, or prickly pear shrubs, and we caught
sight in the distance of one or two monster terrapins crawling among
them.  At last we reached the entrance of a narrow valley, in which, to
our surprise, we found a luxuriant tropical vegetation, not only of
grass and shrubs, but of trees of considerable height, produced, we had
no doubt, by a fountain of clear water which, issuing from the
mountain's side at the farther end, flowed down the centre in a babbling
stream of some width, though what afterwards became of it we could not
discover.  Numberless birds, several of gay plumage, flew about in all
directions, and were so tame that they perched on the branches close to
us whenever we stopped, as if to ask what we wanted in their domain, and
three at different times settled on Mary's head or shoulders.

Medley was going to shoot at some which looked like pigeons, but she
cried out, "For shame!  I would not for the world have the beautiful
things killed.  They trust us, and it would be a cruel return for their
confidence."

My messmate immediately lowered his gun.  "You are right, Miss Bland,"
he answered; "I did not consider what I was about to do."

He shortly afterwards proposed climbing to the top of a cliff from which
he expected to obtain a view over the island to the northward.  As this
was a task Mary was unable to accomplish, I remained with her while he
set off alone.  As I saw by the sun that it was high time to commence
our return, I told him that we would walk on slowly towards the tents,
so that he might overtake us.  I cannot say that I was exactly in a
hurry for him to do so, as Mary and I being old friends we naturally had
a good deal to talk about which could not interest him.  At last,
however, it struck me that he ought to have caught us up; on looking
back I saw him running towards us.  On our stopping to allow him to come
up he made a sign to us to go on.  Had I been alone I should have
waited, but though I could not divine what danger threatened I thought
it prudent to hurry Mary on.

"What can he have seen to alarm him?" she asked.

"That is more than I can say, but he is not a person to be alarmed
without reason," I answered.

"It is said that these islands were produced by volcanoes; perhaps one
has just burst forth, and he fears that the lava may overtake us."

"We should have heard the noise and seen the fire and smoke if that were
the case," I replied.

"Then it is possible that he may have seen some wild beast which was not
known to exist here," she observed.  "Do you think so?"

Medley, who at that moment overtook us, answered the question, "Not a
wild beast, Miss Bland, but a set of ruffians, whom it might be
dangerous for you to meet; I saw them just below me carousing round a
blazing fire, at which they had been cooking a terrapin, or some other
animal.  As I crept nearer to find out who they were, I at once guessed
their character by their horrible oaths, the snatches of ribald songs
and savage laughter which reached my ears.  I got near enough even to
distinguish the features of several of them, among whom I recognised Tom
Moon, the armourer, and Jos Mortis, both of whom were among the rascals
who ran off with our whale boat from Tumbez, you remember, Jack.  I
think there were others of the gang, but would not be certain.  I was
retiring when Moon caught sight of me and shouted to his companions to
give chase.  Fortunately most of them were too drunk to make much
headway, but seeing that some of them were coming, I judged it prudent
to run on and warn you, for I suspect that they are ready for any kind
of atrocity."

While my messmate was giving this account we were hurrying on--indeed
there was no time to lose under any circumstances, for almost directly
after the sun had set it would become dark, and we might have much
difficulty in finding our way.  I frequently looked back with some
anxiety, and fancied that I saw several men in the distance, but we
still hoped to reach the tents before they could come up with us.
Medley and I were resolved, should they do so, to keep them at bay with
our muskets till Mary had effected her escape.  She kept up her spirits,
not being as much alarmed as I thought she would have been.  I was
greatly relieved when at length we saw the white tops of the tents.  As
we got nearer I shouted, and soon Captain Bland appeared, followed by
Pepper and Salt.

"You have been too long away, young people, and I was on the point of
setting out to look for you; however, as I have no doubt that you have
plenty of good excuses to offer, you are forgiven," he said, in his
kind, cheery way.  When Medley told him of the sort of characters we had
seen he expressed his satisfaction that we had avoided them.  "They
probably belong to the schooner you saw standing in for the island the
other day, Jack; and if so, the chances are that she is not the honest
fisherman we supposed," he remarked.  "We must keep a watch on the
fellows in case they should come this way."

Though he said this he did not appear to be much troubled about the
matter, and we were soon all seated at Mrs Bland's tea-table in her
tent.  I, however, had told Pepper and Salt, whom I could trust, to be
on the look-out, so that we might not be taken by surprise.  We spent
the evening happily as usual, Mary singing to her guitar, while the kind
captain told some of his best stories, at which he always laughed most
heartily himself.  I made an excuse two or three times to go out, to be
sure that the Kroomen were on the alert, and I also visited the seamen's
tent, and told them to be ready to turn out if necessary.

"All right, Jack," said the captain, guessing what I had been about.
"You've got the wise prudence of a careful officer in you, though I
don't think the roistering crew Medley saw will attempt to make their
way to-night thus far from their camp."

When I again sat down the captain told the last of his stories for the
night, and Mary sang another song; but scarcely had her sweet notes died
away than Pepper's rough voice was heard shouting, "Who go dere!  Stop
or shoot!"

"Who says that?" exclaimed an English voice, though as gruff as the
black's.

"I say dat," cried Salt, who was at some distance from his companion.
"Take care--I see you."

I guessed that the Kroomen, favoured by the colour of their skins, had
concealed themselves, so that the intruders were puzzled as to their
whereabouts, and afraid to approach.  Medley and I hurried out of the
tent, and calling up the seamen, who followed us with their muskets,
went to where the Kroomen were posted.  The ground rising slightly, we
could see several dark figures in front of us against the sky moving
about, but I doubted whether they could make us out.  If the pirates,
for such we had good reason to suppose they were, had expected to take
us by surprise they were disappointed.  Our men cocked their muskets
with loud clicks, which might easily have been heard by them.  We waited
in silence to see what they would do, but they seemed undecided.
Presently we were joined by Captain Bland.

"What is it you want here, my men?" he shouted.  "We can receive no
visitors to-night.  To-morrow morning if you come back we will hear what
you have to say."

The pirates must have guessed who spoke to them, for one of them
immediately answered, "Just listen, captain; we want some bread and rum,
and salted pork, and a supply of powder and lead, with some shot, and a
few other things.  We wish to be moderate, but the things we must have
to-morrow morning as soon as you can send on board for them if you
haven't brought enough on shore."

"As to that I can make no promise, so goodnight to you, men," said the
captain, in a firm tone.

The strangers made no reply, but we could hear them talking among
themselves.  Presently one of them shouted, "We must take what we want!"
and the whole gang, numbering three times as many as our party, uttering
savage shouts, came rushing on, till, when they were within twenty yards
of us, the Kroomen, without waiting for orders, fired at them.  They, on
this, hesitated for a moment, and then there came a random volley from
muskets and pistols, the shots whistling past our ears.  A dreadful idea
occurred to me.

"Mrs Bland and Mary may be hurt, sir," I exclaimed.

"No fear of that, my lad," said the captain; "I bade them lie down under
their bedding, for I thought that the rascals might use their
fire-arms."

Just as he spoke the pirates began again to advance, though with more
caution than at first, but they had not moved many steps when the four
seamen fired, and the Kroomen, who had quickly reloaded, did the same.
This again checked the advance of the pirates, who probably did not
expect to meet with so warm a reception.

"Reserve your fire the rest of you," shouted the captain, to give the
fellows the idea that we had more men ready to receive them should they
venture to come on.  Strange to say, none of our party were hit, nor, as
far as we could tell, were any of them brought to the ground.
Providentially for us, the whole of the pirates being drunk, and many of
them cowards at heart, instead of rushing forward, as we had expected
them to do, they retired to a distance, shouting and swearing at us as
they went off.  I thought that Captain Bland would now send his wife and
daughter out of danger on board the "Eagle," but he considered that by
so doing the few men who remained might be overpowered, and his property
left to the mercy of the pirates.

"I don't think that the fellows will return, and if they do we must
treat them as before," he observed.  "The chances are that in a short
time they will be all fast asleep.  They attacked us in a drunken freak
more than with any settled plan."

For some time it appeared that he was right.  He returned to the tent to
relieve the anxiety of his wife and daughter, while Medley and I mounted
guard with Pepper and Salt, telling the other men that we expected them
to relieve us in a couple of hours.  Before half that time, however, had
expired, we heard the pirates again coming on.  Presently, giving vent
to the most fearful shouts and shrieks, they fired a volley at us and
then came rushing on.  Their voices aroused our companions, who sprang
out to our assistance, while Captain Bland, who had been on the alert,
also joined us.

"Kneel down, lads, and do not fire till I give the word," he said, in a
low voice.

We obeyed him, and scarcely had we done so than the pirates, still
shouting and shrieking, discharged their pieces, the shot, however,
flying over our heads; then on they again came, but before they got much
nearer, a hearty cheer rose from the direction of the beach, and some
thirty men or more from the two ships, armed with pikes, cutlasses, and
muskets, came tramping up, again cheering lustily.  We all fired just
before they joined us.  The pirates did not stop to encounter them, but
scampered off as fast as their legs could carry them, several throwing
down their weapons the more quickly to escape.  Captain Hake, who led
the party just landed, followed with most of the men for some distance,
but no one could move rapidly over the rough ground, and the pirates,
favoured by the darkness, and better acquainted with the country than we
were, effected their escape.  Though there was very little chance of
their again molesting us, watch was kept during the night.  Captain Hake
said that on hearing the firing, suspecting that we were attacked,
though by whom he could not conjecture, he had lowered his own boats,
and summoned Captain Bland's crew to our assistance.  The next morning a
party set off to try and capture our assailants, but they had managed to
reach their schooner, which was seen standing out to sea.  Though no
dead bodies were found, marks of blood seen on the rocks showed that
several had been wounded.

Mary was unwilling to make any more distant excursions, but she and her
mother continued to reside on the island till the "Lady Alice" was ready
for sea.  Now came the moment of trial.  Captain Hake had been specially
civil whenever he met me in company with Captain Bland, and I began to
hope that he would allow me to join the "Lady Alice."  My old friend at
length once more pressed the point.  Captain Hake at once assumed the
stern manner he knew well how to put on.

"I mustn't let the lad think too much of himself; but it's just this,
Captain Bland, you want him and so do I, and as I have a right to him I
intend to keep him.  He rejoins the `Eagle' this evening."

Captain Bland could not complain.  He had received great assistance from
Captain Hake, who lent him Pepper and Salt and two Sandwich islanders,
with which addition to his crew, now that the rest were well, he was
able to continue his fishing.  Mary, however, was very indignant with
Captain Hake, and went so far as to call him a hard-hearted, cruel man,
who wanted me to do all his drudgery, instead of allowing me to act as
an officer with her father.

The next morning we sailed, and for some time kept company.  I was glad
to see the "Lady Alice" shortly afterwards take two whales, for I felt
as much interest in her success as in that of our own ship.  Twice we
were becalmed when close together, and Medley and I got leave to pay a
visit to our friends.  I need not say that we were most kindly received.
It seemed to us like going out of the rough world into a small paradise
when we entered the pretty neat cabin, and were seated at the table with
Mary and good Mrs Bland.  Medley had a talent for drawing, and used to
make pictures of ships and scenes descriptive of whale-catching for
Mary, which we thought very good and true to nature.  Among them were
two--one of a ship leaving port, another of one returning.

"I wish this was the `Lady Alice,'" said Mary, taking up the last.  "It
will be truly a happy day when we get back with dear father safe."

"I hoped that you were enjoying your cruise, and would be in no hurry to
have it over," I observed.

"So I do on many accounts," she answered.  "But I am always anxious when
I see father go out to attack a huge whale.  Two of our men were killed
by one, and father might share the same fate.  Sometimes his boat is a
long, long way out of sight of the ship, and we cannot tell what is
happening."

"You must just trust in God, Miss Bland," observed Medley.  "He is doing
his duty, and you can pray that he may be protected."

"I always try to do that; but still, you know, the danger is great, and
that makes me wish to be safe at home again, though I fear that you will
be there so long before us that you will have sailed again to some
distant part of the world perhaps, and we may never see you more."

"Perhaps the `Lady Alice' will be more fortunate than you expect, and
may soon get filled up," I answered, wishing to restore her spirits,
which, for some reason, were unusually low.  Was it on account of some
unseen danger threatening us?

For several weeks we continued in company, both ships being tolerably
successful; but the "Lady Alice" certainly killed more whales than we
did, simply, I believe, because a better look-out was kept.  Yet Captain
Bland never sent the boats away on a Sunday, while all days were alike
to Captain Hake.  I judged by his remarks that he was somewhat jealous
of the better fortune of his brother commander.  At last we lost sight
of the "Lady Alice."  Whenever I could manage it I went aloft to look
out for her, but though I strained my eyes gazing round and round the
horizon, I searched in vain.  In what direction she had gone no one
could say.

About a fortnight after this, when we were about fifty miles to the
southward of the Galapagos, I one morning at sunrise having gone aloft,
caught sight of a sail between us and the islands, and almost ahead.  My
heart gave a bound, for I made sure that she was the "Lady Alice."  As,
however, we neared her, when I again went aloft to look out, much to my
disappointment I saw that she was a much smaller craft, a schooner,
standing from the eastward for the islands.  Another look at her a
little later showed me that she was of the same size and appearance as
that of the craft whose piratical crew had attacked us.  I felt, indeed,
convinced that she was the same.  On coming down on deck I told the
captain, unable, however, to conjecture what he would do.  At first I
thought it possible that he might make chase, and attempt to capture
her; but then I reflected that though we had four guns she probably
carried many more, with a larger crew, and that, at all events, we could
not venture to fire at her unless she attacked us.

"We'll let her alone, Jack, whether she's the pirate, schooner or not,
but we must take care that she does not come alongside the ship while
the boats are away, or the rascals aboard her may take the liberty of
relieving us of our money and stores," observed the captain.

The moment he said this the thought flashed across my mind, "What if she
should have fallen in with the `Lady Alice'?"  The idea was too terrible
to dwell on.  Yet once conceived, I could not banish it from my mind.  I
spoke to Medley on the subject.  He tried to console me by saying that
even if the schooner we had seen was a pirate it was not at all likely
that she should have fallen in with the "Lady Alice," and if she had,
have ventured to attack her.  As may be supposed, I more eagerly than
ever looked out for our fellow-cruiser, but day after day went by and
not a white speck denoting a distant sail was to be seen above the
horizon.

We were all this time very unsuccessful in our business.  We gave chase
to three whales, which, one after the other, got away before the boats
reached them.  The captain swore that he would have the next.  Not one
was seen, however, for a whole week.  The men grumbled and wondered why
we remained on the station.  At last one morning, just at daybreak, the
look-out, who had just gone to the masthead, gave the welcome shout of
"There she spouts! there she spouts!"

In a moment the watch on deck aroused those below by the loud stamping
of their feet, and up they tumbled.  The captain and mates rushed out
from their cabins half-dressed.  The four boats were lowered, and away
they pulled in the direction the whale was seen, about two miles to
windward.  Medley and I, with two seamen, the doctor, and other idlers,
remained to take care of the ship, and to beat her up after the boats.
The whale sounded, and remaining down fifty minutes rose again nearer
the ship, so that we could clearly see what took place.

The boats and their crews giving way with might and main, gathered round
from different directions.  The captain was the first to strike his
harpoon into the whale, following the weapon with a couple of lances; he
was fast, but he quickly backed off from the monster, which, leaping
half out of the water, and turning partly round made a dash with open
mouth at another boat coming up, and in an instant crushed it into
fragments as if it had been built of paper.  The crew sprang overboard
on either side, endeavouring to escape--whether any were killed we could
not ascertain--and the next instant the whale, raising its powerful
flukes, struck a third boat, shattering her by the blow, and throwing
her high into the air, bottom upwards, her people and gear being
scattered around on the foam-covered surface of the water.  The other
boats pulled away to avoid the same fate, which it seemed likely would
be theirs, for the old lone whale was savagely bent on mischief it was
very evident, when he suddenly sounded, dragging out the line like
lightning after him.  A second line was secured to the first, but that
reached the bitter end before the first mate's boat, engaged in trying
to rescue the drowning men, could come up, and it was cut to save the
boat from being dragged under water.  Not till then could the captain go
to the assistance of the people still struggling for their lives.  Some
were holding on to oars, others to fragments of planks.  At length the
survivors were picked up, and the two boats returned on board.  The men,
as they came alongside, looked very downcast.  Three of our shipmates
had disappeared--two of whom had been crushed by the monster's jaws, the
other killed by the blow of his flukes--as many more were severely
injured, the third mate was among the killed.  The captain, ordering the
carpenter at once to put together two boats to supply the places of
those destroyed, went to his cabin.  I had never before seen him so much
out of spirits.  He seemed to think that some fatality was attending the
voyage.  In less than half an hour he returned on deck, looking flushed
and excited.

"We must have that whale if we lose a couple more of our boats in taking
him," he exclaimed, addressing the first mate.  "Keep a bright look-out
for him."  This was not so easily done, for darkness was coming on, and
the monster might possibly have swum away from the ship.

The mate answered, "Ay, ay, sir," and hailed the look-out aloft.

Some time passed and no whale appeared; a large one, such as that
attacked, can remain down eighty minutes, and swim some distance in that
time.  At last night came down upon us, and the chances of discovering
the creature decreased.  The weather too, hitherto fine, changed, and
before morning the ship was under close-reefed topsails, dashing through
the fast-rising foaming seas.  Had we got the whale alongside we should
probably have had to cut from it.  The captain, however, had no
intention of giving up the search.  We beat backwards and forwards in
the neighbourhood for three days, till the gale abated, and then made
several circuits round the spot, increasing the radius without seeing
the old whale or any other.

The men who had before grumbled at being kept so long on the station now
declared that the captain had gone out of his mind, and I feared that if
he persisted much longer they would break into open mutiny.  Still day
after day he continued sailing round and round, till one morning when we
had been running to the eastward, and he ordered the watch to brace up
the yards, they stood with their hands in their pockets or folded on
their breasts, while they stamped loudly with their feet.  At that
instant the watch below came rushing up on deck armed with weapons of
all descriptions, some having muskets and pistols, others cutlasses,
pikes, harpoons, and blubber spades.  The captain on this, calling on
the two mates, Medley, and me to stand by him, rushed into his cabin,
from which he quickly returned with a rifle in his hand, and several
pistols stuck in his belt.  A shout of derisive laughter from the crew
greeted him.  He took no notice of it, but cried out to us, "Go and arm
yourselves, and we'll soon put down these mutinous rascals."  As he
spoke he raised his rifle, and half a dozen muskets were pointed at him.
At that juncture the look-out at the masthead shouted, "A dead whale
away to the southward!"

"We must not lose it, sir," said the first mate.  "Lads!" he cried,
turning to the seamen, "we'll settle this matter afterwards.  Brace up
the yards."

The men obeyed with alacrity, having stowed their weapons forward, while
the captain placed his on the companion hatch.  We were soon convinced
that the object seen was a dead whale.  Innumerable birds hovered above
it, while the splashing in the water near it showed that also teemed
with living creatures.  The monster was worth a thousand pounds if we
could secure its blubber, but as we got nearer the horrible odour which
reached us even to windward put an end to our hopes.  To have taken it
alongside would have poisoned the whole crew.  The captain, however,
insisted on regaining his harpoon, and the ship being hove-to he went
away in a boat with a black crew.  He did succeed in getting the
harpoon, but the line was so completely coiled round and round the
monster's body, into which it had cut deeply, that it could not be
brought off.  The captain looked very pale when he returned, and at once
retired to his cabin.  The blacks, though at first very sick from this
horrible task, quickly recovered.  The first mate, who had followed the
captain below, soon coming again on deck told the men that he was
ordered to shape a course for Tumbez, where the ship would remain for a
fortnight, and all hands have leave to go on shore.  A hearty cheer
greeted this announcement, and the mutiny, which threatened not to end
without bloodshed, was peaceably brought to a conclusion.



CHAPTER FIVE.

The recollection of the suspicious schooner was continually haunting me.
Being unable also to account for our not having fallen in with the
"Lady Alice" made me feel far from happy.  Medley tried to cheer me up
by suggesting that she had probably sailed for the westward, and that we
should find her by-and-by in that direction.  At last we reached the Bay
of Tumbez, and came to an anchor off the mouth of the river.  I looked
eagerly out, half expecting to see the "Lady Alice" there, but no other
English ship was in the roads besides ours.  As soon as we had got off a
supply of wood and water on rafts through the surf as before, the
captain said, "Now, lads, I will fulfil my promise and allow you all a
run on shore for three days, a watch at a time; I'll pay for your
lodging, but you must be back at the hour I fix."

The men expressed their satisfaction by a cheer, and that they might
have three full days, the starboard watch, to which I belonged, at once
shoved off.  A surf was breaking on the bar, where an upset would have
been a serious matter, as sharks abounded ready to pick us up.  We
crossed, however, in safety, and pulled up the stream for five or six
miles.  The scenery was very pretty.  In many places the trees grew
thickly on the banks, their branches, among which numbers of amusing
little monkeys were sporting, hanging completely over the water; now we
could see the creatures peeping out at us from among the leaves; now
they would skip off with wonderful activity; now come back and drop
sticks and nuts down on our heads, keeping up a constant chattering all
the time.  As an American sailor observed, we might as well have tried
to stop a flow of greased lightning as to lay hold of their tails.

While we were watching the monkeys I saw what I had taken to be a dead
log begin slowly to move, and presently a huge pair of jaws opened and
an alligator glided off the bank into deep water; we found, indeed, as
we got higher up, that the river swarmed with alligators, so that none
of us were disposed to take a bath in fresh water.  We might have gone
up to Tumbez by the river, but as this would have given us a long pull
against the current, we landed at a plantation owned by a kind old lady,
who offered us fruit and cakes and wine, and said that she should be
happy to see me again.

We then proceeded for three miles or so through orange groves and
sandhills to the town, a wretched tumble-down-looking place, half choked
up with sand.  Here, as it was now dark, we took shelter in a house
called an inn, but, except in the public hall, where the eating and
drinking went on, not a room contained a particle of furniture, so that
we had to lie down on the floor and be devoured by mosquitoes and
creeping things innumerable.  There were several young Americans of a
superior class with whom I had associated during the afternoon, and when
we got up we agreed that the wisest thing we could do would be to get
out of the town as fast as possible.  We scarcely knew each other at
first, so swollen were our faces and necks from the bites of the
voracious insects.  Early in the night the greater part of our men were
drunk, and it appeared probable that before the day was much older the
rest would be so.  We, however, had to wait for breakfast, and before we
left the whole place was in an uproar with tipsy seamen and natives
quarrelling and fighting.  Escaping from the disgraceful scene we made
our way to the house of Donna Anna, the old lady who had been so civil
to us when we landed.  She received us very kindly, and hearing why we
left the town commended us for our discretion, telling us that we were
welcome to remain till we had to return to our ship.  As the heat was
too great to make us wish to go out, we spent the day lolling about in a
cool room, and eating when food was brought to us.  In the evening we
strolled through the orange groves, eating as much of the fruit as we
desired.  Our hostess still further showed her kindness by supplying us
with mosquito curtains to sleep under at night.

We were all sorry when the time came for us to embark, but our men did
not make their appearance, and I don't know when they would have come
had not the second mate gone into the town at daybreak and compelled the
more sober to bring off the others.  As we pulled down the river we met
the captain coming up it to look for us.  He was very angry, and
declared that he was much inclined not to let the other watch go on
shore on account of the behaviour of the men.  He relented, however,
charging them to look out how they conducted themselves.

Soon after they had shoved off, the first mate said that he saw a small
craft of some sort under sail coming in from the offing.  All the
telescopes on board were at once directed towards her, and before long
she was pronounced to be a whale boat.  On she came, steering for our
ship, which, as we had the British flag flying, was easily distinguished
from the American's.  The crew were lying along on the thwarts, the
heads of two of them just raised above the gunwale, as if their eyes
were directed towards us; one man only was sitting up steering, and he
was leaning back seemingly in an exhausted state.  I looked at him
several times through my glass till the boat drew nearer, when I was
convinced that he was my kind friend Captain Bland.  Yes, there was no
doubt about it.  Fearful apprehensions crowded into my mind.  What could
have become of the "Lady Alice"?--had any accident happened to her?
Captain Bland would, I was certain, not willingly have deserted his wife
and daughter.  How eager I felt to inquire!

Directly the boat came alongside the mate and I, with two other men,
descended to assist up the people in her.  "Take them first; they want
help more than I do," said the captain, pointing to the others, one of
whom kept murmuring, "Water! water!"

The others scarcely spoke.  Captain Bland himself looked bad enough--so
haggard and thin.  We soon had him and the rest on deck and their boat
hoisted in, when their captain was carried into Captain Hake's cabin.
After he had taken some weak spirits and water and some food, he was
able to speak without difficulty.

"O sir, do tell me where are Mrs Bland, and Mary, and the `Lady
Alice,'" I said, as I was taking away his plate.

"I wish, Jack, that I could answer the question," he answered.  "They
will be fearfully anxious about me, but I trust that they and the ship
are safe enough.  Just a fortnight ago, when off the Galapagos, we
sighted three whales.  I went in chase of one of them to the northward.
The other boats pulled after the rest.  The whale I was following headed
away from the ship, but still I hoped to come up with him before dark
and make him my prize; I had nearly succeeded, and in another minute
should have had my harpoon in his side, when he turned flukes and
disappeared.  Though the sun was setting, I expected that he would come
up again while there was light enough to strike him, so waited on the
look-out, but the weather changed; a thick mist came up, the night
became very dark, and though we heard the sound of spouting in the
distance during the night, when morning broke no whale was to be seen--
nor was the ship in sight.  Anxious to be on board, I steered in the
direction where I expected to find her, with, as I hoped, one or two
whales alongside.  It was blowing fresh with some sea on, but not
sufficient to make it necessary to cut the whale adrift, should one have
been secured.  Every hour I expected to come in sight of the ship, but
we had reached the spot where I thought she would be found, and she was
nowhere to be seen.  We then steered to the southward and south-east,
supposing that she might have stood after the boats in that direction.
Once we saw a sail, some small craft, a schooner apparently; we tried to
speak her, to learn if she had fallen in with the `Lady Alice,' but she
kept away from us.  At length I came to the painful conclusion that if
we did not before long fall in with the ship, we should run a fearful
risk of being starved.  We had providentially brought away a bag of
biscuits of about fourteen pounds weight, half a dozen sausages, and a
breaker of water, and we had besides a pound and a half of wax candles.
A portion of the biscuits and sausages had already been consumed, but I
now put the crew on an allowance, so that the food might last us for
eight or nine days--the time I calculated it would take us, should the
wind hold from the westward, to reach this place, for which I at once
steered.  The sausages were soon gone, and then the wax candles helped
out the biscuits.  We should have died, I think, though, had not we
caught six flying fish on one day and three another--for our last crumb
of biscuit and drop of water were gone before we sighted the land."

"I hope that Captain Hake will at once sail in search of the `Lady
Alice,'" I exclaimed, "no time should be lost."

I thought of the schooner, but I did not mention my fears respecting
her, lest I should increase the anxiety of my friend.

"Captain Hake has not yet offered to sail, but I trust that he will
without delay," he answered.

Soon afterwards Captain Hake entered the cabin.  My friend at once told
him his wishes.

"Sorry that part of my crew are on shore; we must wait till they
return," was his answer.

"Could not you send for them?" asked Captain Bland.  "I wish to relieve
the anxiety of my wife and daughter."

"I'll go on shore, sir, and bring them back!"  I exclaimed, eagerly.

"More easily said than done," observed the captain.  "However, you may
go."

I hurried on deck, selected Pepper and Salt and two Sandwich islanders,
all of whom I could trust--which I could not the English seamen--lowered
a boat, and pulled away.  I trusted to Medley and the doctor, who were
on shore, to help me.  My aim was to get hold of the men before they
were too tipsy to move.  Going up the river we landed at Donna Anna's,
where I found Medley, and together we hastened on to Tumbez.  On the way
we fell in with our doctor, McCabe.  We told him our object.

"I'll manage it for you," he said.  "I'll frighten them out of their
wits, and make them ready enough to return on board.  I'll just hint to
them that the liquor is poisoned, and so it is, for it's poison itself.
They saw how the other watch looked when they came back, more dead than
alive, and they'll be ready enough to believe me.  I'll go on first, and
then do you come up, and we'll get them down to the boat before they've
time to think about it."

We agreed, and the doctor hurried on.  We followed slowly.  On arriving
at the town we found some of the men already half-seas over, and the
rest looking very much scared at what the doctor had told them.  Some
proposed attacking the place, and burning it down in revenge, but we
suggested that they would be better employed in carrying their helpless
shipmates to the boats, that they might be the sooner under the doctor's
care.  The wine-shop keepers and their friends, afraid of losing their
prey, did their utmost to prevent this, but we succeeded, and
half-carrying half-dragging, we got the tipsy men down to the boats.
The doctor observing that exercise was the best thing to keep off the
effects of the poison, the more sober willingly took to the oars, and to
the surprise of the captain we soon made our appearance alongside.  The
doctor took good care to dose all hands round, and though several were
very ill from the effects of the abominable aguadente, he got the credit
of saving their lives.

The captain, having no excuse for not sailing, gave the order to weigh
at daybreak.  The question was in what direction we should steer?
Should we go back to the Galapagos, look into their harbours, and cruise
about those islands?  It was not likely that the mate of the "Lady
Alice," after losing his captain, would remain long in that
neighbourhood when all hope of finding him had been abandoned.  Captain
Bland thought that he would go either to the Marquesas or Sandwich
Islands, to obtain hands, without whom he could not prosecute the object
of the voyage.

"Then what will your wife and daughter do?" asked Captain Hake.  "Will
they remain on board, or take a passage home in the first full ship they
fall in with?"

"They will remain on board the `Lady Alice', I feel sure of that," said
Captain Bland, in a tone of confidence.  "They'll not give me up so
quickly.  They'll think that I have got on board some ship, or landed on
one of the islands, or have come across to the mainland.  Women do not
give up those they love in the way indifferent persons are apt to do.
They'll not believe I am lost, but oh! how terribly anxious they'll be,
notwithstanding, poor dears, poor dears!" and my kind friend hid his
face in his hands to conceal his grief.

I had all the time the thought in my mind of that abominable schooner
with her miscreant crew, and the terrible dread that she might have
fallen in with the "Lady Alice" while her boats were away, and run off
with her.  What resistance could the five or six people left on board
offer, even though they might have suspected her character before she
got up to them?  Still, I had the wisdom to keep these thoughts to
myself.

The captains decided on sailing first for the Galapagos, and then to the
Marquesas and Sandwich Islands, calling off all intermediate islands.
They hoped, also, to fall in with other whalers from whom information
might be obtained.  Scarcely had we got out of the bay than the wind
headed us, and we were making a long board to the southward, when the
sound of a gun was heard.  It was followed by several others in quick
succession.  The reports evidently came from the direction in which we
were sailing.  Instead of tacking, as the captain had intended to do, he
stood on.  I went aloft with a glass, and in a short time I saw two
vessels standing off from the land on the opposite tack to that we were
holding.  The leading vessel was a schooner, the other a large ship,
which was firing her bow-chasers at her.  I could see the puffs of smoke
issuing from the bows of the ship before I heard the reports.  Every now
and then the chase fired a stern-gun, for the purpose, I guessed, of
trying to knock away some of her pursuer's spars, though from the
distance they were apart it seemed to me with very little chance of
success.  The schooner showed no colours, but presently I saw a flag fly
out from the peak of the ship, which, though indistinct, I was nearly
sure was that of the Peruvian Republic.  That the schooner was the
dreaded craft which had so long haunted my imagination I felt perfectly
certain, as I was that her piratical character was known, and that the
man-of-war was intent on her capture.  Still, there seemed a possibility
of her escaping should her pursuer not succeed in winging her.  We
might, however, cut her off, and prevent her from getting away.  I
watched the two vessels for a few minutes longer, and then hurried down
on deck to tell Captain Hake what I had seen, and to suggest to him that
we might enable the man-of-war to capture the schooner.

"What business have we to interfere with the quarrels of foreigners?" he
remarked.  "The chase is probably a smuggler, which has been trying to
land her cargo on the coast, or it may be has some refugees on board
belonging to one of the many parties who are always at loggerheads."

"But, sir, I am morally certain that she is the schooner we saw off the
Galapagos, to which those ruffians who attacked us belonged," I
exclaimed.  "Perhaps she has been plundering some English vessel, and
for what we can tell she may have fallen in with the `Lady Alice.'"

I felt constrained to say this to induce Captain Hake to do as I
proposed, I did not stop to consider the effect it might produce on
Captain Bland.

"Jack may be right," he exclaimed, in an agitated tone.  "My good
friend, don't hesitate to follow his suggestion.  If we make one tack to
the north-west, and then put about again we shall cross her bows, when
it will be hard if we cannot knock away some of her spars; or perhaps
when her crew see what we are about, they'll lower their sails to save
themselves from worse consequences."

Captain Hake made no reply; but, to my great satisfaction, at once put
the ship about, and soon afterwards ordered the guns to be loaded and
the muskets to be brought on deck.  He was a man of deeds rather than of
words.  Captain Bland thanked him heartily.

"We must see that we are not making fools of ourselves before you need
do that," he answered, somewhat gruffly.

We stood on for some time, and then again put about.  After this we
rapidly approached the schooner, which had lately been drawing ahead of
the corvette.  The latter had ceased firing, but was crowding on more
sail.  Once more we put about so as to be on the same course as the
schooner.  Captain Hake had been narrowly scanning her; as we got her
within range he went to one of the guns, Captain Bland took charge of
another, the mate of a third, and I, no one interfering, prepared to
fire the fourth, all run out at the same side.  We were now well to
windward, all our guns pointed high.  The captain, ordering the man at
the helm to luff up, fired; the rest of us in succession followed his
example.  Our crew gave a hearty cheer, for the schooner's main gaff was
shot away, and the next moment down came her fore-topmast, the square
topsail hanging over the side and the jib trailing in the water.  Our
work was done, and we stood on.  In a short time the corvette was almost
close alongside the schooner, into which she at once poured her
broadside.  I fancied that I could hear the shrieks and groans of the
hapless crew as the shot swept across the deck of the chase, or crashed
into her side, and the sound of the rending and tearing of the stout
planks.  The pirates had had the madness to fire at the Government
cruiser when all hope of escape was gone.

We were by this time away to leeward, and on the point of heaving-to,
the corvette being the nearest to us.  Beyond her I could see the masts
of the schooner; they were bending over away from her antagonist.  For a
few seconds my attention was drawn from her, as I had to assist in
bracing round the yards; when I looked again the masts had disappeared,
the corvette was standing on also, about to brace round her head yards--
the schooner had sunk with every human being on board.  We saw no boat
lowered to attempt saving the lives of any who might be still floating
on the surface.  Perhaps none were seen.

Captain Bland, hoping that he might possibly obtain some information
about the "Lady Alice" on board the corvette at once borrowed a boat and
invited me to accompany him to visit her.  He was remarkably silent as
we pulled for the ship, and thus my mind had time to recur to the gloomy
thoughts which had before pained me so much.

"What if on board that schooner there were others than her crew--
prisoners taken from any vessel they might have pillaged?  All had
shared the common fate, and I had been instrumental in their
destruction.  What if the pirates had, as I dreaded, attacked the `Lady
Alice', and carried off Mrs Bland and Mary?"  The idea was too
terrible; I tried to put it away from me.  Perhaps the same thought was
causing anguish to the heart of my friend.  I was thankful when we got
alongside the corvette; our fears would be relieved, or we might know
the worst.  The accommodation ladder was lowered and manned to do us
honour, and the captain, an Englishman by his appearance, stood ready to
receive us.  He put out his hand as Captain Bland stepped on deck, and
warmly greeted him.

"I am deeply obliged, captain, for the service you have rendered me in
knocking away that rascally schooner's spars," he said in a frank tone.

"She might have got off otherwise, and given me another long cruise in
search of her.  I have been on the look-out for the villains for months
past; for they have plundered numerous vessels, and sunk or destroyed
others I suspect, besides pillaging the villages along the coast.  I
should have been glad to have taken them alive to have had them tried,
but our shot made more sure work than I expected."

"Can you tell me, sir, the names of the English vessels the pirates are
supposed to have plundered?" asked Captain Bland in an agitated tone.

"If we are to believe the stories current at the Peruvian ports, I
should say half-a-dozen at least," answered the captain.  "Let me see,
there is the `Ruby,' the `Jane and John' the `Lady Alice,' the--"

"Good heavens, sir!" cried Captain Bland, interrupting him.  "Were the
people on board ill-treated?  Did the ruffians take any of them away, or
did they merely carry off such valuables and stores and provisions as
they could lay hands on?"

"The `Lady Alice' are you speaking of?" asked the captain in a tone
which showed that he did not suppose we were interested in her fate.
"By the bye, though they attacked her they did not succeed in getting on
board, for they were driven off in the most gallant fashion by her crew,
notwithstanding that her captain and several hands were away in a boat,
and it is much feared have been lost."

"Thank heaven," ejaculated Captain Bland.  "Blessings on my brave
fellows.  I am her captain, sir.  Can you tell me where she is?  Are my
wife and daughter well?"

"She is safe enough in the port of Payta, I hope, by this time, as we
convoyed her within a few leagues of the harbour, and then stood away in
search of the schooner which has just met her just doom.  Your wife and
daughter, to whom I paid a visit on board, were well, and though anxious
about you, persisted in believing that you would be restored to them."

"I knew that they would never give me up for lost.  They have been
spared much misery, anxious as they may have been.  Thank heaven for
that!" cried my kind friend, grasping the captain's hand.  "I am
grateful to you, sir, for the good news you have given me, indeed I am;
and now, with your leave, I'll return on board the `Eagle,' that we may
get to Payta as soon as possible."

Though the captain of the corvette politely pressed us to stop for
dinner, and offered to send for Captain Hake, I was glad that Captain
Bland declined his proposals.  Directly we got on board, the boat being
hoisted in, we made sail for Payta, where we shortly arrived.  The
appearance of Captain Bland and his boat's crew caused no little
astonishment on board the "Lady Alice," for both officers and men had
given them up for lost.  I went into the cabin to break the news to Mrs
Bland and Mary.  They guessed at once by my countenance that Captain
Bland had returned.  He quickly followed me.  "I knew that you would
come back, father.  I was sure that God would take care of you,"
exclaimed Mary, as, half-weeping and half-laughing, she clung round his
neck.  How blessed it is to possess a perfect confidence in our Heavenly
Father's protecting care over those we love!



CHAPTER SIX.

Our stay at Payta was shorter than we had expected.  The "Lady Alice,"
with the assistance of the English commander of the corvette, obtained
more speedily than would otherwise have been the case all the repairs
she required, and Captain Bland secured several good hands from among
the crew of a merchantman wrecked further down the coast.  Captain Hake
gave the larboard watch of our ship leave on shore to make amends for
their disappointment at Tumbez, but they did no credit to our country,
for after quarrelling with the natives, during which one of them was
stabbed, they were brought off in the last stage of brutal intoxication,
from which it took them several days to recover.

I paid frequent visits to the "Lady Alice," which lay close alongside
us.  Captain Hake did not object to my doing that, but when Captain
Bland again asked him for the loan of me (as he put it) my captain
assumed the glummest of glum looks, and replied, "I thought that I had
settled that matter before.  The lad came out in this ship, and he goes
home in her, if I have my will."

Though disappointed when Captain Bland told me this I had much reason to
be thankful that I was able to enjoy, even at intervals, the civilising
influences of female society.  How different my lot to that of many poor
lads away for four long years from any one who takes the slightest
interest in their moral welfare, or attempts to raise their minds above
the grovelling existence of their brutal associates.  I should be
ungrateful if I did not mention, in addition to other advantages, the
benefit I derived from the society of Medley, who was truly a friend to
be prized.

It was a great consolation to me to find that the two ships were to
cruise in company, though I might possibly not be able for many weeks
together to visit the "Lady Alice."  On leaving Payta we steered
westward for the usual cruising ground.  We had each at the end of ten
days taken a couple of whales, when one Sunday morning a number appeared
in different directions.  The "Eagle's" boats were quickly in chase, but
those of the "Lady Alice" remained hanging from the davits.

"What can the old man be about?"  I heard the captain remark to the
first mate as they were about to shove off.  "It cannot be that he
doesn't see the whales.  The owners will be down upon him if he doesn't
look after their interests better."

He said something to the same effect as he passed under our consort's
stern.

"I keep the ten commandments, Captain Hake," answered Captain Bland.
"The Master who gave them is the greatest of the two, and He will look
after the owners' interests."

By night on that occasion our boats had brought two whales alongside,
but the crews were so weary from having been away all day under a
scorching sun that they were unable to commence cutting in till next
morning.  At that time the boats of the "Lady Alice" were away, and in
less than an hour had brought one whale alongside; shortly afterwards
another was secured, so that as it turned out both ships commenced
trying out at the same time, and the "Lady Alice" had the whole of the
oil stowed away by Saturday night.  The same sort of thing occurred more
than once after this.  Captain Bland adhered to his rule, and by the end
of the week had stowed as many barrels of oil in his hold as we had.

At length whales becoming scarce, the two captains agreed to proceed
westward across the Pacific to the Japan whaling ground.  We called off
various islands on our way, chiefly to obtain fresh provisions and
water.  At length we reached the neighbourhood of the Kingsmill group,
off which we found so many whales that we remained for several months,
during which time we captured a large number.  As there is no safe
anchorage the ships had to stand off and on while the boats went on
shore to obtain water and provisions, but we had to be very careful in
our dealings with the natives, who were thorough savages and treacherous
in the extreme.

The weather now gave signs of changing, but as every day a whale was
seen the captains were tempted to remain on.  I had of late frequently
gone away in the boats, generally with Medley, who had become a good
harpooner.  For two days not a whale had been seen, and we were on the
point of proceeding further west when about noon a whole school
appeared, and scattering sported far and wide over the surface of the
deep.  All the boats from both ships were lowered, and I went in one
with Medley, who was intent on attacking a large whale which we saw to
the eastward, in which direction the land lay from us.  Just as we had
got within a dozen fathoms of the monster up went its flukes and it
sounded, leaving us looking very blank at the spot where it had gone
down.  It might be forty minutes or more before it would come up again.
We determined to wait, and as we had had a sharp pull we refreshed
ourselves by munching some biscuits and drinking a part of the contents
of our water breaker.  The whale remained down a much longer time than
we had expected, and when it came up appeared far away to the eastward,
or much closer to the shore.  Again we bent to our oars, eager to get
fast before it should once more sound.  It was as much as we should do
to reach it in time; if we were too late we should scarcely have another
chance before dark.  Already the sun was hidden by a dark bank of clouds
rising above the horizon, and the wind was blowing strong from the
westward, but pulling directly before it we did not feel its force,
though it was evident that the sea was gradually getting up.  I could
see both the ships at some distance apart, but none of the boats were
visible to us sitting down.  I ought to have told Medley, who, having
his eye on the whale ahead, did not remark the change in the weather.
"If we kill the whale we shall be able to lie made fast under its lee,
even should it come on to blow, till the `Eagle' can come and pick us
up," I thought.  The whale, after remaining so long under water, took a
proportionate time to spout on the surface.  We were close to it.
Medley, making a sign to the bow oarsman to take his place, stepped
forward and stood up harpoon in hand.  We ceased pulling--the next
instant a loud thud showed us that the weapon had struck deep into the
monster's side.  He followed up the blow by plunging in three lances,
and was about to hurl a fourth when he shouted out "Back off all!" while
he allowed the line to run rapidly out of the tub over the bollard.  We
backed our oars with all our might, knowing that our lives might depend
on our getting clear of the monster before it commenced the fearful
struggles it was probably about to make.  Instead of sounding, however,
or lashing the water with its flukes, it darted off along the surface at
a rapid rate towards the land.  Already a considerable portion of the
line had run out when Medley secured it round the bollard, and away we
flew, towed by the whale, at a furious rate through the water.  The
second line was secured to the end of the first, in case the whale
should suddenly sound; but this it seemed to have no intention of doing.
On and on we were dragged farther and farther from the ships, but we
had no thoughts of cutting loose from the whale after all our exertions,
and we hoped that, in its endeavours to escape, it would wear out its
strength, and thus become an easy prey.  Medley stood ready all the time
to slacken out more line should its speed become so great as to run the
risk of its dragging the bows under water, while the man next him sat
with axe in hand prepared to cut it in case there was a probability of
the boat being swamped.  Nearer and nearer we approached the land, till
we could distinctly see the surf rising up in a wall of foam, and
breaking over the coral reef surrounding it.  We expected every moment
that the whale would turn to avoid the danger ahead, and that we should
be able to haul in the slack of the rope, and get sufficiently close to
give it another wound.  That it was losing blood, and consequently its
strength, we knew by the red tinge of the water in its wake; still it
held on.  I glanced towards the shore--I could see a gap in the line of
surf, beyond which the land rose to a greater height than anywhere near.
It formed, I concluded, the entrance to a bay or lagoon, but seemed so
narrow that even a boat would run the danger of being swamped by the
surging waters on either side.  Galled or terror-stricken as the whale
evidently was, I could scarcely suppose that it would run itself on
shore, yet from the course it was taking it seemed possible that such it
was about to do.  Suddenly, however, the roar of the surf growing louder
and louder, it appeared to perceive its danger, and leaping almost out
of the water it turned away to the northward, giving the boat so violent
a jerk that she was nearly capsized.  Escaping that danger, we were
exposed to another, for the sea, now brought on our beam, continually
broke over the side, employing two hands in baling, while often it
appeared as if she would be turned completely over.  At length the
monster began to lessen its speed, and we were hauling in the line to
get up to it, when suddenly raising its flukes down it went, dragging
out the line again at a rate which made the bollard smoke, but the sea
breaking over the bows prevented it from catching fire.  The first line
was soon drawn out--the second went on, and that, too, speedily ran
towards the end.  It was vain to attempt stopping it.  The whale was
now, we knew, swimming under water, and heading away from the shore.  It
must ere long come up again--but could we hold on till then?  Already
the seas broke fearfully over the bows.  In spite of the efforts of the
men baling, the boat was half full of water.  Medley seized the axe; the
bitter end of the last line was reached.  A dark sea came rolling on.
Nothing could save us from being swamped, it seemed.  The axe descended,
a loud thud was heard, the line was severed.  "Back off all!" cried
Medley, taking the bow oar to steer by.  We pulled for our lives; the
sea broke under the bows.  Scarcely till now were we conscious that,
after all our toils, the whale was lost.  We had not, as we had hoped,
its huge body to hang on to, to protect us from the fury of the
fast-rising seas.  Darkness had now come on; we looked out in vain for
either of the ships.  The "Eagle," on finding that we did not return,
would burn blue lights to direct us to her.  The "Lady Alice" would do
the same should any of her boats be absent.  We pulled on against the
still rising seas.  How long our boat would float amid them was
doubtful.  "There's alight, boys!" cried Medley at length; but it was
away to the northward, and far off, for it only just appeared above the
horizon.  To reach it we must bring the sea abeam and run a fearful risk
of being rolled over or swamped.  Still the attempt must be made, unless
we were prepared to remain toiling at the oars all night, or to run the
risk of trying to reach the shore.  We continued to pull on, keeping the
boat's head to the sea, when, looking round, I observed a glimmering
bluish light suddenly spring up on the starboard bow.  That it was at an
immense distance I knew, as I could not distinguish the body from which
the rays of light proceeded.  Medley saw it also.  "She is hull down,
and it would take us till morning to reach her, even if we could do it
then," he said in a tone which showed how serious he thought our
condition.  Still we could more easily reach the vessel from which the
distant light proceeded than the one on our beam.

Our situation was sufficient to alarm the stoutest hearts, and we were
all young and comparatively inexperienced.  The dark sky seemed to have
come down close above our heads; the foam-covered seas came rolling on,
every instant increasing in size, while astern was the dreadful reef,
over which the furious breakers were dashing with a terrific roar.  I
had given up my oar to another man, and was seated near Medley, when I
saw a small bright speck in the sky just above the horizon.

"What is that?  Can it come from a ship?"  I asked, pointing it out to
him.  He was silent.  Gradually the spot of light expanded into an arch.

"It is the eye of an hurricane," he said at length.  "We shall have it
break upon us presently, and if we fail to reach the land, Jack, we
shall not live to see another sunrise."

Calmly telling the men to be prepared for the worst, but not to despair,
he put the boat round, and we pulled in for the land.  I told him of the
opening I had seen.  He had observed it also, but was doubtful whether
we should discover it in the darkness.  Still, unless we could do so,
our destruction seemed certain.  Earnestly I prayed for deliverance; so
did Medley, I know.  With fearful rapidity, borne onward by the sea, we
approached the raging breakers.  For some time in vain we looked along
the line of foam for the opening we had seen.  The howling tempest
astern forbade us attempting to pull off the shore; but should we gain
it, if it was inhabited, what sort of treatment were we to expect from
the savages?  Several boats' crews had, it was said, lost their lives
among this group.  I was straining my eyes ahead when I made out against
the sky the outline of the high land I had before remarked.  Beyond it
the clouds appeared to be brighter than in any other part of the
heavens.  The instant afterwards the pale moon burst forth, and though
but for a brief space, it was long enough to enable her to serve as a
beacon to us.  Directly below her we saw the looked-for opening.

"Give way, lads, we may yet save our lives," cried Medley.

The men did give way, but so narrow appeared the opening that it seemed
impossible we should get through without being swamped by the breakers
rising high up on either side, rendered visible and more terrific by the
vivid flashes of lightning darting from the clouds, which were followed
by crashing peals of thunder, sounding above even the roaring of the
angry waters.  Onwards we were carried, the foam leaping high above our
heads on the summit of a hissing sea, and then down we shot like an
arrow, guided by Medley's oar, on to the comparatively calm surface of a
deep bay.  A few strokes more we glided up it, and were in smooth water,
the moon not hiding her face till we were in safety.  We made out before
us a sandy beach, towards which we steered, and, leaping out, drew up
our boat to free her of water.

Our first act was to kneel down and return thanks to our Heavenly
Father, who had so mercifully preserved us, and most of our rough crew,
though at first they hesitated, followed our example.  We then looked
out for a place which would afford us shelter during the night from the
raging storm.  Near the beach was a grove of palm-trees, but the wind,
howling amid their stems, bent and twisted them about so furiously that
we had reason to dread, should we lie down under them, that some, being
uprooted, might fall and crush us.  Keeping outside the trees, we made
our way towards the high ground, one side of which we found consisted of
a coral cliff, and we had not searched long before we discovered a cave
large enough to afford shelter to all our party.  The floor was of sand,
and having no fear of venomous creatures or savage beasts, the men threw
themselves down to obtain the rest they all so much required.  We had
brought from the boat the biscuits and the small stock of water we
possessed, but none of them were inclined to eat, though they drank up
more than half the quantity of the precious liquid remaining in the
breaker.  Medley and I, who were, as were the rest, wet to the skin,
walked up and down under shelter of the rock trying to dry our clothes.

"If we had but a fire it would be a great comfort," I observed.

Pepper, one of our Kroomen, hearing what I said, exclaimed, "Massa, me
got light, nebber fear!"  Groping about, he soon found two pieces of dry
wood, and fashioning them with his knife, he began to rub one against
the other in a way which at length produced a bright spark.  I had a
handful of leaves ready, and we had quickly a capital fire blazing up
just inside the cave.  How grateful we felt for its genial warmth!

What if, while we were congratulating ourselves on being safe on shore,
any misfortune should happen to those in whom we were so deeply
interested?  I felt that I would thankfully be on board the "Lady Alice"
to share the fate of my friends, or to aid, as far as human strength
could go, in averting the danger to which they might be exposed.  I
knew, however, that my wishes were of no avail.  I knelt down with
Medley, and prayed with all earnestness that they might be protected; we
then stretched ourselves on the sand near our men.

"Jack, it did not occur to me before that this island may be inhabited;
if so, that our fire may attract the natives," said Medley, just as I
was dropping off to sleep.  "It ought to be put out, or we must keep
watch.  They might murder us before we could attempt to defend
ourselves."

I agreed with him, but confessed that I could no longer keep my eyes
open.

"I'll keep the first watch, and then I'll call up Pepper and Salt, and
the latter shall call you.  The others cannot be depended on," he said,
though I could scarcely comprehend the meaning of his words.

It was nearly daylight when Salt at last awoke me.  He would not have
done so then, honest fellow, had not he been ordered.  I asked him if he
had heard or seen any natives.

"No, Massa Jack, me tink none here; but better get to de boat and catch
some fish for breakfast, and den if any savage come we ready to start,"
he answered.

I thought his advice good, and desired him, as soon as it was light, to
go down to the boat and get the lines ready, so that we might shove off
as soon as the other men awoke.  I, in the meantime, directly the dawn
broke, made my way to the summit of the hill, that I might survey the
island, and, if possible, ascertain the position of the ships.  I had
fortunately brought a small but powerful telescope given me by Captain
Bland.  The fury of the hurricane was over, but the breakers still beat
with violence against the barrier reef, and made it impossible for us to
put to sea.  In a short time the glorious sun, rising above the horizon
amid the fast dispersing clouds, shed a bright light over sea and land,
and enabled me to obtain a far-extending view.

The island on which we had taken refuge was much smaller than I had
supposed, owing to the reef which extended along it; but across a narrow
passage was another of much greater extent and away to the north and
north-west were several others, besides numerous reefs marked by the
white masses of foam flying over them.  Several tiny wreaths of smoke
which rose up amid the groves on the nearest island showed me that that,
at all events, was inhabited, as, probably, were most of the others.  As
the mist of morning cleared away I could distinguish in the distance the
huts of the natives, though, owing probably to the barren nature of the
soil at the end nearest our island, none were built there.  Again and
again I swept the horizon in search of the ships; nowhere could I
discern them.  In what direction could they have been driven?  I at last
observed beyond a line of reefs what I took to be a group of cocoa-nut
trees rising out of a low islet faintly traced against the blue sky like
gossamer webs.  Yes, there were trees, but among them, after keeping my
glass steady for a minute or more, I made out the masts and yards of a
ship.  That she was either the "Eagle" or the "Lady Alice" I felt
certain, but how she had escaped the reefs and been driven in where I
saw her I could not conjecture.  As her masts appeared upright I trusted
that she was not on shore; but whether such were the case or not, she
might find it difficult to escape from her position should the savage
inhabitants of the neighbouring shores try to make her their prey, as
they had succeeded in doing other vessels under similar circumstances.
What was even now going forward on board her, who could tell?  Again I
looked round in vain for the other ship, and then hastened down to join
Medley.  I found him setting off with the other men for the boat, he
supposing that I had gone with Salt to look after her.  He could not
even conjecture which of the ships I had seen, but he agreed with me
that we must put off to try and get on board her the moment we could
venture out to sea.  He would have gone back with me to the hill, but
the men were crying out for food, and insisting on endeavouring to catch
some fish.  None of the trees near us bore cocoa-nuts, nor had any water
been found, probably the reason that the island was uninhabited.

Medley served only a small portion of biscuit to each man, and warned
them all to be very careful of the water, as we might be unable to
obtain more till we reached the ship.  Judging by the surf which still
beat furiously on the reef there was small prospect of our doing that
till the next day at soonest.  Salt had got the lines and hooks ready,
and some shell-fish for bait, so we at once pulled out as near the
entrance of the lagoon as we could venture.  We had not had our lines
down long before we began to get bites, and in a short time we had
hauled in as many fish as would give us an ample supply of food for the
day, we returned to the shore to cook and eat our prey.  We again
lighted a fire at the mouth of our cave, hoping that the smoke would not
be seen by the savages, but to prevent being surprised Medley sent
Pepper to the other side of the island to give us due warning should he
see any of them coming over.

After breakfast the rest of the men lay down to sleep, while Medley and
I went to the top of the hill to ascertain by the state of the sea when
there was a probability of our getting off, and to watch for the
appearance of the other ship.  We looked for her in vain.  The ocean,
however, was rapidly losing the quickness of its motion, though the huge
waves were still slowly and lazily tumbling against each other as they
rolled on till they reached the reef, where, with a roar of thunder,
they broke into masses of foam.  The chief object of interest, the
distant ship, remained motionless as before, her canvas closely furled.
Had a sail been loosed we should have seen it fluttering in the breeze.

"In a few hours at most we shall be able to pass through yonder
channel," observed Medley, pointing to the entrance of the lagoon.
"Look, the sea scarcely even now breaks across it.  If necessary, I
would not hesitate to take out a boat in spite of the risk I might run;
but we will not make the attempt for the present."

I agreed with him that it would be folly to do so, and we returned to
the cave.  We sat down in the shade.  The heat was great, and neither of
us having had much rest, we both fell as sound asleep as were our men
stretched at their lengths a short distance from us.  Hours may have
passed.  I was aroused by Pepper shouting, "De savage come! de savage
come!  Quick, quick! rouse up, boys, get to de boat."

Salt was the first to start to his feet on hearing his companion's
voice, and by kicks and pulls to awaken the rest.  I grasped Medley by
the arm and helped him up.  The men in a panic were hurrying off, when
he reminded them of the breaker of water and the remainder of the fish
which had fortunately been cooked.  They took the breaker and fish up
between them, and set off, while we waited for Pepper.  He had seen a
large body of savages, flourishing their formidable spears and
gesticulating wildly, come down to the shore and begin to swim across
the channel, evidently, as he supposed, having discovered that strangers
were on the island, though how they had done so it was difficult to
guess, unless they had seen Medley and me on the top of the hill.  That
they had hostile intentions was pretty evident by the account Pepper
gave us.  Had we possessed fire-arms we might have defended our selves,
but as it was we could secure our safety alone by flight.

We found the men hurriedly launching the boat.  In their dread of the
savages I am not sure that they would have waited for us had we been
delayed.  The boat was quickly in the water, and we all leaped on board.
Medley took the steering oar, and the men gave way.  As I looked ahead
I could see the green billows rolling in towards the opening, and still
breaking with fearful force against the barrier reef on either side, but
in the centre I observed a clear glass-like swell, over which I hoped we
might find a safe passage.  Medley seemed not quite certain about the
matter, and told the men to lay on their oars till he could perceive a
favourable opportunity for dashing out.  Just then a fearful yell
sounded in our ears, and looking astern I saw the beach covered by a
band of savages flourishing their spears and gesticulating to us to
return and be killed.  Some of the more active were springing along the
rocks so as to get near enough to hurl their weapons at us.

The crew, without waiting for Medley's orders, bent to their oars, and
though several spears fell into the water at no great distance off, we
were soon beyond their reach.  Without waiting to ascertain what the
savages were about we steered for the centre of the passage.  A sea like
a mass of liquid malachite came rolling in--we mounted to its summit,
and then descending into the trough, were soon rising on another watery
height.  The crew pulled lustily, and in a few minutes we were well
outside the breakers, and able to turn the boat's head to the northward.
It had become a perfect calm, so that we had a long pull before us.  At
this the men grumbled, as they had expected to hoist the sail.  Medley,
however, reminded them that had there been wind the ship would probably
have got under weigh, and we should have missed her.  We pulled on along
the coast of the larger island, but whether or not we were perceived by
the people on shore we could not tell.  The men at last complaining of
fatigue, declared that they must stop and take some food and water.  To
this Medley could not object, eager as he and I were to get up to the
ship.

While the men were eating the remainder of the fish and biscuit, we kept
two of the oars going, and had just passed a point forming one side of a
bay when, looking towards the shore, we saw a fleet of large canoes,
thirty or more, ranged along the shore, the people apparently hurrying
on board.  On examining them through my glass I perceived that they were
all armed, and it at once occurred to me that they were starting on an
expedition to attack the ship.  Medley was of the same opinion.

"You see the savages in those boats," he exclaimed; "let us see what you
can do.  If they catch us we shall be in their try-pots before many
hours have gone by, but if we can get on board the ship we can at all
events have a fight for our lives."

The men needing no further incentive to exertion, cramming their food
into their mouths, threw out their oars and away we flew over the now
calm surface of the ocean.  As I looked over the starboard quarter I saw
that several of the canoes had shoved off from the beach and were coming
after us.  Had there been a breeze we should have had no chance of
escaping them.  In a short time the whole fleet was after us.  The
savages probably reckoned on our not knowing the shortest passages
through the reefs, but Medley and I kept a bright look-out, I making a
good use of my telescope.  Now we had the coral rocks rising close to
us.  Several times I could see the bottom as we dashed on.  Occasionally
we had to turn either to the east or west, but still we were rapidly
nearing the ship.  My chief fear was that other canoes might be waiting
further to the north and dash out upon us.

While standing up I brought my glass to bear on the ship.  How thankful
I felt when I became certain that she was the "Lady Alice."  She had at
all events escaped any accident from the hurricane, and I had no doubt
that we should beat off the savages should they venture to attack her.
Looking astern I saw to my satisfaction that we were greatly distancing
the canoes, so that we should have time after getting on board to make
preparations for their reception.  At length we were discovered by our
friends on board, for we saw several persons waving signals of welcome
to us from the forecastle.  Greatly to my relief also I saw that the
ship was at anchor at some distance from the shore, while beyond her to
the north-west the sea appeared free from reefs.  Captain Bland shook my
hand heartily.

"We had given you up for lost," he said; "we heard that you were away
from your ship when the hurricane came on, and that there was no chance
of your getting on board her."

"How could you hear that?"  I asked, much surprised.

"From the second mate and his crew, whom we took on board.  Very glad I
was to have them, as they were of the greatest assistance during the
gale, though I fear Captain Hake must have been hard put to it without
them."

I interrupted my old friend by telling him of the approach of the
canoes.  He was not a man to disregard a warning.  The boarding nettings
were at once triced up, the small arms got from below, and the guns
loaded.  I inquired anxiously for Mary and her mother, who were not on
deck.

"They suffered much during the hurricane, but are now on foot, and will
be glad to see you," answered the captain.

I sprang below.  I should have startled my friends not a little had not
the steward told them that I had come on board, for they had heard of
the supposed loss of our boat, though Mary told me with a smile, while a
tear was in her eye, that as her dear father had been preserved, so she
had not despaired of again seeing me.  I felt very happy, for I was sure
that we should beat off the savages.  On my return on deck I found that
they had not yet appeared.  It was now getting dark.  This made us
suspect that they had intended to attempt surprising the ship at night,
and very probably they would have succeeded had we not providentially
seen them and thus been the means of putting our friends on their guard.
Captain Bland, always anxious to avoid bloodshed, ordered the guns to
be fired at intervals, both to show the savages that we were on the
alert and to attract the attention of the "Eagle" should she be in the
neighbourhood.  Though prepared we could not avoid being anxious, for if
the natives were resolved on our destruction we should have a severe
struggle before we could drive them off.

It had now become so dark that it would be difficult to see the canoes
till they were close to us.  All hands, therefore, remained on deck with
our weapons in our hands to be ready at a moment's notice, but the hours
went by, the savages had thought better of it we hoped, and dawn at
length appeared.  We looked out for the canoes, but they were nowhere to
be seen, nor was the "Eagle."  The calm continued, and as we had our two
boats besides those of the "Lady Alice," Captain Bland resolved to tow
her out to sea so as to get a good offing before another night.  The
anchor was hove up, and with six boats ahead we made good progress.  We
had got a couple of miles away from the anchorage, and were nearly free
of the reefs when the look-out at the masthead shouted that he saw the
canoes coming towards us.

"Keep to your oars, lads," cried Captain Bland; "we shall have a breeze
presently, and shall then easily tackle them."

On came the canoes.  It seemed too likely that they would reach us
before the wished-for breeze had sprung up.  The crews of the boats gave
way lustily.  I had remained on board.  As I looked astern I fancied
that I could almost hear the shrieks and shouts of the savages as they
approached.  Suddenly I saw the dog-waves blowing out.  I, with the rest
on board, sprang aloft to loose sails, the boats were called alongside,
and by the time they were hoisted up we were gliding rapidly through the
water.  Though several of the canoes, hoisting their sails, got near us,
a few shot, which carried away the masts of two or three, made them give
up the pursuit, and in a few hours we had run the island out of sight.

We cruised in the neighbourhood of the group for two weeks or more in
search of the "Eagle," but at last despairing of falling in with her
continued on for the Japan whaling ground.  Here being very successful,
we got a full ship, and, to the joy of all on board, steered homewards
by way of the Indian seas, calling, however, at several interesting
places to obtain fresh provisions and water.

The white cliffs of old England were seen at length, and home was
reached.  Captain Bland, having made a successful voyage, declared that
he would never more tempt the ocean or expose his wife and daughter to
dangers such as those from which they had been so mercifully preserved.
The "Eagle" had not arrived, and nothing was heard of her for several
years, when a report reached me that she had sought shelter in one of
the harbours of the group, when part of the crew being on shore were set
upon and massacred, while those on board were overpowered and killed.
The ship then having been plundered was sunk with her cargo of oil, and
was thus found by another whaler the following year through information
given by one of the natives.

Thus ended the voyages of the two whalers, of which I have given of
necessity but a hurried sketch.  I left the whaling service, and sooner
than I might have expected, obtained the command of a fine trader to
China and the Eastern seas, having the happiness of being accompanied by
my dear Mary, who had become my wife.  My excellent friend Medley was
equally successful, and both of us having retired from the sea, have
settled near each other, and often spin to attentive young listeners the
preceding yarn, and many others descriptive of our nautical career,
though our boys and girls unanimously give the preference to the voyages
of the Two Whalers.

THE END.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TWO WHALERS; OR, ADVENTURES IN THE PACIFIC ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

