





Madelon

A Novel

By

Mary E. Wilkins

Author of "A Humble Romance"
"Jane Field" etc.

New York
Harper & Brothers Publishers
1896




    Love is the crown, and the crucifixion, of life,
  and proves thereby its own divinity.




Chapter I


There was a new snow over the village. Indeed, it had ceased to fall
only at sunset, and it was now eight o'clock. It was heaped
apparently with the lightness of foam on the windward sides of the
roads, over the fences and the stone walls, and on the village roofs.
Its weight was evident only on the branches of the evergreen-trees,
which were bent low in their white shagginess, and lost their upward
spring.

There were evergreens--Norway pines, spruces, and hemlocks--bordering
the road along which Burr Gordon was coming. Now and then he jostled
a low-hanging bough and shook off its load of snow upon his
shoulders. Then he walked nearer the middle of the street, tramping
steadily through the new snow. This was an old road, but little used
of late years, and the forest seemed to be moving upon it with the
unnoted swiftness of a procession endless from the beginning of the
world. In places the branches of the opposite pines stretched to each
other like white-draped arms across the road, and slender, snow-laden
saplings stood out in young crowds well in advance of the old trees.
At times the road was no more than a cart-path through the forest;
but it was a short-cut to the Hautville place, and that was why Burr
Gordon went that way.

Everything was very still. The new-fallen snow seemed to muffle
silence itself, and do away with that wide susceptibility to sound
which affects one as forcibly as the crashing of cannon.

There was no whisper of life from the village, which lay a half-mile
back; no roll of wheels, or shout, or peal of bell. Burr Gordon kept
on in utter silence until he came near the Hautville house. Then he
began to hear music: the soaring sweetness of a soprano voice, the
rich undertone of a bass, and the twang of stringed instruments.

When he came close to the house the low structure itself, overlaid
with snow, and with snow clinging to its gray-shingled sides like
shreds of wool, seemed to vibrate and pulse and shake, and wax fairly
sonorous with music, like an organ.

Burr Gordon stood still in the road and listened. The constituents of
the concert resolved themselves to his ear. There was a wonderful
soprano, a tenor, a bass, one sweet boy's voice, a bass-viol, and a
violin. They were practising a fugue. The soprano rang out like the
invitation of an angel,

  "Come, my beloved, haste away,
  Cut short the hours of thy delay,"

above all the others--even the shrill boy-treble. Then it followed,
with noblest and sweetest order, the bass in--

  "Fly like a youthful hart or roe,
  Over the hills where the spices grow."

The very breath of the spices of Arabia seemed borne into the young
man's senses by that voice. He saw in vision the blue tops of those
delectable hills where the myrtle and the cassia grew; he felt within
his limbs the ardent impulse of the hart or roe. He stood with his
head bent, listening, until the music ceased; the blue hills sank
suddenly into the land of the past, and all the spice-plants withered
away.

There was but a few minutes' interval; then there was a chorus--

  "Strike the Timbrel."

Burr Gordon, listening, heard in that only the great soprano, and it
was to him like the voice of Miriam of old, summoning him to battle
and glory.

But when that music ceased he did not wait any longer nor enter the
house, but stole away silently. This time he travelled the main road,
which intersected the old one at the Hautville house. The village
lights shone before him all the way. He was half-way to the village
when he met his cousin, Lot Gordon. He knew he was coming through the
pale darkness of the night some time before he was actually in sight
by his cough. Lot Gordon had had for years a sharp cough which
afflicted him particularly when he walked abroad in night air. It
carried as far as the yelp of a dog; when Burr first heard it he
stopped short, and looked irresolutely at the thicket beside the
road. He had a half-impulse to slink in there among the snowy bushes
and hide until his cousin passed by. Then he shook his head angrily
and kept on.

However, when the two men drew near each other Burr kept well to his
side of the road and strode on rapidly, hoping his cousin might not
recognize him. But Lot, with a hoarse laugh and another cough,
swerved after him and jostled him roughly.

"Can't cheat me, Burr Gordon," said he.

"I don't want to cheat you," returned Burr, in a surly tone.

"You can't if you do. Set me down anywhere in the woods when there's
a wind, and I'll tell ye what the trees are if it's so dark you can't
see a leaf by the way the boughs blow. The maples strike out stiff
like dead men's arms, and the elms lash like live snakes, and the
pines stir all together like women. I can tell the trees no matter
how dark 'tis by the way they move, and I can tell a Gordon by the
swing of his shoulders, no matter how fast he slinks by on the other
side in the shadow. You don't set much by me, Burr, and I don't set
any too much by you, but we've got to swing our shoulders one way,
whether we will or no, because our father and our grandfather did
before us. Good Lord, aren't men in leading-strings, no matter how
high they kick!"

"I can't stand here in the snow talking," said Burr, and he tried to
push past. But the other man stood before him with another laugh and
cough. "You aren't talking, Burr; I'm the one that's talking, and
I've heard stuff that was worse to listen to. You'd better stand
still."

"I tell you I'm going," said Burr, with a thrust of his elbow in his
cousin's side.

"Well," said Lot, "go if you want to, or go if you don't want to.
That last is what you're doing, Burr Gordon."

"What do mean by that?"

"You're going to see Dorothy Fair when you want to see Madelon
Hautville, because you don't want to do what you want to. Well, go
on. I'm going to see Madelon and hear her sing. I've given up trying
to work against my own motions. It's no use; when you think you've
done it, you haven't. You never can get out of this one gait that you
were born to except in your own looking-glass. Go and court Dorothy
Fair, and in spite of yourself you'll kiss the other girl when you're
kissing her. Well, I sha'n't cheat Madelon Hautville that way."

"You know--she will not--you know Madelon Hautville never--"
stammered Burr Gordon, furiously.

Lot laughed again. "You think she sets so much by you she'll never
kiss me," said he. "Don't be too sure, Burr. Nature's nature, and the
best of us come under it. Madelon Hautville's got her place, like all
the rest. There isn't a rose that's too good to take a bee in. Go do
your own courting, and trust me to do mine. Courting's in our
blood--I sha'n't disgrace the family."

Burr Gordon went past his cousin with a smothered ejaculation. Lot
laughed again, and tramped, coughing, away to the Hautville house.
When he drew near the house the chorus within were still practising
"Strike the Timbrel."  When he opened the door and entered there was
no cessation in the music, but suddenly the girl's voice seemed to
gain new impulse and hurl itself in his face like a war-trumpet.

Burr Gordon kept on to Minister Jonathan Fair's great house in the
village, next the tavern. There was a light in the north parlor, and
he knew Dorothy was expecting him. He raised the knocker, and knew
when it fell that a girl's heart within responded to it with a wild
beat.

He waited until there was a heavy shuffle of feet in the hall and the
door opened, and Minister Fair's black servant-woman stood there
flaring a candle before his eyes.

"Who be you?" said she, in her rich drone, which had yet a twang of
hostility in it.

Burr Gordon ignored her question. "Is Miss Dorothy at home?" said he.

"Yes, she's at home, I s'pose," muttered the woman, grudgingly. She
distrusted this young man as a suitor for Dorothy. The girl's mother
had long been dead, and this old dark woman, whose very thoughts
seemed to the village people to move on barbarian pivots of their
own, had a jealous guardianship of her which exceeded that of her
father.

Now she filled up the doorway before Burr Gordon with her majestic,
palpitating bulk, her great black face stiffened back with obstinacy.
It was said that she had been born in Africa, and had been a princess
in her own country; and, indeed, she bore herself like one now, and
held up her orange-turbaned head as if it were crowned, and bore her
candle like a flaming sceptre which brought out strange gleams of
color and metallic lustres from her garments and the rows of beads on
her black neck.

Burr Gordon made an impatient yet deferential motion to enter. "I
would like to see her a few minutes if she is at home," said he.

The woman muttered something which might have been in her native
dialect, the words were so rolled into each other under her thick
tongue. Her small, sharp eyes were fairly malicious upon the young
man's handsome face.

"I don't know what you say," he said, half angrily. "Can't I see
her?"

"She's in the north parlor, I s'pose," muttered the black woman; and
she stood aside and let Burr Gordon pass in, following him with her
hostile eyes as he opened the north-parlor door. Dorothy Fair sat
with her embroidery-work at the mahogany table, whereon a whole
branch of candles burned in silver sticks. She was working a muslin
collar for her own adornment, and she set a fine stitch in a sprig
before she rose up, either to prove her self-command to herself or to
Burr Gordon. She had also held herself quiet during the delay in the
hall.

Dorothy Fair came of a gentle and self-controlled race of New England
ministers; but now her young heart carried her away. She stood up;
her embroidery, with her scissors and bodkin, slid to the ground, and
she came forward with her fair curls dropping around a face pink and
smiling openly with love like a child's, and was, seemingly half of
her own accord, in Burr Gordon's arms with her lips meeting his; and
then they sat down side by side on the north-parlor sofa.

Dorothy Fair's face was very sweet to see; her blue eyes and her soft
lips were innocent and fond under her lover's gaze. Her little white
hand clung to his like a baby's. There was a sweet hollow under her
chin, above her fine lace collar. Her soft, fair curls smelt in his
face of roses and lavender. The utter daintiness of this maiden
Dorothy Fair was a separate charm and a fascination full of subtle
and innocent earthiness to the senses of a lover. She appealed to his
selfish delight like a sweet-scented flower, like a pink or a rose.

Lot Gordon had been only half right in his analysis of his cousin's
wooing. When Burr sat with his arm around this maiden's waist, with
his face bent tenderly down towards the soft, pink cheek on his
shoulder, this sweetness near at hand was wellnigh sufficient for
him, and Dorothy's shy murmur of love in his ear overcame largely the
memory of the other's wonderful song. A bee cares only for the honey
and not for the flower, therefore one flower is as dear to him as
another; and so it is with many a lover when he gets fairly to
tasting love. The memory of the rose before fades, even if he never
wore it. Then, too, Burr Gordon had a sense of approbation from his
shrewder self which sustained him. This Dorothy Fair, the minister's
daughter, of gentle New England lineage, the descendant of
college-learned men, and of women who had held themselves with a fine
dignity and mild reserve in the village society, the sole heiress of
what seemed a goodly property to the simple needs of the day,
appealed to his reason as well as his heart. He remained until near
midnight, while the old black woman crouched with the patience of a
watching animal outside the door, and he wooed Dorothy Fair with
ardor and delight, although her softly affectionate kisses were to
Madelon Hautville's as the fall of snow-flakes to drops of warm
honey. And although after he had gone home and fallen asleep his
dreams were mixed, still when he waked with the image of Madelon
between himself and Dorothy, because sleep had set his heart free, it
was still with that sense of approbation.

Madelon Hautville was not considered a fair match for a young man who
had claims to ambition. The Hautville family held a peculiar place in
public estimation. They belonged not to any defined stratum of the
village society, but formed rather a side ledge, a cropping, of quite
another kind, at which people looked askance. One reason undoubtedly
was the mixture of foreign blood which their name denoted. Anything
of alien race was looked upon with a mixture of fear and aversion in
this village of people whose blood had flowed in one course for
generations. The Hautvilles were said to have French and Indian blood
yet, in strong measure, in their veins; it was certain that they had
both, although it was fairly back in history since the first
Hautville, who, report said, was of a noble French family, had
espoused an Iroquois Indian girl. The sturdy males of the family had
handed down the name and the characteristics of the races through
years of intermarriage with the English settlers. All the
Hautvilles--the father, the four sons, and the daughter--were tall
and dark, and straight as arrows, and they all had wondrous grace of
manner, which abashed and half offended, while it charmed, the stiff
village people. Not a young man in the village, no matter how finely
attired in city-made clothing, had the courtly air of these Hautville
sons, in their rude, half-woodland garb; not a girl, not even Dorothy
Fair, could wear a gown of brocade with the grace, inherited from a
far-away French grandmother, with which Madelon Hautville wore indigo
cotton.

Moreover, the whole family was as musical as a band of troubadours,
and while that brought them into constant requisition and gave them
an importance in the town, it yet caused them to be held with a
certain cheapness. Music as an end of existence and means of
livelihood was lightly estimated by the followers of the learned
professions, the wielders of weighty doctrines and drugs, and also by
the tillers of the stern New England soil. The Hautvilles, furnishing
the music in church, and for dances and funerals, were regarded much
in the light of mountebanks, and jugglers with sweet sounds. People
wondered that Lot and Burr Gordon should go to their house so much.
Not a week all winter but Burr had been there once or twice, and Lot
had been there nearly every night when his cousin was not. And he
stayed late also--this night he outstayed Burr at Dorothy Fair's. The
music was kept up until a late hour, for Madelon proposed tune after
tune with nervous ardor when her father and brothers seemed to flag.
Nobody paid much attention to Lot; he was too constant a visitor. He
settled into a favorite chair of his near the fire, and listened with
the firelight playing over his delicate, peaked face. Now and then he
coughed.

Old David Hautville, the father, stood out in front of the hearth by
his great bass-viol, leaning fondly over it like a lover over his
mistress. David Hautville was a great, spare man--a body of muscles
and sinews under dry, brown flesh, like an old oak-tree. His long,
white mustache curved towards his ears with sharp sweeps, like doves'
wings. His thick, white brows met over his keen, black eyes. He kept
time with his head, jerking it impatiently now and then, when some
one lagged or sped ahead in the musical race.

Three of the Hautville sons were men grown. One, Louis, laid his
dark, smooth cheek caressingly against the violin which he played.
Eugene sang the sonorous tenor, and Abner the bass, like an organ.
The youngest son, Richard, small and slender as a girl, so like
Madelon that he might have been taken for her had he been dressed in
feminine gear, lifted his eager face at her side and raised his
piercing, sweet treble, which seemed to pass beyond hearing into
fancy. Madelon, her brown throat swelling above her lace tucker, like
a bird's, stood in the midst of the men, and sang and sang, and her
wonderful soprano flowed through the harmony like a river of honey;
and yet now and then it came with a sudden fierce impetus, as if she
would force some enemy to bay with music. Madelon was slender, but
full of curves which were like the soft breast of a bird before an
enemy. Sometimes as she sang she flung out her slender hands with a
nervous gesture which had hostility in it. Truth was that she hated
Lot Gordon both on his own account and because he came instead of his
cousin Burr. She had expected Burr that night; she had taken his
cousin's hand on the doorlatch for his. He had not been to see her
for three weeks, and her heart was breaking as she sang. Any face
which had appeared to her instead of his in the doorway that night
would have been to her as the face of a bitter enemy or a black
providence, but Lot Gordon was in himself hateful to her. She knew,
too, by a curious revulsion of all her senses from unwelcome desire,
that he loved her, and the love of any man except Burr Gordon was to
her like a serpent.

She would not look at him, but somehow she knew that his eyes were
upon her, and that they were full of love and malice, and she knew
not which she dreaded more. She resolved that he should not have a
word with her that night if she could help it, and so she urged on
her father and her brothers with new tunes until they would have no
more, and went off to bed--all except the boy Richard. She whispered
in his ear, and he stayed behind with her while she mixed some bread
and set it for rising on the hearth.

Lot Gordon sat watching her. There was a hungry look in his hollow
blue eyes. Now and then he coughed painfully, and clapped his hand to
his chest with an impatient movement.

"Well, whether I ever get to heaven or not, I've heard music," he
said, when she passed him with the bread-bowl on her hip and her soft
arm curved around it. He reached out his slender hand and caught hold
of her dress-skirt; she jerked away with a haughty motion, and set
the bowl on the hearth. "You'd better rake down the fire now,
Richard," said she.

The boy jostled Lot roughly as he passed around him to get the
fire-shovel. Lot looked at the clock, and the hand was near twelve.
He arose slowly.

"I met Burr on his way down to Parson Fair's," he said.

Madelon covered up the bread closely with a linen towel. There was a
surging in her ears, as if misery itself had a veritable sound, and
her face was as white as the ashes on the hearth, but she kept it
turned away from Lot.

"Well," said he, in his husky drawl, "a rose isn't a rose to a bee,
she's only a honey-pot; and she's only one out of a shelfful to him;
she can't complain, it's what she was born to. If she finds any fault
it's got to be with creation, and what's one rose to face creation?
There's nothing to do but to make the best of it. Good-night,
Madelon."

"Good-night," said Madelon. The color had come back to her cheeks,
and she looked back at him proudly, standing beside her bread-bowl on
the hearth.

Lot passed out, turning his delicate face over his shoulder with a
subtle smile as he went. Richard clapped the door to after him with a
jar that shook the house, and shot the bolt viciously. "I'll get my
gun and follow him if you say so, and then I'll find Burr Gordon," he
said, turning a furious face to his sister.

"Would you make me a laughing-stock to the whole town?" said she.
"Rake down the fire; it's time to go to bed."

She looked as proudly at her brother as she had done at Lot. The
resemblance between the two faces faded a little as they confronted
each other. A virile quality in the boy's anger made the difference
of sex more apparent. He looked at her, holding his wrath, as it
were, like a two-edged sword which must smite some one. "If I thought
you cared about that man that has jilted you--and I've heard the talk
about it," said he, "I'd feel like shooting _you_."

"You needn't shoot," returned Madelon.

The boy looked at her as angrily as if she were Burr Gordon. Suddenly
her mouth quivered a little and her eyes fell. The boy flung both his
arms around her. "I don't care," he said, brokenly, in his sweet
treble--"I don't care, you're the handsomest girl in the town, and
the best and the smartest, and not one can sing like you, and I'll
kill any man that treats you ill--I will, I will!"  He was sobbing on
his sister's shoulder; she stood still, looking over his dark head at
the snow-hung window and the night outside. Her lips and eyes were
quite steady now; she had recovered self-control when her brother's
failed him, as if by some curious mental seesaw.

"No man can treat me ill unless I take it ill," said she, "and that
I'll do for no man. There's no killing to be done, and if there were
I'd do it myself and ask nobody. Come, Richard, let me go; I'm going
to bed."  She gave the boy's head a firm pat. "There's a turnover in
the pantry, under a bowl on the lowermost shelf," said she; and she
laughed in his passionate, flushed face when he raised it.

"I don't care, I will!" he cried.

"Go and get your turnover; I saved it for you," said she, with a
push.

Neither of them dreamed that Lot Gordon had been watching them,
standing in a snow-drift under the south window, his eyes peering
over the sill, his forehead wet with a snow-wreath, stifling back his
cough. When at last the candlelight went out in the great kitchen he
crept stiffly and wearily through the snow.




Chapter II


Lot Gordon lived about half a mile away in the old Gordon homestead
alone, except for an old servant-woman and her husband, who managed
his house for him and took care of the farm. Lot himself did not work
in the common acceptance of the term. His father had left him quite a
property, and he did not need to toil for his bread. People called
him lazy. He owned nearly as many books as the parson and the lawyer.
He often read all night it was said, and he roamed the woods in all
seasons. Under low-hanging winter boughs and summer arches did Lot
Gordon pry and slink and lie in wait, his fine, sharp face peering
through snowy tunnels or white spring thickets like a white fox,
hungrily intent upon the secrets of nature.

There was a deep mystery in this to the village people. They could
not fathom the reason for a man's haunting wild places like a wild
animal unless he hunted and trapped like the Hautville sons. They
were suspicious of dark motives, upon which they exercised their
imaginations.

Lot Gordon's talk, moreover, was an enigma to them. He was no
favorite, and only his goodly property tempered his ill repute.
People could not help identifying him, in a measure, with his noble
old house, with the stately pillared portico, with his silver-plate
and damask and mahogany, which his great-grandfather had brought from
the old country, with his fine fields and his money in the bank. He
held, moreover, a large mortgage on the house opposite, where Burr
Gordon lived with his mother. Burr's father and Lot's, although sons
of one shrewd father, had been of very different financial abilities.
Lot's father kept his property intact, never wasting, but adding from
others' waste. Burr's plunged into speculation, built a new house,
for which he could not pay, married a wife who was not thrifty, and
when his father died had anticipated the larger portion of his
birthright. So Lot's father succeeded to nearly all the family
estates, and in time absorbed the rest. Lot, at his father's death,
had inherited the mortgage upon the estate of Burr and his mother.
Burr's father had died some time before. Lot was rumored to be
harder, in the matter of exacting heavy interest, than his father had
been. It was said that Burr was far behind in his payments, and that
Lot would foreclose. Burr had a better head than his father's, but he
had terrible odds against him. There was only one chance for his
release from difficulty, people thought. All the property, by a
provision in the grandfather's will, was to fall to him if Lot died
unmarried. Lot was twenty years older than Burr, and he coughed.

"Burr Gordon ain't makin' out much now," people said; "the paint's
all off his house and his land's run down, but there's dead men's
shoes with gold buckles in the path ahead of him."

Burr thought of it sometimes, although he turned his face from the
thought, and Lot considered it when he took the mortgage note out of
his desk and scored another installment of unpaid interest on it. "If
a man's only his own debtor he won't be very hard on himself," he
said aloud, and laughed. Old Margaret Bean, his housekeeper, looked
at him over her spectacles, but she did not know what he meant. She
prepared many a valuable remedy for his cough from herbs and roots,
but Lot would never taste them, and she made her old husband swallow
them all as preventatives of colds, that they should not be wasted.
Lot was coughing harder lately. To-night, after he returned from the
Hautvilles', he had one paroxysm after another. He did not go to bed,
but huddled over the fire wrapped in a shawl, with a leather-bound
book on his knees, all night, holding to his chest when he coughed,
then turning to his book again.

When daylight was fully in the room he blew out the candle, and went
over to the window and looked out across the road at the house
opposite, which had always been called the "new house" to distinguish
it from the old Gordon homestead. It was not so solid and noble as
the other, but it had sundry little touches of later times, which his
father had always characterized as wasteful follies. For one thing,
it was elevated ostentatiously far above the road-level upon terraces
surmounted by a flight of stone steps. It fairly looked down, like
any spirit of a younger age, upon the older house, which might have
been regarded in a way as its progenitor.

The smoke was coming out of the kitchen chimney in the ell. Lot
Gordon looked across. Burr was clearing the snow from the stone steps
over the terraces. There had never been any lack of energy and
industry in Burr to account for his flagging fortunes. He arose
betimes every morning. Lot, standing well behind the dimity curtain,
watched him flinging the snow aside like spray, his handsome face
glowing like a rose.

"I suppose he is going to the party at the tavern to-night," Lot
murmured. Suddenly his face took on a piteous, wistful look like a
woman's; tears stood in his blue eyes. He doubled over with a violent
fit of coughing, then went back to his chair and his book.

This party had been the talk of the village for several weeks. It was
to be an unusually large one. People were coming from all the towns
roundabout. Burr Gordon had been one of the ringleaders of the
enterprise. All day long he worked over the preparations, dragging
out evergreen garlands from under the snow in the woods, cutting
hemlock boughs, and trimming the ball-room in the tavern. Towards
night he heard a piece of news which threatened to bring everything
to a standstill. The dusk was thickening fast; Burr and the two young
men who were working with him were hurrying to finish the decorations
before candlelight when Richard Hautville came in. Burr started when
he saw him. He looked so like his sister in the dim light that he
thought for a moment she was there.

Richard did not notice him at all. He hustled by him roughly and
approached the other two young men. "Louis can't fiddle to-night," he
announced, curtly. The young men stared at him in dismay.

"What's the trouble?" asked Burr.

"He's hurt his arm," replied Richard; but he still addressed the
other two, and made as if he were not answering Burr.

"Broke it?" asked one of the others.

"No; sprained it. He was clearing the snow off the barn roof and the
ladder fell. It's all black-and-blue, and he can't lift it enough to
fiddle to-night."

The three young men looked at each other.

"What's going to be done?" said one.

"I don't know," said Burr. "There's Davy Barrett, over to the Four
Corners--I suppose we might get him if we sent right over."

"You can't get him," said Richard Hautville, still addressing the
other two, as if they had spoken. "Louis said you couldn't. His
wife's got the typhus-fever, and he's up nights watching with
her--won't let anybody else. You can't get him."

"We can't have a ball without a fiddler," one young man said,
soberly.

"Maybe Madelon would lilt for the dancing," Burr Gordon said; and
then he colored furiously, as if he had startled himself in saying
it.

The boy turned on him. "Maybe you think my sister will lilt for you
to dance, Burr Gordon!" cried he, and his face blazed white in Burr's
eyes, and he shook his slender brown fist.

"Nobody wants your sister to lilt if she isn't willing to," Burr
returned, in a hard voice; and he snatched up a hemlock bough, and
went away with it to the other side of the ball-room.

"My sister won't lilt for you, and you can have your ball the best
way you can!" shouted the boy, his angry eyes following Burr. Then he
went out of the ball-room with a leap, and slammed the door so that
the tavern trembled.

The young men chuckled. "Injun blood is up," said one.

"You'll be scalped, Burr," called the other.

Burr came over to them with an angry stride. "Oh, quit fooling!" said
he, impatiently. "What's going to be done?"

"Nothing can be done; we shall have to give the ball up for to-night
unless you can get Madelon Hautville to lilt for the dancing,"
returned one, and the other nodded assent. "That's the state of the
case," said he.

Burr scraped a foot impatiently on the waxed floor. "Go and ask her
yourself, Daniel Plympton," said he. "I don't see why it has all got
to come on to me."

"Can't," replied Daniel Plympton, with a laugh. "Remember the falling
out Eugene and I had at the house-raising? I ain't going to his house
to ask his sister to lilt for my dancing."

"You, then, Abner Little," said Burr, peremptorily, to the other
young man. He had a fair, nervous face, and he was screwing his
forehead anxiously over the situation.

"Can't nohow, Burr," said he. "I've got to drive four miles home, and
milk, and take care of the horses, and shave, and get dressed, and
then drive another three miles for my girl. I'm going to take one of
the Morse girls, over at Summer Falls. I haven't got time to go down
to the Hautvilles', and that's the truth, Burr."

"You'll have to go yourself, Burr," said Daniel Plympton, with a
half-laugh.

"I can't," said Burr, "and I won't, if we give the ball up."

"What will all the out-of-town folks say?"

"I don't care what they say--they can play forfeits."

"Forfeits!" returned Daniel Plympton with scorn. "What's kissing to
dancing?"  Daniel Plympton was somewhat stout but curiously light of
foot, and accounted the best dancer in town. As he spoke he sprang up
on his toes as if he had winged heels. "Forfeits!" repeated he,
jerking his great flaxen head.

"Well, you can go yourself, then, and ask Madelon Hautville to lilt,"
said Burr.

"I tell you I can't, Burr--I ain't mean enough."

"Well, I won't, and that's flat."

"I've got to go home, anyway," said Abner Little. "What I want to
know is--is there going to be any ball?"

"Oh, get your girl anyhow, Ab," returned Daniel, with a great laugh;
"there'll be something. If there ain't dancing, there'll be kissing,
and that'll suit her just as well. And if she can't get enough here,
why there's the ride home. Lord, I'd get a girl nearer home! You've
got to drive six miles out of your way to Summer Falls and back. As
for me, the quicker I get a girl off my hands the better. I'm going
to take Nancy Blake because she lives next door to the tavern. Go
along with ye, Ab; Burr and I will settle it some way."

But it looked for some time after Abner Little left as if there would
be no ball that night. They could not have any dance unless Madelon
Hautville would sing for it, and both Daniel Plympton and Burr Gordon
were determined not to ask her.

At half-past seven Madelon was all dressed for the ball, and neither
of them had come to see her about it. She and all her brothers except
Louis were going. They wondered who would play for the dancing, but
supposed some arrangements would be made. "Burr Gordon will put it
through somehow," said Louis. "Maybe he'll ride over to Farnham
Hollow and get Luke Corliss to fiddle."  Louis sat discontentedly by
the fire, with his arm soaking in cider-brandy and wormwood.

"Farnham Hollow is ten miles away," said Richard.

"His horse is fast; he'd get him here by eight o'clock," returned
Louis.

Madelon was radiant. In spite of herself, she was full of hope in
going to the ball. She knew Dorothy Fair would not be present, since
her father was the orthodox parson, and she had seen her own face in
her glass. With her rival away, what could not a face like that do
with a heart that leaned towards it of its own nature? Madelon dimly
felt that Burr Gordon had to resist himself as well as her in this
matter. She had tended a monthly rose in the south window all winter,
and she wore two red roses in her black braids. Her cheeks and her
lips were fuller of warm red life than the roses. She lowered her
black eyes before her father and her brothers, for there was a light
in them which she could not subdue, which belonged to Burr Gordon
only. No costly finery had Madelon Hautville, but she had done some
cunning needle-work on an old black-satin gown of her mother's, and
it was fitted as softly over her sweet curves as a leaf over a bud. A
long garland of flowers after her own design had she wrought in
bright-colored silks around the petticoat, and there were knots of
red ribbon to fasten the loopings here and there. And she wore
another red rose in her lace tucker against her soft brown bosom.
Madelon wore, too, trim black-silk stockings with red clocks over her
slender ankles, and little black-satin shoes with steel buckles and
red rosettes. Every one of her brothers, except the youngest,
Richard, must needs compare her in his own heart, to her
disparagement, with some maid not his sister, but they all viewed her
with pride. Old David Hautville's eyes, under his thick, white brows,
followed her and dwelt upon her as she moved around the kitchen.

Madelon had got out her red cloak and her silk hood, and it was
nearly time to start when there was a knock on the door. Madelon's
face was pale in a second, then red again. She pushed Richard aside.
"I'll go to the door," said she.

She knew somehow that it was Burr Gordon, and when she opened the
door he stood there. He looked curiously embarrassed, but she did not
notice that. His mere presence for the moment seemed to fill all her
comprehension. She had no eye for shades of expression.

"Come in," said she, all blushing and trembling before him, and yet
with a certain dignity which never quite deserted her.

"Can I see you a minute?" Burr said, awkwardly.

"Come this way."

Madelon led the way into the best room, where there was no fire. It
had not been warmed all winter, except on nights when Burr had come
courting her. In the midst of it the great curtained bedstead reared
itself, holding its feather-bed like a drift of snow. The floor was
sanded in a fine, small pattern, there were white tasselled curtains
at the windows, and there was a tall chest of drawers that reached
the ceiling. The room was just as Madelon's mother, who had been one
of the village girls, had left it.

Madelon glanced at the hearth, where she had laid the wood
symmetrically--all ready to be kindled at a moment's notice should
Burr come. "I'll light the fire," said she, in a trembling voice.

"No, I can't stop," returned the young man. "I've got to go right up
to the tavern. Look here, Madelon--"

"Well?" she murmured, trembling.

"I want to know if--look here, won't you lilt for the dancing
to-night, Madelon?"

Madelon's face changed. "That's all he came for," she thought. She
turned away from him. "You'd better get Luke Corliss to fiddle," she
said, coldly.

"We can't. I started to go over there, and I met a man that lives
next door to him, and he said it was no use, for Luke had gone down
to Winfield to fiddle at a ball there."

"I don't feel like lilting to-night," said Madelon.

The young man colored. "Well," said he, in a stiff, embarrassed
voice, and he turned towards the door, "we won't have any ball
to-night, that's all," he added.

"Well, you can go visiting instead," returned Madelon, suddenly.

"I'd rather go a-visiting--here!" cried Burr, with a quick fervor,
and he turned back and came close to her.

Madelon looked at him sharply, steeling her heart against his tender
tone, but he met her gaze with passionate eyes.

"Oh, Madelon, you look so beautiful to-night!" he whispered,
hoarsely. Her eyes fell before his. She made, whether she would or
not, a motion towards him, and he put his arms around her. They
kissed again and again, lingering upon each kiss as if it were a
foothold in heaven. A great rapture of faith in her lover and his
love came over Madelon. She said to herself that they had lied--they
had all lied! Burr had never courted Dorothy Fair. She believed, with
her whole heart and soul, that he loved her and her alone. And,
indeed, she was at that time, at that minute, right and not deceived;
for Burr Gordon was one of those who can encompass love in one tense
only, and that the present; and they who love only in the present,
hampered by no memories and no dreams, yield out love's sweetness
fully. All Burr Gordon's soul was in his kisses and his fond eyes,
and her own crept out to meet it with perfect faith.

"I will lilt for the dancing," she whispered.

The Hautvilles were going to the ball on their wood-sled, drawn by
oxen. David was to drive them, and take the team home. It was already
before the door when Burr came out, and Madelon asked him to ride
with them, but he refused. "I've got to go home first," he said, and
plunged off quickly down the old road, the short-cut to his house.

Madelon Hautville, in her red cloak and her great silk hood, stood in
the midst of her brothers on the wood-sled, and the oxen drew them
ponderously to the ball. The tavern was all alight. Many other sleds
were drawn up before the door; indeed, certain of the young men who
had not their especial sweethearts took their ox-sleds and went from
door to door collecting the young women. Many a jingling load slipped
along the snowy road to the tavern that night, and the ball-room
filled rapidly.

At eight o'clock the ball opened. Madelon stood up in the little
gallery allotted to the violins and lilted, and the march began. Two
and two, the young men and the girls swung around the room. Madelon
lilted with her eyes upon the moving throng, gay as a garden in a
wind; and suddenly her heart stood still, although she lilted on.
Down on the floor below Burr Gordon led the march, with Dorothy Fair
on his arm. Dorothy Fair, waving a great painted fan with the
tremulous motion of a butterfly's wing, with her blue brocade
petticoat tilting airily as she moved, like an inverted bell-flower,
with a locket set in brilliants flashing on her white neck, with her
pink-and-white face smiling out with gentle gayety from her fair
curls, stepped delicately, pointing out her blue satin toes, around
the ball-room, with one little white hand on Burr Gordon's arm.




Chapter III


Suddenly all Madelon's beauty was cheapened in her own eyes. She saw
herself swart and harsh-faced as some old savage squaw beside this
fair angel. She turned on herself as well as on her recreant lover
with rage and disdain--and all the time she lilted without one break.

The ball swung on and on, and Madelon, up in the musicians' gallery,
sang the old country-dances in the curious dissyllabic fashion termed
lilting. It never occurred to her to wonder how it was that Dorothy
Fair, the daughter of the orthodox minister, should be at the
ball--she who had been brought up to believe in the sinful and
hellward tendencies of the dance. Madelon only grasped the fact that
she was there with Burr; but others wondered, and the surprise had
been great when Dorothy in her blue brocade had appeared in the
ball-room.

This had been largely of late years a liberal and Unitarian village,
but Parson Fair had always held stanchly to his stern orthodox
tenets, and promulgated them undiluted before his thinning
congregations and in his own household. Dorothy could not only not
play cards or dance, but she could not be present at a party where
the cards were produced or the fiddle played. There was, indeed, a
rumor that she had learned to dance when she was in Boston at school,
but no one knew for certain.

Dorothy Fair was advancing daintily between the two long lines,
holding up her blue brocade to clear her blue-satin shoes, to meet
the young man from the opposite corner, flinging out gayly towards
her, when suddenly, with no warning whatever, a great dark woman sped
after her through the dance, like a wild animal of her native woods.
She reached out her black hand and caught Dorothy by the white,
lace-draped arm, and she whispered loud in her ear.

The people near, finding it hard to understand the African woman's
thick tongue, could not exactly vouch for the words, but the purport
of her hurried speech they did not mistake. Parson Fair had
discovered Mistress Dorothy's absence, and home she must hasten at
once. It was evident enough to everybody that staid and decorous
Dorothy had run away to the ball with Burr Gordon, and a smothered
titter ran down the files of the Virginia reel.

Burr Gordon cast a fierce glance around; then he sprang to Dorothy's
side, and she looked palely and piteously up at him.

He pulled her hand through his arm and led her out of the ball-room,
with the black woman following sulkily, muttering to herself. Burr
bent closely down over Dorothy's drooping head as they passed out of
the door. "Don't be frightened, sweetheart," whispered he. Madelon
saw him as she lilted, and it seemed to her that she heard what he
said.

It was not long after when she felt a touch on her shoulder as she
sat resting between the dances, gazing with her proud, bright eyes
down at the merry, chattering throng below. She turned, and her
brother Richard stood there with a strange young man, and Richard
held Louis's fiddle on his shoulder.

"This is Mr. Otis, Madelon," said Richard, "and he came up from
Kingston to the ball, and he can fiddle as well as Louis, and he said
'twas a shame you should lilt all night and not have a chance to
dance yourself; and so I ran home and got Louis's fiddle, and there
are plenty down there to jump at the chance of you for a
partner--and--" the boy leaned forward and whispered in his sister's
ear: "Burr Gordon's gone--and Dorothy Fair."

Madelon turned her beautiful, proud face towards the stranger, and
did not notice Richard at all. "Thank you, sir," said she, inclining
her long neck; "but I care not to dance--I'd as lief lilt."

"But," said the strange young man, pressing forward impetuously and
gazing into her black eyes, "you look tired; 'tis a shame to work you
so."

"I rest between the dances, and I am not tired," said Madelon,
coldly.

"I beg you to let me fiddle for the rest of the ball," pleaded the
young man. "Let me fiddle while you dance; you may be sure I'll
fiddle my best for you."

A tender note came into his voice, and, curiously enough, Madelon did
not resent it, although she had never seen him before and he had no
right. She looked up in his bright fair face with sudden hesitation,
and his blue eyes bent half humorously, half lovingly upon her. She
had a fierce desire to get away from this place, out into the night,
and home. "I do not care to dance," said she, falteringly; "but I
could go home, if you felt disposed to fiddle."

"Then go home and rest," cried the stranger, brightly. "'Tis a strain
on the throat to lilt so long, and you cannot put in a new string as
you can in a fiddle."

With that the young man came forward to the front of the little
gallery, and Madelon yielded up her place hesitatingly.

"But you cannot dance yourself, sir," said she.

"I have danced all I want to to-night," he replied, and began tuning
the fiddle.

"I'm sure I'm much obliged to you, sir," Madelon said, and got her
hood and cloak from the back of the gallery with no more parley.

The young man cast admiring glances after her as she went out, with
her young brother at her heels.

"I'm going home with you," Richard said to her as they went down the
gallery stairs.

"Not a step," said she. "You've just been after the fiddle, and
they're going to dance the Fisher's Hornpipe next."

"You'll be afraid in that lonesome stretch after you leave the
village."

"Afraid!"  There was a ring of despairing scorn in the girl's voice,
as if she faced already such woe that the supposition of new terror
was an absurdity.

They had come down to the ball-room floor, and were standing directly
in front of the musicians' gallery. The young fiddler, Jim Otis,
leaned over and looked at them.

"I don't care," said Richard, "I won't let you go alone unless you
take my knife."

Madelon laughed. "What nonsense!" said she, and tried to pass her
brother.

But Richard held her by the arm while he rummaged in his pocket for
the great clasp-knife which he had earned himself by the sale of some
rabbit-skins, and which was the pride of his heart and his dearest
treasure, and opened it. "Here," said he, and he forced the
clasp-knife into his sister's hand. Otis, leaning over the gallery,
saw it all. Many of the dancers had gone to supper; there was no
other person very near them. "If you should meet a _bear_, you could
kill him with that knife--it's so strong," said the boy. "If you
don't take it I'll go home with you, and it's so late father won't
let me come out again to-night."

"Well, I'll take it," Madelon said, wearily, and she passed out of
the ball-room with the knife in her hand, under her cloak.

When she got out in the cold night air she sped along fast over the
creaking snow, still holding the knife clutched fast in her hand. She
began to lilt again as she went, and again Burr and Dorothy danced
together before her eyes. She passed Parson Fair's house, and the
best-room windows were lighted. She thought that Burr was there, and
she lilted more loudly the Virginia reel.

After Parson Fair's house was some time left behind, and she had come
into the lengthy stretch of road, she saw a shadowy figure ahead. She
could not at first tell whether it was moving towards or from
her--whether it was a man or a woman; or, indeed, whether it were not
a forest tree encroaching on the road and moving in the wind. She
kept on swiftly, holding her knife under her cloak. She had stopped
singing.

Presently she saw that the figure was a man, and coming her way; and
then her heart stood still, for she knew by the swing of his
shoulders that it was Burr Gordon. She threw back her proud head and
sped along towards him, grasping her knife under her cloak and
looking neither to the right nor left. She swerved not her eyes a
hair's-breadth when she came close to him--so close that their
shoulders almost touched in passing in the narrow path.

Suddenly there was a quick sigh in her ear--"Oh, Madelon!"  Then an
arm was flung around her waist and hot lips were pressed to her own.

The mixed blood of two races, in which action is quick to follow
impulse, surged up to Madelon's head. She drew the hand which held
the knife from under her cloak and struck. "Kiss me again, Burr
Gordon, if you dare!" she cried out, and her cry was met by a groan
as he fell away from her into the snow.




Chapter IV


Madelon stood for a second looking at the dark, prostrate form as one
of her Iroquois ancestors might have looked at a fallen foe before he
drew his scalping-knife; then suddenly the surging of the savage
blood in her ears grew faint. She fell down on her knees beside him.
"Have I killed you, Burr?" she said, and bent her face down to
his--and it was not Burr, but Lot Gordon!

The white, peaked face smiled up at her out of the snow. "You haven't
killed me if I die, since you took me for Burr," whispered Lot
Gordon.

"Are you much hurt?"

"I--don't know. The knife has gone a little way into my side. It has
not reached my heart, but that was hurt unto death already by life,
so this matters not."

Madelon felt along his side and hit the handle of the clasp-knife,
firmly fixed.

"Don't try to draw it out--you cannot," said Lot, and his pain forced
a groan from him. "I'll live, if I can, till the wound is healed for
the sake of your peace. I'd be content to die of it, since you gave
it in vengeance for another man's kiss, if it were not for you. But
they shall never know--they shall never--know."  Lot's voice died
away in a faint murmur between his parted lips; his eyes stared up
with no meaning in them at the wintry stars.

Madelon ran back on the road to the village, taking great leaps
through the snow, straining her eyes ahead. Now and then she cried
out hoarsely, as if she really saw some one, "Hullo! hullo!"  At the
curve of the road she turned a headlong corner and ran roughly
against a man who was hurrying towards her; and this time it was Burr
Gordon.

Burr reeled back with the shock; then his face peered into hers with
fear and wonder. "Is it you?" he stammered out. "What is the matter?"

But Madelon caught his arm in a hard grip. "Come, quick!" she gasped,
and pulled him along the road after her.

"What is the matter?" Burr demanded, half yielding and half
resisting.

Madelon faced him suddenly as they sped along. "I met your cousin Lot
just below here and he kissed me, and I took him for you and stabbed
him, if you must know," she sobbed out, dryly.

Burr gave a choking cry of horror.

"I think I--have killed him," said she, and pulled him on faster.

"And you meant to kill me?"

"Yes, I did."

"I wish to God you had!" Burr cried out, with a sudden fierce anger
at himself and her; and now he hurried on faster than she.

Lot was quite motionless when they reached him. Burr threw himself
down in the snow and leaned his ear to his cousin's heart. Madelon
stood over them, panting. Suddenly a merry roulade of whistling broke
the awful stillness. Two men were coming down the road whistling
"Roy's Wife of Alidivalloch" as clearly soft and sweet as flutes,
accented with human gayety and mirth.

On came the merry whistlers. Burr sprang up and grasped Madelon
Hautville's arm. "He isn't dead," he whispered, hoarsely. "Somebody's
coming. Go home, quick!"

But Madelon looked at him with despairing obstinacy. "I'll stay,"
said she.

"I tell you, go! Somebody is coming. I'll get help. I'll send for the
doctor. Go home!"

"No!"

"Oh, Madelon, if you have ever loved me, go home!"

Madelon turned away at that. "I'll be there when they come for me,"
said she, and went swiftly down the road and out of sight in the
converging distance of trees, with the snow muffling her footsteps.

When she reached home she groped her way into the living-room, which
was lighted only by the low, red gleam of the coals on the hearth.
Her father's gruff voice called out from the bedroom beyond: "That
you, Madelon?"

"Yes," said she, and lighted a candle at the coals.

"Have the boys come?"

"No."

Madelon went up the steep stairs to her chamber, but before she
opened her door her brother Louis's voice, broken with pain, besought
her to come into his room and bathe his sprained shoulder for him.
She went in, set the candle on the table, and rubbed in the
cider-brandy and wormwood without a word. Louis, in the midst of his
pain, kept looking up wonderingly at his sister's face. It looked as
if it were frozen. She did not seem to see him. Nothing about her
seemed alive but her gently moving hands.

Suddenly he gave a startled cry. "What's that? Have you cut your
hand, Madelon?"  Madelon glanced at her hand, and there was a broad
red stain over the palm and three of her fingers.

"No," said she, and went on rubbing.

"But it looks like blood!" cried Louis, knitting his pale brows at
her.

Madelon made no reply.

"Madelon, what is that on your hand?"

"Blood."

"How came it there?"

"You'll know to-morrow."  Madelon put the stopper in the cider-brandy
and wormwood bottle; then she covered up the wounded arm and went
out.

"Madelon, what is it? What is the matter? What ails you?" Louis
called after her.

"You'll know to-morrow," said she, and shut her chamber door, which
was nearly opposite Louis's. His youngest brother Richard occupied
the same room, having his little cot at the other side, under the
window. When he came in, an hour later, Louis turned to him eagerly.

"Has anything happened?" he demanded.

The boy's face, which was always so like his sister's, had the same
despair in it now. "Don't know of anything that's happened," he
returned, surlily.

"What ails Madelon?"

"I tell you I don't know."  Richard would say no more. He blew out
his candle and tumbled into bed, turned his face to the window and
lay awake until and hour before dawn. Then he arose, dressed himself,
and went down-stairs. He put more wood on the hearth fire, then knelt
down before it, and puffed out his boyish cheeks at the bellows until
the new flames crept through the smoke. Then he lighted the lantern,
and went to the barn to milk and feed the stock. That was always
Richard's morning task, and he always on his way thither replenished
the hearth fire, that his sister Madelon might have a lighter and
speedier task at preparing breakfast. Madelon usually arose a
half-hour after Richard, and she was not behindhand this morning. She
entered the great living-room, lit the candles, and went about
getting breakfast. Human daily needs arise and set on tragedy as
remorselessly as the sun.

Madelon Hautville, who had washed but a few hours ago the stain of
murder from her hand, in whose heart was an unsounded depth of
despair, mixed up the corn-meal daintily with cream, and baked the
cakes which her father and brothers loved before the fire, and laid
the table. She had always attended to the needs of the males of her
family with the stern faithfulness of an Indian squaw. Now, as she
worked, the wonder, softer than her other emotions, was upon her as
to how they would get on when she was in prison and after she was
dead; for she made no doubt that she had killed Lot Gordon and the
sheriff would be there presently for her, and she felt plainly the
fretting of the rope around her soft neck. She hoped they would not
come for her until breakfast was prepared and eaten, the dishes
cleared away, and the house tidied; but she listened like a savage
for a foot-fall and a hand at the door. She had packed a little
bundle ready to take with her before she left her chamber. Her cloak
and hood were laid out on the bed.

When she sat down at the table with her father and brothers, all of
them except Richard and Louis stared at her with open amazement and
questioned her. Richard and Louis stared furtively at their sister's
face, as stiff, set, and pale as if she were dead, but they asked no
questions. Madelon said, in a voice that was not hers, that she was
not sick, and put pieces of Indian cake into her untasting mouth and
listened. But breakfast was well over and the dishes put away before
anybody came. And then it was not the sheriff to hale her to prison
on a charge of murder, but an old man from the village big with news.

He was a relative of the Hautvilles, an uncle on the mother's side,
old and broken, scarcely able to find his feeble way on his shrunken
legs through the snow; but, with the instinct of gossip, the sharp
nose for his neighbors' affairs, still alert in him, he had arisen at
dawn to canvass the village, and had come thither at first, since he
anticipated that he might possibly have the delight of bringing the
intelligence before any of the family had heard it elsewhere. He came
in, dragging his old, snow-laden feet, tapping heavily with his stout
stick, and settled, cackling, into a chair.

"Heard the news?" queried Uncle Luke basset, his eyes, like black
sparks, twinkling rapidly at all their faces.

Madelon set the cups and saucers on the dresser.

"We don't have any time for anybody's business but our own," quoth
David Hautville, gruffly. He did not like his wife's uncle. He was
tightening a string in his bass-viol; he pulled it as he spoke, and
it gave out a fierce twang. Louis sat moodily over the fire with his
painful arm in wet bandages. Richard was whittling kindling-wood,
with nervous speed, beside him. Eugene and Abner were cleaning their
guns. They all looked at the eager old man except Richard and Louis
and Madelon.

"Burr Gordon has killed Lot so's to get his property," proclaimed the
old man, and his voice broke with eager delight and importance.

Madelon gave a cry and sprang forward in front of him. "It's a lie!"
she shouted.

The old man laughed in her face. "No, 'tain't, Madelon. You're
showin' a Christian sperrit to stan' up for him when he's jilted ye
for another gal, but 'tain't a lie. His knife, with his name on to
it, was a-stickin' out of Lot's side."

"_It's a lie!_  I killed him with my brother Richard's knife!"

The old man shrank back before her in incredulous horror. The great
bass-viol fell to the ground like a woman as David strode forward and
Abner and Eugene turned their shocked, white faces from their guns.

"I killed him with Richard's knife," repeated Madelon.

Richard got up and came around before her, thrusting his hand in his
pocket. He pulled out his own clasp-knife, and brandished it in her
face. "Here is my knife," he cried, fiercely--"my knife, with my name
cut in the handle. Say you killed Lot Gordon with it again!"

Madelon snatched the knife out of her brother's hand and looked at it
with straining eyes. There, indeed, was a rude "R. H." cut in the
horn handle. She gasped. "What does this mean?" she cried out.

"It means you have lost your wits," answered Richard, contemptuously;
but his eyes on his sister's face were full of pleading agony.

"What knife did you give me when I started home last night?"

"I gave you no knife."

Old Luke Basset asserted himself again. "The gal's lost her balance,"
he said. "It was Burr Gordon's knife, with his name cut into it, that
was stickin' out of Lot Gordon's side."

"Is Lot Gordon dead?" Louis demanded, hoarsely.

"No, he ain't dead, but the doctor thinks he can't live long. Ephraim
Steele and Eleazer Hooper were a-goin' home from the ball when they
come right on Lot layin' side of the road and Burr a-tryin' to draw
his knife out, so it shouldn't testify against him."

"It's a lie!" Madelon groaned. "Burr Gordon did not kill him. It was
I! He met me, and tried to--kiss me, and--the knife was in my
hand--Richard made me take it because I was coming home alone, and
there had been rumors of a bear."

"I did not," persisted Richard, doggedly. "I did not make her take my
knife. Here is my knife, with my name cut in the handle."

Madelon turned on him fiercely. "You did, you know you did!" said
she.

"Here is my knife, with my name cut on the handle."

"You gave me a knife as I was coming out of the tavern."

"No, I did not."

"You did, and I killed him with it. It was not Burr! I ran for help,
and I met Burr, and I told him what I had done, and he went back with
me to Lot. Then he sent me home when he heard somebody coming. Ask
Lot Gordon if I did not kill him; if he can speak he can tell you."

"There won't neither him nor Burr say a word," said the old man, "but
there was Burr's knife a-stickin' into Lot's side, with his name cut
into it."

Madelon turned sharply to Louis. "You saw the blood on my hand when I
was rubbing your arm last night," she said.

He made no reply, but stared gloomily at the fire.

"Louis, you saw Lot Gordon's blood on my hand?"

Louis sprang up with an oath, and pushed past her out of the room.

"Louis," Madelon cried, "tell them!"

"She is trying to shield Burr Gordon!" Louis called back, fiercely,
and the closing door shook the house like a cannon-shot.

"Where is Burr?" Madelon demanded of old Luke Basset.

"The sheriff took him to New Salem to jail this morning," he replied,
grinning.

Madelon gave a great cry and started to rush out of the room, but her
father stood in her way.

"Where are you going?" he asked, sternly.

"I am going to get my hood and cloak, and then I am going to Lot
Gordon's."  Her father stood aside, and she went out and up-stairs to
her chamber. She took up the red cloak which lay on her bed, and
examined it eagerly to see if by chance there was a blood stain
thereon to prove her guilt and Burr Gordon's innocence, but she could
find none. She had flung it back when she struck. She looked also
carefully at her pretty ball gown, but the black fabric showed no
stain.

When she went down-stairs with her cloak and hood on old Luke Basset
was gone, and so were her brothers. Her father stood waiting for her,
and he had on his fur cap and his heavy cloak. He came forward and
took her firmly by the arm. "I'm going with you to Lot Gordon's,"
said he. And they went out together and up the road, he still keeping
a firm hand on his daughter's arm, and neither spoke all the way to
Lot Gordon's house.

When they reached it David Hautville opened the door without touching
the knocker, and strode in with Madelon following. Old Margaret Bean
was just passing through the entry with a great roll of linen cloths
in her arms, and she stopped when she saw them.

"How is he?" whispered David, hoarsely.

"He's pretty low," returned Margaret Bean, at the same time nodding
her head cautiously towards the door on her right. Long, smooth loops
of sallow hair fell from Margaret Bean's clean white cap over her
cheeks, which looked as if they had been scrubbed and rasped red with
tears. Her own gray hair was strained back out of sight--not to be
discovered, even when there was a murder in the house.

"Does he know anybody?" queried David Hautville.

"Just as well as ever he did."  Margaret Bean rubbed a tear dry on
her cheek with her starched apron.

"We've got to see him, then."

"I dunno as you can--the doctor--"

"I don't care anything about the doctor! We've _got_ to _see him!"_
David's voice rang out quite loud in the hush of murder and death
which seemed to fill the house. Margaret Bean stood aside with a
scared look. David Hautville threw open the door on the right, and he
and Madelon went in.

Lot Gordon's eyes turned towards them, but not his head. He lay as
still in bed as if he were already dead, and his long body raised the
gay patchwork quilt in a stiff ridge like a grave.

Madelon went close to him and bent over him. "Tell who stabbed you,"
said she, in a sharp voice.

Lot looked up at her, and a red flush came over his livid face.

"Tell who stabbed you."

Lot smiled feebly, but he did not speak.

Margaret Bean came in, with her old husband shuffling at her heels. A
great face, bristling with a yellow stubble of beard, appeared in the
door. It belonged to the sheriff, Jonas Hapgood, who had just
returned from taking Burr to New Salem. Madelon cast a desperate
glance around at them. "Lot Gordon," she cried out, "tell them--tell
them I was the one who stabbed you, and set Burr free!"

There was a chuckle from Jonas Hapgood in the door. "Likely story,"
he muttered to Margaret Bean's husband, and the old man nodded
wisely.

"Tell them!" commanded Madelon. She reached out a hand as if she
would shake Lot Gordon into obedience, wounded unto death although he
was, but Lot only smiled up in her face.

Then David Hautville bent his stern face down to the sick man's. "Lot
Gordon, tell the truth before God, daughter of mine or no daughter of
mine," said he, in his deep voice. Lot only followed Madelon with his
longing, smiling eyes.

"Speak, Lot Gordon!"

The wounded man turned his eyes on David and made a feeble motion,
scarcely more than a quiver of his hand, which seemed to express
negation.

"Can't you speak?"

Again Lot made that faint signal.

"He ain't spoke sence they brought him home," said Margaret
Bean--"not a word to the doctor nor nobody."

"I couldn't get a word out of him," announced the sheriff, stepping
farther into the room. "In course, there was Burr's knife and Burr
himself over him when the others came up, and that was proof enough;
but still we kinder thought we'd like to have Lot's word for it afore
he died, in case it came to hangin' with Burr; but I guess he's past
speakin'. I miss my guess if he can sense anything we say."

"Tell them--tell them I was the one who stabbed you, and Burr is
innocent!" Madelon pleaded; but he smiled back at her unmoved.

Jonas Hapgood's great body shook with mirth. "Likely story a gal did
it," he chuckled.

"I did do it!" returned Madelon, fiercely, turning to him.

"I guess you don't want your beau hung."

"I tell you I killed this man. I am the one to be hung!"




Chapter V


The sheriff turned to David Hautville. "Guess you'd better take your
gal home," he said, his red, bristling cheeks broad with laughter.
"Guess she's kind of off her balance, she feels so bad about her
beau."

David's black eyes flashed haughtily at Jonas Hapgood, who
straightened his face suddenly. He deigned not a word to him, but he
turned to his daughter with a stern air. "Whether it is one way, or
whether it is the other way," said he, "we go neither by staying
here. Come home."

"I won't go!"

David looked sharply at his daughter's face. Jonas Hapgood's doubt
was over him too. He wondered, with a great spasm of wrath, if she
could be accusing herself to shield this man who had played her
false.

He grasped her arm again. "Come," he said, "I'll have no more of
this," and Madelon went out with her father. Full of spirit as she
was, she had always been strangely docile with him. He had ruled all
his children with a firm hand from their youth up, and tuned their
wills to suit his ear as he did his viol strings.

"I'll have no foolery," he said to her, gruffly, when they were out
on the road. "I'll have no putting yourself in the wrong to save a
man that's given you the go-by. If ye be fooling me, ye can stop it
now if you're a daughter of mine."  He shook his head fiercely at
her.

But Madelon answered him with a burst of wrath that equalled his own.
"I stabbed him because I took him for the man who jilted me a-trying
to kiss me, with Dorothy Fair's kiss on his lips. _Me!_" she cried;
and she raised her hand as if she would have struck again had Burr
Gordon and his false lips been there.

Her father looked at her gloomily, then strode on with his eyes on
the snowy ground. He was still in doubt. David Hautville had that
primitive order of mind which distrusts and holds in contempt that
which it cannot clearly comprehend, and he could not comprehend
womankind. His sons were to him as words of one syllable in straight
lines; his daughter was written in compound and involved sentences,
as her mother had been before her. Fond and proud of Madelon as he
was, and in spite of his stern anxiety, her word had not the weight
with him that one of his son's would have had. It was as if he had
visions of endless twistings and complexities which might give it the
lie, and rob it, at all events, of its direct force.

Indeed, Madelon strengthened this doubt by crying out passionately
all at once, as they went on: "Father, you must believe me! I tell
you I did it! I--don't let them hang him! Father!"  All Madelon's
proud fierceness was gone for a moment. She looked up at her father,
choking with great sobs.

David smiled down at her convulsed face. "She's nothing but a woman,"
he thought to himself, and he thought also, with a throb of angry
relief, that she had not killed Lot Gordon. "Come along home and red
up the house, and let's have no more fooling," he said, roughly, and
strode on faster and would not say another word, although Madelon
besought him hard to assure her that he believed her, and that Burr
should not be hanged, until they reached the Hautville house. Then he
turned on her and said, with keen sarcasm that stung more than a
whip-lash, "'Tis Parson Fair's daughter and not mine that should come
down the road in broad daylight a-bawling for Burr Gordon."

Madelon started back, and her face stiffened and whitened. She shut
her mouth hard and followed her father into the house. The great
living-room was empty; indeed, not one of the Hautville sons was in
the house; even Louis was gone. David took his axe out of the corner
and set out for the woods to cut some cedar fire-logs. Madelon put
the house in order, setting the kitchen and pantry to rights, going
through the icy chambers and making the high feather beds. In her own
room she paused long and searched again, holding up her red cloak and
her ball dress to the window, where they caught the wintry light, for
a stain of blood that might prove her guilt; but she could find none.

Madelon prepared dinner for her father and brothers as usual, and
when it was ready to be dished she stood in the doorway, with the
north wind buffeting her in the face, and blew the dinner-horn with a
blast that could be heard far off in the woods.

Presently her father emerged from under the snowy boughs with his axe
over his shoulder, and shortly afterwards Eugene and Abner came, in
Indian file, with their guns. Eugene was carrying a fat rabbit by its
long ears. Louis and Richard did not come at all. David asked sternly
of their brothers where they were, but neither Eugene nor Abner knew.
They had not seen them since David and Madelon left for Lot Gordon's
that morning.

Madelon set the food before her father and her brothers, and took her
place as usual, and ate as she might have filled a crock with milk or
cakes, tasting nothing which she put into her mouth. She did not
during the meal say another word concerning the tragedy in which she
was living, but there was a strange silent vehemence and fire about
her which seemed louder than speech. Now and then her father and her
brothers started and stared at her as if she had cried out. Two red
spots had come on her brown cheeks; her eyes were glittering with
dark light; her lips were a firm red; her fingers stiffened with
nervous clutches. She looked as if every muscle in her were strained
and rigid for a leap.

After dinner Eugene and Abner went out again with their guns, and
David smoked his old pipe by the fire, while Madelon put away the
dishes and swept the floor. When her work was finished the pipe was
smoked out, and David rose up slowly, clapped his fur cap over his
white head, and took up his axe.

"Mind ye say what ye said this morning to nobody else," he said, as
he went out the door.

"I'll say it with my dying breath," returned Madelon, and she caught
her breath, as if it were indeed her last, as she spoke.

"Accuse yourself of murder, would ye, and be hung, and leave your own
kith and kin with nobody to keep house for them, for the sake of a
man that's left ye for another girl!"

"Father, I tell you that _I_ did it!"

But David clapped to the door on her speech, and the awful truth of
it seemed to smite her in her own face.

Madelon went up-stairs, and brushed and braided her black hair before
her glass; but the face therein did not look like her own to her, and
she felt all the time as if she were braiding and wreathing the hair
around another's head. One of those deeds had she committed which
lead a man to see suddenly the stranger that abides always in his
flesh and in his own soul, and makes him realize that of all the
millions of earth there is not one that he knows not better than his
own self, nor whose face can look so strange to him in the light of
his own actions.

Madelon put her red cloak over her shoulders as she might have put it
on a lay-figure, and tied on her hood. Then she went down-stairs, out
of the house to the barn, and put the side-saddle on the roan mare.

Not another woman in the village, and scarcely a man except the
Hautville sons, would have dared to ride this roan, with the backward
roll of her vicious eyes and her wicked, flat-laid ears; but Madelon
Hautville could not be thrown.

The mare, when she was saddled, danced an iron-bound dance in the
barn bay, but Madelon bade her stand still, and she obeyed, her
nostrils quivering, the breath coming from them in a snort of smoke,
and every muscle under her roan hide vibrating.

Then Madelon placed her foot in the stirrup, and was in the saddle,
pulling the bit hard against the jaw, and the mare shot out of the
barn with a fierce lash-out of her heels and an upheaval of her gaunt
roan flanks that threatened to dash the girl's head against the
lintel of the door.

But Madelon knew with what she had to do, and she bent low in the
saddle and passed out in safety. Then she spared not the mare for
nigh three miles on the New Salem road. It was ten miles to New
Salem, and it did not take long to reach it, riding a horse who went
at times as if all the fiends were in chase, and often sprang out
like a bow into the wayside bushes, and was off with a new spurt of
vicious terror. It was still far from sundown when Madelon Hautville
tied the roan outside the jail where Burr Gordon lay.

Burr was sitting in his cell, which was nothing but a rough chamber
with whitewashed walls and a grated window. It was furnished with a
bed, a table, and a chair. He had an inkstand and a great sheet of
paper on the table, and he was writing a letter when the bolt shot
and the jailer entered with Madelon Hautville.

Burr looked at her with a white, incredulous face. Then he started up
and came forward, but Madelon did not look at him. She turned to the
jailer, Alvin Mead. "I want to see him alone," said she,
imperatively.

"It's again my orders," said the jailer. He was a great man, with an
arm like a crow-bar. He was reputed to have used it as one many a
time at a house-raising.

"I've got to see him alone!"

"He's in here on a charge of murder, and it's again my orders,"
repeated Alvin Mead, like a parrot.

"I've got to see him alone!"

Alvin Mead looked at her irresolutely with his stupid light eyes;
then all his great system of bone and muscle seemed to back out of
the room before her. He shut the door after him, and they heard the
bolt slide.

Madelon turned to Burr. "Tell them," she gasped out--"tell them it
was--I!"

Burr did not speak for a minute; he stood looking at her. "Perhaps I
am not any too much of a man," he said, slowly, at length, "but you
ask me to be a good deal less of a man than I am."

Madelon did not seem to hear him. "I have told them I did it! I have
told them all," said she, "but they won't believe me--they won't
believe me! _You_ must tell them."

"I will die before I will tell them," said Burr Gordon.

Madelon looked at his white face, which was set against hers like a
rock; then she gave a great cry and fell down on her knees before
him. "Tell them," she moaned, "or they will hang you--they will hang
you, Burr!"

"Let them hang me, then!"

"Tell them; they won't believe me!"

Burr caught hold of her two arms and raised her to her feet. "See
here, Madelon," said he, "don't you know--"

She looked at him dumbly.

"Don't you know--I would not tell them if they would, but--I might
tell them until I was gray, and they would not believe me!"

Madelon cried out sharply, as if she in her turn had been struck to
the heart.

"It is true," Burr said, quietly.

"Then if he dies without telling, there is no way of--saving you--"

Burr shook his head.

"The knife--how--came your knife there instead of Richard's?"

Burr smiled.

Bluish shadows came around Madelon's dark eyes and her mouth. She
gasped for breath as she spoke. "I--have--killed you, then," said
she. Suddenly she put up her white, stiffly quivering lips to Burr's.
"Kiss me!" she cried out. "I beg you to give me the kiss that I might
have killed you for last night!"

Burr bent down and kissed her, and she threw her arms around him and
pressed his head to her bosom. "They shall not," she cried out,
fiercely--"they shall not hang you! I will make them believe me!
Don't be afraid, don't be afraid, Burr."

"Madelon," Burr said, huskily, "I have been double-faced and false to
you, but, as God is my witness, I'm glad I've got the chance to
suffer in your stead."

"You shall not! They shall believe I did it. I will make Lot Gordon
tell. He shall tell before he dies!"

The bolt slid back, and Alvin Mead's great bulk darkened the doorway.
Madelon turned her face towards him, with her arms still clasping
Burr and holding his head to her bosom. "This man is innocent!" she
cried out, with a fierce gesture of protection, as if she were
defending her young instead of her false lover. "I tell you he is
innocent--you must let him go! I am the one who stabbed Lot Gordon!"

Alvin Mead stared; his heavy pink jaw lopped.

"I tell you, you must let him go!"  She released Burr from her arms
and gave him a push towards the door. "Go out," she said; "I am the
one to stay here."

But Alvin Mead collected and brought about his great body with a show
of lumbering fists. "Come," said he, "this ain't a-goin to do. We
can't have no sech work as this, young woman. It's time you went."

"Let him go, I tell you!" commanded Madelon, confronting him
fiercely. "I am going to stay."

"They won't let you come again if you don't go quietly now," Burr
whispered, and he laid his hand on her nervous shoulder.

"I ruther guess we won't have no sech doin's again," said Alvin Mead,
with sulky assent.

"You must go, Madelon."

Madelon tied on her hood. Her white face had its rigid, desperate
look again.

"I will make them believe me yet, and you shall be set free," she
said to Burr, with a stern nod, and passed out, while Alvin Mead
stood back to give her passage, watching her with sullen and wary
eyes. He was, in truth, half afraid of her.




Chapter VI


When Madelon, returning from New Salem, came in sight of her home the
first thing which she noticed was her father in the yard in front of
the house.

David Hautville's great figure stood out in the dusk of the snowy
landscape like a giant's. He was motionless. The roan mare's gallop
had evidently struck his ear some time before, and he knew that
Madelon was returning. He did not even look her way as she drew
nearer, but when she rode into the yard he made a swift movement
forward and seized the mare by the bridle. She reared, but Madelon
sat firm, with wretched, undaunted eyes upon her father. David
Hautville's eyes blazed back at her out of the whiteness of his
wrath.

"Where have you been?" he demanded, in a thick voice.

"To New Salem."

"What for?"

"To see Burr, and beg him to confess that I killed Lot."

"You didn't."

"I did."

"Fool!"  David Hautville jerked the bridle so fiercely that the mare
reared far back again. He jerked her down to her feet, and she made a
vicious lunge at him, but he shunted her away.

"I'll fasten you into your chamber," he shouted, "if this work goes
on! I'll stop your making a fool of yourself."

"It is Lot Gordon that is making fools of you all," said Madelon, in
a hard, quiet voice.

"Did Burr Gordon say he didn't stab him?" cried her father.

"No; he wouldn't own it. He is trying to shield me."

"He did it himself, and he'll hang for it."

"No, he won't hang for what I did while I draw the breath of life.
I've got the strength of ten in me. You don't know me, if I am your
daughter."  Madelon freed her bridle with a quick movement, and the
mare flew forward into the barn.

David Hautville stood looking after her in utter fury and
bewilderment. Her last words rang in his ears and seemed true to him.
He felt as if he did not know his own daughter. This awakening and
lashing into action, by the terrible pressure of circumstances, of
strange ancestral traits which he had himself transmitted was beyond
his simple comprehension. He shook his head with a fierce
helplessness and went into the barn.

"Go in and get the supper," he ordered, "and _I_'ll take care of the
mare."

As Madelon came out of the stall he grasped her roughly by the arm
and peered sharply into her face. The thought seized him that she
must surely not be in her right mind--that Burr's treatment of her
and his danger had turned her brain. "Be you crazy, Madelon?" he
asked, in his straightforward simplicity, and there was an accent of
doubt and pity in his voice.

"No, father," she replied, "I am not crazy. Let me go."

She broke away from him and was out of the barn door, but suddenly
she turned and came running back. The sudden softness in his voice
had stirred the woman in her to weakness. She went close to her
father, and threw up her arms around his great neck, and clung to
him, and sobbed as if she would sob her soul away, and pleaded with
him as for her life.

"Father!" she cried--"father, help me! Believe me! Tell them I did
it! Tell them it is true! Don't let them hang Burr. Help me to save
him, father! Don't let them! Save him! Oh, you will save him, father?
You will? Tell me, father--tell me, tell me!"  Madelon's voice rose
into a wild shriek.

A sudden conviction of his solution of the matter and of his own
astuteness came over David Hautville's primitive masculine
intelligence. His daughter was wellnigh distraught with her lover's
faithlessness and his awful crime and danger. She was to be watched
and guarded lest she make a further spectacle of herself; but treated
softly as might be, for she was naught but a woman, and liable to
mischievous ailments of nerve and brain. David pressed his daughter's
dark head with his hard, tender hand against his shoulder, then
forced her gently away from him.

"It'll be all right," said he, soothingly--"it'll be all right. Don't
you worry."

"Father, you will?"

"I'll fix it all right. Don't you worry."

"Father, you promise?"

"I'll do everything I can. Don't you worry, Madelon. You'd better go
in and get supper now. I'll go along to the house with you and get
the lantern. It's getting too dark to do the work here."

David drew his daughter along, out of the barn, across the snowy yard
to the house, she pleading frantically all the way, he soothing her
with his sudden wisdom of assent and evasion.

The hearth fire was blazing high when Madelon entered the kitchen.
The red glare of it was on her white face, upturned to her father's
with one last pleading of despair. She clutched his arm and shook his
great frame to and fro.

"Father, promise me you'll go over to New Salem to-night and tell
them to set him free and take me instead! Father!"

"We'll see about it, Madelon," answered David Hautville. There was a
tone in his voice which she had never heard before. It might have
come unconsciously to himself from some memory, so old that it was
itself forgotten, of his dead wife's voice over the child in her
cradle. Some echo of it might have yet lingered in the old father's
soul, through something finer than his instinct for sweet sounds from
human throat and viol--through his ear for love.

"Get the supper now, and we'll see about it," said David Hautville.
He began fumbling with clumsy fingers, all unused to women's gear, at
the string of this daughter's cloak; but she pulled herself away from
him suddenly, and the old hard lines came into her face. "We'll say
no more about it," said she. She lit a candle quickly at the hearth
fire, and was out of the room to put away her cloak and hood. Her
father lighted his lantern slowly and went back to the barn, plodding
meditatively through the snowy track, with the melting mood still
strong upon him. He was disposed to carry matters now with a high and
tender hand with the girl to bring her to reason, and he brought all
his crude diplomacy to bear upon the matter.

When he reached the barn his son Eugene stood in the doorway. He had
just come from the woods, and the smell of wounded cedar-trees was
strong about him. He stood leaning upon his axe as if it were a
staff. "Who's been out with the mare?" he asked.

"Your sister."

"Where?"

"To New Salem."

"To see _him_?"

David nodded grimly. His lantern cast a pale circle of light on the
snow about them.

"About--that?"

"To get him to own up she did it."

Eugene Hautville stared at his father, scowling his handsome dark
brows. He was the most graceful mannered of all the Hautville sons,
and by some accounted the best-looking.

"Is she crazy?" he said.

"No, she's a woman," returned his father, with a strange accent of
contempt and toleration.

"Did the coward lay it to her when she gave him the chance?" demanded
Eugene.

"No; she said he wouldn't, to shield her."

Eugene moved his axe suddenly; the lantern-light struck it, and there
was a bright flash of sharp steel in their eyes. "Shield her!" he
cried out, with an oath. "I wish I could meet him in the path once.
I'd give him a taste before they put the rope 'round his neck, the
lying murderer!"

David nodded his head in savage assent.

"What's going to be done with Madelon?" cried Eugene, fiercely.

"I've been thinking--" said his father, slowly.

"No sister of mine shall go about rolling herself in the dust at that
fellow's feet if I can help it."

"I've been thinking--would you lock her in her chamber a spell?"

"Lock Madelon in her chamber! She'd get out or she'd beat her brains
out against the wall."

"I don't know but she would," assented David, perplexedly. "You can't
count on a woman when they rise up. She might go away a spell."

"Where?"

"We might send her somewhere."

Eugene laughed. The roan mare was pawing in her stall. Now and then
she pounded the floor with a clattering thud like an iron flail.

"How far do you suppose that mare would go if you tried to send her
anywhere?" he asked.

"Maybe Madelon wouldn't go."

"You'd have to halter the mare," said Eugene, "and drag her half the
way and stand from under, or she'd trample you down the other."
Eugene, although his words were strong, spoke quite softly, lowering
his sweet tenor. From where they stood they could see Madelon moving
to and fro behind the kitchen windows preparing supper.

"I don't know what to do," said David, after a pause.

"Watch her," returned Eugene, quietly.

"Watch her?"

"Yes. I've been under cover days before now watching for a pretty
white fox or a deer I wanted."  Eugene laughed pleasantly.

"Will you?"

"I'll stay by the house to-morrow. She sha'n't go about accusing
herself of murder to save the man that's jilted her if I can help
it."  As he spoke Eugene's handsome face darkened again vindictively.
He hated Burr Gordon for another reason of his own that nobody
suspected.

Suddenly Abner Hautville came running into the yard. "Who is it
there?" he called out. "Is that you, father? That you, Eugene?
Hello!"

"Hello!" Eugene called back. "What's the matter?"

Abner come panting alongside. He had run from the village, and,
vigorous as he was, breath came hard in the thin air. It was a very
cold night.

"Where have they gone?" he demanded.

"Who?"

"Louis and Richard. Where have they gone?"

There was a ghastly look in Abner's face, in spite of the glowing red
which the cold wind had brought to it. The other man seemed to catch
it and reflect it in their own faces as they stared at him.

Eugene turned quickly to his father. "Aren't they in the house?" he
asked.

"No, they ain't," returned David, with his eyes still on Abner's
face.

"Sure they ain't up chamber?"

"No; I was home a good half-hour before Madelon came. There wasn't a
soul in the house, and nobody could have come home since without my
knowing it."

"They didn't come home this noon either," said Eugene.

"Thought you said they'd gone to see to their traps on West
Mountain?" David rejoined.

"Thought they had when they didn't come."  Eugene turned impatiently
on Abner. "Where do you think they've gone--what do you mean by
looking so?" he cried.

Abner dug his heel into the snow. "Don't know," he returned, in a
surly voice.

"What do you suspect, then? Good God! can't you speak out?"

Abner's features were heavier than his brother's--his speech and
manner slower. He paused a second, even then; then he turned towards
the house, and spoke, with his face away from them, with a curious
directness and taciturnity. "Didn't go to the traps on West
Mountain," he said, then; "went there myself. They hadn't been
there--no tracks; was home before father was to-night. Louis and
Richard hadn't come. Went down to the village; hadn't been there."

"You don't mean Louis and Richard have run away?" demanded David.

"Both their guns and their powder-horns and shot-bags are gone," said
Abner.

"They would have taken them anyway," said Louis.

"The chest in Louis's chamber is unlocked and the money he kept in
the till is gone, and his fiddle is gone, and the cider-brandy and
wormwood bottle to bathe his arm with, and two shoulders of pork out
of the cellar, and a sack of potatoes, and the blankets off his and
Richard's beds are gone too," said Abner. He began to move towards
the house.

His father made a bound after him and grasped his arm. "What do you
mean?" he cried out. "What do you think they've run away for?"

"Know as much as I do," replied Abner. He wrenched his arm away and
strode on towards the house. Then David Hautville and his son Eugene
stood looking at each other with a surmise of horror growing in their
eyes.

"What does he mean?" David whispered, hoarsely.

Eugene shook his head.

Presently Eugene went into the barn and fell to feeding the roan
mare, and David plunged heavily back to the house. He and Abner sat
one on each side of the fire and furtively watched Madelon preparing
supper.

She spoke never a word. Her red lips were a red line of resolution.
Her despairing eyes were fixed upon her work without a glance for
either of them.

However, when supper was set on the table, and she had blown the horn
at the door and waited, and nobody else came, she turned with sudden
life upon her father and her brothers, who had already begun to taste
the smoking hasty-pudding. "Where are the others?" she cried out,
shrilly. "Where are Louis and Richard?"

The men glanced at one another under sullen eyelids, but nobody
answered. "Where are they?" she repeated.

"You know as much about it as we do," Eugene said, then, in his soft
voice.

Madelon stood with wild eyes flashing from one to another. Then she
gave a sudden spring out of the room, and they heard her swift feet
on the chamber-stairs. The men ate their hasty-pudding, bending their
brows over it as if it were a witches' mess instead of their ordinary
home fare.

Madelon came back so rapidly that she seemed to fly over the stairs.
They scarcely heard the separate taps of her feet. She burst into the
room and faced them in a sort of fury. "They have gone!" she gasped
out. "Louis and Richard have gone! Where are they?"

David Hautville slowly shook his head. Then he took another spoonful
of pudding. The brothers bent with stern assiduity over their bowls.

"You have hid them away!" shrieked Madelon. "You have hid them away
lest Louis own that he saw blood on my hand, and Richard that he gave
me his knife! What have you done with them?"

Not one of the three men spoke. They swallowed their pudding.

"Father! Abner! Eugene!" said Madelon, "tell me what you have done
with my brothers, who can testify that I killed Lot Gordon, and save
Burr?"

David Hautville wiped his mouth on his sleeve, rose up, and took his
daughter firmly by the arm.

"We know no more what has become of your brothers than you do," said
he. "If they have gone away for the reason you say, your old father
would be the first to bring them back, if you were guilty as you say,
daughter of mine though you be. But we know well enough, wherever
your brothers have gone, and for whatever cause they have gone, that
you have done nothing worse then go daft, as women will, to shield a
fellow that's used you ill. You shall put us to no more shame while I
am your father and you under my roof. Abner, fill up a bowl with the
pudding."

Madelon's face was deathly white and full of rebellion as she looked
up in her father's, but she held herself still with a stern dignity
and did not struggle. David Hautville's will was up. His hand on her
soft arm was like a vise of steel. The memories of her childhood were
strong upon her. She knew of old that there was no appeal, and was
too proud to contend where she must yield.

"Take the bowl," said her father, when Abner extended it filled with
the steaming pudding--"take the bowl, and go you to your chamber. Eat
your supper, and get in to your bed and stay there till morning."

Madelon still looked at her father with that same look of speechless
but unyielding rebellion. She did not stir to take the bowl or go to
her chamber.

"Do as I bid ye!" ordered her father, in a great voice.

Madelon took the bowl from her brother's hand and went out of the
room as she was bid; and yet as she went they all knew that there was
no yielding in her.




Chapter VII


The next morning Madelon came down-stairs as usual and prepared
breakfast. When it was ready the family sat up to the table and ate
silently and swiftly. No one addressed a word to Madelon. After
breakfast David and his son Abner put on their leather jackets and
their fur caps, and set forth for the woods with their axes, but
Eugene lounged gracefully over to the hearth and sat down on the
settle, and began reading his Shakespeare book. Eugene was the only
one of the Hautvilles who ever read books. He studied faithfully the
few in the house--the Shakespeare, the _Pilgrim's Progress_, Milton,
and _Gulliver's Travels_. The others wondered at him. They could not
understand how any one who could handle a gun or a musical instrument
could lay finger on a book. "Made-up things," said Abner once, with a
scornful motion towards Shakespeare.

"No more made-up than fugue," retorted Eugene, hotly; but they all
cried out on him.

This morning Madelon cast one quick glance at him as he sauntered
over to the settle with his book. Then she did not look his way
again. She worked quietly, setting the kitchen to rights.

The day was very cold; the light in the room was dim and white, the
windows were coated so thickly with the hoar-frost. Eugene kept
stirring the fire and adding sticks as he read.

Finally, Madelon had finished her work in the kitchen, and went
up-stairs. Then Eugene arose reluctantly, went out into the cold
entry, and stood by the door with his book in hand. Madelon, passing
across the landing above, looked down and saw him standing there, and
knew that what she suspected was true--that her brother was mounting
guard over her lest she leave the house.

She finished her work in the chamber, and came down-stairs with some
knitting-work in hand. She seated herself quietly in her own
cushioned rocking-chair, and fell to work with yarn and clicking
needles, like any peaceful housewife. She knitted and Eugene read,
bending his handsome dark face, smiling with pleasure, over his
Shakespeare book. This fierce winter day he was reading "A
Midsummer-Night's Dream," and letting his fancy revel with
Shakespeare's fairies in an enchanted summer wood. He was, however,
alert as a watch-dog. He could at an instant's warning leave that
delicate and dainty crew and those flowery shores, and intercept his
sister, should she attempt to pass him and escape from the house.

Still, his alertness all came to naught, for Madelon, like some
fleeing fox, took a sudden turn which no canny hunter could have
anticipated. She sat somewhat away from the hearth and well at
Eugene's back. He would have asked her why she did not draw nearer
the fire and if she were not cold had he not feared to encounter a
sulky humor. He could not see the lengths of linen cloth, which she
herself had spun and woven, lying in a great heap on the floor, half
at her back, half under her petticoats. However, could he have seen
it he would have thought of it merely as some mysterious domestic and
feminine proceeding about which he neither knew nor cared to know
anything.

Madelon, as she knitted, ever measured the distance between her
brother and herself with her great black eyes, training her nerves
and muscles for what she had to do as she would have trained a bow
and arrow.

Eugene turned a leaf in his Shakespeare book. Madelon made a leap, so
soft and swift that it seemed like an onslaught of Silence itself,
and he was smothered and wound about and entangled in folds of linen
as if it had been in truth his winding-sheet. He struggled as best he
might against his linen bands, and cried out as angrily as he could
for the linen that bound his mouth and his eyes, but he could not
release himself. Eugene was strong and lithe, but Madelon was nearly
as strong as he at any time; and now the great tension of her nerves
seemed to inform all her muscles with the strength of steel wire.

Eugene sat bound hard and fast to the settle, with his face swathed
like a mummy's, with only enough space clear for breath. "Let me go,
or I'll--" he threatened, in his smothered tone.

Madelon made no reply. She watched him struggle to be sure that he
could not free himself. Then she went out of the room. Eugene called
after her in a choke of fury, but she spoke not a word.

Up-stairs she hastened to her own chamber, and put on her red cloak
and hood, and was down the stairs again, out the door, and hurrying
up the road to the village. From time to time she glanced behind her
to be sure that her brother had not freed himself, and was not in
pursuit; then she sped on faster. The road was glare with ice, but
she did not slow her pace for that. She was as sure-footed as a hare.
She kept her arms close to her sides under her red cloak, and did not
pause until she came out on the village street where the houses were
thick. Then she went at a rapid walk, still glancing sharply behind
her to see if she were followed, until she came to Parson Fair's
house. She went up the front walk, between the rows of ice-coated
box, and up the stone steps under the stately columned porch, and
raised the knocker and let it fall with sharp impetus. The door
opened speedily a little way, and Parson Fair himself stood there,
his pale, stern old face framed in the dark aperture. He bowed with
gentle courtesy and bade her good-morning, and Madelon courtesied
hurriedly and spoke out her errand with no preface.

"Can I see your daughter, sir?" said she.

Parson Fair looked at Madelon's white face, touched on the cheeks and
lips with feverish red, at her set mouth and desperate eyes. The
story of her connection with the Gordon tragedy had not penetrated to
his study, neither did he know how Burr had forsaken her for his
Dorothy; but he saw something was amiss with her, although he was not
well versed in the signs of a woman's face. Parson Fair, moreover,
felt somewhat of interest in this Madelon Hautville, for he had a
decorously restrained passion for sweet sounds which she had often
gratified. Many a Sabbath day had he sat in his beetling pulpit and
striven to keep his mind fixed upon the spirit of the hymn alone, in
spite of his leaping pulses, when Madelon's great voice filled the
meeting-house. It was probable that he also, notwithstanding his
Christian grace, shared somewhat the popular sentiments towards these
musical and Bohemian Hautvilles; yet he looked with a dignified
kindness at the girl.

"I trust you are not ill," he said, without answering her question as
to whether she might see Dorothy.

Madelon did not act as if she heard what he said. "Can I see your
daughter, sir?" she repeated. She cast an anxious glance over her
shoulder for fear Eugene might appear in the road.

Parson Fair still eyed her with perplexity. "I believe Dorothy is ill
in her chamber," he said, hesitatingly. "I do not know--"

Madelon gave a dry sob. "I beg you to let me see her for a minute,
sir," she gasped out, "for the love of God. It is life and death!"

Parson Fair looked shocked and half alarmed. He had not had to do
with women like this, who spoke with such fervor of passion. His
womankind had swathed all their fiercer human emotions with shy
decorum and stern modesty, as Turkish women swathe their faces with
veils.

Madelon, still under the fear of Eugene, pressed inside the door as
she spoke, and he stood aside half involuntarily. "I beg you to let
me see her," she repeated. She looked at the stately wind of the
stairs up to the second floor, as if she were minded to ascend
without bidding to Dorothy's chamber.

"She is ill in her chamber," the Parson said again, with a kind of
forbidding helplessness.

"I would see her only for a minute. I beg you to let me, sir. It is
life and death, I tell you--it is life and death!"

Whether Parson Fair motioned her to ascend, or whether he simply
stood aside to allow her to pass, he never knew, but Madelon was up
the winding stairs with a swirl of her cloak, as if the wind had
caught it. Parson Fair followed her, and motioned her to the south
front chamber, and was about to rap on the door when it was flung
open violently, and the great black princess stood there, scowling at
them.

"I have a guest here for your mistress," said Parson Fair; but the
black woman blocked his way, speaking fast in her wrathful gibberish.

However, at a stately gesture from her master she stood aside, and he
held the door open, and Madelon entered. "You had better not remain
long, to tire her," said the parson, and closed the door. Immediately
the uncouth savage voice was raised high again, and quelled by the
parson's calm tone. Then there was a great settling of a heavy body
close to the threshold. The black woman had thrown herself at the
sill of her darling's door, to keep watch, like a faithful dog.

Madelon Hautville, when she entered Dorothy Fair's room, had her mind
not been fixed upon its one end, which was above all such petty
details of existence, might well have looked about her. No such
dainty maiden bower was there in the whole village as this. Madelon's
own chamber, carpetless and freezing cold, with its sparse furniture
and scanty sweep of white curtains across the furred windows which
filled the room with the blue-white light of frost, was desolation to
it.

A great fire blazed on Dorothy Fair's chamber hearth. The red glow of
it was over the whole room, and the frost on the windows was melting.
Curtains of a soft blue-and-white stuff, said to have been brought
from overseas, hung at Dorothy's windows and between the high posts
of her bed. She had also her little rocking-chair and footstool
frilled and cushioned with it. There was a fine white matting on her
floor, and a thick rug with a basket of flowers wrought on it beside
her bed. The high white panel-work around Dorothy's mantel was carved
with curving garlands and festoons of ribbon and flowers, and on the
shelf stood tall china vases and bright candlesticks. Dorothy's
dressing-table had a petticoat of finest dimity, trimmed with tiny
tassels. Above it hung her fine oval mirror, in a carved gilt frame.
Upon the table were scattered silver and ivory things and glass
bottles, the like of which Madelon had never seen. The room was full
of that mingled perfume of roses and lavender which was always about
Dorothy herself.

The counterpane on Dorothy's bed was all white and blue, and quilted
in a curious fashion, and her pillows were edged with lace. In the
midst of this white-and-blue nest, her slender little body half
buried in her great feather-bed, her lovely yellow locks spreading
over her pillow, lay Dorothy Fair when Madelon entered. She half
raised herself, and stared at her with blue, dilated eyes, and shrank
back with a little whimper of terror when she came impetuously to her
bedside.

"You don't believe it," Madelon said, with no preface.

Dorothy stared at her, trembling. "You mean--"

"I mean you don't believe he killed him! You don't believe Burr
Gordon killed his cousin Lot!"

Dorothy sank weakly back on her pillows. Great tears welled up in her
blue eyes and rolled down her soft cheeks. "They _saw_ him there,"
she sobbed out, "and they found his knife. Oh, I didn't think he was
so wicked!"

Madelon caught her by one slender arm hard, as if she would have
shaken her. "_You_ believe it!" she cried out. "You believe that Burr
did it--_you!_"

"They--saw--him--there," moaned Dorothy, with a terrified roll of her
tearful eyes at Madelon's face.

"_Saw him there!_  What if they did see him there? What if the whole
town saw him? What if you saw him? What if you saw him strike the
blow with your own eyes? Wouldn't you tear them out of your own head
before you believed it? Wouldn't you cut your own tongue out before
you'd bear witness against him?"

Dorothy sobbed convulsively.

"I would," said Madelon.

Dorothy hid her face away from her in the pillow.

Madelon laid her hand on her fair head, and turned it with no gentle
hand. "Listen to me now," she said. "You've got to listen. You've got
to hear what I say. You ought to believe without being told, without
knowing anything about it, that he's innocent, if you're a woman and
love him; but I'm going to tell you. Burr Gordon didn't kill his
cousin Lot. I did!"

Dorothy gave a faint scream and shrank away from her.

"I did!" repeated Madelon. "Now do you believe he's innocent, when
somebody else has told you?"

Dorothy's face was white as her pillows, her eyes big with terror.
There was a soft thud against her door. The black woman was keeping
arduous watch.

"You couldn't!" Dorothy gasped out.

"I could! Look at my hands; they are as strong as a man's."

"You--couldn't!"

"I could, and I did."

Dorothy shook her head in hysterical doubt.

"Listen," said Madelon--"listen. I'll tell you why I did it, Dorothy
Fair. Burr Gordon had been with me a little before he went with you.
Perhaps you knew it. If you did, I am not blaming you--he's got
taking ways, you couldn't help it; and I am not blaming him--he's a
man, and you're fairer complexioned than I am. But I was fool enough
to be mad without any good reason--you understand I am not saying
anything against him, Dorothy Fair--when I saw him with you at the
ball. He had a right to take anybody to the ball that he chose. It
was naught to me, but I was mad. I have a quick temper. And I started
home when that young man from Kingston offered to fiddle for the
dancing after you and Burr went out; and my brother Richard made me
take his knife for fear I might meet stragglers, and I had it open
under my cloak. And when I got to that lonely part of the road, after
the turn, I saw somebody coming, and I thought it was Burr. He walked
like him. And I looked away--I did not want to see his face; and when
I came up to him the first thing I knew he threw his arm around me
and kissed me, and--something seemed to leap up in me and I struck
with Richard's knife. And--then he fell down, and I looked and it was
not Burr--it was his cousin Lot. And--then Burr came, and we heard
whistling, and others were coming, and he made me run, and the others
came up and found him; and now they say he did it and not I. It was I
who stabbed Lot Gordon, Dorothy Fair!"

"It was Burr's knife, with his initials cut in the handle, that they
found," said Dorothy, with a kind of piteous doggedness. There was in
this fair little maiden the same power of adherence to a mental
attitude which her father had shown in his religious tenets. Wherever
the men and women of this family stood they were fixed beyond their
own capability of motion.

Madelon gave a bewildered sigh. "I know not how that was," said she,
"unless--" a red flush mounted over her whole face. "No, he would not
have done that for me," she said, as if to herself.

A red flush on Dorothy's face seemed to respond to that on Madelon's.
"You think he put his knife there to take suspicion from you?" she
cried out, quickly.

Madelon shook her head. "I don't know about the knife," she said,
"but I know I stabbed Lot Gordon."

"He would not have done that," said Dorothy, with troubled, angry
blue eyes on her face. "He would have thought of--others. He never
changed the knife, Madelon Hautville!"

"I know nothing about the knife," repeated Madelon, "but Burr Gordon
did not kill his cousin."

"He was there, and it was his knife," said Dorothy. There was now a
curious indignation in her manner. It was almost as if she preferred
to believe her lover guilty of murder rather than unduly solicitous
for her rival.

Madelon Hautville turned upon her with a kind of fierce solemnity.
"Dorothy Fair," said she, "look at me!" and the soft, blue-eyed face,
full of that gentle unyielding which is the firmest of all, looked up
at her from the pillows--"Dorothy Fair, did that man, who's locked up
over there in jail in New Salem, for a crime he's innocent of, ever
kiss you?"

Madelon's face seemed to wax stiff and white. She looked like one who
bared her breast for a mortal hurt as she spoke. Dorothy went pink to
the roots of her yellow hair and the frill on her nightgown. She made
an angry shamed motion of her head, which might have signified
anything.

"And you can believe this thing of him after that!" said Madelon,
with a look of despairing scorn. "He has kissed you, Dorothy Fair,
and you can think he has committed a murder!"

Dorothy gasped. "They said--" she began again.

"_They said!_  Are you a woman, Dorothy Fair, and don't you know that
the man you love enough to let him kiss you should do no wrong in
your eyes, or else it's a shame to you, and you should kill him to
wipe it out?"  Dorothy shrank away from her in the bed, her
frightened blue eyes staring at her over her shoulder. "My God! don't
you know," said Madelon, "the man you love is yourself? When you
believe in his guilt you believe in your own; when you strike him for
it you strike yourself. Don't you know that, Dorothy Fair?"

Dorothy looked at her, all white and trembling. She gave a half-sob.
Suddenly Madelon's tone changed. "Don't be afraid," said she. "I'm
different from you. I don't wonder he liked you better. It's no blame
to him. I know you care about him. You don't believe he did it."

"I don't know," sobbed Dorothy. The door opened a crack, and the
black woman's watchful eyes appeared.

"Oh, you do know, you do know! I tell you, I did it--I! Can't you
believe me? I'm a wicked woman, and I love anybody I love in a
different way from any that a woman as good as you are can. I did it,
Dorothy, and not Burr! He mustn't suffer for it. We must see him, you
and I together! Don't you believe me?"

"I don't--know," sobbed Dorothy. The dark face appeared quite fully
in the door. Madelon cast a quick glance about the room. Dorothy's
pretty Bible, with a blue-silk-ribbon marker hanging from it, lay on
her dimity dressing-table. Madelon sprang across and got it. The
black woman stood in the doorway, muttering to herself. She looked
all ready to spring to Dorothy's defence. Madelon did not notice her
at all. She went close to Dorothy, put the Bible on the bed, and laid
her right hand upon it.

"I swear upon this Holy Book," said she, "that this hand of mine is
the one that stabbed Lot Gordon. I swear, and I call God to witness,
and may I be struck dead as I speak if what I say is not true. Now do
you believe what I say, Dorothy Fair?"

Dorothy looked at her and the Bible in bewildered terror. She nodded.




Chapter VIII


Something like joy came into Madelon's face. "Then we will save him,
you and I!" she cried out. "We will save him together! He shall not
be hung! He shall be set free! They shall let him out of jail to-day,
and put me there instead. We will save him! He would not own that I
was guilty and he innocent; Lot would not own it, nor my brother
Richard, but now--we will save him--now!"

"How?" asked Dorothy, feebly.

"He will own it to you. Burr will own it to you if you go and plead
with him. He can't help owning it to you. And then you shall go to
Lot, and when you ask him for your sake, that you may marry Burr, if
he knows Burr has told you, and does not care about me, he will
speak. He will be sure to speak for you. Come!"

Dorothy raised herself on one elbow and stared at Madelon, her yellow
hair falling about her fair startled face. "Where?" said she.

"With me to New Salem."

"To New Salem?"

"Yes, to New Salem--to see Burr."

"But I am ill, and the doctor has bid me stay in bed. I have been ill
ever since the ball with a headache and fever."

"You talk about headache and fever when Burr is there in prison! I
tell you if my two feet were cut off I would walk to him on the
stumps to set him free!"

"How can I go?" said Dorothy. Her blue eyes kindled a little under
Madelon's fiery zeal.

"We will take your father's horse and sleigh."

"But the horse is gone lame, and has not been used for a month."

"I will get one from Dexter Beers at the tavern," said Madelon,
promptly. "I will lead him over here and harness him into the
sleigh."

"My father will not let me go," said Dorothy.

"He is a minister of the gospel--he will let his daughter go to save
a life."

"I tell you he will not," said Dorothy. "I know my father better than
you. He will not let me go out when I am ill. It is freezing cold,
too. If I go I must go without his knowledge and consent."

"I am going without my father's," said Madelon, shortly, "and I go at
a greater cost than that, too."

"It's the second time I have deceived and disobeyed my father in a
week's time," Dorothy said.

"You talk about your father when it is Burr--Burr--that's at stake!"
Madelon cried out. "What is your father to Burr if you love him? That
ought to go before anything else. It says so in your Bible--it says
so in your Bible, Dorothy Fair!"

Dorothy, with her innocent, frightened eyes fixed upon the other
girl's passionate face, as if she were being led by her into unknown
paths, put back the coverlet and thrust one little white foot out of
bed. Then swiftly the black woman, who had entered the room, backed
against the door as stiffly as a sentinel, darted forward, and would
have thrust her mistress into bed again, making uncouth protests the
while, had not Dorothy motioned her away with a gentle dignity, which
was hers for use when she chose.

"Go down-stairs, if you please," said she, "and see if my father is
in his study. If he is in there, and busy over his sermon, go to the
barn, and drag out the sleigh for us."

Dorothy, white and fair as an angel, in her straight linen nightgown,
stood out on the floor, in front of her great black guardian, who
made again as though she would seize her and force her back, and
pleaded with her in a thick drone, like an anxious bee, not to go.

"Do as I bid you!" said Dorothy, and glided past her to her dimity
dressing-table, and began combing out her yellow hair.

The black woman went out, muttering.

"If my father is in his study on the north side of the house, and
busy over his sermon, we can get away; otherwise we cannot," said
Dorothy, combing the thick tress over her shoulder.

Madelon went to a south window of the room and looked out. She could
see the barn, and across the road, farther down, the tavern. She
watched while Dorothy bound up her hair, and soon she saw the black
woman run, with a low crouch of her great body like a stealthy
animal, across the yard.

"Your father is in his study," Madelon said, quickly. "I will go over
to the tavern for a horse if yours is too lame."

"He can scarce stand," said Dorothy. Her soft voice trembled; she
trembled all over--then was still with nervous rigors. Bright pink
spots were on her cheeks. A certain girlish daring was there in this
gentle maiden for youthful love and pleasure, else she had not stolen
away that night to the ball, but very little for tragic enterprise.
And, moreover, her fine sense of decorum and womanly pride had always
served her mainly in the place of courage, which she lacked.

Sorely afraid was Dorothy Fair, if the truth were told, to go with
this passionate girl, who had declared to her face she had done
murder, to visit a man who she still half believed, with her helpless
tenacity of thought, was a murderer also. The love she had hitherto
felt for him was eclipsed by terror at the new image of him which her
fearful fancy had conjured up and could not yet dismiss, in spite of
Madelon's assurances. She was, too, really ill, and her delicate
nerves were still awry from the shock they had received the night of
the ball. Parson Fair had been sternly indignant, and his daughter
had quailed before him, and then had come the news concerning Burr.
Sage tea, and hot foot-baths, and the doctor's nostrums had not cured
her yet. Her very spirit trembled and fluttered at this undertaking;
but she could not withstand this fierce and ardent girl who upbraided
her with the cowardice and distrust of her love. Instinctively she
tried to raise her sentiment to the standard of the other's and
believe in Burr.

Madelon paused a second as she went out, and gave a strange,
scrutinizing glance at her.

"Why do you not wear your blue-silk quilted hood with the swan's-down
trimming?" said she. "It becomes you, and it is warm over your ears."

"Yes, I will," said Dorothy, looking at her wonderingly.

Madelon went softly out of the house, and ran across and down the
road to the tavern. Dexter Beers, the landlord, was just going around
the wide sweep of drive to the stable with a meal-sack over his
shoulder. No one else was in sight; it was so cold there were no
loafers about. Madelon ran after him, and overtook him before he
reached the stable door.

"Can you let me take a horse?" said she, abruptly.

Dexter Beers looked slowly around at her with a quick roll of a black
eye in a massive face. He had an enormous bulk, which he moved about
with painful sidewise motions. His voice was husky.

"What d'ye want a horse for?" said he.

"I want it to put in Parson Fair's sleigh."

"What for?"

"To take Dorothy to ride."

"Parson's horse lame yet?"

Madelon nodded.

"Where's yours?"

"I can't have him."

Dexter Beers still moved on with curious lateral twirls of his
shoulders and heaves of his great chest, with its row of shining
waistcoat buttons.

"Pooty cold day for a sleigh-ride," he observed, with a great steam
of breath.

"I'll pay you well for the horse," said Madelon, in a hard voice. She
followed him into the stable. He heaved the meal-sack from his
shoulder to the floor with a grunt. Another man came forward with a
peck measure in his hand. He was young, with a frosty yellow
mustache. He had gone to school with Madelon and knew her well, but
he looked at her with uncouth shyness without speaking. Then he began
unfastening the mouth of the sack.

Madelon stepped forward impatiently towards the horse-stalls. There
were the relay of coach-horses, great grays and bays, champing their
feed, getting ready for their sure-footed rushes over the mountain
roads when the coaches came in. She passed them by with sharp
glances.

A man whose face was purplish red with cold was out in the rear of
the stable, rubbing down a restive bay with loud "whoas," and now and
then a stronger word and a hard twitch at the halter. He looked
curiously at Madelon as she walked up to one of the stalls.

"Better look out for them heels!" he called out, as she drew nearer.
She paid no heed, but went straight into the stall, untied the horse,
and began to back him out. "Hi, there!" the man shouted, and Dexter
Beers and the young man came hurrying up. "Better look out for that
gal--I believe she's gone crazy!" he called out. "I can't leave this
darned beast--she'll get kicked to death if she don't look out. That
old white won't stan' a woman in the stall. Whoa, there! whoa, darn
ye! Stan' still!"

"Hullo, what ye doin' of?" demanded Dexter Beers, coming up.

Madelon calmly backed the horse out of his stall. "I want to hire
this horse," said she, holding his halter with a firm hand.

"That horse?"

"Yes. I'll pay you whatever you ask."

Dexter Beers stared at her and the horse dubiously. "Jest as soon set
a woman to drivin' the devil as that old white," volunteered the man
who was cleaning the bay. The young man stood gaping with wonder.

"Can I have this horse or not?" demanded Madelon. Her black eyes
flashed imperiously at Dexter Beers. Her small brown hand held the
halter of the old white with a grasp like steel.

"Dunno 'bout your drivin' that horse," said Dexter Beers. "'Fraid
you'll get run away with. Better take another."

"Isn't this horse the fastest you've got on a short stretch?"

"S'pose he is, but I dunno 'bout a woman's drivin' of him."

Madelon looked as if she were half minded to spring upon the back of
the old white and settle the matter summarily. She fairly quivered
with impatience.

"A woman who can drive David Hautville's roan can drive this horse,
and you know it," said she. She moved forward as she spoke, leading
the high-stepping old white, and Dexter Beers stood aside.

"Well, David Hautville's roan is nigh a match for this one," he
grunted, hesitatingly, "but then ye know your own better. Hadn't ye
better--"

But the old white was out of the stable at a trot, with Madelon
running alongside.

"Don't ye want a man to hitch him up?" Dexter Beers called after her;
but she was out of hearing.

"If the gal's ekal to drivin' that horse, she's ekal to hitchin' of
him up," said the man who was cleaning the bay. "If a gal wants to
drive, let her hitch. Ye'd better let a woman go the whole figger
when she gits started, just as ye'd better give an ugly cuss of a
horse his head up hill an' down. It takes the mischief out of 'em
quicker'n anything. Let her go it, Dexter--don't ye fret."

"I don't want her breakin' any of the parson's daughter's bones with
none of my horses," said Dexter Beers, uneasily. "Wonder where the
parson is?"

"Let 'em go it! They won't git smashed up, I guess," said the other.
"I've seen that gal of Hautville's with that mare of his'n. She kin
drive most anythin' short of the devil, an' old white's got sense
enough to know when he's well driv, ugly's he is. He wa'n't on the
track for nothin'. He ain't no wuss, if he's as bad, as that roan
mare. Let 'em _go_ it!"

"Wonder what's to pay?" said the young man, who had not spoken
before.

"Dunno," said Dexter Beers. "Somethin's to pay--that girl acted
queer."

"S'pose she takes it hard 'bout Burr Gordon. He used to fool 'round
her, I've heerd, afore he went courtin' the parson's gal."

"Dunno--queer she's so thick with the parson's gal all of a sudden."

"Lord, I wouldn't tech a gal that could git the upperhand of a horse
like that roan mare with a ten-foot pole," half soliloquized the man
at work over the bay. "Wouldn't have her if she owned half the
township, an' went down on her knees to me--darned if I would. Don't
want no woman that kin make horse-flesh like that knuckle under.
Guess a man wouldn't have much show; hev to take his porridge 'bout
the way she wanted to make it. Whoa, there! stan' still, can't ye?
Darned if I want nothin' to do with sech woman folks or sech horses
as ye be."

Dexter Beers moved laboriously out to the stable door and peered
after Madelon, but she had disappeared in Parson Fair's yard. The
white horse had gone up the road at a brisk trot, but she had easily
kept pace with him. She also harnessed him into the sleigh with no
difficulty. The animal seemed docile, and as if he were to belie his
hard reputation. There was, however, a proud and nervous cant to his
old white head, and he set his jaw stiffly against his bit.

Dorothy came out in her quilted silk pelisse and her blue hood edged
with swan's-down, and got into the sleigh. The black woman was
keeping watch at the parson's study door the while, but he never
swerved from his hard application of the doctrines. The sleigh
slipped noiselessly out of the yard and up the road, for Madelon had
not put on the bells. The old white went rather stiffly and steadily
for the first quarter-mile; then he made a leap forward with a great
lift of his lean white flanks, and they flew.

Dorothy gave a terrified gasp. "Don't be frightened," Madelon said.
"It's the horse that used to beat everything in the county. He's old
now, but when he gets warmed up he's the fastest horse around for a
short stretch. He can't hold out long, but while he does he goes; and
I want to get a good start. I want to strike the New Salem road as
soon as I can."

Madelon had a growing fear lest Eugene might have freed himself, and
might ride the roan across by a shorter cut, and so intercept her at
the turn into the New Salem road. He might easily suspect her of
attempting to see Burr again. If she passed the turn first she could
probably escape him if her horse held out; and, indeed, he might not
think she had gone that way if he did not see her.

Dorothy held fast to the side of the sleigh, which seemed to rise
from the track as they sped on. "Don't be frightened," Madelon said
again. "This is the only horse in town that can beat my father's on a
short stretch, and I don't know that he can always, but I don't think
he has been used, and father's was ridden hard yesterday. I can
manage this one in harness better than I can father's. Don't be
frightened."  But Dorothy's face grew pale as the swan's-down around
it, and her great blue eyes were fixed fearfully upon the bounding
heels and flanks of the old white race-horse.

Madelon strained her eyes ahead as they neared the turn of the New
Salem road. There was nobody in sight. Then she glanced across the
fields at the right. Suddenly she swung out the reins over the back
of the old white, and hallooed, and stood up in the sleigh.

Dorothy screamed faintly. "Sit still and hold on!" Madelon shouted.
Dorothy shut her eyes. It seemed to her she was being hurled through
space. Her slender body swung to and fro against the sleigh as she
clung frantically to it.

Eugene Hautville, on the roan, was coming at a mad run across the
open field on the right towards the turn of the road. It seemed for a
second as if Madelon would reach it before he did; but they met
there, and the roan reared to a stop in the narrow road directly in
front of the old white, who plunged furiously.

"Look out there!" shouted Eugene, as the sleigh tilted on the
snow-crust. The old white's temper was up at this sudden check, but
the woman behind him had a stronger will than he. She brought him to
a straining halt, and then she spoke to her brother.

"You let us pass!" she said, sternly.

"Where are you going?" he demanded. He looked uneasily at Dorothy as
he spoke. It was easy enough to see that she was a restraint upon
him, and that fair, timid face in its blue hood held his indignation
well in check.

"We are going to New Salem," replied Madelon. "Let us pass."

"I want to know what you are going for," said Eugene; and he tried to
speak with fire, but he still looked furtively at Dorothy.

Nobody had ever suspected how that lovely face of hers had been in
his dreams, unless it had been for a time Dorothy herself. Nobody had
noticed in meeting, of a Sabbath day long since, when Dorothy had
first returned from her Boston school, sundry glances which had
passed between a pair of soft blue eyes in the parson's pew and a
pair of fiery black ones in the singing-seats.

Dorothy, half guiltily in those days, had arranged her curls and tied
on her Sunday bonnets with a view to Eugene Hautville's eyes; and
always, when she returned from meeting, had gone straight to her
looking-glass, to be sure that she had looked fair in them. But
nobody had ever known, and scarcely she herself.

She had come to think later that she had perhaps been mistaken, for
never had Eugene made other advances to her than by those ardent
glances; and Burr had come, and she had turned to him, and thought of
Eugene Hautville only when he crossed her way, and then with a
mixture of pique and shame. Never by any chance did her eyes meet his
nowadays of a Sabbath day, and she listened coldly to his sweet tenor
in the hymns. Now, suddenly, she looked straight up in his face and
met his eyes, and a pink flush came into her white cheeks.

"Please to let us pass," she said, in her gentle tone, which had yet
a tincture of command in it. Any woman as fair as she, who has a
right understanding of her looking-glass, has, however soft she may
be, the instincts of a queen within her. She felt a proud resentment
for her own old folly and for Eugene's old slighting of her, and
indignation at his present attitude as she looked up at him with
sudden daring.

Eugene threw back his head haughtily. "She wants to see Burr Gordon,"
he thought, and would have died rather than let her think he would
stand in the way of it. He jerked the roan aside, and seemed as if he
would have been flung into the way-side bushes with her curving
plunge.

"Pass, if you wish," he said, with a graceful bend in his saddle, and
was past them, riding the other way towards the village.




Chapter IX


When they reached the county buildings, the court-house and the jail,
in New Salem, the old race-horse was still not nearly spent, although
he breathed somewhat hard. When Madelon sprang out to blanket and tie
him he seemed to vibrate to her touch like electric steel, and showed
that the old fire had not yet died out of his nerves and muscles.

Poor Dorothy Fair's knees were weak under her as she got out of the
sleigh. Her pretty face was pitiful, her sweet mouth drooping at the
corners like a troubled child's.

Madelon looked at her sharply when they stood before the jail door
waiting for admittance. "I have seen you wear a curl each side of
your face outside your hood," said she.

"I didn't think of it to-day," Dorothy replied, with forlorn
surprise.

Madelon went close to the other girl peremptorily, as if she had been
her mother, pulled forward two soft curls from under her hood, and
arranged them becomingly against the pale cheeks; and Dorothy
submitted.

Alvin Mead opened the jail door, and his great face took on a
forbidding scowl when he saw Madelon Hautville.

"Can't let ye in," he said, gruffly. "Ain't a visitin' day."  He
would have shut the door in their faces had not Madelon made a quick
spring against it.

"I don't want to come in!" she cried. "I don't want to see him
to-day. It's this lady who wants to see him."

"Can't see nobody," said Alvin Mead, filling up the door like a surly
living wedge.

"You must let us see him," persisted Madelon. "She's Parson Fair's
daughter. She is going to marry Burr Gordon--she must see him."

Alvin Mead shook his head stubbornly. Then Dorothy spoke, thrusting
her fair face forward, and looking up at him with terrified, innocent
pleading, like a child, and yet speaking with a gentle lady's
authority. "I beg you to let me come in, only for a few moments,"
said she. "I will not make you any trouble. I will come out directly
when you bid me to."

Alvin Mead looked at her a second, then at Madelon with rough
inquiry. "Who did ye say she was?" he growled.

"Parson Fair's daughter, the lady that's going to marry Burr Gordon."

"I can't let but one of ye see him, and she can't stay more'n ten
minutes," said Alvin Mead, and moved aside, and Madelon and Dorothy
entered.

They followed Alvin Mead down the icy, dark corridor to Burr's cell
door. He unlocked it, and bade Dorothy enter. He cast a forbidding
look at Madelon. "I will stand here," she said with a strange
meekness, almost as if her heart were broken; but when the jailer
prepared to follow Dorothy into Burr's cell she caught him by the arm
and tried to force him back, and cried out sharply that he should let
her see him alone. "She is the girl he is going to marry, I tell
you!" she said. "Let them see each other alone. You cannot come
between two like that when they are in such trouble."

Alvin Mead looked at her a second irresolutely. Then he stepped back
in the corridor and locked the cell door. "That the gal? Thought ye
was the one," he said, with a half-chuckle, with coarse, sharp eyes
upon her face.

"He is going to marry her," Madelon repeated. She stood stiff and
straight like a statue, and waited. Once, when Alvin made an
impatient motion as though to open the door, she restrained him with
such despairing eagerness that he drew back and looked at her
wonderingly, and stood in surly silence awhile longer.

"She's got to come out now," he said, at last. "I've got other things
to tend to. Can't stay here no longer, nohow."  He unlocked the door
and threw it open with a jerk. "Time's up!" he shouted, and Dorothy
came out directly, almost as if she were running away. Alvin Mead
clapped to the door with a great jar and locked it. Madelon, had she
tried, could not have got a glimpse of Burr; but she did not try. She
sprang at Dorothy Fair, and took her by the shoulders, and looked
into her scared face with agonized questioning.

"Did--he confess?" she gasped out. "Did--he tell you, did he--tell
you, Dorothy Fair?"

Dorothy shook her head in a mute terror that was almost horror. It
seemed as if she would sink to the floor under Madelon's heavy hands.
Alvin Mead stood staring at them.

"Didn't he--tell you--I was the one who--stabbed Lot? Didn't he--tell
you?"

"She's at it again," muttered Alvin Mead.

Dorothy shook her head. "He wouldn't speak," she said, faintly. "He
would say nothing about it."

Madelon fairly shook her. "Couldn't you make him speak? _You!_"

"I couldn't, I couldn't, Madelon!"

"Did you tell him your heart would break if he didn't--that you
couldn't marry him if he didn't?"

"Yes--don't, don't--look at me so, Madelon."

Alvin Mead stepped forward. "Look at here--you're scarin' of that gal
to death," he interfered. "You'd better take your hands off her."

Then Madelon turned to him, and grasped at the keys in his hands, as
if she would wrest them from him. "Unlock the door and let me in, and
let Burr Gordon out!" she demanded, wildly.

The jailer wrested his keys away with a contemptuous jerk, and took
the skin from Madelon's hands with them. "You're crazy," he said.

"I am not crazy! You've got an innocent man locked up in there, and
I, who am guilty and tell you so, you will not arrest. It is you who
are crazy. Let me in!"

Alvin Mead laid a rough hand on Madelon's shoulder. "Now you look at
here, gal," said he. "I've had about all this darned nonsense I'm
a-goin' to stan'. That chap is in jail for murder, an' in jail he's
a-goin' to stay till I git orders from somebody besides you to let
him out. An' what's more, don't you come here on no sich tom-fool
arrant agin. If you do you won't git in. I ain't no objection to gals
he was goin' to marry ef he hadn't broke the laws comin' to see him a
leetle spell, if they'll go away peaceable when they're bid, but as
for havin' sech highstericky work as this, I'll be darned if I will.
Now I can't stan' here foolin' no longer; you'd better be gittin'
right along home, an' don't you break this other gal's neck with that
old stepper you've got out there."

Madelon Hautville said not another word. She went out of the jail
quickly, and she and Dorothy were soon in the sleigh and flying down
the road. The old racer was not so old nor so weary that the impetus
of the homeward stretch failed to stir him--for a mile or so, at
least. After that his pace slackened, and then Madelon turned to the
other girl, who looked up at her with a kind of piteous defiance.
"What did you say to him?" she demanded.

"I--begged him--if he--did not kill Lot to--say so," replied Dorothy,
faintly; then she shrank and quivered before the other girl, who
started wrathfully, half as if she would fling her from the sleigh.

"_If_ he did not kill Lot to say so!" repeated Madelon. "_If_ he did
not! You know he did not."

"He would not tell me so," said Dorothy, with her stubbornness of
meekness, and her blue eyes met Madelon's, although there were tears
welling up in them.

"Tell you so!" cried Madelon. "What are you made of, Dorothy Fair?"

"He would not," repeated Dorothy. "If he _was_ innocent, why should
he not have told me if he loved me?"

Madelon looked at her. "You don't love him!" she cried out, sharply.
"You don't love him, and that's why. You don't love him, Dorothy
Fair!"

Dorothy flushed red and drew herself up with gentle stiffness. "You
cannot expect me to unveil my heart to you," said she.

"You have betrayed it," persisted Madelon. "You don't love him,
Dorothy Fair! Shame on you, after all!"

"What right have you to say that?" demanded Dorothy, and this time
with some show of anger.

"The right of another woman who does love him, and would save his
life," Madelon answered, fiercely. "The right of a woman who can love
more in an hour than such as you in a lifetime!"

"You--don't know--"

"I do know. You don't love him or you would not have distrusted him.
You would have made him tell you the truth. You would have flung your
arms around him, and you would not have let him go until he told you.
Did you do that? Answer me: did you do that?"

A great wave of red crept over Dorothy's face, but she replied, with
cold dignity: "I throw my arms around no man unbidden!"

"Unbidden!" repeated Madelon, and scorn seemed to sound in her voice
like the lash of a whip. She flung out the reins over the horse's
back, and they slipped along swiftly over the icy crust, and not
another word did she speak to Dorothy Fair all the way home.




Chapter X


When they entered Parson Fair's south yard there was a swift
disappearance of a dark face from a window, and the door was flung
open, and the grimly faithful servant-woman came forth and lifted
Dorothy out of the sleigh, crooning the while in tender and angry
gutturals. Poor Dorothy Fair shook like a white flower in a wind, for
beside the rigor of the cold, which seemed to pierce her very soul,
the chill of fever was still upon her. She chattered helplessly when
she tried to speak, and there were sobs in her throat. The black
woman half carried her into the house, and up-stairs to her own
chamber, where the hearth-fire was blazing bright. She covered her up
warm in bed, with a hot brick at her feet, and dosed her with warm
herb drinks, and coddled her, until, after some piteous weeping, she
fell asleep.

But for Madelon Hautville there was no rest and no sleep. She felt
not the cold, and if she had fever in her veins the fierce disregard
of her straining spirit was beyond it. No knowledge of her body at
all had Madelon Hautville, no knowledge of anything on earth except
her one aim--to save her lover's life. She was nothing but a purpose
concentrated upon one end; there was in her that great impetus of the
human will which is above all the swift forces of the world when once
it is aroused.

She unharnessed the horse quickly from the parson's sleigh, and led
him, restive again at the near prospect of his stall and feed, back
to the tavern stable, paid for him, and struck out on the homeward
road, straight and swift as one of her Indian ancestors. A group of
men in the stable door stood aside with curious alacrity to let her
pass; they stared after her, then at each other.

"I swan!" said one.

"Wouldn't like to be in the way when that gal was headed anywheres,"
said another.

"If that gal belonged to me I'd get her some stronger bits," said the
man who had been cleaning the bay horse when Madelon came for the
white.

"I believe she's lost her mind," said the tavern-keeper. "It's the
last time I'll ever let her have a horse, and I told her so."  There
came a blast of northwest wind which buffeted them about their faces
and chests like an icy flail, and they scattered before it, some to
their duties in the stable, some into the warm tavern for a mug of
something hot to do away with the chill. It was too cold a day to
gossip in a doorway. It was not long past noon, but the cold had
seemed to strengthen as the sun rode higher. The wind blew from the
icy northwest more frequently in fiercer gusts. Madelon Hautville
sped along before it, her red cloak flying out like a flag, and took
no thought of it at all. She was, while still in the flesh and upon
the earth, so intensified in spirit that there existed for her
consciousness neither heat nor cold. She reached the old road, the
short-cut, stretched down through the stiff white woods to her own
home; she hastened along it a little way, then she stopped and faced
back and stood irresolute. The icy wind stiffened her face, but she
did not note it. She looked back at the road with its blue
snow-furrows stretching between the desolate woods, at the spires and
roofs of the village beyond. If one followed that road to the village
and took the first one upon the right, and travelled ten miles, one
would come to the town of Kingston.

Madelon began moving along on the road to the village, vaguely at
first, as if half in a dream, then with gathering purpose. Back she
went, in her tracks, straight to the village and the tavern stable,
and asked of Dexter Beers another horse to drive to Kingston. But he
refused her, standing before her, blocking the stable door, looking
aside with a kind of timid doggedness. "Can't let ye have another
horse to-day nohow," said he; "too cold to let 'em out."

"I'll pay you well," said Madelon.

"Pay ain't no object. Can't let none of 'em out but the stage-horses
in no sech weather as this."  Still Dexter Beers did not look at
Madelon's stern and angry eyes; he gazed intently at a post in an icy
slant of snow in the yard on the left.

He had the usual masculine dread of an angry woman, and, moreover, he
had a sharp-tongued wife, but he had also the masculine tenacity of a
position. He stared at the post as if his spirit held fast to it, and
braced itself against the torrent of feminine wrath which he
expected; but it did not come. Madelon Hautville set her mouth hard,
wrapped her red cloak around her with a firm gesture, as if she were
a soldier about to start on a long march, and walked out of the yard
and up the road without another word.

"I swan!" said Dexter Beers.

The red-faced hostler approached with a pail in each hand bound for
the well; he was watering the coach-horses for the next relay.
"What's up?" he inquired, pushing past him.

"I'll be darned if I don't believe that gal of Hautville's has
started to walk to Kingston, 'cause I wouldn't let her have another
horse!"

"Let her go it," droned the red-faced man, with a short chuckle.

"Hope she won't freeze her feet nor nothin'," said Dexter Beers,
uneasily.

"Let her _go_ it!" said the red-faced man, swinging across the yard
with his pails.

Madelon Hautville walked on steadily. She reached the right-hand
turn, and then she was on the direct Kingston road, with a ten-mile
stretch before her. It was past one o'clock, and she could not reach
her journey's end much before dark.

About two miles after the turn of the road the more thickly set
habitations ceased, and there were only isolated farm-houses, with
long, sloping reaches of woods and pasture-lands between. The
pasture-lands were hummocked with ice-coated rocks and hooped with
frozen vines; they seemed to flow down in glittering waves, like
glaciers, over the hill-sides. The woods stood white and petrified,
as woods might have done in a glacial era. There was no sound in them
except now and then the crack of a bough under the weight of ice, and
slow, painful responses, like the twangs of rusty harp-strings, to
the harder gusts of wind. The cold was so intense that the ice did
not melt in the noonday sun, and there were no soft droppings and
gurglings to modify this rigor of white light and sound. Occasionally
a rabbit crossed Madelon's path, silent as a little gray scudding
shadow, and so swiftly that he did not reach one's consciousness
until he was out of sight. There was seldom a winter bird, even, in
sight. The ice on the trees and the pastures had locked and sealed
their larders. Their little beaks could not pierce it for seeds and
grubs, and so they were forced to repair to kitchen doors and
barnyards in quest of stray crumbs from the provender of men and
cattle.

The rabbits, and an ox-team drawing a sled laden with cedar logs,
slipping with shrill, long squeaks over the white road, driven by a
man with a red face in an ambush of frozen beard, were all the living
things she met for the first four miles. The man clambered stiffly
down from his sled just before he met her, and began walking,
stamping, rubbing his ears, and swinging his arms violently the
while. He stared hard at Madelon, and gave a sort of grunt as he
passed. It was an instinctive note of comradeship with another in a
situation hard for their common humanity. The man, toiling painfully
along that hard road, on that bitter day, with hands and feet half
frost-bitten, and face smarting as if with fire, his aching lungs
straining with the icy air, felt that he and the woman struggling
over the same road had common cause for wrath against this stress of
nature, and so made that half-surly, half-sympathetic grunt as he
passed her. But she did not respond. She did not even glance at him
as she went along. Her face glowed all over, red as a rose with the
freezing wind; she wrapped her cloak instinctively tight around her,
and walked a little stiffly, as if her feet might be somewhat numb;
but there was in her fixed dark eyes no recognition of anything but
some end she had in view beyond his ken.

The man stopped and looked seriously after her, and past her down the
road. "Wonder what she's up to!" he muttered. Then he struggled on
after his oxen, who plodded along with goat's-beards of their frozen
breath hanging from their jaws.

Two miles farther on there was a sudden loud blast of a horn, and
following upon it a great jangle of bells and the tramp of hoofs, and
Madelon knew the Ware and Kingston stage was coming. Presently the
top of the coach and the leaders' heads appeared above the rise of
the road, and Madelon stood well aside to meet it, pressing in among
the crackling icy bushes.

There was another blast of the horn, then a wild rush of sure-footed
horses down the hill, and the coach was past, going towards Ware.
Madelon had caught only a glimpse of the frost-white driver on the
box, a man beside him shrugged up miserably in great-coat and
comforter, with back rounded and head bent against the cold, and some
chilled faces in the windows. Some of the passengers had come from
Wolverton, ten miles past Kingston, and one might freeze to death on
a long stage journey a day like that. There was, perhaps, less danger
in a walk, but there was danger in that should the cold increase, and
it did increase hourly. Madelon's feet grew more and more numb. She
stamped them from time to time, but more from instinct than from any
real appreciation of the discomfort they gave her. So wrought up was
she with zeal that it seemed she might have set out to walk through a
fiery furnace as soon as through this frozen waste, and perhaps have
had her flesh consumed to ashes, with her soul still intent upon its
one purpose. All thought of her own self, save as an instrument to
save the life of the man she loved, was gone out of the girl.
Jealousy was purged out of her; all resentment for faithlessness, all
longing for possession were gone. She bore in her heart the greatest
love of her life as she sped along down the frozen road to Kingston.

The last two miles of the way poor Madelon struggled hard to cover.
She drew short, gasping breaths, as if she were on a high
mountain-top. The cold strengthened as the daylight waned. The very
air seemed frozen and resolved into a cutting diamond-dust of frost.
Suddenly Madelon awoke to the fear that she could not walk much
farther. She had eaten nothing since morning; the cold and fatigue
were consuming her life as the flame consumes the wick of the lamp
when the oil is lacking.

"I must get there!" she said to herself. She stamped her numb feet
desperately. She beat herself pitilessly with her stiff hands. She
set forth on a run towards Kingston, and quickened her blood a little
in that way, although she panted and fairly gasped for breath.

She drew a sigh of relief when she gained the last rise in the road,
and the town of Kingston lay before her a mile in the valley. It was
growing dark and the village lights were coming out when she had
passed the straggling farms and come into the little centre of the
town where the stores, the meeting-houses, and the tavern were
grouped.

The village main street looked almost deserted. There was only one
sleigh in sight, drawn up in front of the store. The horse was well
covered with a buffalo-skin and an old bed-quilt in addition, which
his master's wife had doubtless provided on account of the terrible
cold.

As Madelon reached the store a man came out with a molasses-jug in
hand and arms clasping parcels, which he began stowing away under the
seat of the sleigh. Madelon went up to him. "Can you tell me where
Mr. Otis lives?" said she. She could scarcely enunciate. Her very
tongue seemed stiff with the cold.

The man turned and stared at her with sharp blue eyes under red brows
frost-white between his cap and twice-wound red tippet. "Hey?" he
said, in a muffled voice.

"Can you tell me where Mr. Otis lives?"

"Otis?"

"Yes, sir."

"Which Otis d'ye mean? There's two Otises. D'ye mean Calvin Otis or
Jim Otis?"

"He has a son that plays the fiddle," answered Madelon, faintly.

"Then it's Jim ye mean. He died last year. He had a son Jim that
plays the fiddle. Lives down the road on the left-hand side, five
houses below the meeting-house. House with three popple-trees in
front--sets close to the road."

Madelon started, but the man's voice arrested her. "You look most
froze," said he. "Hadn't ye better go in there an' warm up?"  He
pointed towards the store-windows with a rosy glow of light and
warmth transfusing their thick layers of frost. "It's pipin' hot in
there--warm ye all through in a minute. It's a terrible cold night.
Old man in there, lived 'round these parts risin' eighty years, says
he never knew sech a night. Better just step in there."

Madelon shook her head and started on.

"Where did ye come from?" called the man.

"Ware Centre," Madelon gasped out, as the freezing wind struck her.

"Good Lord! you don't mean to say you've walked risin' ten mile from
Ware Centre a day like this!"

Madelon was gone, bending before the wind, without another word.

"Good Lord!" said the man, "a woman walkin' from Ware Centre this
weather!"  He stood staring after the girls' retreating figure; then
he started to unblanket his horse. But he stopped and stared again,
and finally went into the store to tell the news.

Madelon kept on as fast as she was able, but she was nearly spent.
Her exultation of spirit might indeed survive fleshly exhaustion and
perhaps in a measure overcome it, but it could not prevent it
altogether. When she reached the fifth house below the white
meeting-house, the house set close to the road, with three
poplar-trees in front, she had just strength enough to stagger to the
door and raise the knocker. Then she leaned against the door-post,
and it was only with a fierce effort that she kept her grasp upon her
consciousness. She did not seem to feel her body at all.




Chapter XI


Presently a bolt was shot and the door pushed open with an effort. It
was little used, and there was ice against it. Then a man's face
peered out irresolutely into the dusk. A knock upon the front door,
upon a night like this, seemed so unlikely that he doubted if he had
heard rightly.

"Anybody here?" he said. Then he saw the woman's figure propped
stiffly against the door-post. "Who is it?" he asked, in a startled
voice. "Is it you, Mrs. Lane?"

Madelon aroused herself. "I want to see Mr. Otis's son a minute if I
can," she said, with a great effort. Then she raised her piteous eyes
to the face before her, and realized dimly that it was the face of
the young man who had taken her place at the ball, and sent her
homeward to work all this misery on that dreadful night.

"I am Mr. Otis's son," returned the young man, wonderingly.
"What"--then he gave a cry--"why, it is you!"

"I want--to--see you--a minute," said Madelon, and her voice sounded
far away in her own ears.

The young man started. "Why, you're half frozen," he cried out, "and
here I am keeping you standing out here! Come in."

Madelon shrank back. "No," she faltered, "I--only want to ask--"

But Jim Otis took her by the arm with gentle force, and she was so
spent that she could but let him have his way, and lead her into the
house and the warm living-room, staggering under his supporting
clasp.

"Mother," called Jim Otis--"mother, come here, quick!"  He placed
Madelon tenderly on the settle, and his mother came hurriedly out of
the pantry.

"What is it?" she asked. "What is the matter, Jim? Who was it
knocked? Why, who's that?"

Madelon leaned back helplessly in the corner of the settle, her head
hanging half unconsciously. The young man stooped over her and
unfastened her cloak and hood. "Come here, quick, mother!" he cried,
and his voice was as sweet with pity as a woman's. "This poor girl is
half dead with the cold."

Mrs. Otis, large and fair-faced, with her soft, massive curves
swathed in purple thibet, stared for a second in speechless wonder.
"Who is it? How did she get here?" she whispered.

"Hush--I don't know. She's from Ware Centre. Her name's Hautville."

"Seems to me I've heard of her. What has she come here for, Jim?"

"Hush--I don't know. She'll hear you. Go and get something hot for
her to drink. I saw her at the ball the other night. Go quick,
mother."

"I'll get her some brandy cordial," said Mrs. Otis, with sudden
alacrity. She needed time always to get her mental bearing thoroughly
in any emergency, but action was prompt afterwards. She made a quick
motion towards the cupboard, but Madelon aroused herself suddenly.
Her senses had lapsed for a few minutes upon coming into the warm
room. "Where am I?" she asked, in a bewildered way.

"In our house," replied Mrs. Otis, promptly. "Jim just brought you
in, and it's lucky you come just as you did, for I don't know but
you'd froze to death if you'd been out much longer. Now, I'll get you
some of my brandy cordial, and that'll warm you right up. Did you
come way over from Ware Centre this dreadful night?"

"Yes, ma'am," replied Madelon, with the dazed look still in her eyes.
Mrs. Otis looked back on her way to the cupboard.

"Rode way over from Ware Centre in an open sleigh?" she said.

"No, ma'am; I walked."

Mrs. Otis stopped and looked at Madelon with a gasp, then at her son.
"She's out of her head, I'm afraid," said she.

"You didn't really walk over from Ware Centre?" questioned Jim.

"Yes, I did," replied Madelon. She stood up with sudden decision. "I
want to see you a minute," she said to Jim. Then she turned to Mrs.
Otis. "I don't need anything to take," said she. "I was only a little
dizzy for a minute when I came into this warm room. I feel better
now. I only want to ask your son a question, then I must go home--"

Before Mrs. Otis could speak she asked the question with no preface.

"Didn't you see him give me the knife?" she cried out, with fiercely
imploring eyes upon Jim Otis's face.

The young man turned deadly white. He looked at her and did not
answer.

"Didn't you?" she repeated.

"What knife?" asked Jim Otis, slowly.

"You know what knife! The knife that my brother handed me when I
started home from the ball--the knife that I stabbed Lot Gordon with.
Tell me that you saw it, that you saw me take it, here before your
mother, and then you must go to New Salem and testify, and set Burr
Gordon free! He is in prison for murder, and I am guilty, and they
will not believe it. You must tell them, and they will. You saw my
brother give me that knife."

Still Jim Otis, with his white face, stood looking at her, and
answered not a word. His mother, continually opening her mouth to
speak, then shutting it, looked first at one, then at the other, with
round, dilated eyes, turning her head and quivering all over her soft
bulk, like some great agitated and softly feathered bird.

"Why don't you speak?" demanded Madelon.

"What is it you want me to say?" said Jim Otis, then, hesitatingly.

"Say? Say that you saw my brother Richard give me the knife that I
did the deed with."

Jim Otis stood silent, with his pale, handsome face bent doggedly
towards the floor.

"Say so! You saw it!"

Still Jim Otis did not speak, and Madelon pressed close to him, and
thrust her agonized face before his. "Have mercy upon me and speak!"
she groaned.

"Jim, what does she mean?" asked his mother, in a frightened whisper.
"Is she out of her head?"

"No; hush, mother," replied Jim. Then he turned to the girl. "No," he
said, with stern, defiant eyes upon her face, "I did not see your
brother give you the knife."

"You did! I know you did!"

"I _did not!_"

"You did see him! You were looking at us when I went out!"

"I was tightening a string in the fiddle when you went out," said Jim
Otis.

"You must have seen."

"I tell you I did not."

Madelon looked at him as if she would penetrate his soul, and he met
her eyes fully.

"I did not see your brother give you the knife," he replied, with a
steady, unflinching look at her; but a long shudder went over him as
he spoke. The first deliberate lie of his whole life was Jim Otis
telling, for he had seen Richard Hautville give his sister the knife.

Madelon believed his lie at last, and turned away. What with her sore
exhaustion of body and this last disappointment her heart almost
failed her. She went back to the settle for her cloak and her hood,
and tied them on, while the others stood watching her, seemingly in a
maze. She made for the door, but Jim Otis stopped her.

"You cannot go back to Ware Centre to-night," he said.

Madelon looked at him with proud determination, although she could
scarce stand. "I must go," said she, and would have pressed past him,
but he took hold of her arm.

"Mother," he said, "tell her she cannot go. There has been no such
night as this for forty years, and it is dark now. To-morrow morning
I will carry her home; but to-night, as she is, it is out of the
question. Tell her so, mother."

Mrs. Otis gathered herself together then, and came forward and laid
hold of Madelon's arm, and strove to pull her back towards the
settle. "Come," said she, as if Madelon were a child--"come, that's a
good girl. You stay with us till morning, and then my son shall hitch
up and carry you home. I shouldn't dare to have him go way over to
Ware Centre to-night, cold as 'tis. He ain't very tough. You stay
here with us to-night, and don't worry anything about it. I don't
know what you're talkin' about, an' I guess you don't--you are all
wore out, poor child; but I guess there didn't nobody have any knife,
and I guess he'll git out of prison pretty soon. You just take off
your things, and I'll get some pillows out of the bedroom, and you
lay down on the settle by the fire while I get some supper. The
kettle's on now. And then I'll heat the warming-pan and get the
spare-room bed as warm as toast, and mix you up a tumbler of hot
brandy cordial, and then you drink it all down and get right into
bed, and I'll tuck you up, and I guess you'll feel better in the
morning, and things will look different."

"Let me go," Madelon said to Jim Otis.

"She mustn't go, mother," he said, never looking at Madelon at all,
although he still held fast to her straining arm.

"Well," said Mrs. Otis, "You ain't no daughter of mine, and if you
set out to go I suppose I ain't any right to hinder you. But there's
one thing maybe you ain't thought of--I can't let my son take you
'way over to Ware Centre a night like this, nohow. He's all I've got
now, and I can't have anything happen to him. He can't go with you,
and there ain't any stable here, and there ain't a neighbor round
here that will hitch up and carry you there to-night, and--I suppose
you know, if you've got common-sense, that if you set out to walk
there, the way you are, you don't stand much chance of gettin' there
alive."

Madelon stared at her.

"I don't really know myself what you and my son have been talkin'
about," continued Mrs. Otis, "but near's I can make out you think
you've done something wrong, and somebody's in prison you want to get
out. I suppose you've got sense enough to know that if you freeze to
death going home to-night you can't do anything more to get him out.
Then there's another thing--it's night. You can't do much to get him
out anyway before morning. I don't believe they ever let folks out at
night, and my son shall carry you over just as soon as it's fit in
the morning, and you'll do just as much good as if you went
to-night."

Still Madelon stood staring at her. Then presently she began
unfastening her hood and cloak. "If you can keep me till morning I
shall be obliged," she said, with a kind of stern gratitude.

"Stay just as well as not!" cried Mrs. Otis. "Jim, just take her
things and lay 'em in the bedroom. Then you have her set right down
close to the hearth, and get all warmed through, while I get supper."

Handsome young Jim Otis stood by with his brows knit moodily while
Madelon Hautville removed her wraps, then took them over his arm, and
conducted her to the warm seat in the hearth-corner which his mother
designated.

In his heart he judged this girl whom he was defending to be guilty,
yet was full of intensest admiration, and was sorely torn between the
two and his own remorse over his false witnessing. "If I'm called
into court and sworn on the Bible, I won't own up that I saw her take
that knife," he muttered to himself, as he laid the red cloak and
hood on the high feather-bed in his mother's room.

This handsome, stalwart young man, who had hitherto been considered
full of a gay audacity where womenfolk were concerned, able to make
almost any pretty girl flutter at his smile, was strangely abashed
before this beautiful Madelon Hautville, stained, in his eyes, with
crime. He brought in wood and mended the hearth fire; he moved about
doing such household tasks as were allotted to his masculine hands,
and scarcely let his eyes rest once upon the girl in the
chimney-corner. He dreaded the sight of that beautiful face which
gave him such a shock of pity and admiration and horror. Jim Otis's
mind could not compass this new revelation of a woman, but he would
not betray her even for her own pleading if he went down perjured to
his grave. So valiant was he in her defence that he withstood her
against her own self.

Madelon's mother had died when she was a little girl. She could not
fairly remember that ever in her whole life she had been so tended
and petted as she was that night by Jim Otis's mother. Kind indeed
her father and her brothers had always been to her. They had watched
over her with jealous fondness, and had taken all rougher tasks upon
themselves, but the devotion of woman, which extends to all the minor
details of life, she had never known.

She had never had a supper-table set out for her own especial
pleasure with this and that dish to tempt her appetite, as Mrs. Otis
set out hers that night. A dish of a fine and sublimated porridge did
Mrs. Otis make for her--a porridge mixed with cream and sprinkled
with nutmeg and fat plums. "I thought some hot porridge would do you
good," said Mrs. Otis, when she sat the smoking bowl before Madelon.
Then she whispered low, that her son, who was putting another stick
on the fire before coming to table, might not hear, "It's the same
kind of porridge I had after my son was born--with cream and plums in
it. I used to think there never was anything so good."  This porridge
might well have possessed a flavor of the sweetest memories of
motherhood to the older woman, but to the girl, wild with longing to
be gone and carry out her purpose, manna from heaven would not have
yielded its full measure of sweetness.

She would scarcely have eaten at all had not Jim Otis's mother
remarked, as she watched her reluctant sips of the good porridge, "As
I said just now, you ain't any daughter of mine, and I ain't any
right to dictate, but if you want to get that man, whoever he is, out
of prison, you'll have to eat enough to get some strength to do it."

Simply placid as Mrs. Otis looked, she had often wisdom enough to
gain her ends by means of that shrewd finesse of government which
appeals to the reason of others as applied to the furthering of their
own desires.

Madelon after that swallowed her porridge almost greedily, and when
supper was over went up-stairs to bed, following Mrs. Otis as readily
as any meek young daughter of her own might have done. The spirit of
resistance was laid for the time in this poor Madelon Hautville, but
it had yielded, after all, more to the will of her own reason than to
Jim Otis's mother or the weariness of her own flesh.

When Mrs. Otis came down-stairs she was flushed with pleasant
motherly victory. "She's drunk all that hot cordial," she said to her
son, "every drop of it, and I've tucked her into bed with the extra
comfortables over her, an' she eat quite a good supper, an' I told
her to go right to sleep, and I guess she will."

"If she don't she'll be down sick," said Jim, sternly. He sat by the
fire, tuning his fiddle.

"She can't hear your fiddle so it'll keep her awake, can she?" asked
Mrs. Otis, anxiously.

"Of course she can't, up in the front chamber, with all the doors
shut. Wouldn't have touched it if she could."

"Well, I don't s'pose she can. Jim--"

Jim twanged a string. "What is it, mother?"

"I don't want to have you think I'm interferin', Jim. I know you're
grown-up now, and I know there's things a young man might not want to
tell his mother till he gets ready, but I do kind of want to know one
thing, Jim."

Jim tightened the G string. He bent his face low over his violin. "I
don't know as I've ever kept much back from you, mother," he said,
soberly.

"No, I know you ain't, Jim; you've always told more to your mother
than most boys. But I didn't just know but this might be something
you hadn't got ready to speak about."

"What is it you want to know, mother?"

"Jim, is that your _girl?_"

Jim laughed a little, although his eyes were grave; he raise the
fiddle to his shoulder. "Lord, no, mother. I wouldn't get a girl
without asking you."

"I didn't know but you might have seen her over to Ware when you've
been there to parties, and not said anything."

"I never saw her but that once, mother."  Jim struck up "Kinloch of
Kinloch," but he played softly, lest by any chance Madelon, aloft in
her chamber, might hear.

"She's handsome as a picture," said his mother. "Who is it that's in
prison, Jim?"

"A young man by the name of Gordon."

"What for?"

"They think he stabbed his cousin."

"My sakes! Do you s'pose he did, Jim?"

"I don't know, mother. I wasn't there."

"I s'pose the young man that did it is this girl's beau, and that's
why she's so crazy to get him out."

Jim played the merry measure softly, and made no reply.

His mother stood before him quivering with curiosity, which she
restrained lest it defeat its own ends. She had learned early that
too impetuous feminine questioning is apt to strike a dead-wall in
the masculine mind.

"I didn't quite understand what she meant about a knife," she
ventured, with an eager glance at her son. He played a little louder,
as if he did not hear.

"I s'pose she come here, walked all that way from Ware Centre, this
dreadful night, 'cause she thought you could help to get her young
man out of prison."

Jim nodded as he fiddled.

"But I can't see how your seein' her brother give her a knife could
do any good. Of course that sweet, pretty girl didn't do it herself.
But you didn't see her brother give her the knife, Jim?"

"Didn't you hear me say I didn't?" replied Jim, with sudden force.
"Don't let's talk any more about it, mother. It's a dreadful piece of
work, anyway. I don't half know what it means myself. That poor girl
is 'most crazy because that fellow is in prison. That's why she came
on this wild-goose chase after me. You can't tell anything by what
she says."

"Wasn't he a nice kind of a fellow before this happened, Jim?"

"No, he was a scamp," said Jim Otis, angrily. He struck into the
"Fisher's Hornpipe" with fury, regardless of the girl up-stairs.

"Land sakes, Jim, don't fiddle quite so loud as that--I'm dreadful
afraid she'll hear," said his mother. "I shouldn't thought a girl
that looks as sweet as she does would ever have taken up with a
scamp."

"The sweetest girls are the worst fools," answered Jim, bitterly, but
he obeyed his mother and played less loudly. The shadows of the
winter night might have footed it to the soft measures of the
hornpipe which Jim Otis played on his fiddle. His mother could
scarcely hear it in the pantry when she went in there to set away the
supper dishes. She shut the door every time, lest her son should feel
the icy air from the fireless closet. She had always a belief that
Jim was delicate, and took a certain pride in it, although she could
not have told why.

Everything that was in the least likely to freeze to its injury had
to be removed from the cold pantry and set on the hearth that bitter
night. It was quite a while before her soft, heavy pattering, which
jarred the house when she stepped on certain parts of the floor,
ceased, and she took her knitting-work and sat down in her
rocking-chair opposite her son.

Jim continued to fiddle, touching the strings as if his fingers were
muffled with down. The wind whistled more loudly than his fiddle; it
had increased, and the cold with it. Some of Mrs. Otis's crocks froze
on the hearth that night. No such cold had been known in Vermont for
years. The frost on the window-panes thickened--the light of the full
moon could not penetrate them; all over the house were heard sounds
like those on a straining ship at sea. The old timbers cracked now
and then with a report like a pistol. "It's a dreadful night," said
Mrs. Otis, and as she spoke the returning wind struck the house, and
she gasped as if it had in truth taken her breath away.

A few minutes before nine o'clock Mrs. Otis put away her
knitting-work and got the great Bible off the desk. "Stop fiddling
now, Jim," she said, solemnly. Mrs. Otis spoke with more direct
authority in religious matters than in others. She felt herself well
backed by the spiritual law. Jim finished the tune he was playing and
lowered his fiddle from his shoulder. His mother found the place in
the Bible, and the holy words were on her tongue when there was a
sharp clash of sleigh-bells close under the window.

"Somebody's drove into the yard!" cried Mrs. Otis. "Who do you s'pose
'tis this time of night?"

"Hullo!" shouted a man's voice, hoarsely, and Jim shouted "Hullo!" in
response, and started towards the door.

"Ask who's there before you open the door," said the mother,
anxiously. She stood listening a moment after Jim had gone; then she
caught her shawl from a peg, put it over her head, and followed
him--she was so afraid some harm would come to her son.

The outer door was open, and before it was drawn up a sleigh and a
great, high-shouldered, snorting and pawing horse. In the sleigh was
a man muffled in furs like an Eskimo, leaning out and questioning
Jim.

"When did she come?" asked the man.

"About five o'clock," answered Jim.

Then Mrs. Otis understood that they were talking about the girl in
her spare-chamber, and she interposed, standing in the doorway. "She
was just about tuckered out, what with the cold and that awful
tramp," said she. "She most ought to have rode over."  Mrs. Otis's
voice was soft and conciliatory.

"We didn't know she was coming," replied the man in the sleigh,
courteously, "or we should not have let her walk so far on such a
day."

"Be you her brother?" questioned Mrs. Otis.

"Yes. I'm her brother Eugene."

"And you drove over to see where she was?"

"Yes; we've been very anxious."

"Well, you can be easy about her for to-night," said Mrs. Otis.
"She's tucked up nice and warm in my spare-chamber bed, and I give
her a tumbler of my brandy cordial, and I guess she's sound asleep."

"He wants to take her home to-night, mother," said Jim, and there was
a curious appeal in his tone.

Mrs. Otis, standing there on the door-step in the freezing moonlight,
turned quickly upon the man in the sleigh, and all the soft
conciliation was gone from her voice. "You ain't plannin' to take
that girl way home to Ware Centre to-night?" said she.

"Father sent me for her," replied Eugene Hautville.

"Well, she ain't goin' a step!"

"Her father will expect me to bring her," said Eugene, with his
unfailing courtesy. "He has been very anxious. I had hard work to
find where she was. My father won't be satisfied if I come home
without her."

"That girl ain't going out of this house to-night!"

"I've got a bearskin here to wrap her up in. She is used to being out
in all weathers," persisted Eugene, gently.

"She can't go. Pull her out of a warm bed such a night as this! If
you try to take that poor child out to-night I'll stand in my
spare-chamber door, and you'll have to walk over me to do it--and my
son won't see his mother hurt, I guess!"

Jim Otis stepped closer to the sleigh and spoke to Eugene Hautville
in a low voice.

"Well," said Eugene, slowly, "maybe you're right, Otis. I don't know
what father will say, but if she was as used up as you tell for, I
don't know as 'tis safe. It is an awful night."

"I guess it ain't safe, and she ain't going," maintained Mrs. Otis
from the door-step.

Then Eugene Hautville bent well out of his sleigh and asked a
question in the other man's ear.

"Yes, she did," replied Jim Otis.

"The poor girl is crazy over it," said Eugene. He and Jim talked for
a few moments, but Mrs. Otis, straining her ears on the door-step,
could not hear.

Suddenly Jim said, quite distinctly, "She wanted to know if I saw him
give her the knife."

There was a pause; then Eugene Hautville asked, in a voice with which
he might have addressed a judge of his life and death, "Did you?"

"No," said Jim Otis.




Chapter XII


The next morning there took place in a few hours a great change in
the temperature. It moderated rapidly. The frost on the windows and
the ice-ridges in the roads did not soften yet, since the sun was
overcast by heavy clouds, but the terrible rigor and tension of the
cold was relaxed, and men could breathe without constraint. At eight
o'clock, when Jim Otis and Madelon started for Ware Centre, there was
a white film of fallen snow over the distant hills and scattering
flakes drove in advance of the storm.

A mile out of Kingston it snowed hard. "Hadn't you better have that
extra shawl mother put in over your shoulders?" Jim Otis suggested.

But Madelon shook her head. "The snow won't hurt me," she said. She
sat up straight in the sleigh, and there was a look in her eyes,
fixed ahead on the white drive of the storm, as if her spirit were
out-speeding her body. She had her strength again that morning. She
had slept and eaten. She had submitted to the exigencies of life that
she might gain power to resist them again.

Jim Otis drove a stout little mare with a good wind for speed, but
she had not the stride of David Hautville's great roan. Moreover,
after the first stretch, she slacked on the hills and fell into walks
in the lonely reaches, almost as if she had learned it in a lesson.
Many a pretty girl, flushing sweetly under Jim Otis's gay smile, and
perhaps under his caressing arm, had ridden behind that little canny
mare, who learned well the meaning of the careless rein along the
woodland roads.

However, to-day there was no careless rein. At the first slack
Madelon herself had reached the whip and touched the gently ambling
neck. "She has more speed in her than this," said she, shortly.

"She hasn't been driven for two days, either," asserted Jim Otis.
"Wake up, Molly!"  He took the whip himself and flourished it with a
quick little snap over her back. In truth, Jim Otis was as anxious to
be at this journey's end as Madelon, for he feared every minute lest
she should ask him again if he had seen her take the knife, and that
he would again have to oppose falsehood to her frantic pleading. But
Madelon had believed him. She did not beg him again for his evidence.
She sat still at his side with a strained look in her black eyes, and
they rode in silence, with the storm heaping its white flakes on
their shoulders, until they reached Ware Centre.

Then Madelon turned quickly to Jim Otis. "Don't drive to my home,"
said she; "I would rather not go home yet. Drive to Burr Gordon's
house, please. I want to see his mother. Don't turn--keep straight
on."

"Yes, I know where he lives," said Jim, soberly. He drove very
slowly. They were drawing near the turn in the road. "See here," he
said, suddenly, "don't you think you'd better go home now?"  He spoke
with nothing of the half-gay, half-caressing authority with which he
was wont to turn a pretty girl to his mind, but timidly rather, and
kept his eyes fixed on the mare's nodding head, hooded with snow.

"No, I must see Burr's mother," replied Madelon.

"But your folks will be expecting you, won't they?" persisted Jim
Otis. He felt that he had a duty of loyalty towards this desperate
girl's father and brothers as well as to herself. He had promised
Eugene Hautville to bring her home this morning, and who could tell
where she might wander and when she might return if he left her now?

He still did not look at Madelon as he spoke, but he felt her turn
and fasten her eyes upon his face, and somehow they compelled his. He
raised them and saw her beautiful face full of a scorn of passion
which he might die and never know in himself.

"What do you think that is to me," said she, "when I've got to save
his life? If you do not wish to carry me farther, go back. I will
walk."

"I will take you wherever you wish," returned Jim Otis, and touched
up the mare, and neither spoke again until they reached Burr Gordon's
house, high on its three terraces, with Lot Gordon's opposite. Then
Jim halted his mare in the road before it, and would have alighted to
assist Madelon, but she sprang out before him. "I am much obliged to
you and your mother for what you have done for me," said she, and
turned with a swing of her red cloak, and was skimming up the
terraces like a red-winged bird.

As for Jim Otis, he slewed his sleigh about recklessly, and shook the
whip over the little mare, and drove up the road. When he reached the
turn which he knew led to the Hautville house he drew rein, and sat
pondering in his sleigh for a few minutes. He was in doubt whether he
should inform Eugene Hautville of his sister's whereabouts or not.
Finally he spoke to the mare, and continued on his way to Kingston.

The terraces which Madelon mounted were all covered with the
gathering snow. When she reached the last the door was opened, and
Burr Gordon's mother, Elvira, stood there. "I am sorry there's so
much snow for you to wade through," said she, in a sweet, quiet
voice.

"I don't mind it, thank you," replied Madelon, harshly. She felt
incensed with this mother of Burr's, who came to the door and greeted
her as if she were an ordinary caller, and her son were not in
prison.

"You had better shake it off your skirts or you'll take cold," said
Mrs. Gordon.

"I am not afraid," returned Madelon. She gave her skirts a careless
flirt and entered the door with the snow still clinging to her.

"If you will wait a moment," said Mrs. Gordon, "I will get a broom
and brush the snow from you before it melts. Then you won't take
cold."

"I don't care to have you, thank you," said Madelon. Mrs. Gordon said
no more, but led the way to the sitting-room. She was a tall, slender
woman with the face of a saint, long and pale, and full of gentle
melancholy, with large, meek-lidded blue eyes and patiently
compressed lips. She had a habit of folding her long hands always
before her, whether she walked or sat, and she moved with sinuous
wavings of her widow-bombazine.

The room into which she ushered Madelon was accounted the grandest
sitting-room in the village. When Burr's father had built his fine
new house he had made the furnishings correspond. He had eschewed the
spindle-legged tables and fiddle-backed chairs of the former
generations, and taken to solid masses of red mahogany, which were
impressive to the village folk. The carpet was a tapestry of great
crimson roses with the like of which no other floor in town was
covered, and, moreover, there was a glossy black stove instead of a
hearth fire.

"Please be seated," said Mrs. Gordon. She indicated the best chair in
the room. When her guest had taken it, she sat down herself in the
middle of her great haircloth sofa, and folded her long hands in her
lap. Mrs. Gordon had the extremest manners of the old New England
gentlewoman--so punctiliously polite that they called attention to
themselves. She had married late in life, having been previously a
preceptress in a young ladies' school. She was still the example of
her own precepts--all outward decorum if not inward composure.

Madelon Hautville, opposite her, in her snow-powdered cloak, with her
face like a flash of white fire in her snow-powdered silk hood,
seemed in comparison a female of another and an older race. She might
well, from the look of her, have come a nearer and straighter road
from the inmost heart of things, from the unpruned tangle of woods
and undammed course of streams, from all primitive and untempered
love and passion and religion, than this gentlewoman formed upon the
models of creeds and scholars.

Madelon looked at the other woman a second with fierce questioning.
Then she sprang up out of the chair where she had been placed, and
stood before her on her sofa, and cried out, abruptly, "I have come
to tell you about your son. He is not guilty. I, myself, stabbed Lot
Gordon!"

"Please be seated," said Elvira Gordon, and her folded hands in her
lap never stirred.

"Seated!" cried Madelon, "seated! How can _you_ be seated, how can
you rest a moment--you, his mother? Why do you not set out to New
Salem now--now? Why do you not walk there, every step, in the snow?
Why do you not crawl there on your hands and knees, if your feet fail
you, and plead with him to confess that I speak the truth, and tell
them to set him free?"

"I beg of you not to so agitate yourself," said Elvira Gordon. "You
will be ill. Pray be seated."

Madelon bent towards her with a sudden motion, as if she would seize
her by the shoulders.

"Are you his mother," she cried--"his mother--and sit here, like
this, and speak like this? Why do you not move? Why do you not start
this instant for New Salem--this instant?"

"I beg you to calm yourself," replied Elvira Gordon. "I have been to
New Salem to visit my son. I have prayed with him in his prison."

"Prayed with him! Don't you know that he is innocent, and in prison
for murder--your own son? You stop to pray with him; why don't you
act to save him?"

"You will make yourself ill, my dear."

"Don't you believe that your son is innocent?" demanded Madelon.
"Don't you believe it?"

Her eyes blazed; she clinched her hands. She felt as if she could
spring at this other woman with her gentle murmurings and soft
foldings, and shake her into her own meaning of life. If her impulse
had had the power of deed, Elvira Gordon's little cap of fine
needle-work would have been a fiercely crumpled rag upon her decorous
head, her sober bands of gray hair would have streamed like the locks
of a fury, the quiet clasp of her long fingers would have been
stirred with some response of indignant defence if nothing else.
Madelon, with her, realized that worst balk in the world--the balk of
a passive nature in the path of an active one--and all her fiery zeal
seemed to flow back into herself and fairly madden her.

"I hope," said Elvira Gordon, "that my son will be proved innocent
and set free."

"_Proved_ innocent! Don't you know your own son is innocent?"

"I pray without ceasing that he may be acquitted of the crime for
which he is imprisoned," replied Elvira Gordon, over her folded
hands.

Madelon looked at her. "You are a good woman," said she, with fierce
scorn. "You are a member of Parson Fair's church, and you keep to the
commandments and all the creed. You are a good woman, and you believe
in the eternal wrath of God and the guilt of your own son. You
believe in that, in spite of what I tell you. But I tell you again
that I, and not your son, am guilty, and I will save him yet!"

Madelon Hautville gathered her red cloak about her, and Mrs. Gordon
arose as she would have done when any caller was about to take leave.
It would scarcely have seemed out of keeping with her manner had she
politely invited Madelon to call again. However, her quiet voice was
somewhat unsteady and hoarse when she spoke to Madelon on the
threshold of the outer door, although the words were still gently
formal. "I am grateful to you for the interest you take in my son,"
she said; "I hope you will not excite yourself so much that you will
be ill."

"I will die if that can save him," answered Madelon Hautville, and
went down the snowy steps over the terraces.

Elvira Gordon, when she had closed the door, drew the bolt softly.
Truth was, she thought the girl had gone mad through grief and love
for her son. Believing, as she did, that the love was all unsought
and unreturned, and being also shocked in all her delicate decorum by
such unmaidenly violence and self-betrayal, she regarded Madelon with
a strange mixture of scorn and sympathy and fear.

Moreover, not one word did she believe of Madelon's assertion that
she herself was guilty. "She is accusing herself to save my son,"
thought Elvira Gordon, and her heart seemed to leap after the girl
with half-shamed gratitude, in spite of her astonishment and terror,
as she watched her go out of the yard and across the road to Lot
Gordon's house. Mrs. Gordon stood at one of the narrow lights beside
her front door and watched until Madelon entered the opposite house;
then she went hastily through her fine sitting-room to her own
bedroom, and there went down on her knees, and all her icy constraint
melted into a very passion of weeping and prayer. Those placidly
folded hands of hers clutched at the poor mother-bosom in the fury of
her grief; those placid-lidded eyes welled over with scalding tears;
that calmly set mouth was convulsed like a wailing child's, and all
the rigorous lines of her whole body were relaxed into overborne
curves of agony. "Oh, my son, my son, my son!" lamented Elvira
Gordon. "Have mercy, have mercy, O Father in heaven! Let him be
proved innocent! Let Lot Gordon live! Oh, my son!"

Elvira Gordon had the stern pride of justice of a Brutus. She would
not without proof discover even to the passionate pleading of her own
heart that she believed her son innocent, but believe it she did.
Every breath she drew was a prayer that Lot Gordon might yet speak
and clear Burr. This morning she had some slight hope that that might
come to pass, for the sick man had passed a comfortable night except
for his old enemy, the cough.

"It's my belief," Margaret Bean had told Elvira, when she had sped
across the road in the early morning to inquire, "that it's his old
trouble that's going to kill him when he does die instead of anything
else."

"Has he spoken yet?" asked Elvira, eagerly.

"No, he ain't; but there's none so still as them that won't speak."
Margaret Bean nodded shrewdly at Elvira. Her voice was weak and
hoarse as if from a cold or much calling, but there was sharp
emphasis in it. She gave a curious impression of spirit subdued and
tearfully rasped, like her face, yet never lacking.

"You--think he--could?" whispered Elvira Gordon.

"'Tain't for me to say," replied Margaret Bean. "He lays there--looks
most as if he was dead."  She wiped her eyes hard, with a
handkerchief so stiff that it looked on that cold morning frozen as
with old tears. Margaret Bean was famous for her fine starching in
the village; it was her chief domestic talent, and she was faithful
in its application in all possible directions.

"I wish he would speak if he could," said Mrs. Gordon.

"I do, if it's for the best," returned Margaret Bean. She hesitated;
there were red rings around her tearful eyes, like a bird's. "I can't
believe your son did it, nohow, Mis' Gordon," said she.

"I hope if my son is innocent he will be proved so," returned Elvira
Gordon. She was too proudly just herself not to use the word _if_,
and yet she could have slain the other woman for the sly doubt and
pity in her tone.

"It's harder for you than 'tis for him, layin' there," said Margaret
Bean, nodding towards the house. There was an odd gratulation of pity
in her tone. She rubbed her eyes again.

"We all have our own burdens," replied Elvira, with a dignified
motion, as if she straightened herself under hers. "I hope he will be
able to speak--soon."

"I hope so, if it's for the best," said Margaret Bean.




Chapter XIII


Elvira Gordon had gone home hoping that Lot might yet speak. She had
heard his rattling cough as she picked her way out of the icy yard,
and Madelon also heard it when she entered it. She knocked at the
side door, and Margaret Bean opened it. She had a gruel cup in her
hand.

"I want to see him," said Madelon.

Margaret Bean looked at her. Her starched calico apron flared out
widely over her lank knees across the doorway.

"I'm afraid he ain't able to see nobody this morning," said she, and
the asperity in her tone was less veiled than usual. Her voice was
not so hoarse. She was mindful of this girl's former conduct at her
master's bedside, and herself half believed her mad or guilty. A
suspicious imagination had Margaret Bean, and Madelon would have
found in her a much readier belief than in others.

"I've got to see him, whether he's able or not," said Madelon.

"The doctor said--"

"I'm going to see him!"

Madelon pushed roughly in past the smooth apron and ran through the
entry to Lot's room, with the housekeeper staring after her in a
helpless ruffle of indignation.

"She's gone in there," she told her husband, who appeared in the
kitchen door, dish-towel in hand. Margaret Bean's husband always
washed the dishes and performed all the irresponsible domestic duties
of the establishment. He was commonly adjudged not as smart as his
wife, and little store was set by his counsels. Indeed, at times the
only dignity of his man's estate which seemed left to this obediently
pottering old body was the masculine pronoun which necessarily
expressed him still. However, even in that the undisturbed use was
not allowed. "Margaret Bean's husband" was usually substituted for
"He," and nothing left of him but the superior feminine element
feebly qualified by masculinity.

Margaret Bean's husband's name was Zenas, but scarcely anybody knew
it, and he had almost forgotten it himself through never being
addressed by it. Margaret herself spoke of her husband as "Him," but
she never called him anything, except sometimes "You."  However, he
always knew when she meant him, and there was no need of
specification.

Now he half thought she was appealing to his masculine authority from
her bewildered air. He stiffened his meek old back. "Want me to go in
there and order her out?"

"_You!_  Go back in there and finish them dishes."

Margaret Bean's husband went back into the kitchen, and Margaret
followed Madelon with a sly, determined air, to Lot's room.

The great square northwest room was warm, but the frost had not yet
melted from the window-panes. The room looked full of hard white
lines of frost, and starched curtains, and high wainscoting; but the
hardest white lines of all were in Lot Gordon's face, sunken sharply
in his pillows, showing between the stiff dimity slants of his
bed-hangings as in a tent door. He looked already like a dead man,
except for his eyes. It seemed as if the life in them could never die
when they saw Madelon. She bent over him, darkening the light.

"Speak now!" said she.

Lot Gordon looked up at her.

"I tell you, speak! I will not bear this any longer. I am at the
end."

Still Lot Gordon looked up at her silently.

Then Madelon made a quick motion in the folds of her skirt, and there
was the long gleam of a hunting-knife above the man in the bed.
Margaret Bean, standing by the door, shrieked faintly, but she did
not stir.

"I have tried everything," said Madelon. "This is the last. Speak, or
I will make your speaking of no avail. I will strike again, and this
time they shall find me beside you and not Burr. My new guilt shall
prove my old, and they will hang me and not him. Speak, or, before
God, I will strike!"

Then Lot Gordon spoke. "I love you, Madelon," said he.

"Say what I bid you, Lot Gordon; not that."

"All your bidding is in that."

"Will you?"

"I will clear--Burr."

Madelon slipped her knife away, and stood back. Margaret Bean slunk
farther around past the bedpost. Neither of them could see her.

"On one condition," said Lot Gordon.

"What?"

"That you marry me."

Madelon gasped. "You?"

Lot laughed faintly, stretching his ghastly mouth. "You think it is
an offer of wedlock from a churchyard knight," he said.

"What are you talking about, Lot Gordon?"

"Marry me!"

"Marry you? I am going to prison to-day for stabbing you. If you die,
I die for your murder. Marriage between us? You are mad, Lot Gordon."

Lot Gordon opened his mouth to speak, but he coughed instead. He half
raised himself feebly, and his cough shook the bed. Madelon waited
until he lay back, gasping.

"You are mad to talk so," she said again, but her voice was softer.

"No madder--than--my ancestors made me," Lot stammered, feebly. Great
drops of sweat stood on his forehead.

Madelon stood looking at him. He lay still, breathing hard, for a
little; then he spoke again. "Say you will marry me, and I will clear
him," he said, "or else--strike as you will. But all will believe
that Burr struck the first blow and you the second for love of him,
and though he be not hung, the mark of the noose will be round his
neck in folks' fancies so long as he draws the breath of life."

"I will marry you," said Madelon.

"Don't cheat yourself," Lot went on, in his disjointed sentences,
broken with the rise of the cough in his throat. "This wound may not
be--mortal--after all, and a man lives--long, sometimes, when he's
sore put to it for breath. The spark of life dies hard, and you may
fan it into a blaze again. All the doctor's nostrums may not stir my
poor dying flesh--but give the spirit--what it craves--and 'tis
sometimes--strong enough--to gallop the flesh where it will. Lord,
I've seen a tree blossom in the fall, when 'twas warm enough. It may
be a long life we'll--live together, Madelon. Don't--cheat--yourself
into--thinking you'll be my widow, instead of--my wife. My wife you
may be, and--the mother of my children."

Madelon moved towards him with a curious, pushing motion, as if she
thrust out of her way her own will. She bent over him her white face,
holding her body aloof. "I will marry you, come what will. Now, set
him free."

Great tears stood in Lot's eyes. "Oh," he whispered, "you think only
of him. I love you better than he does, Madelon."

"Set him free," said she, in a hard voice.

Lot heaved a great sigh, and rolled his eyes feebly about towards the
door.

"Find--Margaret Bean," he began; and with that Margaret Bean, who had
kept the door ajar, slid out softly, "and tell her--to send her
husband to--Parson Fair, and--Jonas Hapgood, and she--must go the
other way for--the doctor. Tell them to come at once."

With that Lot fell to coughing again, but Madelon went out quickly,
and found Margaret Bean in the kitchen mixing gruel.

"Mr. Gordon wishes your husband to go at once for Parson Fair and
Jonas Hapgood, and you for the doctor," said she.

"Is he took worse?" asked Margaret Bean, innocently, with a quick
sniff of apprehension.

"No, he is no worse, but he wishes to see them. He said to go at
once."

Margaret Bean cast an injured eye at the window, all blurred with the
clinging shreds of the storm. "I don't see how I can get out in this
awful storm nohow," she said. "I've got rheumatism now. Why can't
_he_ go to see 'em all, I'd like to know?"

"The doctor lives a quarter of a mile the other way. It will save
time."

Margaret Bean looked at the gruel. "I've got to make this gruel for
him."

"I will make it. Get your shawl, quick."

"It ain't b'iled."

"I tell you I will make it."

"Why can't _he_ go to both places?"

"I will go myself!" Madelon cried, suddenly. She had been bewildered,
or that would have occurred to her before. She had never been one to
send where she could go, but for the time Lot Gordon's will had
overcome hers. "Tell your husband to go to the parson's and the
sheriff's, quick, and I will go for the doctor," said she, and was
flashing out of the yard in her red cloak before Margaret Bean had
time to turn herself about from the prospect of her own going. Then
she ordered her husband imperiously into his boots and great-coat and
tippet, and sent him forth.

She finished the gruel, and took it in to the sick man, and fed him
with hard thrusts of the spoon. Lot looked about feebly for Madelon,
and Margaret Bean replied to the look, in her husky voice, "She's
gone, instead of me. I've got rheumatism too bad to venture out in
such a storm and get my petticoats bedraggled."  She spoke with a
little whine of defiant crying, but Lot took no notice. He was
exhausted. After he had eaten the gruel, he pointed to the
chimney-cupboard.

"What is it ye want?" said she.

Lot pointed.

"How do I know what ye want when ye jest p'int like that?"

But there came then a look into Lot Gordon's eyes as expressive as a
word, and Margaret Bean crossed over to the chimney-cupboard, and got
out the brandy-flask and a wine-glass and some loaf-sugar. She mixed
a little dose of the brandy and sugar, and would have fed it to the
sick man as she had the gruel, but he motioned her aside, raised
himself with an effort, and drank it down eagerly. Then he lay still,
and soon a faint flush came into his face. Margaret Bean went back
into the kitchen and mixed some bread, with her eye upon the window.

Presently there was a wild gallop and great clash of bells past the
window, and a shout at the door. Margaret Bean put on her little blue
shawl and opened it when the shout had been twice repeated. Old David
Hautville sat there in his sleigh, keeping a tight rein on his
tugging roan. "My daughter here?" he shouted. "Whoa, there!"

"There's sick folks here," said Margaret Bean, shivering in the
doorway. "You hadn't ought to holler so."  Her tearful eyes were more
frankly hostile than usual. She had always looked down from her own
slight eminence of life upon these Hautvilles, and now was full of
scorn that her master was to marry one of them.

"I want to know if my daughter is here," said David Hautville, and he
did not lower his voice. It sounded like a hoarse bellow of wrath,
coming out of the white whirl of snow. His fur coat was all crusted
with snow, his great mustache heavy with it; the roan plunged in a
rising cloud of it.

"No, she ain't here," replied Margaret Bean, and her weak voice
seemed by its very antithesis to express the utmost scorn and disgust
at the brutality of the other.

"Has she been here?"

"Yes, she's been here."  Margaret made as though to shut the door,
but David Hautville stopped her.

"Did she start for home?"

"You'd better ask somebody that knows more about it."

"Where did she go?"

"You'd better ask somebody that knows about it!" repeated Margaret
Bean, in her malicious meekness. Then she shut the door.

David Hautville, with a great "whoa!" leaped out of the sleigh. He
led up the roan with a fierce pull to the fence, and tied her there.
Then he strode into the house, and through the entry to Lot's room,
with no ceremony.

"Where is my daughter?" he demanded, standing at Lot's bedside in his
great fur coat, all bristling with points of snow.

"She'll be back presently," answered Lot. His voice was a little
stronger; there were two red spots on his cheeks.

"Where's she gone?"

"For the doctor."

All at once David Hautville gave a great start. "Why, you're
talking!" he cried out. "You couldn't speak."

Lot nodded vaguely.

"You're better, then?" cried the other, with a sharp look at him.

Lot nodded again.

"When did she come here?"

"Just now."

"Same damned nonsense, I suppose. She's gone mad. If the law don't
finish that fellow, I will!"

Lot motioned towards a chair. "Sit down," he whispered.

"She coming back with the doctor?"

"Yes," Lot coughed.

David Hautville settled into a chair with a surly grunt. He watched
Lot cough, holding to his straining chest, and thought that he must
be worse, else he would not have sent for the doctor. He resolved to
wait and take his daughter home with him, by force if necessary, but
with no more disturbance of this man, who might be sick unto death.
Seeing Lot cast his eyes about as if looking for something, and make
a motion towards the table at his side, he rose up quickly and got
him a spoonful of the cough mixture in a bottle thereon, and
administered it to him gently.

"Don't you touch my wet coat," said David Hautville, "or yo'll get a
chill," and he held himself carefully away from the sick man.

When Lot lay back, panting, he returned to his chair and did not
speak again. The two remained in silence until there came the jingle
of bells, the tramp of horses' feet, and the voice of men out in the
yard.

Lot lay still, with his eyes closed. David Hautville raised his head
and looked at the window, thick with frost. Presently the door was
opened softly, and the doctor came in, with Parson Fair and Jonas
Hapgood. Madelon, in her snow-powdered red cloak, came last. David
started up fiercely when he saw her; then he stood back and waited.
The doctor bent over Lot and began counting his pulse. He eyed him
sharply.

"The pendulum still swings," said Lot.

The doctor started. "You can speak, then!" he cried out, brusquely.

Lot smiled.

The doctor was old, and his long struggle with birth and death had
begun to tell upon him. He had already visited Lot that morning,
after a hard night with a patient, back in the hills. His face was
haggard under its sharp gray bristle of beard; his eyes fierce, like
an old dog's, with fatigue and hunger. He had just reached home and
sat down to his breakfast when this new call came. He had thought Lot
was dying from Madelon's imperative summons, and she had not
undeceived him. She was growing cunning in her desperate efforts to
save Burr Gordon.

"What in thunder did ye send for me again for?" he snapped. This old
country doctor was never chary of plain speaking, and his brusqueness
had increased his popularity. Many of his patients were simple
countrywomen, who had greater belief in that which they feared. They
repeated his half-savage speeches to each other, and added, "He's a
good doctor, if he does speak out."

Lot only smiled that covert smile of his, which seemed to imply some
wisdom of humor beyond the ken of others. "I ought to be dying," he
said, with grim apology. "I ought not--to have disturbed you all for
a less reason than to witness my final exit, but I want you to
witness something else."  Lot Gordon spoke quite strongly and
connectedly.

"What?" asked the doctor, irritably.

"I want to make a statement," said Lot Gordon.

There was a pause. Jonas Hapgood, with his look of heavy
facetiousness, slightly tempered now with curiosity, stood lounging
into his great snowy boots at the foot of the bed. Parson Fair, the
consolation for the dying which he had thought to administer still in
his mind, which could not swerve easily, his slender height in his
black surtout inclined towards the sick man with gentle courtesy,
waited. Margaret Bean peered around the bed-curtain. Madelon stood
near the doctor, her face white as if she were dead, and a look of
awful listening upon it. In the background David Hautville, wrathful
and wondering, towered over them all.

"I wish to declare in the presence of these witnesses," said Lot
Gordon, "the doctor here testifying that I am in my right mind"--the
doctor gave a surly grunt of assent--"that it is my firm belief that
all mortal ills come to man through his own agency, and this last ill
of mine is no exception. I declare solemnly before you all that my
cousin Burr Gordon is not guilty of administering this wound which I
bear in my side."

The sheriff started forward. "Who did do it, then?" he cried out.

"I myself," replied Lot Gordon.




Chapter XIV


There was a gasp of astonishment from the company. Jonas Hapgood
began to speak, but Madelon's soprano drowned out his thick bass.

"How dare you," she cried out, "swear to that lie? Liar! You are a
liar, Lot Gordon!"

Then, before Lot could reply, David Hautville came forward with a
mighty plunge, and grasped his daughter by the arm, and forced her to
the door.

"Get ye out of this," growled David Hautville; but Madelon turned her
face back in the doorway for one last word. "Don't you know," she
shrieked back to Lot Gordon, in her pitiless despair--"don't you know
that I would rather have seen the inside of my prison-cell to-night
and the gallows to-morrow than this, Lot Gordon?"

"Quit your talk!" shouted David Hautville; and she followed his
fierce leading out of the house into the yard.

"Get ye into this sleigh," ordered her father; and she obeyed.
Suddenly the fire of passion and revolt seemed to die out in her; it
was like a lull in a spiritual storm. She rode home with her father,
and neither spoke. David Hautville now considered the matter as past
any words of reasoning. He was convinced that his daughter's fair
wits were shaken, and that nothing but summary dealing, as with a
child, could avail anything. When they reached home he bade her, with
a kind of stern forbearance, to get into the house at once and see to
her work there, and she obeyed again.

All that day, and many days after that, poor Madelon Hautville, who
had been striving like any warrior against the powers and
principalities of human wills and passions, and had grounded her arms
after a victory which had left her wounded almost to death, carried
her bleeding heart and walked her woman's treadmill. She scoured
faithfully the pewter dishes and the iron pots. She swept the hearth
clean and baked and brewed and spun and sewed. Her lot would have
been easier had her woe befallen her generations before, and she
could, instead, have backed her heavy load of tenting through the
snow on wild hunting-parties, and broken the ice on the river for
fish, and perchance taken a hand at the defence when the males of her
tribe were hard pressed. Civilization bowed cruelly this girl, who
felt in greater measure than the gently staid female descendants of
the Puritan stock around her the fire of savage or primitive
passions; but she now submitted to it with the taciturnity of one of
her ancestresses to the torture. Week after week she went about the
house, and neither spoke nor smiled. Burr Gordon was set free, fully
acquitted of the charge against him; Madelon's denial of Lot's false
confession had gone for nothing. Half the village considered her
hysterical and irresponsible, and Lot Gordon, it was agreed, was just
the man to lay violent hands upon his own life, steal and use his
cousin's knife, and keep mute to fasten the guilt upon him, as he had
confessed.

A week after Burr's release Louis and Richard Hautville came home.
They had been trapping on Green Mountain, they said, camping in the
little lodge they had built there. When they came in laden with stark
white rabbits and limp-necked birds, and one of them with a haunch of
venison on his back, Madelon faced them with sudden fierceness, as if
to speak. Then she turned away to her work, without a word of
greeting. The boy Richard stared at her with a quiver, as of coming
tears on his handsome face. He whispered to Eugene, when she went
into the pantry.

"Best let her alone," said Eugene. "She's been so ever since."

Not one of them knew of her promise to marry Lot Gordon, and Lot had
bound Margaret Bean over to secrecy. All the village was as yet
ignorant of that, but there was enough besides to afford a choice
bone of gossip to folk sunken in the monotony and isolation of a
Vermont country winter. The women put their heads together over it at
their quilting-bees, and the men in their lounging-places in the
store and tavern. This mystery, which endured as well as their
hard-packed snows, and kept their imaginations always upon the
stretch, was a great acquisition to them. Plenty of mental activity
was there in Ware Centre that winter, and the brains of many were
smartly at work upon some of those problems whose conditions, being
all unknown quantities of character and circumstance and fate, are
beyond all rules of solution.

Would Burr Gordon marry Dorothy Fair, or would he, after all, turn
again to his old love, who had shown such devotion to him that it had
almost turned her brain? Unless, indeed--for there is room in gossip
for all suspicion, and surmise can never be quite laid at rest--her
brain had not been turned, and she had struck the blow, as she said.
But, in that case, why had Lot taken her guilt upon himself? Why had
he cleared Burr at his own expense, and saved her? If he had done it
for love of Madelon, he had also set his rival free to woo her, and
had established her innocence in his eyes.

Lot still lived. Would he die, finally, of his wound or of his
disease? Would he recover and come out of his house alive again? Time
went on, and the people knew no more than they knew at first; but
they continued to watch, crossing the gleams of all the neighboring
window-panes with sharp lines of attention, hushing conversation in
the store if a Hautville or a Gordon entered, and rolling keen eyes
over shoulders after meeting one of them upon the country roads. But
especially they were alert in the meeting-house upon Sabbath days.
Their eyes were slyly keen upon Dorothy Fair, softly wrapped in her
blue wadded silk and swan's-down, holding up her head with gentle
state in the parson's pew; upon Burr Gordon, somewhat pale and moody
in his smart Sunday coat; and Madelon, up in the singing-seats. They
never, in those days, saw Madelon elsewhere. She went to meeting
every Sabbath day and sang as usual, but between the hymns she sat
with her beautiful face as irresponsive to all around her as a
painted portrait, and more so, for the eyes of a portrait will often
seem to follow an ardent gazer. Madelon's father and brothers, except
Richard and Louis, who kept their own counsel, were much bewildered
among themselves at her strange mood, and were inclined to hold the
opinion that her wits were a little shaken, and, moreover, to keep it
quiet and secret from everybody until she should be quite restored.
They said little to her, treating her with a kind of forbearing
compassion; but the indignation of them all was fierce, although held
well in check, against Burr Gordon. Him they held accountable for
all.

Burr Gordon might well have been quit of any charge of cowardice had
he shrunk from facing the male Hautvilles on those days. They passed
him in the road with the looks of surly dogs in leash. None of them
except Eugene gave him a nod of recognition. Eugene bowed always,
with his unfailing grace of courtesy, but he hated him more than all
the others, for he was jealous on his own account as well as his
sister's. It was said that Burr Gordon, since his acquittal, was
courting Dorothy Fair steadily, although they had not been seen out
together.

Burr had been to the Hautville house twice since his return from New
Salem, but had not been admitted. Once when he called Madelon had
been alone in the house, and caught a glimpse of her old lover coming
into the yard. She had sprung up, letting her needle-work slide to
the floor, and fled with her face as white as death and her heart
beating hard into the freezing best room, and stood back in a corner
out of range of the windows, and listened to the taps of the knocker
and finally to Burr's retreating steps. Then she crept across to a
window and peered around the curtain, and watched him out of sight as
if her soul would follow him; then she stole out the door and looked
up and down to see if anybody was in sight; and then she flung
herself down upon her knees and kissed her lover's cold footprint in
the snow.

The second time Burr came was on an evening, when her father and all
her brothers except Richard were at the singing-school. She knew
Burr's step when he drew near the door, and bade Richard shortly to
answer the knock, and say she was busy and could see nobody, which he
did with all the emphasis which his fiery young blood could put into
words of dismissal. The boy, of all the others, alone knew a reason
why he should be more lenient with Burr; and yet this very reason
seemed to swell his wrath and hold him more deeply responsible for a
deeper disgrace. When he had shut the door hard upon Burr, he turned
to his sister. "I would have killed him rather than let him in," said
he.

Madelon took another stitch in her work. Her face looked as if it
were carved in marble. Richard stood staring at her a second; then he
flung out of the room, and the doors closing behind him shook the
house. Richard's manner towards his sister was sometimes full of a
fierce sympathy and partisanship, sometimes of wild anger and
aversion. He looked ten years older in a few weeks. Both he and Louis
appeared to avoid the other members of the family, and kept much
together, and yet even in their close companionship they also seemed
to have a curious avoidance of each other; one was seldom seen to
look in his brother's face, or address him directly.

One morning, a month after Burr's release, Margaret Bean came to the
Hautville door. She was well wrapped against the cold, her head
especially being swathed about with lengths of knitted scarf over her
silk hood; there was only a thin sharp gleam of face out of it, like
a very lance of intelligence. Margaret held out the stiff white
corner of a letter from the folds of her shawl. "He sent it," she
said to Madelon, who came to the door.

Madelon opened the letter and read it. "I can't come," she said,
shortly. "I'm busy. Tell him he must write what he wants to tell me."

Margaret Bean's eyes were sharp as steel points. She had not known
what was in the letter. "Hey?" said she, pretending that she had not
heard, in order to make Madelon repeat and perhaps reveal more.

"I can't come," said Madelon. "He can write what he wants to tell
me."

Suddenly a great red flush spread over her pale face and her neck.
She lowered her eyes before the other woman as if in utter
degradation of shame, and shrank back into the house and closed the
door in Margaret Bean's face.

Margaret Bean stood for a moment, a silent, shapeless figure in the
cold air. "Pretty actions, I call it," said she then, quite loudly,
and went out of the yard with a curious tilting motion on slender
ankles, as of a balancing bale of wool.

Madelon slipped her letter into her pocket as she entered the
kitchen. Her father and all her brothers were there. It was shortly
after breakfast, and they had not yet gone out.

"Who was it at the door?" her father asked. He sat by the fire in his
great boots.

"Margaret Bean."

"What did she want?"

"Lot Gordon sent for me to come over there."

"What for?"

"He wanted--to--tell me something."

"You ain't going a step. I can tell ye that."

"I--told her I couldn't go," said Madelon. Her voice was almost
breathless, and still that red of shame was over her face. She bent
her head and turned her back to them all, and went out of the room.
The male Hautvilles looked at one another. "What's come over the girl
now?" said Abner, in his surly bass growl.

"She's a woman," said his father, and he stamped his booted feet on
the floor with a great clamp.

Madelon meantime fled up-stairs to her chamber, with her first
love-letter from Lot Gordon in her pocket. Until this the reality of
all that had happened had not fully come home to her. Without
acknowledging it to herself she had entertained a half-hope that Lot
might not have been entirely in earnest--that he might not hold her
to her promise. And then there had been the uncertainty as to his
recovery. But here was this letter, in which Lot Gordon called
her--her, Madelon Hautville--his sweetheart, and begged her to come
to him, as he had something of importance to say to her! He used,
moreover, terms of endearment which thrilled her with the stinging
shame of lashes upon her bare shoulders at the public whipping-post.
She lit the candle on her table, snatched the letter out of her
pocket, crumpled it fiercely as if it were some live thing that she
would crush the life out of, and then held it to the candle-flame
until it burned away, and the last flashes of it scorched her
fingers. Then she caught a sight of her own miserable, shamed face in
her looking-glass, and flushed redder and struck herself in her face
angrily, and then fell to walking up and down her little room.

Her father and brothers down below heard her, and looked at each
other.

"There was that Emmeline Littlefield that went mad, and fell to
walking all the time," said Abner.

The others listened to the footsteps overhead with a gloomy assent of
silence.

"They had to keep her in a room with an iron grate on the window,"
said Abner, further, with a pale scowl.

Then David Hautville took down his leather jacket from its peg with a
jerk, and thrust his arm into it. "I tell ye, she's a _woman_," he
said, in a shout, as if to drown out those hurrying steps; and then
he went out of the room and the house, and disappeared with axe on
shoulder across the snowy reach of fields; and presently all his sons
except Eugene followed him. Eugene remained to keep watch over his
sister.




Chapter XV


After his father and brothers were gone, Eugene got Louis's fiddle
out of the chimney-cupboard and fell to playing with an imperfect
touch, picking out a tune slowly, with halts between the strains, as
if he spelled a word with stammering syllables. Eugene's musical
expression was in his throat alone; his fingers were almost powerless
to bring out the meaning of sweet sounds. A drunken crew on a rolling
vessel might have danced to the tune that Eugene Hautville fingered
on his brother's fiddle that morning while his sister walked back and
forth overhead, running the gantlet, as it were, of an agony which
his masculine imagination could not compass, well tutored as it was
by the lessons of his Shakespeare book.

When Margaret Bean came to the door the second time she heard the
squeak of the fiddle, and clanged the knocker loud to overcome it.
Madelon and Eugene reached the door at the same time, and Margaret
Bean extended another letter. "Here's another," said she, shortly, to
Madelon. She tucked the hand which had held the letter under her
shawl and hugged herself with a shiver, ostentatiously. "I'm most
froze, traipsin' back and forth, I know that much," she muttered.

Eugene stood aside with a flourish and a graceful, beckoning wave of
his hand. "Won't you come in and warm yourself?" he said, and he
smiled in her face as if she and no other were the love of his heart.

But Margaret Bean had a shrewd understanding which no grace of
flattery could dazzle, and felt truly that nowadays her principal
claim to masculine admiration lay in her fine starching specialty of
housewifery; and of that she gave no show, bundled up against the
cold in her shapeless wools. So she put aside the young man's smiling
courtesy scornfully, as not belonging to her, and spoke in a voice as
sharp as an edge of her own well-stiffened linens. "No, sir," said
Margaret Bean; "I've got bread in the oven and I can't stop, and I
ain't coming in for two or three minutes and set with my things on,
and get all chilled through when I go out. I'll stand here while your
sister reads that letter. He said the answer would be just 'yes' or
'no,' and I shouldn't have to wait long. 'She ain't one to teeter
long on a decision,' says he; 'she finds her footin' one side or the
other.'  He talks queer, queerer'n ever sence he was hurt. I pity
anybody that gets him."

"Tell him 'yes,'" said Madelon, abruptly; and then she wheeled about
and went into the house.

"Well," said Margaret Bean, harshly. The door closed before her;
Eugene had forgotten his courtesy, and followed his sister into the
house without a good-day to the guest.

Margaret Bean stood for a minute looking at the house, with its yawn
of blank windows in her face; then she went out of the yard, bearing
her message to Lot Gordon.

Eugene Hautville was startled at the look on Madelon's face when she
went into the house. "Madelon, what is it?" he said, softly. But she
did not answer him a word; she ran across the room and thrust Lot
Gordon's letter into the fire. Eugene followed her and turned her
about gently, and looked keenly in her white face.

"What was in that latter?" said he.

Madelon shook her head dumbly.

"Madelon?"

"Wait. You will know soon. I can't tell you," she gasped out then.

"Was it from Lot Gordon?"

She nodded.

"What is he writing to you about? You are my sister, and I have a
right to know."

"Wait," she gasped again. "Oh, Eugene, wait. I--can't--"

Suddenly Madelon hung heavy on her brother's arm. "Madelon," he cried
out loudly to her, as if she were deaf--"Madelon, don't! You needn't
tell me. Madelon!"

Eugene almost lifted his sister into the rocking-chair on the hearth,
and hastened to get her a cup of water; but when he returned with it
she motioned it away, and was sitting up, stern and straight and
white, but quite conscious.

"Hadn't you better drink it, Madelon?" pleaded Eugene.

"No. What do I want it for? I am quite well," said she.

"You almost fainted away."

"I don't want it."

Eugene set the cup on the dresser; then he came back to Madelon, and
stood over her, looking at her, his dark face as pitiful as a
woman's. "Madelon, why can't you tell me what new thing is making you
act like this?" he said. Madelon made an impatient motion and started
up, and would have gone out of the room, but Eugene flung an arm
around her and held her firmly. "What is it, poor girl?" he whispered
in her ear.

Madelon had soft woman's blood in her veins, after all. Suddenly she
shook convulsively, and would have kept her face firm, but she could
not. She put her head on her brother's shoulder, and sobbed and wept
as he had never seen her do, even when she was a child, for she had
never been one to cry when she was hurt. Eugene sat down in the
rocking-chair with his sister on his knee, and smoothed her dark hair
as gently as her mother might have done. "Poor girl! poor girl!" he
kept whispering; but, softly caressing as his voice was, his eyes,
staring over his sister's head at the fire, got a fierce and fiercer
look; for he was thinking of Burr Gordon and cursing him in his heart
for all this. "Good Lord, Madelon, can't you put that fellow out of
your head?" he cried out, sharply, all at once.

Then Madelon hushed her sobs, with a stern grip of her will upon her
quivering nerves, and raised herself up and away from him. "That has
nothing to do with this," she said, coldly. "Let me go now, Eugene."

But Eugene held her strongly with a hand on either arm, and scanned
her keenly with his indignant eyes. "He is at the root of the whole
matter," said he, "and you know it. I wish--"

"I tell you Burr Gordon has nothing to do with this last. He knows
nothing of it. Let me go, Eugene."

But Eugene still held her and looked at her. "Madelon--"

"What? I can sit here no longer. I have work to do. There is nothing
the matter with me. I have nothing to complain of. What I do I do of
my own free will."

"Madelon," whispered Eugene, with a red flush stealing over his dark
face, his eyes dropping a little before her, "you don't--think she
will--marry him?"

"Who? Dorothy?"

Eugene nodded.

"Of course she will--marry him, Eugene Hautville."

Eugene set his sister down suddenly and got up. "All I've got to say
is, then," he cried, with a movement of his right arm like a blow,
"it's a damned shame that the child can't be taken care of among us
all."

"What do you mean, Eugene Hautville?"

"I mean that she had better lie down in her grave than marry that--"

"Take care what you say, Eugene."

"I say she had--"

"Better lie down in her grave than marry him--than marry Burr Gordon?
What do you mean? Who are you, that you talk in this way? He is
better than you all; not one of you is fit to tie his shoe."

"Madelon, are you mad? He is a lying villain, and you know it,
and--God knows it's only on her account I speak. Some one ought to
tell her."

"Tell her, tell her! What do you think I would tell her if I were to
speak? If she were to come to me and ask me if Burr ever courted me
and played me false for her, I would tell her, no, no, no! If she
were to ask me if Burr ever kissed me, or said a fond word to me, or
gave me a fond look, I would tell her, and this last is the truth,
that he never gave me more than a passing thought, and 'twas only my
own short-sightedness and conceit that made me think 'twas more than
that, shame to me! Isn't he a man, and shouldn't a man look well
about him among us to be sure his heart is set? I'd tell her 'twas
something for her to hold up her head for among other women all the
days of her life, because he chose her. That's what I'd tell her."

"Madelon!"

"Dorothy Fair shall not cheat Burr now, when he has set his heart
upon her. It would be worse than all that has gone before. I tell you
I won't bear that. He shall have her if he wants her. He has suffered
enough."

"But you--you," gasped Eugene. "I thought you--I thought you wanted
him yourself, Madelon."

"I've gone past myself. All I think of now is what he wants," said
she, shortly. She turned to go out of the room; then she stopped and
spoke to him over her shoulder: "There's no need of talking any more
about it."  She added: "I know what I've set out to do, and I can go
through with it."  Then the door shut after her, and Eugene sat down
with his Shakespeare book. But he could not read; he sat moodily
puzzling over his sister, whose unfulfilled drama of life held his
mind better than them all.

But puzzle as he might, he never once dreamed of the truth--that his
sister Madelon had promised to marry Lot Gordon in a month's time,
and sent her "yes" by word of mouth of Margaret Bean that morning.
Somehow, even with the ashes of the letter of proposal before his
eyes on the hearth, and his sister's "yes" ringing in his ears,
knowing as he did that Lot as well as Burr had lost his heart to her,
he could not conceive of such a possibility. He was too well
acquainted with Madelon's attitude towards Lot, and she had never
been one to walk whither she did not list for any man. He could not
imagine the possibility, well versed as he was, through his
Shakespeare lessons, in the feminine heart, of his sister's yielding
her proud maiden will to any man. He would as soon have thought of a
wild-cat which he had trailed in the woods, which knew him as his
mortal enemy, whose eyes had followed him with stealthy fury out of a
way-side bush, to unbend from the crouch of its spring and walk
purring tamely into his house at call, and fall to lapping milk out
of a saucer on the hearth. But no man can estimate the possibilities
of character under the lever of circumstances, and there is power
enough abroad to tame the savage in all nature. Madelon Hautville had
yielded to a stress of which her brother knew nothing, and he
therefore scouted the idea, if it crossed his mind like a wild fancy,
of her yielding at all. He rather came to the conclusion that the
letter had announced Burr's engagement to Dorothy Fair, and that
Madelon's "yes" had signified proud approval of it. He leaned to this
conclusion the sooner because of the miserable tendency which a
jealous heart has to force all suspicions to open its own sore. "He's
going to marry Dorothy Fair," Eugene told himself. "It was like Lot
to tell Madelon, and ask her if she was pleased with it. And that was
why she acted so. Her heart broke at first and she cried, and then
she stood up and hid it. He's going to marry Dorothy Fair!"

Eugene had a strong imagination, whereby he could suffer a
thousandfold, if he would, every woe of his life. Sitting now by his
hearth fire, with his Shakespeare book, full of the joys and sorrows
of immortal lovers, disregarded upon his knees, he let his fancy show
him many a picture which tore his heart, although look upon it he
would. He saw Dorothy Fair in her wedding-gown; he saw her blush like
a rose through her bridal lace; he saw her following Burr up the
meeting-house aisle the Sabbath after her marriage with a soft
rustling of silken finery, and a toss of white bridal plumes over her
fair locks. He saw those glances, which he swore to himself boldly
enough then had first been his, turned upon his rival; he imagined
sweet words and caresses which he had never tasted, and were
perchance the sweeter for that, bestowed upon Burr.

Suddenly he started up and flung down his book upon the settle, and
put on his fur cap and was out of the house. "The first turn of her
heart was towards me, and I was the first man she coupled with love
in her thoughts, and nothing can undo it," he said, aloud, fiercely
to himself as he went up the lonely snowy road; and he believed it
then. Those soft blue glances of Dorothy's came back to him so
vividly that he seemed to see them anew whenever his eyes fell upon
the way-side bushes, or the cloud-shadowed slopes of white fields, or
the dark gaps of solitude between the forest pines.

For the first time a fierce insistence of his rights of love was upon
him. Straight to the village he went, and to Parson Fair's house. But
he did not enter; his madness was not great enough for that. He did
not enter, but he went past with a bold, searching look at all the
windows and no pretence of indifference, and up the road a little
way. Then he returned and passed the house again, and looked again;
and this time Dorothy's face showed between the dimity sweeps of her
chamber curtains. He half stopped, and then came another glance of
blue eyes which verified those that had gone before, straight into
his, which replied with a dark flash of ardor, and then Dorothy's
face went red all of a sudden, and there was a vanishing curve of
blushing cheek and a flirt aside of fair curls, and the space between
the dimity curtains was clear.

Eugene stood still beneath the window for a few minutes. There were
watchful eyes in the neighboring windows. In the tavern-yard, farther
down the street, Dexter Beers and old Luke Basset stood, also fixedly
staring at Parson Fair's house.

"Wonder if he thinks there's any trouble--fire or anything," said
Dexter Beers.

"Don't see no smoke," said old Luke.

Eugene Hautville, rapt in that abstraction of love which is the
completest in the world, and makes indeed a world of its own across
eternal spaces, knew nothing and thought nothing of outside
observers. He was half minded for a minute to enter Parson Fair's
house. Had Dorothy appeared outside, the impulse to seize her and
bear her away with him and fight for her possession against all odds,
like any male of his old savage tribe when love stirred his veins,
would have been strong within him. But she did not come, nor appear
again in the window. She stood well around the curtain and peeped;
but he did not know that, and presently he went away.

When he passed the tavern Dexter Beers hailed him. "Say, anythin'
wrong to the parson's?"

"No," returned Eugene, sharply, and strode on.

"Didn't know but you see smoke, you were lookin' up at the house so
stiddy," called Beers, conciliatingly; but Eugene swung down the road
without another look. All his grace of manner was forgot in the stir
of passion within him. What had Dorothy Fair meant by that look? Was
she betrothed to Burr Gordon? Was she playing with him for her own
amusement? And what was he to do, what could he do, for the sake of
his love, with honor?

Eugene left the road after he had cleared the village, and struck off
across the fields for a long tramp through snowy solitudes as well
known to him as, and better suited to him for perplexed thoughts
than, any place in his home. In a way, out-doors was the truest home
of all these Hautvilles, with the strain of wild nomadic blood in
their veins.

The sight of the little fireless dwellings of woodland things, the
empty nests revealed on the naked trees, the scattered berries on
leafless bushes, the winter larders of birds, the tiny track of a
wild hare or a partridge in the snow, disturbed less the current of
their inmost life, as being more the wonted surroundings of their
existence, than all the sounds and sights and savors within four
domestic walls.

Eugene tramped on for miles over paths well known to him, which were
hidden now beneath the snow, pondering upon himself and Dorothy Fair,
and never gave his sister, whose guardian he had been, another
thought.




Chapter XVI


Madelon, half an hour after Eugene had left, put on her cloak and
hood, and went down the road to Lot Gordon's. "I want to see him a
minute," she said to Margaret Bean when the woman answered her knock,
and went in with no more ado. Her face was white and stern in the
shadow of her hood.

Margaret Bean recoiled a little when she looked at her. "He's up,"
said she, backing before her, half as if she were afraid. "I guess
you can walk right in."

Madelon went into the sitting-room, and Lot's face confronted her at
once, white and peaked, with hollow blue eyes lit, as of old, with a
mocking intelligence of life.

He was sunken amid multifold wrappings in a great chair before the
fire, with a great leathern-bound book on his knees. Beside him was a
little stand with writing-paper thereon, and sealing-wax and a
candle, a quill pen and an inkstand. All the room was lined with
books, and was full of the musty smell of them.

Madelon went straight up to Lot and spoke out with no word of
greeting. "I have sent your answer," said she. "I will keep my
promise, but have you thought well of what you do, Lot Gordon?"

Lot looked up at her and smiled, and the smile gave a curiously
gentle look to his face, in spite of the sharp light in his eyes.

"The thought has been my meat and my drink, my medicine and my breath
of life," said he.

"If I were a man I would rather--take a snake to my breast than a
woman who held me as one--"

"Two parallel lines can sooner meet than a woman know the heart of a
man. What do I care so I hold you to mine?"

Madelon stood farther away from him, but her eyes did not fall before
his.

"Why did you lie" said she. "You knew I stabbed you, and not
yourself. You are a liar, Lot Gordon."

But Lot still smiled as he answered her. "However it may be with
other men, no happening has come to me since I set foot upon this
earth that I brought not upon myself by my own deeds. The hand that
set the knife in my side was my own, and I have not lied."

"You have lied. Tell them the truth."

"I have told the truth that lies at the bottom of the well."

"Call them all in now, and tell them--I--did it, I--"

Lot Gordon raised himself a little, and looked at her with the
mocking expression gone suddenly from his face. "What good do you
think it would do if I did, Madelon?" he said, with a strange sadness
in his voice.

She looked at him.

"I shall not die of the wound. You can't escape me by prison or a
disgraceful death, and as for me, do you think it would make any
difference to me if all the village pointed at you, Madelon?"

Madelon looked at him as if she were frozen.

"All the way to be set loose from your promise is by your own
breaking it," said Lot.

"I will keep my promise," said Madelon, shutting her lips hard upon
her words. She turned away.

"Madelon," said Lot.

She went towards the door as if she did not hear.

"Madelon."

She turned her white face slightly towards him and paused.

"Won't you come here to me a moment?"

"I cannot until I am driven to it!" she cried out, passion leaping
into her voice like fire. "I cannot go near you, Lot Gordon!"

She opened the door, and then she heard a sob. She hesitated a
second, then looked around; and Lot Gordon's thin body was curled
about in his chair and quivering with sobs like any child's.

Madelon closed the door, and went back and stood over him. She looked
at him with a curious expression of pity struggling with loathing, as
she might have looked at some wounded reptile.

"Well, I am here," she said, in a harsh voice.

"All my life my heart has had nothing, and now what it has it has
not," moaned Lot, as if it had been to his mother. He looked up at
her with his hollow blue eyes swimming in tears. He seemed for a
minute like a little ailing boy appealing for sympathy, and the
latent motherhood in the girl responded to that.

"You know I cannot help that, Lot," she said. "You know how you
forced me into this to save the one I do love."

"Oh, Madelon, can't you love me?"

She shrank away from him and shook her head, but still her dark eyes
were soft upon his face.

"Does not love for you count anything? I love you more than he--I do,
Madelon."

"It is no use talking, I can never love you, Lot," she said, but
gently.

"It ought to count. Love ought to count, dear. It is the best thing
in the world we have to give. And I have given it to you; oh, God,
how have I given it to you, Madelon!"

"Lot, don't--it's no use."

"Listen--you must listen, dear. You must hear it once. It can't turn
you more against me. You don't know how I have loved you--you don't
know. Listen. Never a morning have I waked but the knowledge of you
came before the consciousness of myself. Never a night I fell asleep
but 'twas you, you I lost last, and not myself. When I have been sick
the sting of my longing for you has dulled all my pain of body. If I
die I see not how that can die with me, for it is of my soul. I see
not why I must not bear it forever."

"Lot, I must go!"

"Listen, Madelon; you must listen. When I have taken my solitary
walks in the woods and pried into the secrets of the little wild
things that live there in order to turn my mind from my own musing, I
found always, always, that you were in them--I cannot tell you how,
but you were, Madelon. There was a meaning of you in every bird-call
and flutter of wings and race of wild four-footed things across the
open. Every white alder-bush in the spring raised you up anew before
me to madden me with vain longing, and every red sumach in the fall.
When I have sat here alone every book I have opened has had in it a
meaning of you which the writer knew not of. You are in all my
forethoughts and my memories and my imaginations. The future has your
face, and the past. My whole world is made up of you and my vain
hunger. Oh, love, and not toil, is the curse of man!"

"You knew about Burr," Madelon said, in a quiet, agitated voice.
"Why--did you?"

Lot gave a sharp cry, as if he had been wounded anew. "Oh," he cried,
"you are blind, blind, blind--a woman is born blind to love! If I had
had the face and the body of him it would have been me you would have
turned to, Madelon. Don't you know? can't you see? He has been false
to you, he cares no more for you. But if he had? In the end it is
love and love alone that sweetens life, and what could his love be to
mine?"

Madelon turned away again. "I can't stand here any longer, Lot," she
said, and moved towards the door.

But Lot called her piteously: "Madelon, come back! If you have any
mercy, come back!"

She stood irresolute, frowning; then she went back. "What is it?" she
asked, impatiently.

"Madelon, kiss me once."

"I can't--I can't! Don't ask that of me, Lot."

"Madelon, once!"

Madelon bent over him, keeping her body stiffly aloof, and kissed him
on his hollow forehead. Lot closed his eyes and smiled like a
contented child; then suddenly he opened them upon Madelon, and the
look in them was not a child's. She shrank away with a strong
shudder, flushing with anger and shame, and made resolutely for the
door again. She looked back and spoke out sharply to him, with her
hand on the latch: "Mind you do not say one word about--what I said
I'd do, until the last."  Then she went out, flinging to the door
quickly lest she hear Lot's voice again.

When she got home there was no one there. Eugene had not returned.
She went about preparing dinner as usual; it was on the table when
the men, all except Eugene, came home, and none of them dreamed she
had left the house. They inquired where Eugene was, and she replied
that she did not know. They did not suspect that she had taken
advantage of this lack of guardianship, and yet there was something
unwonted in her manner which led them to look at each other furtively
when they first noticed it. The perfect poise of decision at which
she had arrived affected their minds in some subtle fashion. Eugene,
when he returned late in the afternoon, noticed the change in her, in
spite of his own perturbation. He looked hard at her staid face,
fixed into a sort of unquestioning and dignified acquiescence with
misery, but he said nothing. Madelon, in this state, was not to be
questioned even by her father. He simply muttered to himself, as he
strode out of the room, that she was a woman.

Madelon's manner was the same as the days went on. There ceased to be
any question as to her sanity among her father and brothers. She no
longer paced overhead like a wild thing. She no longer made fierce
outbreaks of despairing appeal. They no longer kept watch over her
lest she commit some folly, and became easier in their minds about
her.

They made no objections when, three weeks later, she asked for the
sleigh and the roan to go to New Salem and make some purchases for
herself. She went early in the afternoon, and returned in good season
with her parcels. They did not dream that she had been in a strange
spirit of bitterness and shameful misery and feminine pride to
purchase her wedding-gown for her marriage with Lot Gordon.

Her frantic and unreasoning impulse of concealment was still strong.
It was almost as if the whole horror of it were not so plainly thrust
upon her if none but she knew it; then there was the agony of shame
which made her fain to turn her back and deafen her ears to her own
self, let alone all these others.

They rather wondered, the next morning, when they saw Madelon seated
at work upon some shining lengths of silk, at the magnificence of her
purchase in New Salem; but they knew that she had a little private
fund of her own, which they had never questioned her right to spend.

"Guess she's been saving her egg-and-butter money," Abner said, when
she went out for something.

His father nodded. "Glad she's got a new gown. Guess she'll show
folks she ain't quite done for on account of that fellow," he said.

When Madelon was seated at her work again, and he passed her to leave
the room, he laid a heavy, caressing hand on her black head. "Glad
ye've got ye a handsome gown," said he. "It's money well spent."

That day there was a great snow-storm--the last of the season. There
had been many such that winter. Snow fell upon snow, and the bare
ground was never seen. This time the storm lasted two days. On the
morning of the third the sun came out and the wind blew. There was a
northern gale all day. The new snow arose like a white spirit from
its downfall, and was again all abroad in the air. It moved across
the fields in great diamond-glittering shafts; it crested itself over
the brows of hills in flashing waves; it lengthened its sharp slants
of white light from hour to hour against the windward sides of the
fences and houses.

On the morning of the next day everything was still. The snow lay
transfixed in blue whirlpools around the trees; the fields were full
of frozen eddies, and the hill-tops curled with white wave-crests
which never broke. There was a dead calm, and the mercury was
fourteen degrees below zero. Everything seemed in the white region of
death after the delirium of storm. That morning Madelon Hautville,
after her household tasks were done, sat down again to sew her
wedding-dress. The silk was of changeable tints, and flashed in
patches of green and gold as it lay over her knee and swept around
her to the floor.

All the others had gone, but presently, as she sewed, Richard came in
with some parcels. He had been on an errand to the store. He tossed
the packages on the dresser, then he went and stood directly in front
of his sister, looking at her.

"I want to know if it's true," said he.

Then Madelon knew that he had heard. "Yes," said she.

"And that is--"  Richard pointed at the silk.

"Yes."

Richard continued to look at his sister and the gorgeous silk. There
was consternation in his look, and withal a certain relief. Boy as he
was, he reasoned it out astutely. If Madelon married Lot Gordon the
merest shadow of suspicion that her confession had been true would
not cling to her, and Richard hated Burr, and was fiercely triumphant
that he should not think his sister dying for love of him; and then
Burr would lose the Gordon money.

All at once Madelon rose up, let her silk breadths slip rustling to
the floor, and took Richard by the shoulder. "Richard," she said,
"why could you not have told the truth about the knife, and not
forced me to this? Why could you not?"

The boy looked aside from her doggedly. "I don't know what you mean
about a knife," said he, but his voice shook.

"Yes, you do know, Richard! It is all over now. I must marry Lot. I
have promised. I shall not try to escape it--I shall not try again to
make people believe it was I. If you were to tell the truth now it
would do no good. But you must tell me this, Richard. How came Burr
Gordon's knife there instead of yours?"

The boy hesitated.

"Richard, you know you can trust me."

"Well," said Richard, slowly, in a low voice, "I came right up behind
Burr before you were hardly out of sight. I'd got uneasy about your
going home alone, and I'd thought I'd follow you unbeknown to you,
and turn 'round and go back when you were safe in sight of home. Burr
pulled my knife out of the wound quick and wiped it on the snow.
'Take it quick,' says he, and I knew what he meant, and put it in my
pocket, and slid out of sight in the bushes; and then he whipped out
his knife and laid it in the pool of blood, and the others came up,
and 'twas all done in a second. That's how."

"He did it to save me," said Madelon, and her voice was fuller of
exultant sweetness than it had ever been in a song.

"He's a rascal, that's what he is!" said Richard. "If he hadn't
treated you so, it wouldn't ever have happened."

"He did it to save me," said Madelon, as if to herself; "it's worth
all I'm going to do to save him."  She sat down again, and took up
her wedding-dress, and resumed sewing. Richard stood looking at her a
minute; then he got his gun off the hooks where he kept it, put on
his fur cap, and went out.

Madelon sat and sewed, in a broad slant of wintry sunshine, for an
hour longer. Then a shadow passed suddenly athwart the floor, the
door opened, and Burr Gordon was in the room. He came straight across
to her, but she sat still and drew her needle through her
wedding-silk.

"Madelon!" he cried out, "is this true that I have just heard?
Madelon!"--Burr Gordon's handsome face was white as death, and he
breathed hard, as if he had been running--"Madelon! tell me, for
God's sake, is it--true?"

"Yes," said Madelon. She took another stitch. The self-restraint of
her New England mother was upon her then. Burr Gordon, betrothed to
Dorothy Fair, loving her not, yet still noble enough and kind enough
to have perilled his life to save hers, should know nothing of the
greater sacrifice she was making for him.

"You are going to marry--Lot?"

"Yes."

"Oh, my God!"

Burr Gordon stood a moment looking at the girl sewing the breadths of
shining silk. Then he went over to the settle and sat down there and
bent over, leaning his head on his hands. He knew no more at that
moment of Madelon's mind than an utter stranger.

It well might be, he thought, that she no longer cared for him. It
was not long since she had seemed to, but women, he had always heard,
were fickle, and he had so treated her that it might have turned any
woman's heart cold. And his cousin Lot had the family wealth, and if
she married him she would inherit it, and not he. What could he say
to her, sewing so calmly upon her wedding-dress, seemingly in utter
acquiescence and content with her fate? Could he take another step
without going deeper into the slough of shame and distress where it
seemed to him he already stood? And there was Dorothy.

Madelon never glanced at him as she sewed. Presently he arose and
went over to her again. "Madelon," he said, hesitatingly, coloring
red, "tell me you do not have any hard feelings towards me? I know I
deserve it."

"You deserve nothing; it is I," she said, in a low voice.

"_You!_"

"I know what you did to save my life," she said. Her voice gave out a
rich thrill, like a musical tone, as she spoke. She bent lower over
her work.

"That was nothing. Madelon"--he paused a moment; she was
silent--"Madelon, tell me. Are you--are you satisfied--with this step
you are going to take?"

"Yes."

"There is nothing I can do? You know I would do--anything to-- You
know if you wished--I would do whatever you said."

"You will marry Dorothy Fair," Madelon said, in such a tone of calm
assertion that he quailed before it.

"Then you--are satisfied to--marry Lot-- It is your wish?"

"Yes."

"Oh, my God!" said Burr, and went out, while Madelon took another
stitch in her wedding-gown.




Chapter XVII


However the tale of Madelon's and Lot's engagement had found
mouth--whether Margaret Bean had vented her knowledge when it grew
too big for her or not--it was scarce one day before the whole
village was agape with it. With that tendency of the human mind born
of involuntary self-knowledge which leads it to suspect a selfish
motive in all untoward actions, many gave unhesitatingly a reason for
Madelon's choice.

The women nodded astutely at each other, and the men exchanged shrewd
affirmative grunts. "She's goin' to marry Lot to pay off Burr," they
all agreed. "She'll get all the money."

Madelon herself had never thought of that. She had never considered
the fact that her marriage with Lot would rob Burr of his prospective
wealth; and, if she had, she would have dismissed the thought as of
no moment. Capacity for revenge of that sort was not in her; even the
imagination of it was lacking. She would simply have resolved to give
the property to Burr if she should outlive Lot, and she would have
carried out her resolution. Consciously, perhaps, this consideration
was no more evident to her father and her brothers than to herself.
The Hautvilles were not mercenary, and retaliation, involving
personal profit at the expense of an enemy, was not of their code.
They did have, however, a consideration no less selfish, in a way,
and no less acute when they heard the news. One and all thought, "Now
Madelon will be cleared of all suspicion that she may have brought
upon herself. Nobody will believe that Lot Gordon would marry a girl
who attempted his life. Every hint of disgrace will be removed from
her and us all by this marriage."

Louis, when he heard the news, gave an involuntary glance at his own
hands at the thought of Madelon's crimsoned ones, to which he had
tried to blind his memory. "Well, maybe it's the best thing that
could happen," he said, grimly, but his wonder over it was great. He
knew well enough, however he tried to hide the knowledge from
himself, that Madelon's story had been true. He looked at his brother
Richard, and Richard looked back at him; and one's knowledge for once
faced the other's boldly in their utter astonishment. Then they
nodded at each other in a stern understanding of assent. It was best
their sister should cover her crime and avert the disgrace, which she
had seemed to hang over all of them, in that way.

When the male Hautvilles came home to dinner, on the noon of the day
after Burr called, Madelon knew at once that they had all heard. They
sat down to the table and ate in silence. None of them spoke a word
to Madelon on the subject, but she knew they had heard. After dinner
they all went out again except her father. He stood on the hearth,
filling his pipe moodily, with an automatic motion of his fingers,
his eyes aloof. Madelon moved about with quick, decided motions,
clearing the dinner-table. David, when the tobacco was well packed in
his pipe-bowl, turned his eyes mechanically upon the glowing coals on
the hearth, but made no motion to light it. He looked slowly and
furtively about presently at Madelon's wedding-silk, which lay heaped
in a chair with a green and gold shimmer, as of leaves and flowers.
All unmoved by, and oblivious of, the splendor of woman's gear was
David Hautville usually, but this silk, radiant with the weaving of
party-lights, affected him with a memory of old happiness, so vague
that it was scarce more than a memory of a memory. In splendid silken
raiment had Madelon's mother gone as a bride years ago. It had been
in reality widely different from this gown of Madelon's, but still,
looking at this, David Hautville's masculine eyes saw dimly beyond it
another dapple of gorgeous tints, and heard a soft rustle of silken
skirts out of the past. He would not have said that this bright mass
of silk in the chair made him think of his wife's wedding-gown, but
he knew by that thought it was Madelon's. He stared at it, scowling
over his great mustache. Then he looked slowly around at his
daughter. She was just coming out of the pantry, and faced him as he
spoke.

"I suppose this is true I've heard," said he.

Madelon's face blazed red before his eyes, but her mouth was firm and
hard, and her eyes unflinching. "Yes, sir," she replied; and she took
a dish from the table and turned about, and went again into the
pantry, carrying it.

David Hautville, rearing his great height before the fire, casting a
long shadow over the room, stood, holding his unlighted pipe, and
staring again at the wedding-silk, until his daughter returned. Then
he brought his gaze to bear upon her again.

"I suppose you've thought over what you're going to do, and feel it's
for the best," said he, with a kind of stern embarrassment. David
Hautville felt no resentment because his daughter had not confided
her engagement to him. From his very lack of understanding of the
feminine character, and his bewilderment over it, he was disposed to
give his daughter a wide latitude in a matter of this kind. Not
comprehending the feminine gait to matrimony, but recognizing its
inevitability, he was inclined to stand silently out of the road,
unless his prejudices were too violently shocked. He had also a mild
respect for, and understanding of, reticence concerning one's own
affairs, and was, moreover, furtively satisfied with the match.

"Yes, I have," answered Madelon, calmly.

"How soon were you calculating--" asked her father, pressing the
tobacco harder into the pipe-bowl, and casting a meditative eye at
the coals.

"He said a month--that was three weeks ago Monday. To-day is
Wednesday."  Madelon Hautville spoke with her proud chin raised, and
her eyes as compelling as a queen's; but in spite of herself there
came into her voice the tone of one who counts the days to death.

Her father looked at her sharply. She turned again towards her task
at the table. "Well, Lot Gordon can give ye a good home," said he.
"His health ain't very good, that's the most I see about it. But he
may last a number of years yet--folks in consumption do sometimes;
and I hear he's gettin' over that cut he give himself. I suppose he
did that because he thought you wouldn't have him."

Madelon, moving about the table, did not say a word.

"It must have been that," said David Hautville. "I suppose he thought
you favored--" he was about to speak Burr's name; then he stopped
short. He was usually one to plunge upon dangerous ground, but this
time something stopped him--perhaps a look in his daughter's face. He
laid his pipe carefully on the mantel-shelf, went over to Madelon,
and laid a heavily tender hand on her shoulder.

"D'ye want any money to buy your wedding-fixings with?" he said, in a
half-whisper.

"I've got all I want," replied Madelon, wincing as if he had struck
her.

"Because I've sold some skins, lately, and wood."  David plunged a
hand into his pocket, and began to pull out a leather pouch jingling
with coins.

"I've got all the money I want, father," said Madelon, catching her
breath a little, but keeping her face steady. Could her father have
understood, if she had told him, the pretty maiden providence, almost
like one of the primal instincts, which had led her to save, year
after year, little sums from her small earnings, towards her
wedding-outfit? Could he, with his powerful masculine grasp of the
large woes of life, have sensed this lesser one, and fairly known the
piteous struggle it cost Madelon to spend her poor little wealth,
which was to have furnished adornment for her bridal happiness with
her lover, for such a purpose as this? Had she turned upon him then
and there, and told him that she hated Lot Gordon, and would rather
lie down in her grave than be his wife, he might have grasped that
indeed, although not in her full sense of it, for the same sense of
misery of that kind comes not to a man and a woman; but the other he
would have puzzled over and solved it by his one sweeping solution of
all feminine problems--by femininity itself.

However, he continued to stand beside his daughter, looking at her
across that great gulf of original conceptions of things which love
itself can never quite bridge. Tears came into his keen black eyes,
and his voice was hoarse when he spoke again. "Well, Madelon," said
David Hautville, with a firmer laying on of his heavy hand on his
daughter's shoulder, "ye've been a good daughter and sister, and
we're all of us glad you've got over this last foolishness, and we
don't lay it up against ye, and--we'll all miss ye when ye're gone."

Madelon moved quietly away from her father's roughly tender hand. "I
thought maybe the Widow Scoville would be willing to come here and
live," said she. "She's a good cook and a good housekeeper. I'm going
to see her about it."

"Well, we'll see," said David Hautville, huskily--"we'll see."  He
turned away, and looked irresolutely at the shelf whereon his pipe
lay, at the wedding-silk on the chair, at his great boots in the
corner at the outer door, then at his bass-viol leaning in the corner
which the dresser formed against the wall, and a light of decision
flashed into his eyes.

He drew his old arm-chair nearer the fire, carried the viol over to
it, set it between his knees, flung an arm around its neck and began
to play. His great chest heaved tenderly over it; its sweetly
sonorous voice spoke to his soul. Here was the friend who vexed David
Hautville with no problems of character or sex, but filled his simple
understanding without appeal. These chords in which the viol spoke
were from the foundations of things, like the spring-time and the
harvest and the frosts; they abided eternally through all the vain
speculations of life, and sounded above the grave. No imagination of
a great artist had David Hautville, but his music was to him like his
woodcraft. He traced out the chords and the harmonies with the same
fervor that he followed the course of a stream or climbed a
mountain-path. A great player was he, although the power of creation
was not in him, for he fingered his viol with the ardor of a soul set
in its favorite way of all others. As David Hautville played his
great resonant viol he forgot all about his own perplexity and his
daughter's love-troubles; but she, listening as she worked, did not
forget.

Madelon, swept around with these sweet waves of sounds, never once
had her memory of her own misery submerged. A strange double
consciousness she had, as she listened, of her senses and her soul.
All her nerves lapsed involuntarily into delight at the sounds they
loved, and all her soul wept above all melodies and harmonies in her
ears. The spirit of an artist had Madelon, and could, had she wished,
have made the songs she sung; and for that very reason music could
never carry her away from her own self.

She finished her household tasks and sat down again to sew upon her
wedding-gown. After a while her father ceased playing, and leaned his
viol tenderly back in its corner, pulled on his great boots, put on
his leather jacket and his fur cap, lighted his pipe, shouldered his
gun, and set out with his eyes full of the abstraction of one who
follows alone a different path.




Chapter XVIII


Then Madelon sat alone, sewing, setting nice stitches in her
green-and-gold silk. Like other women, heretofore when she had sewn a
new gown she had builded for herself air-castles of innocent vanity
and love when she should be dressed in it. Now she builded no more,
but sat and sewed among the ruins of all her happy maiden fancies.
She had given herself no care concerning any other arrangements for
her wedding than this gown--she felt even no curiosity concerning it.
She left all that to Lot, as a victim leaves the details of his death
to the executioner. She supposed he would send for her and tell her
before long. When she heard a scraping step at the door she knew
instinctively that the message had come.

Margaret Bean's husband's simple old face confronted her when she
opened the door. The weather was moderating fast that morning. The
sun had the warmth of spring, and the old man stood in a shower of
rainbow drops from the melting icicles on the eaves. He handed her a
letter, backed clumsily and apologetically from under the drops, then
retreated carefully down the slippery path, his clumsy old joints
jolting.

Madelon, back in the kitchen, stood for a second looking at the
letter. Then she opened it, and read the message written in Lot
Gordon's strange poetic style:

"Madelon,--The rose waits in the garden for her lover, because he has
wings and she has none. But had the rose wings and her lover none,
then would she leave her garden and fly to him with her honey in her
heart, for love must be found.

    "Lot Gordon."

Enough strength of New England blood Madelon had to feel towards Lot
a new impulse of scorn that he should write her thus, instead of
bidding her come, simply, like a man, displaying his power over her
that they both knew.

Small store of honey did she bear in her heart when she set out to
obey Lot's call. She hurried along, indeed, with her cloak flying out
at either side, like red wings in the south wind, but not from
eagerness to see her lover. She was in constant dread lest she meet
Burr on the road; but she gained Lot's house without seeing him or
knowing that his miserable, jealous eyes watched her from an opposite
window.

Burr was up in his chamber when Madelon went into his cousin's house.
Presently he went down-stairs, where his mother was, with a face so
full of the helpless appeal of agony that she looked at him as she
used to do when he came in hurt from play.

"What is the matter, Burr, are you sick?" she said, in her quiet
voice. She was sitting in a rocking-chair in the sun with her
knitting-work. She swayed on gently as she spoke, and her long,
delicate fingers still slipped the yarn over the needle.

"Yes, I am sick, mother; I am sick to death," Burr groaned out. Then
he went down on the floor at his mother's feet, and hid his face in
her lap, as he had used to do when he was a child in trouble. Mrs.
Gordon's stern repose of manner had never seemed to repel any
demonstration of her son's. Now she continued to knit above his head,
but he apparently felt no lack of sympathy in her.

She asked no more questions, but waited for him to speak. "She's just
gone in there," he half sobbed out, presently. "Oh, mother, what
shall I do--what shall I do?"

"You'll have to get used to it," said his mother. "You'll have to
make up your mind to it, Burr."

"Mother, I can't! Oh, God, I can't see her every day there with him.
Mother, we've got to sell out and move away. You'll be willing to,
won't you? Won't you, mother?"

"You forget Dorothy. She can't leave the town where her father is."

"I wish I could forget Dorothy in honor!" Burr cried out.

"You can't," said his mother, "and there's an end of it."

"I know it," said Burr. He got up and stood looking moodily out of
the window.

"You know," said his mother, still knitting, "how I have felt from
the very first about Madelon Hautville. I never approved of her for a
wife for you; I approve of her still less now, after her violent
conduct and her consent to marry Lot, whom she cannot care for.
Still, since you feel as you do about it, I should be glad to have
you marry her, if such a thing could be done with any show of honor;
but it cannot. You know that as well as I. You must marry Dorothy
Fair, and Madelon is going to marry Lot. Leaving everything else out
of the question, it is out of your power to say anything on account
of the money which you will lose by her marriage with him. You know
what she might think."

"Curse the money!" Burr cried out. "Curse the money and the position
and all the damned lot of bubbles that come between a man and what's
worth more, and will last!"

"Burr, don't talk so!"

"I can't help it, mother. I mean it. Curse it, I say, and the
infernal weakness that makes a man see double on women's faces when
there's only one woman in his heart! Mother, why didn't you know
about that last, so you could tell me when I was a boy?"

His mother colored a little. "I never taught you to be fickle," she
said, with a kind of shamed bewilderment.

"I never have been fickle. This is something else worse."  Burr
looked at his mother again, with the old expression of his when he
had come in hurt from play. No matter how long Burr Gordon might
live, no matter what brave deeds he might do--and there was brave
stuff in him, for he would have gone to the gallows rather than
betray Madelon--there would always be in him the appeal of a child to
the woman who loved him. "Mother, I don't know how to bear it," he
said.

"You must bear it like a man."

"It is hard to bear the consequence of unmanly conduct like a man,"
said Burr, shortly; then he went out, as if the old comfort from his
mother had failed him. As for her, she finished heeling her stocking,
and then went out into the kitchen and made a pudding that her son
loved for his dinner.

Burr went back up-stairs to his cold chamber, and watched for Madelon
to come out of Lot's house. It seemed to him she was there an
eternity, but in reality it was only a half-hour.

She had found Lot sitting as usual before the fire with a
leather-covered volume on his knees. "I have come," she said,
standing just inside the door; then she started at the look he gave
her. There was a significance in it which she could not understand.

He did not say a word for full five minutes while she waited. He did
not even ask her to be seated. "Do you know the date?" he asked then,
harshly. There was no hint of roses and honey in his speech and
manner to offend her like his letter.

"Yes, I do."

"You know the month is up on Monday?"

"I am not likely to forget."

"True," said Lot; "it is the last thing a girl will forget--the day
set for her happy marriage."  He laughed.

Madelon's face contracted. She set her mouth harder, and looked
straight at Lot. "When you have done laughing," said she, "will you
tell me what you want of me? I have to go home and get dinner."

Lot still looked at her with his mocking smile. "I wished to inquire
if you are ready to become my bride on Monday," said he.

"Yes, I am ready. Is that all?"

"I wished also to inquire if you have any plans concerning the
ceremony which you would like carried out."

"I have none."

"Then will it suit you to come here on Monday at two o'clock in the
afternoon, since the doctor tells me I shall scarcely be able to go
out myself, and be united to me by Parson Fair?"

"I am ready to carry out any plans you may make."

"Your father and your brothers and my cousin Burr and his mother
will, of course, be present at our wedding," said Lot, with wary eyes
upon her face.

Madelon looked at him as proudly as ever. "Very well," said she. She
waited a minute longer; then she laid her hand on the doorlatch.

"Wait a minute!" Lot cried. He looked at her hesitatingly. A flush
crept over his white face. "Madelon," he began; then his cough
interrupted him. He tried to force it back with fierce swallowings,
but had to yield. He bent over double, and shook with rattling
volleys. Madelon waited, her eyes averted, without a sign of pity.
The near approach of her wedding-day caused a revolt of her whole
maiden soul towards him so intense that it was as a contraction of
the muscles. She was utterly hard to his suffering. At last he raised
himself, panting, and cast a pale look around at her.

"Well, what do you want?" she said.

He motioned feebly towards is desk on the other side of the room.
"Top drawer," he whispered, hoarsely; "left-hand corner--find--leather
case--bring to me."

Madelon crossed the room to the desk, opened the drawer, found the
leather case, and carried it to Lot. "Here," said she.

"Open it," Lot whispered.

Madelon pressed the spring in the case, and held it out open towards
Lot without a glance at its contents.

"Look," he said.

Madelon glanced at the little gold watch, curled round with a long
gold chain, which the case contained, and continued to hold it out
towards Lot. "I've looked," said she. "Here, take it; I must go
home."

"Oh, Madelon, it's for you."

"I don't want it."

"Take it--Madelon, won't you have it? I got it for you."

"No, I don't want it. Shall I put it back in the drawer?"

"Don't you think it's a pretty watch?"

"Yes. Shall I put it back?"

"You haven't any watch, Madelon."

"I don't want one."  Madelon closed the case impatiently, and turned
away.

"Oh, Madelon, won't you take it?" Lot begged, piteously.

"I told you no--I do not care for it."  Madelon put the case back in
the desk drawer. Then she drew her cloak together, and went to the
door again.

"Oh," said Lot Gordon, weakly, in his hoarse voice, "the hardest
thing in the whole world for Love to bruise himself against is the
tender heart of a woman, when 'tis not inclined his way."

"Good-bye," said Madelon, and shut the door behind her fiercely. That
last speech of Lot's, which, like many of his speeches, seemed to her
no human vernacular, added terror to her aversion of him. "He's more
like a book than a man," she had often thought, and the fancy seized
her now that the great leather-bound book upon his knees, and all
those leather-bound books against his walls, had somehow possessed
him with an uncanny life of their own.

And she may have been in a measure right, for Lot Gordon, during his
whole life, had dealt indirectly with human hearts through their
translations in his beloved books rather than with the beating hearts
of men and women around him. Still, although he spoke like one who
learns a language from books instead of the familiar converse of
people, and his thoughts clothed themselves in images which those
about him disdained and threw off as impeding their hard race of
life, poor Lot Gordon's heart beat in time with the hearts of his
kind. But that Madelon could not know because hers was so set against
it.

She hurried out of the house and the yard, dreading again lest she
should encounter Burr. But her haste was of no avail, for he came
straight down his opposite terraces, and met her when she reached the
road.

She would have pushed past then, but he stood squarely before her.
"Madelon, can't I speak with you a minute?" he pleaded. Madelon saw,
without seeming to look, that Burr's handsome face was white as death
and haggard.

"Are you sick?" she asked, suddenly. "Why do you look so? What is the
matter with you?" and she put a half-bitter, half-anxiously
compassionate weight upon the _you_.

"I believe I am going mad," Burr groaned, with the quick grasp of a
man at the pity of the woman he loves. "Oh, Madelon!"  He held out
his hands towards her like a child, but she stood back from him, and
looked straight at him with sharp questioning in her eyes.

"Do you mean--" she began; then stopped, and questioned him with her
eyes again. She was seized with the belief, which filled her at once
with agony and an impulse of fierce protection like that of a mother
defending her young with her own wounded bosom, that Burr had had a
falling out with Dorothy.

"Oh, Madelon!" Burr said again, and then he could say no more for
very shame and honor. He had run out, indeed, in a half-frenzy.

"She _shall_ not play you false!" Madelon cried out. "Dorothy Fair
_shall_ keep her word with you."

Burr looked at her, bewildered.

"Marry her at once," Madelon cried, with a quick rush of her
words--"at once. Do you hear me, Burr Gordon? It's all the way to do
with a girl like that. Do you hear me?"

"Yes, I hear you," Burr said, slowly, as if he were stunned.

"Dorothy Fair _shall_ keep her promise to you--I will make her. She
shall marry you whenever you say. I will go this very day and see
her."

"There is no need for you to do that, Madelon. I will marry her at
once, as you advise. I think she will be willing," Burr said, slowly
and coldly. Then he left her without another word, and went up his
terraces with his back bent like an old man's. He was holding hard to
his heart the surety that Madelon no longer cared for him, for it is
scarcely within the imagination of either man or woman that one can
love and yet give away. But by the time he entered the house his
spirit had awakened within him, and he made a proud resolve that
since Madelon so advised and was herself to marry that he would marry
Dorothy Fair as soon as she should be willing.




Chapter XIX


As for Madelon, she went home with her mind diverted from her own
unhappiness by Burr's, and, in spite of his assurance, might have
gone to visit her righteous anger upon Dorothy had she not heard that
very night that Burr and Parson Fair's daughter were to be married in
a month's time.

The next day Lot sent again for her, and she obeyed, with her proud
sense of duty to her future husband, although every step she took
towards him carried her farther away. His conduct began to puzzle her
more than ever. Again he sent her to the desk drawer, and this time
for a roll of precious rose-colored satin stuff, fit for a queen's
gown; but she would have none of that either, although he pleaded
with her to take it. When she started to go away he called her back,
and called her back, and when she came had nothing to say, until she
lost patience and went home.

And the day after that he sent again, and there was a great carved
comb for her in the desk drawer, and some rose-colored satin shoes;
but she thrust them back indignantly. "Understand once for all, Lot
Gordon," said she, "you I will take, as I would take my death,
because I have pledged my word; but your presents I will not take."

"I have been buying them and treasuring them, against the time you
would have them, for years," pleaded Lot.

"I tell you I will not have them," said she.

That day, as the day before, he called her back again and again, and
looked at her as if he had something on his mind which he would and
could not say; and she went home at last resolved not to go again
until she was obliged to for the marriage ceremony.

The next day was Sunday, and Madelon went to meeting and sang, as
usual. Burr was not there, but pretty Dorothy was, and looked up at
Madelon with a kind of wondering alarm when she sang. Madelon had the
heart of one who sings her death-song, and there was something of it
in her face that morning. Unconsciously people looked past her, when
her voice rang out, to see some dead wall of horror at her back to
account for the strange tones in it and the look in her face. She had
never looked handsomer, however, than she did that day. Her cheeks
had the bloom of roses, and her black eyes seemed to give out their
own light, like stars.

She held up her head like a queen as she sang, and her wonderful
voice sounded through and beyond the viols and violins, and all the
other singing voices. The agony within her was great to penetrate the
consciousness of others through this fair triumphant mask.

Madelon looked better than her rival that morning. Dorothy sat, as
usual, daintily clad in her Sabbath silks and swan's-downs, with a
sweet atmosphere as of a flower around her; but her delicate color
had faded, and her blue eyes looked as if she had been weeping and
had not slept. She never glanced once at Eugene Hautville up in the
singing-seats; but sometimes he looked at her, and then her face
quivered under his eyes.

That noon Lot Gordon sent again for Madelon, but this time she
refused to go. "Tell him I am busy and can't come," she told Margaret
Bean's husband, who had brought the note. The old man went off,
muttering over her message to himself lest he forget it. She heard
him repeating it in a childish sing-song--"Tell him I'm busy and
can't come; tell him I'm busy and can't come"--as he went out of the
yard, slanting his old body before the south wind. The wind blew from
the south that day in great gusts as warm as summer; the air was full
of the sounds of running water, of sweet, interrupted tinkles and
sudden gurgles and steady outpourings as from a thousand pitchers.
The snow was going fast; here and there were bare patches that showed
a green shimmer across the wind. Sometimes spring comes with a rush
to New England on the 1st of April.

That afternoon Madelon went to meeting and sang again, and when she
got home Margaret Bean was waiting for her, sitting, a motionless,
swaddled figure, beside a window. The Hautvilles never locked their
doors while away from home, and she had walked in and waited at her
ease until Madelon should return.

Madelon came in alone; her father, Abner, and Eugene had stopped in
the barn to look after the roan, who had gone somewhat lame in one
foot, and Louis and Richard had lagged. Margaret Bean stood up when
Madelon entered.

"You'd better come over," said she.

"Didn't I tell your husband I couldn't?" returned Madelon, harshly.

"You'd better, I guess."

"I've got my father's and brothers' supper to get, and other things
to see to. Tell him he must leave me in peace to-day, or I'll never
come."  Madelon's voice rose high and strident. She unfastened her
cloak as if it choked her. Margaret looked at her, her small black
eyes peering out wrathfully from her swathing woollens. She was as
much wrapped up on this mild day as she had been when the cold was
intense. A certain dogged attitude towards the weather Margaret Bean
always took. On Thanksgiving Day she donned her winter garments; on
May Day she exchanged them for her summer ones, regardless of the
temperature. She never made any compromises or concessions. She
sweltered in her full regalia of wools on mild spring days; she
weathered the early November blasts in her straw bonnet and silk
shawl, without an extra kerchief around her stiff old neck. To-day
she would not loosen her wraps as she sat waiting for Madelon in the
warm room, but remained all securely pinned and tied as when she
entered.

However, her discomfort, although she would not yield to it, aroused
her temper. "You'd better come," said she, "or you'll be sorry."

Madelon made no reply.

"He's sick," said Margaret Bean; "he's took considerable worse."  She
nodded her head angrily at Madelon.

"Is his cough worse?"

"He can scarcely sit up," said Margaret Bean, with severe emphasis.
She rose up stiffly, as if she had but one joint, so girt about was
she. "If a woman's going to marry a man, I calculate it's her place
to go to him when he's sick and wants her," she added.

"Is his cough worse?"

"Ain't his cough bad all the time? Well, I'm going. If folks 'ain't
got any feelings, they 'ain't. I've got to make some porridge for
him."

Madelon opened the door for her. "I'll come over after supper," said
she; "you can tell him so."

After supper Madelon went over to Lot's in the early twilight. The
tinkles and gurgles and plashes of water came mysteriously from all
sides through the dusk. The hill-sides were flowing with shallow
cascades, and the woods were threaded with brooks. The wind blew
strongly as ever from the south; it had lost the warmth of the sun,
but was still soft. The earth was full of a strange commotion and
stir--of disorder changing into order, as if creation had come again.
It might have been the very birthnight of the spring. Madelon, as she
hurried along, felt that memory of old, joyous anticipation which
enhances melancholy when the chance of realization is over. The
spring might come, radiant as ever, with its fulfilment of love for
flowers and birds and all living things, but the spring would never
come in its full meaning, with its old prophecies, for her again.

Just before she reached Lot's home, Burr passed her swiftly with a
muttered "good-evening."  He was on his way to Dorothy Fair's.

"Good-evening," Madelon returned, quite clearly.

She found Lot sitting up, but she could see that he looked worse than
usual. He was paler, and there was an odd, nervous contraction about
his whole face, as if a frown of anxiety and perplexity had extended.

He held out his hand, but she took no notice of it.

"I have come," said she; "what is it?"

"Won't you shake hands, Madelon?"

Madelon held out her hand, with her face averted, but Lot did not
take it, after all.

"My hand is too cold," he muttered; "never mind--"  He continued to
look at her, and the anxious lines on his face deepened.

"Are you feeling worse than usual?" Madelon asked; and a little
kindness came into her voice, for Lot Gordon looked again like a sick
child who had lost his way in the world.

Lot shook his head, with his wistful eyes still upon her face. A
little light-stand, with his medicines and a candle, stood on his
left. Presently he reached out and took a little box from off it, and
extended it to Madelon. She shrank back.

"Take it, Madelon."

"No, I don't want it."

"Oh, Madelon, take it and open it at least, and let me see you."

Madelon took the box, with an impatient gesture, and opened it, and a
ring set with a great pearl gleamed on its red velvet cushion. She
closed the box and held it out towards Lot. "I want no presents,
Lot," she said, but almost gently.

"Oh, Madelon, keep it!"

She reached across him, and laid the little box back on the table.

"There's another ring I've got for you you'll have to wear, Madelon."

"I will wear what I must, for the sake of my promise, when the time
comes, but that is all I will do," returned Madelon; and she seemed
to feel, as she spoke, the wedding-ring close around her finger like
a snake.

"Can nothing I can give you please you, Madelon?"

"No, Lot," she said, but not ungently. She began to move away.

"Madelon," said Lot.

"Well?"  Madelon waited, but Lot said not another word. She went on
towards the door.

"Madelon," he whispered, and she stopped again; but this time also
there was a long silence, which he did not break.

Madelon opened the door, and his piteous cry came for the third time,
and she waited on the threshold; but again he said nothing more.

"Good-night," said she, shortly, and was out, and the door shut. Then
she heard a cry from him, as if he were dying. "Madelon, Madelon!"

She opened the door with a jerk, and went back. "Lot," said she,
sternly, "this is the last time I will come back. Once for all, what
is it you want of me?"

Lot looked up at her, his face working. He strove to speak and could
not. He strove again, and his voice was weak and gasping as if the
breath of life had almost left him. "We--had better not be
married--to-morrow," he said, with his piteous eyes upon Madelon's
face.

She started, and stared at him as if she feared she did not hear
rightly.

"I--have been--thinking it over," Lot went on, panting; "I am not as
well--we had better wait--until--May. My cough--the doctor--we will
wait--Madelon!"  Lot's broken speech ended in a pitiful cry of her
name.

"Why do you do this?" she asked, looking at him with her white, stern
face, through which an expression of joy, which she tried to keep
back, was struggling.

"I am not as well, Madelon," Lot answered, with sudden readiness and
sad dignity. "If you do not object to the change of time we had best
defer it."

Madelon looked away. "There is no need of any pretence between us,"
she said; "I am sorry you are not as well."

"But not sorry that our wedded bliss must be deferred?"

"No," said she. Then she went away, and that time Lot did not call
her back. She heard him coughing hard as she went through the entry.

When she came out of the house into the tumultuous darkness of the
spring night, and went down the road with the south wind smiting her
with broadsides of soft air, and the living sounds of water ahead and
on either hand of her, she was happy--in spite of Burr, in spite of
everything--with the happiness of one to whom is granted a respite
from death.




Chapter XX


When the mind has been strained up and held to the furthering of some
painful end and then suddenly released, it sinks back for a time,
alive to nothing but the consciousness of freedom and rest. Even the
thought for the future, which is its one weapon against fate, is laid
down. Madelon, for a few days after the postponement of her marriage,
went about in a kind of negative happiness. There are few who have so
much to bear that there is not left to them at least the joy of
escape from another trial. Madelon had lost her lover indeed, but she
was let loose for a while from a worse trouble than that.

When Madelon entered the house that Sunday night her face was so
changed that it held her father's and her brothers' casual glances.
Her cheeks were brilliant with the damp wind, her eyes gleaming, her
mouth half smiling as she looked around. For the first time for weeks
it seemed to Madelon that she had really come home, and the old
familiar place did not look strange to her with the threatening light
of her own future over it. She tossed off her hood and her red cloak,
and proposed with her old manner that they have some music.

The men looked at her and each other. "She's a woman," old David
muttered under his mustache, and got his viol.

Soon the grand chorus began, and Madelon sang and sang, with all her
old fervor. The brothers kept glancing at her, half uneasily, but
David wooed his viol as if it were his one love in the world, and
paid no attention to aught besides.

The concert lasted late that night. It was midnight before they
stopped singing and put their stringed instruments away.

Then Madelon turned to them all. "I am not going to be married
to-morrow," she said, and her face flushed red. "I had better tell
you. I am not going to be married for a month."  She strove to
control her voice, but in spite of herself it rang exultantly at the
last.

Louis and Richard exchanged one look with a sudden turn of white
faces. David stared hard and perplexedly at his daughter. "What's
that ye say?" he asked, after a second's pause.

"I am not going to be married for another month."

"Why not?"

"Lot isn't as well as he was."

"What's the matter? That cut he got?"

"No, I guess not. I think it's his cough."  Madelon paled and
shivered, and turned away as she spoke, for the horror of her deed
and the forced pity came over her again.

Her father caught her by the arm as she would have gone out of the
room.

"Look ye here," he said, "is this the whole truth of it? We've got a
right to know. Be ye going to marry him in a month's time?"

Madelon looked at him proudly. "I am going to marry him in a month's
time, and I am not afraid to face all the truth in the world. Let me
go, father."

When she was gone the father and sons stood staring at one another.
There was on all their faces an under meaning to which not one would
give tongue.

Richard jostled Louis's shoulder. "Suppose--" he whispered, looking
at him with dismayed and suspicious eyes.

"Hush up!" returned Louis, roughly, and swung across to the shelf for
his candle.

"If I thought--" began David, with force; then stopped, shaking his
old head. The male Hautvilles went out, one after the other, their
candles flaring up in their grimly silent faces. They were capable of
concerted action without speech, and had evolved one purpose of going
to bed with no more parley about Lot Gordon and Madelon that night.
Brave as these men were, not one of them dared set foot squarely upon
the dangerous ground which two of them knew, and three suspected, and
look another in the face with the consciousness of his whereabouts in
his eyes.

Truly afraid were they all, with that subtle cowardice which lurks
sometimes in the bravest souls, of one another's knowledge and
suspicions, as they filed up the creaking wooden stairs.

Richard looked at Louis in a terrified sidelong way when they were
safe in their room with the door shut. "Hush up!" Louis whispered
again, roughly, as if Richard had spoken. The two brothers were not
to sleep much that night, each being tormented by anxiety lest Lot
Gordon had resolved to stand by their sister no longer, and let
disgrace fall upon her head; but neither would speak.

The candles flashed athwart the dark window-spaces of the Hautville
chambers, and one by one went out. The house was dark and still, with
all the sweet voices and stringed instruments at rest. Yet so full of
sonorous harmony had it been not long since that one might well fancy
that it would still, to an attentive ear, reverberate with sweet
sounds in all its hollows, like a shell.

Madelon slept soundly that night, and when she woke on the morning of
what was to have been her wedding-day felt as if she had a glimpse of
her own self again, after a long dream in which she had been changed
and lost. Richard went early to tell the woman who had been engaged
to do the housework that she need not come for a month. After
breakfast her father and brothers all went away, and she was alone in
the house. She went about her work singing for the first time for
weeks. She raised her voice high in a gay ditty which was then in
vogue, entitled "The Knight Errant":

  "It was Dennis the young and brave
    Was bound for Palestine;
  But first he made his orisons
    Before Saint Mary's shrine.

  "'And grant, immortal Queen of Heaven,'
    Was still the soldier's prayer,
  'That I may prove the bravest knight
    And love the fairest fair.'"

So sang Madelon, loud and sweet, as she tidied the kitchen. There
were four verses, and she was on the last when the door opened
stealthily and her granduncle, old Luke Basset, entered. Her back was
towards him, and she did not see or hear him.

He waited, his old face fixed in a sly grin, standing unsteadily on
his shaking old legs, and holding to the back of a chair for support,
until Madelon sang at the close of the song,

  "And honored be the bravest brave,
    Beloved the fairest fair,"

and stopped. Then he spoke. "'Tain't so, then, I s'pose," said he,
and his voice seemed to crack with sly suggestiveness.

Madelon faced around on him. "What isn't so?" she asked, coldly. "I
didn't hear you come in."

Old Luke Basset shuffled stiffly to the hearth and settled into
David's chair. "Well," said he, "I heerd in the store just now that
your weddin' was put off, but I s'pose it ain't so, 'cause you seem
to be in sech good sperits. A gal wouldn't be singin' if her weddin'
was put off."

"Look here, Uncle Luke," said Madelon.

"Well?"

"My wedding is put off for a month; now that settles it. I don't want
to say another word about it."  Madelon went into the pantry.

Luke sent his old voice, shrill and penetrating as a baby's, after
her. "They say 'tain't luck to have a weddin' put off. 'Ain't ye
afeard he'll give ye the slip?"

Madelon made no reply. There was a rattle of dishes in the pantry.

Old Luke waited a moment; then raised his shrill, infantile voice
again. "If this feller gives ye the slip, ye can jest hang up yer
fiddle; ye won't git t'other one back. Parson Fair's gal's got 'nough
fine feathers comin' from Boston to fit out the Queen of England,
they say."

Madelon said nothing.

"D'ye hear?" called old Luke; but he got no reply. "Dexter Beers says
a hull passel of stuff come up from Boston on the stage yesterday.
Saturday," persisted old Luke, "Mis' Beers she see an eend of blue
satin a-stickin' out of one of the bundles."

Old Luke waited again, with sharp eyes on the pantry. He could see
therein a fold of Madelon's indigo-blue petticoat, and could hear the
click of a spoon against a dish; that was all.

Old Luke tried his last prod of aggravation. "Folks air sayin' down
to the store that mebbe there was some truth, arter all, in what you
said 'bout the stabbin', an' mebbe that's the reason Lot is a puttin'
off the weddin'," piped old Luke. He chuckled slyly to himself, but
sobered suddenly, and cowered in his chair before Madelon.

She came out of the pantry with a rush, and stood before him, her
eyes blazing. "There _was_ truth in what I said, after all!" she
cried. "The truth's the truth, whether there's folks to believe it or
not, and I spoke it, and you can tell them so at the store."

Old Luke shrank before her. His old body seemed to cease to shape his
clothes. He looked up at her with scared eyes.

"And the reason I have told for the wedding being postponed is the
truth, too," continued Madelon. "I did stab Lot Gordon, and he knows
I did, though he won't own it, and he's bound to stab me back my
whole life. And we shall be married in a month fast enough--you
needn't worry, Uncle Luke Basset."

Madelon stood over the old man a minute, quivering with impatience
and utterly reckless anger and scorn, and he shrank before her with
scared eyes, and yet a lurking of his malicious grin about his mouth.
Then she made a contemptuous gesture, as if she would brush him out
of her consciousness altogether, and went away out of the room
without another word, and left him alone.

He turned his head slowly and looked cautiously around after the door
was closed. He heard Madelon's quick tread up the stairs. "Gorry!"
muttered old Luke under his breath, and scowled reflectively over his
foxy eyes. Quite convinced in his own mind was old Luke Basset that
his grandniece had spoken the truth, and had wounded Lot Gordon
almost to death, and quite resolute was he also that he would, since
she was his own kin, contend against the carping tongues of the
village gossips with all the cunning in him.

Old Luke waited for some time. Then he got up stiffly and shuffled
out on his tottering legs, scraping his feet for purchase on the
floor, like some old claw-footed animal.

Out in the entry he paused a moment, with his head cocked shrewdly
and warily towards the stairs. "Hey!" he called, but got no response.
He opened the outer door, and, all ready to be gone should his niece
appear, he called shrilly up the stairs, "Hey, Mad'lon--forgot to
tell ye. Mis' Beers she said she see a bandbox 'mongst them things
that come for the parson's gal; said 'twas most big 'nough to hold
the bride, and she guessed 'twas the weddin'-bunnit."

Not a sound from above heard old Luke, and presently he gave it up
and went out and down the road to the village, with occasional
glances of a crafty old eye over his shoulder at Madelon's chamber
window. Madelon had heard every word. She was folding up her own
wedding-silk and putting it away in the cedar chest until she should
want it. She put away her wedding-bonnet also, with its cream-colored
plumes and its linings and strings of yellow satin, in the bandbox.

She set her mouth hard, and coupled bitterly her own poor
wedding-finery with Dorothy Fair's grand outfit; and yet not for the
reason that her Uncle Luke had striven to give her, for she would
have held an old ragged blanket of one of her Indian grandmothers
like the bridal gown of a queen had Burr been her bridegroom.

Madelon heard the door shut, and knew her tormentor was gone; and
after her fine attire was packed away she went down-stairs and about
her tasks again. But she sang no more. The certainty of the future
overcame her like the present, and her short-lived joy or respite was
all gone. When her father and brothers came home at noon they found
the old stern quiet in her face, and their suspicions that there had
been a rupture with Lot ceased. They were relieved, but the boy
Richard eyed her with furtive pity. That night he lingered behind the
others when they dispersed for the night, and went up to Madelon and
threw an arm around her, and laid his cheek against hers. "Oh,
Madelon, I wish--" he began, and then he caught his breath, and his
cheek against hers was wet, and Madelon turned and comforted him, as
a woman will turn and comfort a man for even his pity for her sorrow.

"There is no need for you to fret," she said, with a sort of gentle
authority, as if she had been his mother. "I've got my life to live,
and I've got strength enough to live it. I shall do well enough."

Then she put him away from her softly, and went about setting bread
to rise. But he followed beseechingly at her heels, with a little
parcel which he had been hiding in a corner of the dresser. "I bought
these for you, with some of my trap money, for a little present," the
boy whispered, piteously; and Madelon smiled at him and took the
parcel and opened it, and found therein a pair of fine red-satin
shoes. Then he brightened at the delight which she showed, and went
up-stairs to bed, feeling that after all it would be no such hard
task for his sister to marry Lot Gordon, and cover her fault of mad
temper and her disgrace. "He likes her so much he will treat her
kindly, and she will have a fine house, and plenty of silk gowns, and
feathers in her bonnets," reflected Richard, comfortably, with no
more consciousness of his sister's outlook upon life than if his eyes
were turned towards a scene in another world. Still he loved his
sister with all his heart, although he never in his life had seen
anything just as she saw it. He did not dream that Madelon's calm
broke before his red-satin shoes, and that she was sitting alone
before the kitchen fire with them in her lap, weeping bitterly. She
was made of stern stuff to endure the worst of things; but, after
all, the pitiful little accessories of grief and death are harder to
bear without weakening, because all one's powers of defence are not
enlisted against them. They are sometimes the scouts that kill.

Poor Madelon looked at her brother's wedding-gift, the little
red-satin shoes, in which she could never walk or dance with a merry
heart, and her courage almost failed her. But it was only for a
little while. She rose up and finished setting the bread to rise, and
then she went to her chamber and packed away the shoes with the other
things in the cedar chest.

Through the days that came now Madelon toiled as she had never toiled
before, although she had always been an industrious girl. She had her
own linen-chest, which she would take with her when she married, and
now she bestirred herself to replenish the stores of the house she
would leave, for the comfort of her father and brothers. Long before
dawn the gentle hum of her spinning-wheel began, although the days
were lengthening, and many a time she sat plying it on her solitary
hearth until after midnight. She spent days at the great loom in the
north chamber, marching back and forth before it, a straight,
resolute figure of industry filling human needs, although with sweat
of the brow and heart's blood. No happier was she for her hard toil,
but it kept at least the spirit of fierce endurance alive within her,
for no one succumbs entirely to misery with unfolded hands. Then,
too, she was upheld somewhat by her pride in right-doing and
providing for the interests of her family. Enough of the New England
conscience she had to give her a certain comfort in holding herself
to duty, like a knife to a grindstone.

The third week of April had begun when one morning Dorothy Fair came
to the door. Madelon was out in the field beside the house, laying
some lengths of cloth on the green sunny levels to whiten. The grass
had turned quite green in places, and the sun was hot as midsummer.
The buds on the trees opened before one's eyes, as if unfolded by
warm fingers. People walked languidly, for the humid heat served to
force nothing to life in them but dreams; but the birds lived on
their wings and called out of all the distances.

Madelon, standing up from spreading her linen, caught sight of the
swing of a blue petticoat, like the swing of a blue flower, beside
the house door, and went towards it directly.

But when she reached the house the blue-clad visitor had disappeared
within. Madelon entered and found Dorothy Fair in the north parlor.
Eugene had been sitting in there with his Shakespeare book, and he
had opened the door, bowing and wishing her good-day, with his
courtly grace of manner, although his handsome face was pale.

Dorothy was pale, also, under her blue-ribboned bonnet. She
courtesied on trembling knees, and spoke like a scared child, in
spite of her training and genteel deportment. "Can I see your
sister?" she said, in a half-whisper, and she did not raise her blue
eyes to Eugene's face.

Eugene looked past her. "I see her coming now across the field," he
said; "she has seen you and will be here presently."

Then he bade her enter, and made way for her, like a courtier for a
princess, and seated her in the north parlor in the best
rocking-chair, as if it were a throne. Then he sat down opposite her,
with his Shakespeare book still on his knees. That morning he had
been poring over "Romeo and Juliet."  His imagination was afire with
the sweet ardor of that other lover, and he would gladly have
identified Dorothy, as she sat there, with Juliet; and so he adored
her doubly.

Yet he saw only the tip of her little shoe below the blue hem of her
gown, and dared not fairly glance at her face, although he bore
himself with such calm ease that none could have suspected.

"It is a beautiful day," said Eugene.

"Yes," whispered Dorothy. Somehow for the moment Eugene forgot
Dorothy's marriage, and Burr and his bitter jealousy, for suddenly a
strange and unwarrantable sense of possession came over him. He
looked fully at Dorothy, and scanned her drooping face, and smiled,
and then Madelon came in.

Dorothy arose at once and greeted her with more of her usual manner.
Then she fumbled uneasily with a little parcel she held, and glanced
at Eugene, and then at Madelon. "I had an errand--" began Dorothy and
stopped, and then Eugene said softly, still smiling, "I see you have
some weighty matter to discuss," and bowed himself out with his
Shakespeare book.

Then Dorothy, all trembling, and before he was fairly out of hearing
across the entry in the other room, announced her errand. She had
come to beg Madelon, whose rare skill in embroidering her own floral
designs was celebrated in the village, to work for her the front
breadth of one of her silken gowns with a garland of red roses. "I
can work only from patterns which are marked out," said Dorothy; and
then she held up a shining length of green silk upon which the
garland already bloomed in her pretty feminine fancy. "I will pay you
whatever you ask," said Dorothy, further. Then she started and
shrank, for Madelon looked at her with such wrath and pride in her
black eyes that she was frightened.

"What--have--I--done?" she faltered, piteously. And it was quite true
that she did not know what she had done, for she reasoned always like
a child, with premises of acts only and not of motives. She
considered simply that Madelon had urged her to be true to Burr, and
was herself to marry another man, and therefore could not be jealous,
and that she wanted her gown embroidered.

Dorothy was not happy, and a nervous terror was always upon her which
had caused her blue eyes to look out wistfully from delicate hollows
and faded the soft pink on her cheeks; still she kept involuntarily
to her feminine ways, and wanted her gowns embroidered.

"I want no pay!" Madelon cried, hoarsely.

"I meant no harm," Dorothy faltered, again. She remembered that
Madelon Hautville had on divers occasions, for prospective brides,
turned her marvellous skill in embroidery to financial profit, but
she dared not say so for an excuse. "I could not do it myself,"
Dorothy said, further, trembling in every limb, "and--I thought
maybe--you--"

Suddenly Madelon extended her hand. "Give me this silk," she said; "I
will work the flowers on it for you, but never dare to speak to me of
pay, Dorothy Fair."

Dorothy looked at her, made a motion as to give her the silk, then
drew it back again.

"Give me the silk," said Madelon. Dorothy yielded up the silk
hesitatingly, with a scared and apologetic murmur. Then she screamed
faintly, for Eugene Hautville strode back into the room with a look
on his face which she had never seen before. He snatched the silk out
of Madelon's hand and thrust it roughly into Dorothy's.

"Take it home," he said. "My sister does no work on your
wedding-clothes!"

Dorothy gasped and looked at him with wild terror in her blue eyes,
and then he caught her in his arms, pressed her yellow head against
his breast, and stroked it softly. "Don't be afraid," he said--and
his voice had its wonderful gentle charm again. "Don't be afraid,
dear child! I could not harm you if I tried--not a hard word shall be
said to you, sweet!"

"_Eugene!_" cried Madelon, and her voice seemed to carry wrath like a
trumpet. She laid hold of his shoulders, and forced him back, and
Dorothy slipped out of his arms and stood aside, trembling and
weeping, with a little worked apron which she wore thrown over her
face. "Let me be!" Eugene cried, angrily, and would have gone to
Dorothy again to comfort her, but Madelon in her wrath was as strong
as he, and she thrust herself between them.

"You are no brother of mine, Eugene Hautville," she said, her face
all white and fierce with anger. "You dare to touch her again, and
you will find out that I can fight to keep her from you as well as
Burr could if he were here. You _dare_ to touch her again!"  Then she
turned to Dorothy. "Give me the silk," she said, in a hard voice. In
her heart she blamed her more than her brother, although
unnecessarily.

Dorothy shrank back. "No," she said, feebly, "I had better not."

"Give me the silk!"

Dorothy gave her the silk. Eugene stood apart. He possessed his fine
pride and graceful self-poise again, and though his blood boiled he
would not, being a man, wrestle with his sister for another man's
bride.

Dorothy moved towards the door, her fair curls drooping over her
agitated face. Eugene made a motion in her direction, and when
Madelon would have thrust him back again, he only said, with a
half-smile, "I would crave the lady's pardon; you would not prevent
that."  And then he bowed low before Dorothy Fair, and besought her
to pardon, if she could, his unseemly conduct, and believe that it
had for motive only the highest respect and esteem for her.

And Dorothy swept her curls farther over her face, and could not make
the dignified response of offended maidenhood that she should, but
courtesied tremblingly and fairly fled out of the house.

Eugene, with his Shakespeare book under his arm, went also out of the
house and over across the field, to a piney wood he loved, where all
the trees, even in this warm flush of spring, whispered eternally of
winter and the north, and there he stretched himself out beneath a
tree, as melancholy as Jacques in the forest of Arden. Now that he
had got the better of his impulse of mad passion and jealousy, he was
ashamed, and stayed late in the wood, for he did not like to meet his
sister's rightly scornful face.

When he went at last late for his supper, Madelon, as he expected,
noticed him only by an angry flash of her black eyes, under drooping
lids. She said not one word to him, and as the days went on treated
him coldly; and yet she did not give to the matter its full
seriousness of meaning.

Madelon, well acquainted with Eugene's caressing manner, thought
simply that, seeing poor Dorothy's alarm, he had striven to soothe
her with endearments and assurance that he would not hurt her, as he
would have done with a child. As for Dorothy, Madelon credited her
with the soft spirit which she knew she possessed. She scorned them
both, and felt as jealous for Burr's sake as he himself could have
done, that other hands than his had touched his bride's; and yet she
did not dream of the full significance of it all.

She wrought a marvellous garland of red roses on Dorothy Fair's green
silk, and scarcely left herself time to sleep that she might complete
that and her stint of household linen. She had nothing to add to her
own wedding-garments.




Chapter XXI


The weeks went past, and the Sunday before the day set for her
wedding came again. She had seen Lot but three times in the interval.
He had sent for her, and she had gone obediently, and remained a
short time, pleading her work as an excuse to return home. Lot had
not sought to detain her; he had vexed her with no vain appeals, but
treated her with a sort of sad deference which would have perplexed
her had she cared enough for him to dwell upon it.

Lot was said to be in no better health. He did not stir abroad on
those warm spring days. Once he had put on his great-coat, and was
for setting foot on the springing grass in the sunny yard, but
Margaret Bean had remarked to him how she had heard, whilst
purchasing a bit of cheese in the store, a man say that he guessed
Lot Gordon wasn't much worse, only afraid of a wife that could use a
knife. Margaret Bean had shaken in her starched petticoats as she
said it, not knowing how the news might affect her master towards the
monger of it; but she was disposed to risk a little rather than have
a mistress over her.

Lot said nothing in response about the matter, but pulled off his
great-coat and sank into his chair with a fit of coughing, and
declared he felt not well enough to go out that day.

That last Sunday Madelon went to him without being summoned, in the
early evening after supper. On her last visit, the week before, he
had asked her, and she had promised to come.

The frogs were calling across the meadows as she went along; there
was a young moon shining with frequent silvery glances through the
budding trees, which tossed athwart it like foam, and the mists
curled along the horizon distances. Madelon, moving along, was as the
ghost of one who had belonged to the spring, as a part of its radiant
hope and stir of life and youth in days past, but was now done with
it forever. The spring sounds and sights, and all its sweet
influence, seemed to tear her heart anew with memories of the visions
of fair futures which she had forfeited. The loss of the sweet dreams
which the spring awakens in the human heart is not one of the least
losses of life. Though the spring be unfulfilled, it sweetens the
year.

Just before Madelon reached Lot Gordon's house, she met Burr going to
court Dorothy. They were to be married in two weeks more. Madelon and
Burr exchanged a murmur of salutations and passed each other.

Madelon went directly into Lot's house, to his sitting-room, as she
was used to do lately, and found Lot standing in the midst of the
room, waiting for her, with a lighted candle in his hand.

"I heard your footstep when you came through that open space, where
the road has a hollow echo," he said; "and I have been waiting for
you ever since."

"You could not hear me; it is a half-mile away," said Madelon.

"A half-mile! what's a hundred miles when 'tis the heart that
listens, and not the ears? Come; I have something I want to show
you."

Lot led the way and Madelon followed out of the room across the front
entry, with its spiral of stair mounting its landscape-papered
height, and Lot opened the door of the opposite room, the great north
parlor. "Wait here a minute," he said to Madelon, and she waited in
the entry after he entered until he called her to follow.

Lot had lighted every candle in the great branching candelabra upon
the shelf, and the room was full of light. Madelon looked about her,
and even her despairing calm was stirred a little. Never had she seen
or dreamed of a room like this. She grasped no details; her
bewildered eyes saw them all melting into each other, combining newly
and vanishing like kaleidoscopic pictures--folds and gleaming
stretches of crimson damask and velvet, the dark polish of precious
woods, spots and arabesques of gold and the satin shimmer of
wall-paper, lights and shades of steel engravings, and elegant and
graceful lady-treasures of gilded books and work-boxes and vases on
shelf and tables. There was even a little piano, the only one in the
village, with slender, fluted legs, and a mother-of-pearl garland
over the key-board.

"I have had this all newly furnished for you. I hope it may please
you," said Lot; and he looked at Madelon with hollow, wistful eyes.

That brought her to herself. "It is very pretty," she replied, and
turned away.

Lot sighed. "Well, I have something more to show you," said he, and
went forlornly before her, stooping weakly and coughing now and then,
into the great middle room of the house, which was fitted up with
carven oak which Governor Winthrop might have used. Here, too, Lot
lighted all the branches of the candelabra on the shelf; and the
great buffet directly responded with the dazzling white glitter of
silver from the cream-jugs and ewers and spoons thereon.

Then Lot threw open the fine carved doors of the cupboard, and the
shelves were covered with precious blue china, brought from over
seas, and wine-glasses like bubbles of crystal, and decanters as
graceful as plumes.

"Do you like it, Madelon?" Lot asked; and Madelon replied, as before,
that it was pretty.

Lot showed Madelon all the wealth of his house before they returned
to the sitting-room. Much had been there from his father's day, but
much had been added to please this bride, who looked at it more
coldly and with less part in it than she would have looked at the
treasures in a merchant's windows. She saw, unmoved by any pride of
possession, great canopied bedsteads, and chests of drawers whose
carven tops reached the ceiling, and mirrors in gilded frames. She
saw marvellous stores of linen damask napery in such delicate and
graceful designs, from foreign looms, as she had never dreamed. She
saw an India shawl, and lengths of silk and satin and velvet, and
turned away from it all to the obstinate contemplation and endurance
of her own misery.

At last Lot led the way back to the sitting-room. He set the candle
on the shelf, and gave a strange, beseeching glance around the room
at his books. It was as if he besought, with the irrationality of
grief, those only friends he fairly knew for help and sympathy.

Then he turned to Madelon and laid a hand on each of her shoulders,
and looked at her. "No, there is no need now," he said, when she
would have shrunk away from him; and something in his voice hushed
her, and she stood still.

"Madelon," said Lot Gordon, "tell me true, as before God. You are a
woman, and always, I have heard, a woman takes comfort and pleasure
in life with such gear as I have shown you, alone, even if she has
little else. Would not all this give you some little happiness, even
as my wife, Madelon?"

Madelon looked at Lot and hesitated. She had a feeling that her word
of reply would stab him more cruelly than her knife had done.

"Madelon, tell me!"

"Will you have the truth?"

Lot nodded.

"No, Lot."

"Madelon, I can buy you more than all this. Are you sure?"

"Yes."

Lot gave a great sigh. "Dearly bought possessions are worse than
poverty, you hold," said he. "Then, Madelon, there is no sweetening
in all this for your bondage?"

She shook her head. "I shall do my duty, as I have promised," she
said. "All this is useless. Let me go, Lot."

"Madelon!"

She looked up in his face, and a strange awe came over her at the
look in it. A more secret lurking-place than any of the little wild
things that he loved to discover had the self in Lot Gordon, and
Madelon saw it for the first time, and perhaps he, also.

"True love exists not unless it can do away with the desire of
possession. I love you, Madelon," said Lot; and then he let go of her
shoulders and went over to the mantel-shelf, and leaned against it,
with his head bent.

Madelon, all bewildered and trembling, stared at him.

"I--don't think I know what you mean," she gasped out, finally.

"You are--free," said Lot.




Chapter XXII


That year, spring seemed to break over the village in a day, like a
green flood. All at once people's thoughts were interrupted, and
their eyes turned from selfish joys or pains by the emerald flash of
fields and hill-sides in the morning sun, and the white flutter of
flowering boughs past their windows like the festal garments of
unexpected guests.

The first week in May, the cherry-trees were in blossom, and the
alders and shad bushes were white in the borders of the woods against
the filmy green of the birches. The young women got out their summer
muslins, and trimmed their bonnets anew; their faces, all unknown to
themselves, took on a new meaning of the spring, like new flowers,
and the young men looked after them as they passed as if they were
strangers in the village.

On the afternoon of Wednesday, in the first week of May, Eugene
Hautville strolled across-lots over to the village. Through the
fields north of the Hautville place there was an old foot-path to the
former site of an old homestead, long ago burned to the ground and
its ashes dissipated on winds long died away. The oldest inhabitants
in the village barely remembered the house that used to stand there.
The slant of its roof crossed their minds dimly when they spoke of
it: they could not agree as to whether it had faced north or south.
It might have seemed almost fabulous, had it not been for the thicket
of old lilacs purpling with bloom every spring, which had first grown
before its windows, and the perennial houseleek which had clustered
round the door.

Then, too, east of where the house had stood there was an old apple
orchard, the trees thereof bent to the ground like distorted old men,
and, when spring came, bearing scarcely one bough of pink bloom,
among others shaggy with gray moss like the beard of age.

Then, also, the lane still remained which had stretched, in days gone
by, from the northward of the old house to the highway. The lane had
divided the fields of the old landowners, and had been the
thoroughfare for the dwellers in the house when they went to meeting
and to mill.

The Hautvilles often used it in the summer-time for a short-cut to
the village. Eugene went along this foot-path, which was in its way a
little humble track of history of simple village life, passed the
site of the house, and then struck into the lane. It stretched before
him like a shaft of green light. The afternoon sun shone through
young willow-leaves, transparent like green glass. Low overhead hung
rosy tassels from out-reaching boughs of maples. Between the trees,
the flowering alders seemed gleaming out of sight before him like the
white skirts of maidens. Here and there the ground was blue with
violets. Eugene picked some half mechanically, as he went along, and
made a little nosegay, with some sprigs of alder. He was half through
the lane, and had just emerged from a clump of alders, when he saw
Dorothy Fair coming. She gave a start when she saw him appear with a
great jostling of white branches, and made as if she would have fled;
then she held up her head with gentle dignity and advanced, lifting
her lady-skirts with dainty fingers on either side. Mistress Dorothy,
being weary of fine needle-work upon her bridal linen, had come out a
little way to take the air, and naturally enough had chosen for her
walk this sweet lane, which opened upon the highway a stone's-throw
below her house.

If Eugene Hautville, at sight of her, felt a quaking of his spirit,
and would also fain have fled, he made no sign, but walked on proudly
like a prince, with a bold yet graceful swing of his stalwart
shoulders. And when he and Dorothy met, he bowed low before her, and
she courtesied and he bade her good-day quite clearly, and she
murmured a response with pretty, prim lips; and they would have
passed on had not both, as if constrained by hands of force upon
their necks, raised their faces and looked of a sudden into each
other eyes with that same old look which they had exchanged in the
meeting-house long ago.

Dorothy Fair wore on that day a thin wool gown of a mottled blue
color like a dapple of spring violets. It was laid across her bosom
in smooth plaits, and showed at the throat her finely wrought lace
kerchief. The sun was so warm that she had put on her white straw hat
with blue ribbons, and her soft curls flowed from under it to her
blue belt ribbon. She wore, too, her little black-silk apron,
cunningly worked in the corners with flowers in colored silks.
Dorothy looked up in Eugene Hautville's face, and he looked down at
her, for a force against which they had come into the world unarmed
constrained them. Then she bent her head before him until he could
see nothing but the white slant of her hat, and caught at her silk
apron as if she would hide her face with that also.

Eugene stood still looking at her, his face radiant and glowing red.
"Dorothy!" he stammered, and then Dorothy straightened herself
suddenly, though she kept her face averted, flung up her head, caught
up her blue skirts again, and made as if she would pass on without
another word. Eugene, with his face all at once white, and his head
proudly raise, stood aside to let her pass. "'Tis a warm day for the
season," he said, with his old graceful courtesy. But Dorothy looked
up at him again as she neared him in passing, and her sweet mouth was
quivering like a frightened baby's, and the tears were in her blue
eyes, and no man who loved her could have let her go by; and
certainly not this fiery young Eugene. Suddenly, and with seemingly
no more involvement of wills or ethics than the alders in their
blossoming, the two were in each other's arms, and their lips were
meeting in kisses.

This fair and demure daughter of Puritans might well, as she stood
there in her lover's embrace, being already, as she was, the
betrothed bride of another, have been accounted fickle and false, but
perhaps in a sense she was not. Never had she forgot or been untrue
to her first love-dreams, which Eugene had caused, but had held to
them with that mild negative obstinacy of her nature which she could
not herself overcome. Now it was to her as if she were reconciled to
her true lover, and was faithful instead of false; and less false she
surely was to her own self.

Right contentedly had she loved for a time Burr's love for her and
his tenderness, and had been stirred thereby to passion, but now she
loved this other man for something better than her own sweet image in
his eyes.

Never a word she said, but her hat slipped down on her shoulders,
hanging by its blue strings, and she let her head lie on Eugene's
shoulder, with a strange sense of wontedness and of remembering
something which had never been.

And, also, all Eugene's fond words in her ear seemed to her like the
strains of old songs which were past her memory. Burr's, although she
had listened happily, had never seemed to her like that.

They stood together so for a few minutes, while the alder-flowers
shook out sweetness, as from perfumed garments, at their side, and a
bee who had left his hive and winter honey, and made that day another
surprise of spring, hummed from one white raceme to another and then
was away, disappearing in the blue air with a last gleam of filmy
wing as behind a sapphire wall.

Neither of the lovers had knowingly heard the bee's hum, but when it
ceased the silence seemed to make an accusing sense audible to them.
They let each other go and stood apart guiltily, as if some one had
entered the lane and was spying upon them.

Dorothy spoke first, without raising her pale little face, all
drooped round with her curls. "What shall I do?" she said, like a
child. She was trembling, and could scarcely control her tongue.

Eugene made no reply. He stood looking moodily at the ground, where
his nosegay of violets and alders was all scattered and trampled.

Suddenly he had the feeling as of a thief in another man's garden,
and a shame before Dorothy herself came over him. Eugene Hautville's
principles of honor, in spite of his fiery nature, read like a
primer, with no subtleties of evasion therein. Here was another man's
betrothed, and he had wooed her away! He had kissed her lips, which
were vowed to another. He had wronged her and Burr Gordon also.
Strangely enough, Dorothy's own responsibility never occurred to him
at all; he never dreamed of blaming her for falsity either to himself
or Burr. That little fair trembling creature, clad like a violet in
her mottled blue, seemed to him at once above and below all questions
of personal agency. She bloomed like a flower in her garden,
infinitely finer than those who wrangled around her and strove to
gather her, and yet in a measure helpless before them.

In a moment Dorothy answered her question negatively herself: "I will
not marry Burr," she said, without raising her head, and yet with
that tone of voice which accompanies a lift of chin and stiffening of
the neck muscles.

Eugene looked at her, and extended his arms as if he would take her
to him again; then drew them back. "I do not know what to counsel
you," he said, slowly. Then his eyes fell before the sudden shame and
distress in Dorothy's.

"You do not know what do counsel me!" she cried. "Then you do
not--care--"  Tears rolled over her cheeks, and Eugene gathered her
into his arms again, and laid his cheek against her fair head, and
soothed her as he would have soothed a child. "There, there," he
whispered, "it is not that, it is not that, sweet. I would die for
you, I love you so! It is not that, but you are the promised wife of
another man. How can I turn a thief even for you, Dorothy? How can I
bid you be false, and forswear yourself? There's honor as well as
love, child."

"But love is honor," said Dorothy.

"Not for a man," said Eugene.

Then she clung to him softly and modestly, and sobbed, and he kissed
her hair and whispered in one breath that she was all his own, and in
another that he knew not what to do, and was near distracted between
his love and his sense of honor, until Dorothy said something which
set him pleading for his rival whether he would or no, for the sake
of stern justice.

"I am afraid of him, I am afraid of Burr," Dorothy whispered in his
ear. "How could I have married him, when I was so afraid, even if you
had not come?"

"Afraid?"

"_You--know--what--they said--Burr did!_"

Eugene held her away from him by her slender arms, and looked at her.
"You did not believe that?"

"He would not tell me he was innocent, even when I begged him so."

"You knew he was."

"Why did he not tell me, when I begged him so?" she said, and the
soft unyielding in her tone was absolute.

"Dorothy!"

"I am so afraid--you don't know," she whispered, piteously.

"But--you know Burr was cleared."

"Yes, I know, but even now he will not tell me on the Bible, as I
asked him, that he is innocent."

"Dorothy, he _is_ innocent," Eugene said, with solemn and bitter
emphasis of which she knew not the full meaning.

"Then why does he not swear that he is, to me?"  Back went Dorothy
always, in all reasoning, to the starting-point in her own mind.

"I tell you he is, child. It has been proven so."

"Then why--" Dorothy began, but Eugene interrupted her in her circle.
"There is no more cause for you to fear him than me," he said almost
harshly, in his stern resolve to be just. Then Dorothy turned on him
with sudden passion. "I am afraid," she cried out, "I shall always be
afraid; even if he were to swear to me now that he is innocent, I
shall always be afraid, for I coupled him with that awful deed once
in my thoughts, and I cannot separate him from it forever. He will
always hold the knife in his hand; even if it were not for you, I
should be near mad with fear. I bid black Phyllis stay by the door
when he comes."

"Dorothy!"

"Yes, I do. What my mind has once laid hold of, that it will not let
go. I cannot separate him from my old thought of him. I have tried to
be faithful, and true, but even had he sworn to me that he was
innocent, the fear would have remained. Save me from him--oh, Eugene,
save me!"

But Eugene put her quite away from him, and looked at her almost
sternly. His honor held the reins now in good earnest. The suspicion
of Madelon, which he had never owned to himself, became a certainty.
He defended his rival as strenuously as he would have defended
himself, since it involved truth to himself. "I swear to you, Dorothy
Fair," he said, "that Burr Gordon is innocent, and that your fear of
him is groundless."

Dorothy looked at him with dilated eyes. She said not a word, but her
mind travelled its circle again.

"It is so," said Eugene; "I know it."

Still Dorothy looked at him.

"All my heart is yours," Eugene went on, "but I would rather it
broke, and yours too, before I counselled you to be false to a man
for a reason like that."

A flush came over Dorothy's face. She pulled her straw hat from her
shoulders to her head, and tied the blue strings under her chin. She
gathered up daintily a fold of her blue mottled skirt on either side.
"Then I will marry Burr this day week," she said. "I will endeavor to
be a good and true wife to him, and I pray you to forget if you can
what has passed between us to-day."

She said this as calmly and authoritatively as her father could have
said it in the pulpit, and courtesied slightly, then went on down the
lane and out into the open beyond, with a soft tilt of her blue
skirts and as gently proud a carriage as when she walked into the
meeting-house of a Sabbath.

Eugene said not a word to stop her, but stood staring after her. All
his study of his Shakespeare helped him not to an understanding of
this one girl, whom he saw with love-dimmed eyes. This sudden
abetting on her part of his resolve gave him a sense of earthquake
and revolution, yet he did not call her back or follow her.

He proceeded through the lane to the highway, then a few yards
farther to the store, to get his Boston weekly paper. The mail had
come in. On this warm spring day the loafers on the boxes and barrels
within the store had crawled out to the bench on the piazza and sat
there in a row. All mental states have their illustrative lives of
body. This shabby row leaned and lopped and settled upon themselves,
into all the lines and curves and downward slants of laziness, and
with rank tobacco-smoke curling about them, like the very languid
breath of it. However, when Eugene Hautville drew near, there was a
slight shuffling stir; a drawling hum of conversation ceased, and
when he entered the store their eyes followed him, bright with
furtive attention. The mill of gossip had ground slowly in this heavy
spring atmosphere, but it had ground steadily. They had been
discussing Madelon Hautville and the breaking off of her marriage
with Lot Gordon. It was village property by this time, and all
tongues were exercised over it.

"Why ain't Lot Gordon goin' to marry her?" they asked each other, and
exchanged answering looks of dark suspicion. The reason for not
marrying which Lot used every means in his power to promulgate--his
fast-failing health--gained little credence. The story came directly
from the doctor's wife that Lot Gordon was no worse than he had been
for the last ten years, and was likely to live ten years to come.
Margaret Bean was said to have told a neighboring woman, who told
another, who in her turn told another, and so started an endless
chain of good authority, that Lot Gordon had never coughed so little
as he did this spring, and "ate like a pig."  He was, it is true,
never seen on the highway, but there were those who said he was
abroad again in his old woodland haunts.

"Guess he didn't change his mind about havin' Mad'lon Hautville
'cause he was so much worse than common," they said; "guess when the
time drawed near he was afraid."  Margaret Bean was, furthermore, on
good authority reported to have intimated that never, if Madelon had
come to that house while she was in it, would she and her husband
have gone to bed without the scissors in the latch of their bedroom
door.

Lot Gordon, who had forsworn himself to save Madelon, was now, by his
last sacrifice for her, bidding fair to prove what her own assertions
had failed to do--her guilt. He crept out secretly into cover of the
woods, now and then, on a mild day; he could not deny himself that.
But otherwise he stayed close, and coughed hard when there were
listening ears, and complained like any old woman of his increasing
aches and pains. Still his cunning availed little, although he did
not dream of it.

He went not among the gossips himself, and no one as yet had ventured
to approach him with the rumor that was fast gaining ground.

No one had ventured to broach the matter to the Hautville men, for
obvious reasons. "I wouldn't vally your skin if that fellar overheard
what you was sayin' of when he come up the road, Joe Simpson," one
loafer drawled to another, when Eugene left the store that afternoon
and had disappeared going the long way home.

"Hush up, will ye!" whispered the other, glancing around pale under
his unshaven beard as if he feared Eugene might yet be there. The
Hautville men, however, hearing nothing, and saying nothing about the
matter to each other, had always, among themselves, a subtle exchange
of uneasy thought concerning it. If one sat moodily by and moved out
of her way without a word while Madelon prepared a meal, the others
knew what it meant. They also knew well the meaning of each other's
glances at her, and sudden lowering of brows. Madelon herself did not
know. When she had come home that Sunday night, and announced that
she was not going to be married at all, she had not understood the
sharp questioning, and then the stern quiet that followed upon it.
She had told them simply that Lot said that his lungs were gone; that
he had ascertained the fact himself through his own knowledge of
medicine; that he could only live a wreck of a man, if at all, and,
knowing it was so, had made up his mind that he would not marry.

Lot had indeed told her so, and had made her believe it, doing away
with much of the force of his giving her up for the sake of his love.
It is difficult in any case for one to understand fully the love to
which he cannot respond, for involuntarily the heart averts itself
from it like an ear or an eye, and misses it like the highest notes
of music and colors of the spectrum.

Madelon had stared dumbly at Lot when he told her she was free, and
for a moment indeed had struggled with a consciousness which would
have stirred her at least into pity and gratitude and remorse, which
she had never known, had not Lot recovered himself and spoken again
in his old manner. He tapped himself on his hollow chest. "After
all," he said, "'tis best you are not seduced like most of your sex
into making the accessories of life supply the lack of the primal
needs of it, into taking sugar instead of bread, and weakening your
stomach and your understanding. 'Tis best for you and best for me,
and best for those that might come after us. Treasure of house and
land and fine apparel and furnishings may be a goodly inheritance,
but our heirs would thank us more for power to draw the breath of
life freely, and you would do better without a gown to your back, or
a shoe to your foot, and a mate that was not half a dead man; and I
should do better alone in my anteroom of the tomb than with another
life to disturb the peace of it, and rouse me to efforts which will
send me farther on."

Madelon had stared at him, not knowing what to say, with compassion,
and yet with growing conviction of his selfish ends, which disturbed
it.

Lot tapped his chest again. "My lungs are gone," he said, shortly; "I
need no doctor to tell me. I know enough of physics myself to send
the whole village stumbling, instead of racing, into their graves, if
I choose to use it. My lungs are gone, and you are well quit of me,
and I of a foolish undertaking, though of a charming bride. Now, go
your way, child, and take up your maiden dreams again, for all me."

Madelon looked at him proudly, although she was half dazed by what
she heard. "I care nothing for all the fine things you have shown
me," said she, "and I have told you truly always that I do not care
for you, but I will keep my promise to marry you unless you yourself
bid me to break it."

"I bid you to break it," said Lot, steadily, and his eyes met hers,
and his old mocking smile played over his white face. Then suddenly
he bent over with his racking cough, and Madelon made a step towards
him, but he motioned her away. "Good-night--child," he gasped out.

Then Madelon had gone home and told her father and brothers, and
thought their strange reception of the news due to anything but the
truth. She had told them that she was guilty of wounding Lot Gordon
almost to death. That they should now be rendered uneasy by
suspicions, when she had given them actual knowledge, was something
beyond her imagination. She fancied rather that they considered Lot
had treated her badly, or else that she had a longing love for Burr,
and, perhaps, had herself broken off her match with his cousin on
that account. She strove hard to bear herself in such a manner that
they should not think that. She put on as gay a face as she could
muster, and even took, beside the dress, a little blue-silk mantle to
embroider for Dorothy Fair's wedding outfit, and sang over it as she
worked.

Still, in a way, although her pride led her to it, her singing and
her gayety were no pretence, for Madelon, through much suffering, had
reached that growth in love which enabled her to see over her own
self and her own needs. That knife-thrust she had meant for her lover
had stilled forever the jealous temper in her own heart, and she
fairly dreamed as she embroidered Dorothy's bridal mantle some dreams
of happiness that might have been Burr's; so filled was she with
purest love for him that his imagination possessed her own.




Chapter XXIII


It was told on good authority in the village that Parson Fair had
paid all Burr Gordon's back interest money on his mortgage, and so
released him from the danger of foreclosure; and then on equally good
authority it was denied. There was much discussion over it, but one
day the loafers in the store arrived at the truth. Parson Fair had
indeed offered to pay the interest, and Burr had declined. He had
also refused to live with his bride in his father-in-law's house, and
when Parson Fair had, with his gracefully austere manner, intimated
that he should be unwilling to place his daughter in such uncertain
shelter, had replied harshly that Dorothy should have a roof over her
head of his own providing while he lived; when he was dead it would
be time to talk about her father's.

When Burr had gone to Lot Gordon and offered to part with a small
wood-lot of his, with a quantity of half-grown wood thereon, at
two-thirds of its real value to pay the interest, Margaret Bean had
listened at the door, and thus the story.

"It is a sacrifice of a full third of its value, you know well
enough," Burr had said, standing moodily before his cousin. "If I
could wait for the growth of the wood, 'twould bring much more, but
I'll call it even on the interest I owe you, if you will. This is the
last foot of land I own clear."

For answer Lot had bidden Burr open his desk and bring him a certain
paper from a certain corner. Then Margaret Bean had opened the door a
crack, and had with her two peering eyes seen Lot Gordon take his pen
in hand and write upon the paper, and show it to his cousin Burr.

"Very well," said Burr, "I will go home and get the deed of the
wood-lot," and motioned towards the door, which drew to in a soft
panic as if with the wind.

"Stop," said Lot; and Margaret Bean paused in her flight, and laid
her ear to the door again. "I don't want your woodland," said Lot.
"The interest is paid without it. It is your wedding-gift."

"Why should you do this? I did not ask you to," Burr returned, almost
defiantly; and Margaret Bean had felt indignant at his unthankfulness.

"You can take from your kinsman what you could not take from Parson
Fair," replied Lot. "I hear you will not go to nest in Parson Fair's
snug roof-tree, with your pretty bird, either."

"I will die before I will take my wife under any roof but my own,"
cried Burr, fiercely, "and I want no gifts from you either. I am not
turned beggar from any one yet. You shall take the woodland."

Lot waved his hand as if he swept the woodland, with all its
half-grown trees, out of his horizon. "And yet," he said, "I thought
'twas what you left the other for. I should have said 'twas but your
wage that was offered you;" and he smiled at his cousin.

"What do you mean, Lot Gordon?"

Lot looked at him with sharp interest. "Was there another leaf of you
to read when I thought I was at the end," said he, "or were you writ
in such plain characters that I put in somewhat of my own imaginings
to give substance to them? Are you better, and worse, than I thought
you, cousin? Do you love this flower that has her counterpart in all
the gardens of the world, that is as sweet and no sweeter, that you
can replace when she dies by stooping and picking, better than the
one which has thorns enough to kill and sweetness enough to pay for
death, and whose bloom you can never match?"

"I don't know what you mean," Burr said, impatiently and angrily; and
Margaret Bean outside the door wagged her head in scornful assent.

"Then you loved Dorothy Fair better than Madelon Hautville, and 'twas
not her place and money that turned you her way," said Lot, as if he
were translating; and he kept his keen eyes on the other's face.

Burr's face flashed white. "What right have you to question me like
this?" he demanded.

"But you would not take the price, after all," said Lot, as if he had
been answered, instead of questioned. Then he looked up at his cousin
with something like kindness in his blue eyes. "It proves the truth
of what I've thought before," he said, "that oftentimes a man has to
sting his own honor with his own deeds to know 'tis in him."

"My honor is my own lookout," Burr said, harshly.

"And you've looked out for it better than I thought," Lot returned.

Burr made another motion towards the door. "I can't stand here any
longer," he said. "I'll go for the deed."  Margaret Bean, moving as
softly as she could in her starched draperies, fled back to the
kitchen.

"Wait a minute," Lot said.

"Well," returned Burr, impatiently.

Lot got up, went over to the mantel-shelf, and stood there a minute,
leaning against it, his face hidden. When he looked at Burr again he
was so white that his cousin started. "Are you sick?" he cried, with
harsh concern.

Lot smiled with stiff lips. "Only with the life-sickness that smites
the child when it enters the world, and makes it weep with its first
breath," he answered.

"If you want to say anything to me, Lot, talk like a man, and not a
book," Burr cried out, with another step towards the door; and yet he
spoke kindly enough, for there was something in his cousin's face
which aroused his pity.

"It is not--" began Lot, and stopped, and caught his breath. Burr
watched him half alarmed; he looked in mortal agony. Lot clutched the
carven edge of the mantel-shelf, then loosened his fingers. "If," he
said, brokenly, looking at Burr with the eyes of one who awaits a
mortal blow, "you want--Madelon--it is not--too late. She--I know how
she feels--towards you."

Burr turned white, as he stared at him. "She--she was going to marry
you!" he said with a sneer.

"Do--you know why?"

Burr shook his head, still staring at his cousin.

"It was the price of--your--acquittal."

Burr did not move his eyes from Lot's face. He looked as if he were
reading something there writ in startling characters, against which
his whole soul leaped up in incredulity. "My God, I see!" he groaned
out slowly, at length. And then he said, sharply, "But--you were
going to marry her. Why did you give her up?"

"I loved her," Lot said, simply. His white face worked.

"But now--you--ask me to--"

"I love her!" Lot said again, with a gasp.

Burr strode forward, quite up to his cousin, and grasped his hand
warmly for the first time in his life. "Before the Lord, Lot," he
said, huskily, "'twas you, and not me, she should have fancied in the
first of it."

"It is neither you nor me, nor any other man, that she will ever love
as he is," Lot said, shortly, straightening himself, for jealousy
stung him hard.

"What do you mean?"

"Woman reverses creation. She is a sublimated particle of a man, and
she builds a god from her own superstructure, and clothes him with
any image whom she chooses. She chose yours. Live up to her thought
of you, if you can."

Burr dropped his cousin's hand, and surveyed him with that impatient
wonder which he always felt when he used his favorite symbolic
speech. "There's no question of my living up to the thought of any
woman's but my wife's," he said, bitterly, and turned away.

"There's no knowing to what stature even a Dorothy Fair may raise a
man in her mind. You may not be able to grow to that."

"It is all I shall attempt."

Then Lot spoke again, in that short-breathed voice of his, straining
between the syllables. "Be sure--that you do--what--you will
not--regret. Honor is not--always what we--think it."

"I have my own conception of it at least, and that I live up to. 'Tis
high time," said Burr, with a kind of proud scorn of himself in his
voice.

"Madelon Hautville--loves--you."

"She does not, after all this."

"She does!"

Burr stood straight and firm before his cousin, like a soldier. "If
she does," said he, "and if she loved me with the love of ten lives
instead of one, and I her, as perhaps I do, this last word of mine I
will keep!"  Then he went out with not another word, and presently
returned with the deed of his little wooded property, which, however,
his cousin Lot finally persuaded him to keep, as Margaret Bean
gathered at the door, whither she had ventured again.

The loafers knew it all by nightfall, the news having been brought to
the store by old Luke Basset, who had gotten it from Margaret Bean's
husband. In a day or two they knew more from the same source. Lot
Gordon had engaged his cousin to improve the Gordon acres which had
been lying fallow for the last ten years. He had offered him a good
salary. He wanted to carry out some new-fangled schemes which he had
got out of books. Burr was going right to work; he had hired a man
from New Salem to help him.

People began to think better of Lot Gordon than they had ever done,
and they looked at Burr with more respect. Many had considered that
Dorothy Fair was not going to "do very well."  "Guess if it wa'n't
for her father, and the chance of Lot's dying, she'd have a pretty
poor prospect," they had said. Now they agreed that "Maybe Burr
Gordon won't turn out so bad after all. Maybe he'll settle right down
and go to work, and pay off his mortgage, when he gets married, and
get a good living, even if Lot should hold out some time to come."

They watched Burr as he swung up the street to Parson Fair's in the
spring twilights, with admiration for his stalwart grace, and growing
approval for those inner qualities which outward beauty sometimes but
poorly indicates. They approved also of the temperate hours which he
observed in his courting, for no one within eye-shot, or ear-shot,
but knew when Parson Fair's front door closed behind him. Burr,
during the last weeks before his marriage, never stayed much later
than half-past nine or ten at his sweetheart's house, and, in truth,
was not sorely tempted to do so. Mistress Dorothy in those days
behaved in a manner which might well have aroused to rebellion a more
ardent or a less determinately faithful lover. She had the candles
lit early in the beautiful spring twilights, and then she sat and
stitched and stitched upon her wedding finery, bending her fair face,
half concealed by drooping curls, assiduously over it, having never a
hand at liberty for a lover's caress, or an eye for his smiles. Then,
too, when Burr took leave, she stood before him with such a strange
effect of terror and hauteur that he could do no more than touch her
lips as if she had been a timid child, and bid her good-night. Had
Burr Gordon, in those days, been less aware of his own unfaithfulness
and weariness, and less fiercely resolved not to yield to it, he
might well have perceived Dorothy's. As it was he confused her
coldness with his own, and attributed it to the change in his own
heart, and not to that in hers. And even had he suspected it he would
not have made the first motion for freedom, so desperate was his
adherence to falsity for the sake of truth.

Burr Gordon had at stake in this last more than any temporal good or
ill of love. He had at stake his whole belief in himself, and he was
also actuated by another motive which he scarcely admitted in his own
thoughts.

Convinced he was that Madelon Hautville, believing as she did that he
had forsaken her for honest love of another, would hold him in utter
scorn and contempt were she to discover him false to Dorothy as she
had been to her; and his very love of her love, strangely enough,
kept him true to her rival.

So he went to see Dorothy, and found no fault with her coldness. The
wedding preparations went on, and at last the day came.




Chapter XXIV


The wedding was to be at eight o'clock in the evening, and nearly all
the village was bidden to it--even many of the Unitarian faction who
had been Parson Fair's old parishioners. At half-past seven o'clock
the street was full of people. The village women rustled through the
soft dusk with silken whispers of wide best skirts. Young girls with
spring buds in their hair flounced about with white muslins, and
fluttering with ribbons, flitted along. The men, holding back firmly
their best broadcloth shoulders, marched past in their creaking
Sunday shoes. Before eight o'clock the fine old rooms in Parson
Fair's house were lined with faces solemnly expectant, as the faces
of simple country folk are wont to be before the great rites of love
and death.

The women sat with their mitted hands folded on their silken laps,
their best brooches pinning decorously their fine-wrought
neckerchiefs, their bosoms filled with sober knowledge and patient
acquiescence. The young girls sat among them very still, with the
stillness of unrest, like birds who alight only to fly, their soft
cheeks burning, their necks and arms showing rosy through their
laces, their little clasped fingers full of pulses, and their hearts
tumultuous and stirred to imagination by the sweet surmise and
ignorance of love. They looked seldom at the young men, and the young
men at them, as they sat waiting. Still there were some who had
learned in city schools the suavities which cover like clothes the
primal emotions of life, and they moved about with exchanges of fine
courtesies, while the others looked at them wondering.

When the tall clock in the south room struck eight, there was a hush
among these few who had learned to flock gracefully, chattering like
birds, bearing always the same aspect to one another, without regard
to selfish joys or pains. The lawyer's wife, in a grand gown and
topknot of feathers, which she was said to have worn to a great party
at the governor's house in Boston, composed to majestic approval her
handsome florid face, and stood back with a white-gloved hand on an
arm of each of her daughters, slender and pretty, and unshrinkingly
radiant in the faces of the doctor's college-bred son and his
visiting classmate. The doctor's wife, also, who had come of a grand
family, and appeared always on festive occasions in some
well-preserved splendor of her maiden days, which had been prolonged,
drew back, spreading out with both hands a vast expanse of purple
velvet skirt. She quite eclipsed as with a murky purple cloud the two
meek elderly women and a timid young girl who sat behind her. They
immediately peered around her sumptuous folds with anxious eyes lest
they might lose sight of the bridal party; but the bridal party did
not come.

A passageway was left quite clear to the space between the windows on
the west side of the room, where it was whispered the bride and groom
were to stand, and the people all pressed back towards the walls; but
no one came. A little hum of wondering conversation rose and fell
again at fancied stirs of entrance. Folk hushed and nudged each other
a dozen times, and craned their necks, and the clock struck the
half-hour, and the bridal party had not come.

In a great chair near the clear space between the windows sat the
bridegroom's mother, with a large pearl brooch gleaming out of the
black satin folds on her bosom. Her face, between long lace lappets,
looked as clearly pallid and passively reflective as the pearls. Not
a muscle stirred about her calm mouth and the smooth triangle of
forehead between her curtain slants of gray hair. If she speculated
deeply within herself, and was agitated over the delay, not a
restless glance of her steadily mild eyes betrayed it.

People wondered a little that she should not be busied about the
bridal preparations, instead of waiting there like any other guest;
but it was said that Dorothy had refused absolutely to have any
helping hands but those of her old black slave woman about her. It
was known, too, that Dorothy had only once taken tea with Burr's
mother since the engagement, and everybody speculated as to how they
would get on together. Dorothy had, in truth, received the rigorously
courteous overtures of her future mother with the polite offishness
of a scared but well-trained child, and the proud elder woman had not
increased them.

"When she comes here to live I shall do my duty by her, but I shall
not force myself upon her," she told Burr. Burr's mother had not seen
any of the dainty bridal gewgaws, but that she kept to herself.
People glanced frequently at her with questioning eyes as the time
went on; but she sat there with the gleam of her personality as
unchanged in her face as the gleam of the pearls on her bosom.

"Catch her looking flustered!" one woman whispered to another. After
the clock struck nine a long breath seemed to be drawn simultaneously
by the company; it was quite audible. Then came a sharp hissing
whisper of wonder and consternation; then a hush, and all faces
turned towards the door. Burr Gordon, his face stern and white, stood
there looking across at his mother. She rose at once and went to him
with a stately glide, and they disappeared amid a distinct buzz of
curiosity that could no longer be restrained.

"They've gone into the parson's study," whispered one to another.
Some reported, upon the good authority of a neighbor's imagination,
that Parson Fair had "fallen down dead;" some that Dorothy had
fainted away; some that the black woman had killed her and her
father.

Meanwhile, Burr and his mother went into Parson Fair's study. There
stood the minister by his desk, with his proudly gentle brow all
furrowed, and his fine, long scholar-fingers clutching nervously at
the back of his arm-chair. He cast one glance around as the door
opened and shut, then looked away, then commanded himself with an
effort, and stepped forward and bowed courteously to the woman in her
black satin and pearls. Elvira Gordon looked from one to the other,
and the two men followed her glances, and each waited for the other
to speak.

"Where is she?" she asked, finally.

"She is up in her chamber," replied Parson Fair, in a voice more
strained with his own anxiety than it had ever been in the pulpit
over the sins of his fellow-men. "I know not what to say or do--I
never thought that daughter of mine--she will not come--"

Then Elvira Gordon cast a quick, sharp glance at her son, which he
met with proud misery and resentment. "It is quite true, mother," he
said. "We have both tried, and she will not come."

"Perhaps a woman--" said Parson Fair. "I wish her mother were alive,"
he added, with a break in his voice.

"I will go and see her if you think it is best," said Mrs. Gordon. In
her heart she rebelled bitterly against seeming to plead with this
unwilling bride to come to her son. Had she not felt guilty for her
son, with the conviction of his own secret deflection, she would
never have mounted the spiral stairs to Dorothy Fair's chamber that
night. Parson Fair led the way, and Burr followed. The people stood
back with a kind of awed curiosity. Some of the young girls were
quite pale, and their eyes were dilated. Folk longed to follow them
up-stairs, but they did not dare.

At the door of Dorothy's chamber crouched, like a fierce dog on
guard, the great black African woman. When the three drew near she
looked up at them with a hostile roll of savage eyes and a glitter of
white teeth between thick lips. The parson advanced, and she sprang
up and put her broad back against the door and rolled out defiance at
him from under her burring tongue.

But he continued to advance with unmoved front, as if she had been
the Satanas of his orthodoxy, which, indeed, she did not faintly
image. She moved aside with a savage sound in her throat, and he
threw the door wide open. There sat Dorothy Fair before them at her
dimity dressing-table, with all her slender body huddled forward and
resting seemingly upon her two bare white arms, which encompassed her
bowed head like sweet rings. Not a glimpse of Dorothy's face could be
seen under the wide flow of her fair curls, which parted only a
little over the curve of one pink shoulder. Dorothy wore her
wedding-gown of embroidered India muslin; but her satin slippers were
widely separated upon the floor, as if she had kicked them hither and
thither; and on the bed, in a great, careless, fluffy heap, lay her
wedding-veil, as if it had been tossed there.

Elvira Gordon, at a signal from Parson Fair, entered the room past
the sullen negress, who rolled her eyes and muttered low, and went
close to the girl at the dressing-table.

"Dorothy!" said Mrs. Gordon.

Dorothy made no sign that she heard.

"Dorothy, do you know it is an hour after the time set for your
wedding?"

Dorothy was so still that instinctively Mrs. Gordon bent close over
her and listened; but she heard quite plainly the soft pant of her
breath, and knew she had not fainted.

Mrs. Gordon straightened herself and looked at her. It was strange
how that delicate, girlish form under the soft flow of fair locks and
muslin draperies should express, in all its half-suggested curves,
such utter obstinacy that it might have been the passive
unresponsiveness of marble. Even that soft tumult of agitated breath
could not alter that impression. When Mrs. Gordon spoke again her
words seemed to echo back in her own ears, as if she had spoken in an
empty room.

"Dorothy Fair," said she, with a kind of solemn authority, "neither I
nor any other human being can look into your heart and see why you do
this; and you owe it to my son, who has your solemn promise, and to
your father, whose only child you are, to speak. If you are sick, say
so; if at the last minute you have a doubt as to your affection for
Burr, say so. My son will keep his promise to you with his life, but
he will not force himself upon you against your wishes. You need fear
nothing; but you must either speak and give us your reason for this,
or get up and put on your wedding-veil and your shoes, and come down,
where they have been waiting over an hour. You cannot put such a
slight upon my son, or your father, or all these people, any longer.
You do not think what you are doing, Dorothy."

Mrs. Gordon's even, weighty voice softened to motherly appeal in the
closing words. Dorothy remained quite silent and motionless. Then
Burr gave a great sigh of impatient misery, and strode across to
Dorothy, and bent low over her, touching her curls with his lips, and
whispered. She did not stir. "Won't you, Dorothy?" he said, gently,
then quite aloud; and then again, "Have you forgotten what you
promised me, Dorothy?" and still again, "Are you sick? Have I
offended you in any way? Can't you tell me, Dorothy?"

At length, when Dorothy persisted in her silence, he stood back from
her and spoke with his head proudly raised. "I will say no more," he
said; "I have come here to keep my solemn promise, and be married to
you, and here I will remain until you or your father bid me go, with
something more than silence. That may be enough for my pride, but
'tis not enough for my honor. I will go back to your father's study,
Dorothy, and wait there until you speak and tell me what you wish."

Burr turned to go, but Parson Fair thrust out his arm before him to
stop him, and himself came forward and grasped Dorothy, with hardly a
gentle hand, by a slender arm. "Daughter," said Parson Fair in a
voice which Dorothy had never heard from his lips except when he
addressed wayward sinners from the pulpit, "I command you to stop
this folly; stand up and finish dressing yourself, and go down-stairs
and fulfil your promise to this man whom you have chosen."  The black
woman pressed forward, then stood back at a glance from her master's
blue eyes.

Dorothy did not stir; then her father spoke again, and his nervous
hand tightened on her arm. "Dorothy," said he, "I command you to
rise"--and there was a great authority of fatherhood and priesthood
in his voice, and even Dorothy was moved before it to respond, though
not to yielding.

Suddenly she jerked her arm away from her father's grasp, and stood
up, with a convulsive flutter of her white plumage like a bird. She
flung back her curls and disclosed her beautiful pale face, all
strained to terrified resolve, and her dilated blue eyes "I will
not!" she cried out, addressing her father alone, "I will not,
father. I have made up my mind that I will not."

Then, as Parson Fair said not a word, only looked at her with stern
questioning, she went on, shrill and fast, "I will not; no, I will
not! Nobody can make me! I thought I would, I thought I must, until
this last. Now when it comes to this, I can do no more. I will not,
father."

"Why?" said Parson Fair.

"I would have kept my promise, father. I would have kept it, no
matter if--I would have been faithful to him if he--"  Suddenly
Dorothy turned on Burr with a gasp of terror and defiance. "I would
never have done this, you know," she cried; "it would never have come
to this, if you had spoken and told me you were innocent."

"What do you mean, child?" said Parson Fair, sternly.

"He would not tell me that he did not stab his cousin Lot," replied
Dorothy, setting her sweet mouth doggedly. Her blue eyes met her
father's with shrinking and yet steadfast defiance.

"Dorothy," said he, "do you not know that he is innocent by his
cousin's own confession?"

"Why, then, does he not say so?" finished Dorothy. "How do I know who
did it? Madelon Hautville said she was guilty, then Lot Gordon; and
Burr would not deny his guilt when I asked him. How do I know which?
Madelon Hautville was trying to shield him; I am not blind. Then Lot
liked her. How do I know which?"  Suddenly she cried out to Burr so
loud that the people in the entry below heard her, "Tell me now that
you are innocent, and either your cousin Lot or Madelon Hautville
guilty," she demanded. "Tell me!"

Burr, white and rigid, looked at her, and made no reply. "Tell me,"
she cried, in her sweet, shrill voice, "tell me now that you did not
stab your cousin Lot, and Madelon Hautville spoke the truth, and I
will keep my promise to you, even if my heart is not yours."

Parson Fair grasped his daughter's arm again. "No man whom you have
promised to wed should reply to such distrust as this," he said.
"Dorothy, I command you to go down-stairs and be married to this
man."

Then Dorothy broke away from him with a wild shriek. "No, I will not
marry this man with his cousin's blood on his soul! I will not,
father; you shall not make me! I will not! Night and day I shall see
that knife in his hand. I will not marry him, because he tried to
kill his cousin Lot. I will not, I will not!"  The black woman pushed
between them with a savage murmur of love and wrath, and caught her
mistress in her arms, and crooned over her, like a wild thing over
her young.

"There is no use in prolonging this, sir," Burr said to Parson Fair.

The elder man looked at him with a strange mixture of helpless
dignity and sympathy and wrath. "You know that I have no share in
this," he said, and he glanced almost piteously from Burr to his
mother. "I could never have believed that my daughter--"

"We will say no more about it, sir," responded Burr. "I hold neither
you nor your daughter in any blame."  Then he offered his arm to his
mother, and the three went out and down-stairs, and the black woman
clapped to the chamber door with a great jar upon her mistress, whose
calm of obstinacy had broken into wailing hysterics which betokened
no less stanchness. Parson Fair, Burr Gordon, and his mother, at the
foot of the stairs among the curious wedding-guests, looked for a
second at one another.

The parson's fine state seemed to have deserted him. There were red
spots on his pale cheeks. His long hands twitched nervously. "I
will--inform them," he said, huskily, at length, but Burr moved
before him. "No, sir; I will do it," he said.

Then he strode into the great north parlor, where the more important
guests were assembled, and where he and Dorothy were to have been
married. He stood alone in the clear space between the windows, and
knew, as the eyes of the people met his, that they had heard
Dorothy's last wild cry, and knew why she would not marry him. He
stood for a second facing them all before he spoke, and in spite of
the shame of rejection which he felt heaped upon him by them all, and
a subtler shame arising from his own heart, in spite of the fact that
he could not offer any defense, or do aught but bend his back to the
full weight of his humiliation, he had a certain majesty of demeanor.
Revolt at humiliation alone precipitates the full measure of it, and
the strength which survives defeat, even of one's own convictions, is
of a good quality. Silence under wrongful accusation gives the
bearing of a hero.

There was a hush over the assembly so complete that it seemed as if
the very personalities of the listeners were drawn back from
self-consciousness to give free scope for sound. When Burr spoke,
everybody heard.

"The marriage between Dorothy Fair and myself is broken off," was all
he said. Then he went out of the room as proudly as if his bride had
been by his side, through the entry to the study. Parson Fair and his
mother were there. "They know it," he announced, quite calmly; then
he took his fine wedding-hat from the table.

"Where are you going?" his mother demanded, quickly.

"To walk a little way."  Burr turned to Parson Fair. "I beg you not
to feel that you must deal severely with your daughter for this," he
said, "for she does not deserve it. She was justified in asking what
she did, and in feeling distrust that I did not answer."

"If a wife's faith cannot survive her husband's silence, then is she
no true spouse, and 'twas the part of a man not to answer," said this
Parson Fair, who had all his life followed in most roads the lead of
his womankind, and not known it, so much state had he been allowed in
his captivity.

"She was justified," said Burr, "and I beg you, sir, not to visit any
displeasure upon her. I have not at any time been worthy of her,
although God knows had she not cast me off, and did not this last,
with what I remember now of her manner for the last few weeks, make
me sure that her heart is no longer mine, I would have lived my life
for her, as best I could; and will now, should she say the word."

With that, Burr Gordon thrust on his wedding-hat, and was out of the
study and out of the south door of the house.




Chapter XXV


In the yard was drawn up in state, behind the five white horses, the
grand old Gordon coach, which had not been used before since the
death of Lot's father. Lot had insisted upon furnishing the coach and
the horses for his cousin's wedding. The man who stood by the horses'
heads looked up at Burr in a dazed way when he came out of the house
and spoke to him.

"When my mother is ready you can take her home, Silas," said Burr.
"Then drive over to my cousin's, and put up the coach and the
horses."

The man gasped and looked at him. "Do you hear what I say?" said
Burr, shortly.

The man gave an affirmative grunt, and strove to speak, but Burr cut
him short. "Look out for that bad place in the road, before you get
to the bridge," he said, and went on out of the yard. The road was
suddenly full of departing wedding-guests, fluttering along with
shrill clatter of persistently individual notes, like a flock of
birds.

Burr, out of the yard, passed along through their midst with a hasty
yet dignified pace. He said to himself that he would not seem to be
running away. He looked neither to the right nor left, except to
avoid collisions with silken and muslin petticoats, yet he was
conscious of the hush of voices as he passed, and knew that they all
recognized him in the broad moonlight.

When he reached the lane which led across-lots to the old place, he
plunged into it by a sudden impulse. He went half-way down its leafy
tunnel; then he stopped and sat down on a great stone which had
fallen off the bordering wall.

Great spiritual as well as great physical catastrophes stun for a
while, and there is after both a coming to one's self and an
examining one's faculties, as well as one's bones, to see if they be
still in working order. Burr Gordon, sitting there on his stone of
meditation, in the moonlit dapple of the lane, came slowly to a full
realization of himself in his change of state, and strove to make
sure what power of action he had left under these new conditions.

His first thought was a cowardly one--that he would sell out, or
rather give up his estate to his cousin, take his mother, and turn
his back upon the village altogether. He knew what he had to expect.
He tasted well in advance the miserable and half ludicrous shame of a
man who has been openly jilted by a woman. He tasted, too, the
covertly whispered suspicion which had perhaps never quite departed,
and which now was surely raised to new life by Dorothy's loud cries
of accusation. He knew that he was utterly defenceless under both
shame and suspicion, being fettered fast by his own tardy but stern
sense of duty and loyalty. It seemed to him at first that he would be
crippled beyond cure in his whole life if he should stay where he
was; and then he felt the spring of the fighting instinct within him,
and said proudly to himself that he would turn his back upon nothing.
He would brave it all.

There was a light wind, and now and then the young trees in the lane
were driven into a soft tumult of whispering leaves. Burr did not
notice when into this voice of the wind and this noise as of a crowd
of softly scurrying ghosts there came a crisp rustle of muslin and a
quick footstep up the lane. He only looked up when Madelon Hautville
stopped before him and looked at him with incredulous alarm, as if
she could not believe the evidence of her own eyes.

Dressed like a bride herself was Madelon Hautville, in a sheer white
gown, which she had fashioned for herself out of an old crape shawl
which had belonged to her mother, and cunningly wrought with great
garlands of red flowers. She was going to Burr Gordon's wedding, not
knowing the lateness of the hour; for her brother Richard had played
a trick upon her, and set back the clock two hours, when to his great
wrath she would not stay at home. The others were half in favor of
her going, thinking that it showed her pride; but Richard was sorely
set against it, and watched his chance, and slipped back the hands of
the clock that she should be too late to see the wedding of the man
who had forsaken her.

Madelon looked at Burr, and he at her, and neither spoke. Then, when
she saw surely who it was, she cried out half in wonder and half
chidingly, as if she had been his mother reproaching him for his
tardiness: "What are you doing here, Burr Gordon? Do you know 'tis
nearly eight o'clock, and time for your wedding?"

"'Tis nearly ten," said Burr, "and there is no wedding."

"Nearly ten?"

"Yes."

"But 'twas not eight by our clock."

Burr took out the great gold timepiece which had belonged to his
father, and held it towards her, and she saw the face plainly in the
moonlight.

"What does this mean?" she said; and then she cried, half shrinking
away from him, "Are you married then? Where is she?"

"Dorothy Fair is at home in her chamber, and I am not married, and
never shall be."

"Why--what does this mean, Burr Gordon?"

"She will not have me, and--no blame to her."

"Will not have you, and the people there, and the hour set! Will not
have you? Burr, she shall have you! I promise you she shall. I will
go talk to her. She is a child, and she does not know--I can make her
listen. She shall have you, Burr. I will go this minute, and talk to
her, and do you come after me."

Madelon gave a forward bound, like a deer, but Burr sprang up and
caught her by the arm. "Why do you stop me, Burr Gordon?" she cried,
trying to wrest her arm away.

"Do you think I have no manhood left, Madelon Hautville, that I will
let you, _you_ beg a woman who does not love me to marry me?"

"She does love you, she shall love you!"

"I tell you she does not!"  Burr spoke with a bitterness which might
well have come from slighted love, and, indeed, so complex and
contradictory are the workings of the mind of a man, and so strong is
the bent when once set in one direction, that not loving Dorothy
Fair, and loving this other woman with his whole heart, he yet felt
for the moment that he would rather his marriage had taken place and
he were not free. His freedom, which he knew was a shame to welcome,
galled him for the time worse than a chain, and he felt more injured
than if he had loved this girl who had jilted him; for something
which was more precious to him than love had been slighted and made
for naught.

"She does--you are mad, Burr Gordon! She was all ready to marry you.
She came to me to help on her wedding-clothes. She was all smiling
and pleased. How could she be pleased over her wedding-clothes if she
did not love you? She does, Burr! She is a child--I can talk to her.
I will make her. Let me go, Burr! You wait here, and not fret. Oh,
how pale you look! I tell you, you shall have her, Burr!"

"I tell you, Madelon, she does not love me, and I will not have you
go."

Madelon stood looking at him, her face all at once changing curiously
as if from some revelation from within. She remembered suddenly that
old scene with Eugene, and a suspicion seized her. "There's somebody
else!" she cried out, fiercely. "There's no truth in her. If she
thinks--she shall not--nor he--I will not have it so!"

"For God's sake, Madelon, don't!" said Burr, not fairly comprehending
what she said. He sat down again upon the stone, and leaned his head
upon his hands. In truth he felt dazed and helpless, as if he had
reached suddenly the mouth of many roads and knew not which to take.
The intricacy of the situation was fairly paralyzing to an order of
mind like his, which was wont to grasp, though shrewdly enough, only
the straight course of cause and effect. He revolved dizzily in his
mind the fact that he could not tell Madelon the reason which Dorothy
had given for her rejection of him, and the conviction was fast
gaining upon him that it was not the true and only reason. He held
fiercely to his loyalty to Madelon, and his shammed loyalty to
Dorothy, and his slipping clutch of loyalty to himself, and knew not
what to say nor what course to take.

Madelon, as he settled back upon the stone and bowed his head, made
towards him one of those motions which the body has kept intact from
the primitive order of things, when it was free to obey Love; then
she stood back and looked at him a moment, while indignation and that
compassion which is the very holiness of love swelled high within
her. Then suddenly she leaned forward against him in her white robes,
with the soft impetus of a white flowering tree driven by the wind,
and put her arms around him, and drew his unhappy head against her
bosom, and stroked his hair, and poured out in broken words her wrath
against Dorothy Fair, and her pity for him. And all this she did in
utter self-despite and forgetfulness, not caring if he should
discover how great her love for him still was, believing fully that
his whole heart had belonged to the other girl, and was breaking for
her, and arguing thence no good for herself.

"She shall never marry him, that I swear to you, Burr," she cried,
passionately, "and in time she may turn to you again; there is no
faith in her."

Burr listened a while bewildered, not fully knowing nor asking what
she meant, letting his head rest against her bosom, as if he were a
child whom she comforted.

"Burr, you shall have her, you shall have her yet!" she said, over
and over, as if Dorothy were a sweetmeat for which he longed, until
at last a great shame and resolution seemed to go over him like a
wave, and he put her away and rose up.

"Madelon," he said, "you don't know. Listen. You will scorn me after
this--you will never look at me again, but listen: Dorothy must never
know, for all the slight of this last must come from her and not from
me, since she is a woman and I a man; but you shall know the whole
truth. I never loved Dorothy Fair, Madelon, not as I love you, as God
is my witness. She was pretty to look at, and I liked--but you cannot
understand the weakness of a man that makes him ashamed of himself. I
left you, and--I went--courting her because she was Parson Fair's
only daughter, and I was poor, and that was not all the reason. I
liked her pretty face and her pretty ways well enough, but all the
time it was you and you alone in my heart; and, knowing that, I left
you, though I was a man. I turned Judas to my own self, and denied
and would have sold the best that was in me. Now you know the truth,
Madelon Hautville."

Madelon looked at him. Her lips parted, as if her breath came hard.

Burr made as if to pass on without another word, but she held out her
hand to stop him, though she did not touch him.

"Stop, Burr," she said, with a strange, almost oratorical manner,
that he had never seen in her before. It was almost as if she mounted
before his eyes a platform of her own love and higher purposes.
"Listen to me," she said. "That night when I was in such terrible
anger with you that for a second I would have killed you, I put it
out of your power forever to do anything that could turn me against
you again. I broke my own spirit that night, Burr. The wrong I would
have done you outweighs all you ever have done or ever can do me.
There is no wrong in this world that you can do me, if I will not
take it so; and as for the wrong you may have done yourself--that
only makes me more faithful to you, Burr."

Burr stood looking at her, speechless. It was to him as if he saw the
true inner self of the girl, which he had dimly known by
half-revealings but had never truly seen before. For a minute it was
not Madelon Hautville in flesh and blood who stood before him, but
the ghost of her, made evident by her love for him; and his very
heart seemed to melt within him with shame and wonder and worship.
"Oh, Madelon!" he gasped out, at length.

But Madelon turned away then. "You must go home now," said she, "and
I must. Good-night, Burr."

"Good-night," said Burr, as if he repeated it at her bidding.

Then they passed without touching each other. Madelon went home down
the lane, across the fields, and Burr went out in the silent street,
whence all the wedding-guests had departed, and homeward also.




Chapter XXVI


In this little Vermont village, lying among peacefully sloping hills,
away from boisterous river-courses, there was small chance of those
physical convulsions which sometimes disturb the quiet of
generations. The roar of a spring freshet never smote the ears of the
dwellers therein, and the winters passed with no danger of
avalanches. From its sheltered situation destructive storms seldom
launched themselves upon it; the oldest inhabitant could remember
little injury from lightning or hail or wind.

However, there is no village in this world so sheltered in situation
that it is not exposed to the full brunt of the great forces of human
passion, when they lash themselves at times into the fury of storm.
It was here in this little village of Ware Centre, which could never
know flood or volcanic fire, as if a sort of spiritual whirlpool had
appeared suddenly in its midst. The thoughts of all the people, lying
down upon their pillows, or rising for their daily tasks, centred
upon it, and it was as if the minds of all were prone upon the edge
of it, gazing curiously into the vortex.

The Sunday after Burr Gordon's disastrous wedding-day the faces of
all the people on their way to meeting wore the same expression, in
different degrees of intensity. One emotion of strained curiosity and
wonder made one family of the whole village. The people thought and
spoke of only one subject; they asked each other one question--"Will
any of them be at meeting?"  The Unitarian church was nearly deserted
that Sunday, for Parson Fair's former parishioners returned to their
old gathering place, under stronger pressure, for the time, than
religious tenets.

It was a burning day for May--as hot as midsummer. The flowers were
blossoming visibly under the eyes of the people, but they did not
notice. They flocked into the meeting-house and looked about them,
all with the same expression in their eyes.

When Burr Gordon and his mother entered, a thrill seemed to pass
through the whole congregation. Nobody had thought they would come.
Mrs. Gordon, gliding with even pace, softly murmurous in her Sunday
silk, followed her son, who walked with brave front, although he was
undeniably pale, up the aisle to their pew. He stood about to let his
mother enter, meeting the eyes of the people as he did so; then sat
down himself, and a long glance and a long nudge of shoulders passed
over the meeting-house. Burr and his mother both knew it, but she sat
in undisturbed serenity of pallor, and he stirred not a muscle,
though a red spot blazed out on each cheek.

Madelon Hautville sat in the singing seats, but he never looked at
her nor she at him. There were curious eyes upon her also, for people
wondered if Burr would turn to her now Dorothy Fair had jilted him;
but she did not know it. She heeded nobody but Burr, though she did
not look at him, and when she stood up in the midst of her brothers
and sang, she sang neither to the Lord nor to the people, but to this
one weak and humiliated man whom she loved. The people thought that
she had never sung so before, recognizing, though ignorantly, that
she struck that great chord of the heart whose capability of sound
was in them also. For the time she stood before and led all the
actors in that small drama of human life which was on the village
stage, and in which she took involuntary part; and the audience saw
and heard nobody but her.

Burr, stiff as a soldier, at the end of his pew, felt his heart leap
to hope and resolve through the sound of this woman's voice in the
old orthodox hymns, and laid hold unknowingly, by means of it, of the
love and force which are at the roots of things for the strengthening
of the world. With weak and false starts and tardy retrogrades he had
woven around his feet a labyrinth of crossing paths of life, but now,
of a sudden, he saw clearly his way out. He trampled down the
scruples which hampered and blinded him like thorns and had their
roots in a false pride of honor, and recognized that divine call
of love to worship which simplifies all perplexities. He would
take that girl singing yonder for is wife, if she were indeed so
generous-minded after all, not now, but later, when there could be no
possibility of slight to Dorothy Fair. His honest work in the world
he would do, were it in the ploughshares or the wayside ditches, with
no striving for aggrandizement through untoward ways, and so would he
humbly attain the full dignity of his being.

When Madelon Hautville stopped singing not one in the meeting-house
had seen Burr Gordon stir, but the soul in him had surely turned and
faced about with a great rending as of swathing wills that bound it.

Parson Fair preached that morning. Great had been the speculation as
to whether he would or not. When he stood up in his pulpit and faced
the crowded pews and the steely glances of curious eyes through the
shifting flutter of fans, he was as austerely composed as ever; but a
buzzing whisper went through the audience like a veritable bee of
gossip. "He looks dreadful," they hissed in each other's ears, with
nudges and nods.

All the principal participants in the village commotion were there
except Lot Gordon and Dorothy Fair. Dorothy had not come, in spite of
her father's stern commands, and sterner they had been than any
commands of his to his beloved child before. Dorothy had cowered
before her father, in utter misery and trepidation, after the company
had left that wedding-night, but yielded she had not--only fallen ill
again of that light fever which so easily beset her under stress of
mind.

That Sunday morning, striving to rise and go to meeting as her father
said, and being in truth willing enough, since she had a terrified
longing to see Eugene Hautville in the choir and ascertain if he were
angry or glad, she fell back weak and dizzy on her pillows, and the
doctor was called. Dorothy's fever ran lightly, as all ailments of
hers, whether mental or physical, were wont to do; and yet she had a
delicacy of organization which caused her to be shaken sorely by
slight causes. A butterfly may not have the capacity for despair, but
the touch of a finger can crush it; and had it more capacity, there
would be no butterflies.

It was a full month before Dorothy was able to go out of doors,
and all that time the gossips were cheated out of the sight of
her, and her father was constrained to treat her with a sort of
conscience-stricken tenderness, in spite of her grave fault. Her
mother had never risen from a fever which seemed akin to this; and
Dorothy, in spite of his stern Puritan creed, was yet dearer to him
than that abstraction of her which he deemed her soul.

Looking at the girl, flushed softly with fever, her blue eyes shining
like jewels, as she lay in her white nest, he knew that he loved her
life more fiercely than he judged her sins. He would turn his back
upon her and go out of her chamber, his black height bowed like a
penitent, and down to his study, and wrestle there upon his knees for
hours with that earthly and natural love which he accounted as of the
Tempter, yet might after all have been an angel, and of the Lord. And
when Dorothy came weakly down-stairs at last, with the great black
woman guarding her steps as if she were a baby, he found not in
himself the power of stern counsel and reproof which he had decided
upon when she should have left her chamber.

All the neighbors knew when Dorothy Fair first stepped her foot out
of doors, and told one another suspiciously that she did not look
very sick, and that they guessed she might have come out sooner, and
gone to meeting, had she been so minded.

And in truth the girl, beyond slight deflections in the curves of her
soft cheeks, and a wistful enlarging and brightening of her blue
eyes, as in thoughtful shadows, was not much changed. The first
Sunday when she appeared in the meeting-house she wore, to the
delight and scandal of the women, one of the new gowns and hats of
her bridal outfit. Dorothy Fair, in a great plumed hat of peach-blow
silk, in a pearly silk gown and pink-silk mitts, in a white-muslin
pelerine all wrought with cunning needlework, sat in the parson's
pew, and uplifted her lovely face towards her father in the pulpit,
and nobody knew how her whole mind and fancy were set, not upon the
sermon, but upon Eugene Hautville in the singing-seats behind her.
And nobody dreamed how, as she sat there, she held before her face,
as it were, a sort of mental hand-mirror, in which she could see her
head of fair curls, her peach-blow hat, and her slender white-muslin
shoulders reflected from Eugene's dark eyes. The fall of every curl
had she studied well that morning, and the folds of the muslin
pelerine over her shoulders. And when the congregation arose for the
hymns and faced about towards the singers, then did Dorothy let her
blue eyes seek, with an innocent unconsciousness, as of blue flowers,
which would have deceived the very elect, Eugene's face.

But his black eyes met hers with no more fiery glances. Eugene never
even looked at her, but sang, with stern averted face, which was
paler and thinner than Dorothy's, though he had had no illness save
of the spirit. In vain Dorothy sought his eyes, with her blue
appealing ones, during every hymn; in vain once or twice during the
sermon she even cast a glance around her shoulder with a slight fling
of her curls aside, and a little shiver, as if she felt a draught.
Eugene never looked her way that she could see.

When the long service was over, Dorothy, with sly, watchful eyes,
quickened her pace, and strove so to manage that she and Eugene
should emerge from the meeting-house side by side. But he was
striding far ahead, with never a backward glance, when she came out,
lifting daintily her pearly skirts. Burr was near her, but him she
never thought of, even to avoid, and his mother's stately aside
movement was not even seen by her. She courtesied prettily to those
who met her face to face, from force of habit, and went on thinking
of no one but Eugene.

Again, in the afternoon, Dorothy went to meeting, though her pulses
began to beat, with a slight return of the fever, and again she
strove with her cunning maiden wiles to attract this obdurate Eugene,
and again in vain. That night Dorothy lay and wept awhile before she
fell asleep, and dreamed that she and Eugene were a-walking in the
lane and that he kissed her. And when she awoke, blushing in the
darkness, she resolved that she would go a-walking in the lane on
every pleasant day, in the hope that the dream might come true.

And Mistress Dorothy Fair, with many eyes in the neighbors' windows
watching, went pacing slowly, for her delicate limbs as yet did not
bear her strongly, day after day down the road and into the lane,
and, with frequent rests upon wayside stones, to the farther end of
it. And yet she did not meet Eugene therein, and her dream did not
come true.

But it happened at last, about the middle of the month of June, when
the great red and white roses in the dooryards were in such full
bloom that in another day they would be past it and fall, that
Dorothy and Eugene met in the lane; for there is room enough in time
for most dreams to come true, and for the others there is eternity.

That afternoon Dorothy had gone forth as usual, but she said to
herself that he would not come; and half-way down the lane she ceased
peering into the green distances for him, and sat herself down on a
stone, and leaned back against the trunk of a young maple, and shut
her eyes wearily, and told herself in a sort of sad penitence that
she would look no more for him, for he would not come.

The grass in the lane was grown long now, with a pink mist over the
top of it; the trees at the sides leaned together heavy with foliage,
and the bordering walls were all hidden under bushes and vines.
Everywhere on bush and vine were spikes and corymbs of lusty
blossoms. Birds were calling to their mates and their young; the
locusts were shrilling out of depths of sunlight. Dorothy, in the
midst of this uncontrolled passion of summer, was herself in utter
tune and harmony with it. She was just as sweet and gracefully
courtesying among her sisters as any flower among the host of the
field; and she had silently and inconsequently, like the flower, her
own little lust of life and bloom which none could overcome, and
against which she could know no religion. This Dorothy, meekly
leaning her slender shoulders against the maple-tree, with her blue
eyes closed, and her little hands folded in her lap, could no more
develop into aught towards which she herself inclined not than a
daisy plant out in the field could grow a clover blossom. Moreover
her heart, which had after all enough of the sweetness of love in it,
opened or shut like the cup of a sensitive plant, with seemingly no
volition of hers; therefore was she in a manner innocently helpless
and docile before her own emotions and her own destiny.

She sat still a few minutes and kept her eyes closed. Then she
thought she heard a stir down the lane, but she would not open her
eyes to look, so sadly and impatiently sure was she that he would not
come. Even when she knew there was a footstep drawing near she would
not look. She kept her eyes closed, and made as if she were asleep;
and some one passed her, and she would not look, so sure was she that
it was not Eugene.

But that afternoon Eugene Hautville, who had gone all this time the
long way to the village, felt his own instincts, or the natural
towardness of his heart, too strong for him. Often, watching from a
distance across the fields, he had seen a pale flutter of skirts in
the lane, and knew well enough that Dorothy was there, and had turned
back; but this time he walked on. When he came to Dorothy he cast one
glance at her, then set his face sternly and kept on, with his heart
pulling him back at every step. Dorothy did not open her eyes until
he had fairly passed her, and then she looked and saw him going away
from her without a word. Then she gave a little cry that no one could
have interpreted with any written language. She called not Eugene by
his name; she said no word; but her heart gave that ancient cry for
its lover which was before all speech; and that human love-call
drowned out suddenly all the others.

But when Eugene stopped and turned, Dorothy blushed so before his
eyes that her very neck and arms glowed pink through her lace tucker
and sleeves. She shrank away, twisting herself and hiding her face,
so that he could see naught of her but the flow of her muslin skirts
and her curling fair locks.

Eugene stood a minute looking at her. His dark face was as red as
Dorothy's. He made a motion towards her, then drew back and held up
his head resolutely.

"It is a pleasant day," he said, as if they were exchanging the
everyday courtesies of life; and then when she made no reply, he
added that he hoped she was quite recovered from her sickness.

And then he was pressing on again, white in the face now and
wrestling fiercely with himself that he might, as it were, pass his
own heart which stood in the way; but Dorothy rose up, with a sob,
and pressed before him, touching his arm with her slender one in her
lace sleeve, and shaking out like any flower the rose and lavender
scent in her garments.

"I want to speak to you," she said, and strove in vain to command her
voice.

Eugene bowed and tried to smile, and waited, and looked above her
head, through the tree branches into the field.

"I want to know if--you are angry with me because--I would not--marry
Burr," said Dorothy, catching her breath between her words.

"I told you that you had no reason--that he was not guilty," Eugene
said, with a kind of stern doggedness; and still he did not look at
her.

"I could not marry--him," Dorothy panted, softly.

"I told you you had no reason," Eugene said again, as if he were
saying a lesson that he had taught himself.

"Are you angry--with me because I could not marry him?" Dorothy
asked, with her soft persistency in her own line of thought, and not
his.

Then Eugene in desperation looked down at her, and saw her face worn
into sweet wistfulness by her illness, her dilated eyes and lips
parted and quivering into sobs, like a baby's.

"I am not angry, but I encourage no woman to be false to her
betrothal vows," he said, and strove to make his voice hard; but
Dorothy bent her head, and the sobs came, and he took her in his
arms.

"Are you angry with me?" Dorothy sobbed, piteously, against his
breast.

"No, not with you, but myself," said Eugene. "It is all with myself.
I will take the blame of it all, sweet," and he smoothed her hair and
kissed her and held her close and tried to comfort her; and it seemed
to him that he could indeed take all the blame of her inconstancy and
distrust, and could even bear his self-reproach for her sake, so much
he loved her.

"I would not have married Burr--even if--he had told me--he was
innocent," Dorothy said, after a while. She was hushing her sobs, and
her very soul was smiling within her for joy as Eugene's fond
whispers reached her ears.

"Why?" said Eugene.

"Because--you came first--when you looked at me in the
meeting-house," Dorothy whispered back. Then she suddenly lifted her
face a little, and looked up at him, with one soft flushed cheek
crushed against his breast, and Eugene bent his face down to hers.
They stood so, and for a minute had, indeed, the whole world to their
two selves, for love as well as death has the power of annihilation;
and then there was a stir in the lane, a crisp rustle of petticoats
and a hiss of whispering voices; and they started and fell apart.
There in the lane before them, their eyes as keen as foxes, with the
scent of curiosity and gossip, their cheeks red with the shame of it,
and their lips forming into apologetic and terrified smiles, stood
Margaret Bean and two others--the tavern-keeper's wife and the wife
of the man who kept the village store.

For a second the three women fairly cowered beneath Eugene
Hautville's eyes, and Margaret Bean began to stammer as if her old
tongue were palsied. Then Eugene collected himself, made them one of
his courtly bows, turned to Dorothy with another, offered her his
arm, and walked away with her out of the lane, before the eyes of the
prying gossips.




Chapter XXVII


It was four o'clock that summer afternoon when the three
women--Margaret Bean, the tavern-keeper's wife, and the storekeeper's
wife--who had followed Dorothy and Eugene into the lane to pry upon
them set forth to communicate by word of mouth the scandalous
proceedings they had witnessed; and long before midnight all the
village knew. The women crept cautiously at a good distance behind
Dorothy and Eugene out of the lane, and watched, with incredulous
eyes turning to each other for confirmation, the pair walk into
Parson Fair's house together. Then they could do no more, since their
ears were not long enough, and each went her way to tell what she had
seen.

All the neighbors knew when Eugene Hautville left Parson Fair's
house that afternoon, but their knowledge stopped there. Nobody
ever discovered just what was said within those four walls when
Dorothy--who, soft plumaged though she was, had flown in the
faces of all her decorous feminine antecedents and her goodly
teaching--confronted her father with her new lover at her side.

It was safe enough to assume, for one who knew her and them well,
that the two men did finally turn and protect her and shelter her
each against himself, and his own despite, as well as one another.
After that Eugene Hautville was seen every Sunday night and twice in
the week going into Parson Fair's house, and the candles burned late
in the north parlor.

The banns were published in a month's time. Some accounted it
unseemly haste, after the other banns which had come to naught, and
some said 'twas better so, and they blamed not Parson Fair for
placing such a flighty and jilting maid safe within the pale of
wedlock--and they guessed he was thankful enough to find a husband
for her, even if 'twas one of the Hautvilles.

However, Eugene was held in somewhat more of esteem than the others,
since he had in his own right a snug little sum in bank which had
come to him from an uncle whose name he bore. When it was known that
Eugene had bought the old Squire Damon place, a goodly house with a
box-bordered front walk, and a pillared front door, and would take
his bride home to it, public favor became quite strong for him. Folk
opined that he would, even if he was a Hautville, make full as good a
husband as Burr, and that Dorothy Fair would have the best of the
bargain all around. While many held Dorothy in slight esteem for her
instability and delicacy, and thought she was no desirable helpmeet
for any man, some were of the opinion that she had shown praiseworthy
judgment and shrewdness in jilting Burr for Eugene.

Dorothy this time made small show of her wedding, and was married in
her father's study with only the necessary witnesses and no guests.
Eugene Hautville had chafed. Dorothy also, with her feminine desire
for all minor details of happiness, was aggrieved that she could
never now appear before the public gaze in all the splendor of her
wedding-gear. But Parson Fair stood firm for once, and would have it
so.

All the watchful neighbors saw was, after nightfall and moonrise,
Parson Fair's door open, and the bride and groom appear for a second
in a golden shaft of light which flashed into gloom at the closing of
the door, and left there two shadows, as if the story of their life
and love had already been told and passed into history. And then the
neighbors saw them move up the road with long vanishing flutters of
the bride's white draperies, and the great black woman, steadying a
basket against her hip, in their wake, following her mistress like a
faithful dog, with perhaps the most unselfish love of all.

The black woman favored Eugene more than she had ever favored Burr,
perhaps because she was a true slave of love, and leaned with the
secret leanings of her mistress's heart against all words of mouth,
obeying her commands with a fuller understanding of them than Dorothy
herself.

When this new lover came a-courting, the African woman had always
greeted him at the door with that wide, sudden smile of hers, at once
simple, like a child's, and wild, like the grin of an animal; and her
voice, in her thick jargon, was nearly as softly rich to him as to
Dorothy. Moreover she kept no longer jealous watch at the door of the
room where the lovers sat, and was fond of treating the young man
with little cakes which she made with honey, whose like was to be
eaten nowhere else in the village.

After Dorothy and Eugene were wedded they faded into comparative
insignificance in the thoughts of the villagers, which were then
centred upon Burr Gordon and Madelon. The curtain went down upon
Eugene and his bride as upon any pair of wedded lovers in his
Shakespeare book.

Burr was in exceedingly ill repute, but he did not himself know it.
Many of his old friends treated him coolly, but he attributed that to
the embarrassed sympathy and constraint which they naturally felt
towards him in his position. He thought they avoided him because they
knew well that he would suspect even friendliness lest it contain a
pity which would hurt his pride; and he thanked them for it. But the
truth was, that outcry of Dorothy's against him on the wedding-night
had lashed up into a hurricane all the suspicions which Lot's avowal
had stilled. They did away easily enough with the force of Lot's
statement, for there are many theories to furnish skin-fits for every
difficulty, if one searches in the infinity of possibilities.

Lot's true reason none fathomed, for it was beyond their
sounding-lines of selfish curiosity; but they found another which
seemed to meet the needs of the case as well.

Lot, they said, had bargained with Burr to give up all claim to
Madelon, and he would set him free by confessing an attempt at
suicide. Margaret Bean, it was reported, had seen the letter which
Lot had written to Burr in prison. When Madelon, who, half crazed by
anxiety about her lover, had wrongfully accused herself to save him,
had seen him turn to her rival and scorn her after his release, she
had accepted Lot in a rage of pride and jealousy, as he had planned
for her to do. The breaking off of the marriage betwixt her and Lot
they mostly attributed to the simple cause he had mentioned--his
failing health--though some thought that he had hesitated about
marrying into the Hautville family when it came to it.

Suspicion had been for a time somewhat hushed against Madelon, the
more so that she had been seen, since Dorothy had jilted Burr, to
pass him with scarcely a nod, and was popularly supposed to hold an
Indian grudge against him, and to be still anxious to wed his cousin
Lot.

However, the tide soon turned again. On the Sunday after the banns
between Dorothy and Eugene had been published, Burr had been seen to
walk home openly with Madelon from evening meeting; and it was soon
known that he was courting her regularly.

Then darker whispers were circulated. People said now that they were
accomplices in attempted crime. That black atmosphere of suspicion
and hatred, which gathers nowhere more easily than in a New England
town, was thick around Burr and Madelon. They breathed, though as yet
it was in less degree, the same noxious air as did the persecuted
Quakers and witches of bygone times. The gases which lie at the
bottom of human souls, which gossip and suspicious imaginations
upstir, are deadlier than those at the bottoms of old wells. Still
Madelon and Burr knew nothing of it, nor Burr's mother, nor Lot, nor
any of the Hautville men. The attitude of Madelon's father and
brothers towards herself and Burr had done much to strengthen
suspicion. High voices and strange remarks had been overheard by folk
strolling casually, of a pleasant evening, past the Hautville house.

In truth, at first old David Hautville and all his sons except Eugene
had risen against Burr and Madelon, all their pride in arms that she
should return to this man who had once forsaken her for another. But
later they had yielded, for their pride was undermined by their own
gloomy convictions as to Madelon, which they confided not to one
another. However, the boy Richard still greeted Burr surlily, with a
fierce black flash under frowning brows, and scarcely spoke to
Madelon at all until the day before her marriage. That was set some
two months after Dorothy's.

Burr and Madelon, during the days of their betrothal, were as closely
beset by spies on every hand as a party of Madelon's old kindred
might have been, encamped in a wooded country, where every bush
veiled savage eyes and every tree stood in front of a foeman, but
they did not know it. Folk knew when Mrs. Gordon went to visit her
son's betrothed, though 'twas on a dark evening. They knew what she
wore, and how long she stayed. They knew when Madelon returned her
visit; they knew, to remember, in many cases, more details of their
daily lives than Burr and Madelon themselves.

Madelon had few wedding preparations to make. The wedding-garments
which she had stitched with sorrow for her marriage with Lot would
serve her now. She employed her time in increasing still further the
household stores of linen for her father's and brothers' use, when
she should be gone, and in making a great stock of sweet-sauce,
jelly, and cordials from the fruits and berries of the season.

One afternoon in late summer, when the high blackberries were ripe,
Madelon set forth with a great basket on her arm. A fine cordial,
good for many ills, she knew how to make from the berries, and had
planned to brew a goodly quantity this year. She went down the road a
way, then over some bars, with her hands on the highest and a spring
like a willow branch set free, across a pasture where some red cows
were grazing, then over another set of bars, into a rough and shaggy
land sloping gradually into a hill. Here the high blackberries grew
in great thorny thickets, and Madelon pressed among them warily and
began picking. She had not picked long--indeed the bottom of her
basket was not covered--when she heard a rustle in the bushes behind
her and looked over her shoulder hurriedly, and there was Lot Gordon.

Lot came forward from a cluster of young firs, parting the rank
undergrowth with the careless wonted movement of one who steers his
way among his own household goods. Well used to all the wild disorder
of out-doors was Lot Gordon, and could have picked his way of a dark
night among the stones and bushes and trees of many a pasture and
woodland. Moreover, Lot, uprising from the great nest which he had
hollowed out for himself from a sweet fern growth under the balsam
firs, exhaling their fragrant breath of healing, and coming into
sight, made better show than he had ever done in his own book-walled
study.

Here, where the minds of other men swerved him and incited him not,
where only Nature herself held him in leading-strings with
unsearchable might or was laid bare before his daring eyes and many a
secret discovered, Lot Gordon gained his best grace of home. The
balsam firs framed him with more truth than the door of his own
dwelling. To Madelon, as he came out from them, he looked more a man
than he had ever done; for all unconsciously to her mind of strong
and simple bent, he had seemed at times scarce a man but rather some
strange character from a book, which had gotten life through too
strong imagining.

Moreover to-day his likeness to Burr came out strongly. Madelon saw
the cant of his head and swing of his shoulders, with a half sense of
shame that he was not Burr, and yet with a sudden understanding of
him that she had never felt before. She had not seen him since her
betrothal to Burr. She thought to herself that he was thinner, and
that the red flush on his cheeks was the flush of fever and not of
the summer sun.

"How do you do, Lot?" she said. Madelon's cheeks were a splendid red;
her green sunbonnet hung by its strings low on her neck, and her
head, with black hair clinging to her temples in moist rings, was
thrust out from the green tangle of vines like a flower. When Lot did
not answer at once, but stood pale and trembling, as if an icy wind
had struck him, before her, she pulled the pricking vines loose from
her dress, and came out. "How do you do, Lot?" she said, again. Still
Lot did not answer, and after a minute she turned with impatient
dignity as if to enter her fastness again; but then Lot spoke.

"Like mankind," he said, "'tis not well, and it tends to death, but
we were born with a lash at our backs to do it."

Madelon knit her brows impatiently, for this was his old talk, that
savored to her of ink and parchment and thoughts laid up in studied
guise, like mummies. Then she noted his poor face, and again the look
like Burr, which caused her heart to melt with the fancy of her love
in like case, and she said, with that gracious kindness which became
her well, that it was a pleasant day, and the smell of the balsam fir
was good for him.

But Lot looked at her with his great eyes set in hungry hollows, and
answered her in that stilted speech which she liked not, trying to
smile his old mocking smile with his poor lips, which only trembled
like a child's when tears are coming. "There are rivers of honey and
gardens of spices, and branches dropping balm," said Lot, "where a
man can walk but his soul cannot follow him. His soul waits outside
and strives to taste the sweet when he swallows it, and smell the
balm and the spices when he breathes them in, but cannot; and that is
only good for a man which is good for his soul."

"I don't know what you mean," said Madelon, shortly.

"I mean that I am outside all the good of this world, since the one
good which I crave and cannot have is the gate to all the rest," said
Lot. Then suddenly he cried out passionately, lifting up his face to
the sky, "O God, why need it be so? Why need a man be a bond-slave to
one hunger? Why need this one woman be the angel with the flaming
sword before all the little pleasures I used to taste and love? Why
need she come between me and the breath of the woods, and the incense
of the fields, and their secrets which were to me before my own, so I
can take no more delight in them?"

Madelon looked at him half in pity, half in proud resentment. "If it
is so," she said, "it was not of my own accord I came; you know that,
Lot Gordon. I meant no harm to you, and the harm that I did you
brought upon yourself. I would not have come here to-day if I had
known you were here and that it would disturb you."

"You could not have helped coming," said Lot. "I have been here since
morning, and you have been here all the while."

"Why do you talk so, Lot Gordon?" cried Madelon, angrily, for Lot's
covert meanings fretted her straightforwardness beyond endurance.
"You know that I have just come here!"

"You came here when I did," said Lot, "when the fields were dewy. You
held up your skirts and stepped daintily. I went ahead and you
followed, high-kilted, pointing your steps among the wet grasses like
a dove. Had I looked over my shoulder I could have seen you, but I
looked not lest the power of flight might be in you like the dove."

"I shall go away if you talk like this. I will not stay here and
listen to it; you know I was not here," said Madelon, and she paled a
little, for she almost thought, used to his fanciful talk though she
were, that Lot had gone mad.

"We walked towards the sun," persisted Lot, "but you were in my
shadow and needed not to cast down your eyes. I saw some red flowers,
but I did not pick them for you, and I heard you stop and break the
stems as you came after. When we reached the shade of the firs there
I sat down, but I left the space there, where the needles are
smoothest and thickest, for you, and there you sat too, all day."

"Lot Gordon!"

"You need not mind, Madelon, for all day I looked not over my
shoulder once. I saw not your face, nor touched your lips, nor your
hand, nor even the fold of your dress. I harmed you not, even in my
dreams, dear."

Madelon, standing quite free of the clinging blackberry vines, held
up her dark head like an empress, and looked at him. In truth she
felt little pity for Lot Gordon then, for she liked not being made to
follow other than Burr even in a man's dreams. Still, when she spoke
it was not unkindly, for in spite of this jealousy of herself for
Burr, and in spite of her inability to understand such worship of
herself, when she was spent in worship of another, she remembered how
she had nearly taken the life of this man, and how he had striven to
shield her, though against her will, and on hard and selfish
conditions, and how he had at last sacrificed himself to set her
free.

"Lot," said she, "there must be no more of this. I am almost your
cousin's wife. You have no right."  And then she repeated it
passionately. "I say you have no right to love me like this, if I do
not love you, Lot Gordon. I will have no other man but Burr think me
at his heels. I will follow him till the day of my death, but no
other. I would only have married you to save his life--you know that.
You know I never loved you. You have no right."

"The right of love is every man's who sets not himself before it,"
returned Lot, with sad dignity. "I will not yield that even for love
of you, Madelon; but myself shall be pushed yet farther out of sight,
I promise you, and you shall be pestered no more, child. Go on with
your berry-picking."

A great mound of rock uplifted itself like the swelling crouch of
some fossil animal among the sweet ferns and the wild scramble of
vines. Lot sank down upon it panting for breath. He leaned his head
wearily forward between his hands, his elbows resting on his knees.

Madelon looked at him hesitatingly; she opened her mouth as if to
speak, then was silent. She looked at the high vines, black with
fruit, then at the field beyond, as if half minded to go away and
leave them.

Finally she fell to picking again without a word. Lot coughed once,
but he did not speak. Madelon kept glancing at him as she picked.
Compunction and pity softened more and more her fiery heart, the more
so since she felt the guilt of happiness in the face of the woe of
another upon her. Finally she said, with that fond reversion to the
little homely truths and waysides of life with which the feminine
mind strives often to comfort, that she would put up for him a jug of
her blackberry cordial, and furthermore that she hoped his cough was
better. She said it with half-constrained kindness, not looking up
from her berry-picking; but Lot lifted his head and thanked her and
said the cough was nearly cured, with eagerness to respond to grace,
like a child who has been chidden.

Then he watched her with bright eyes as she picked, his breath coming
hard and quick. "Madelon!" he said, and stopped.

"What, Lot?"

"You remember--the gewgaws which I--showed you, Madelon--the feathers
and ribbons and satins, and the other things? You cared not for them
then. Will you have them now, for your wedding-gift?"

"No, Lot," said Madelon, quickly. "I thank you, but I cannot take
them; I have enough."

"Why not?"

"I have enough."

"There is no need for you to tell me why," said Lot. "A woman like
you would almost veil herself from her own eyes for the sake of a
lover, so great is her jealousy. The thoughts and the dreams with
which I bought the gewgaws profane them in your eyes while I am
alive."

"I do not need them, and I cannot take them, Lot," said Madelon,
steadily.

Lot said no more. He leaned his head upon his hands again. Madelon
could hear his panting breath. She resolved that she would go away
across the fields, down the road a piece, to another berry patch that
she knew of. Still she did not go. One of those impulses which seem
to come from authority outside one's self, or else from some hidden
springs of motion which we know not of, had seized her. She looked at
Lot and moved softly away a few steps, holding her skirts clear of
the vines. Then she paused and looked again, and was away again. Her
face was resolute and wary, as if she saw something which she feared
and loathed, and yet would brave. Then she went close to Lot, and
stood still over him a minute.

"Lot," she said.

He looked up at her, wonderingly. "Are you sick, Madelon?" he cried,
and would have risen, but she motioned him back and spoke, turning
her face away the while.

"Once I asked Burr to give me the kiss that I would have killed him
for," said she, in a voice so sharpened by her stress of spirit that
it might have come out of the flames of martyrdom. "Now I ask you to
give me the kiss that I almost took your life for."

"Madelon!"

"It is all I can do to make amends," said she. Then she looked full
at him, and did not shrink when she met his eyes, though her face
grew white before the mad longing in them.

Lot stood up and leaned towards her, and she stood waiting. Then he
threw out his hands, as if he would push her back, and turned away.
"You owe me no amends," he said, hoarsely. "The wound that you gave
me was my just desert for striving to take what you were not willing
to give."

"Your life is your life," said she, steadily, "and I almost took it
away from you. I would do this in token of repentance for that and
whatever other harm I have done you unwittingly."

"You owe me no amends, and I will take none," said Lot, again.

Then he faced about towards her, and she started and looked at him,
wondering and half in awe, for suddenly the love in the heart of the
man showed itself in his face like a light, and it was almost as if
she saw, unbelieving and denying, her own transfigured image in his
eyes.

"Good-bye, Madelon," said Lot.

"Good-bye," she returned, faintly, and looked at him for the first
time in all her life without the thought of Burr between them.

But that Lot did not know, and stood a moment gazing at her as a man
gazes at one beloved under the shadow of long parting, striving to
gain possession of somewhat to hold and cherish aside from the
conditions of the flesh. Then he said good-bye again, and went away,
with that soft winding glide of his through the underbrush which he
might have learned from the wild dwellers in the woods, and was out
of sight through the violet glooms of the firs.




Chapter XXVIII


The night before Madelon was married, as if by some tacit
understanding of peace and harmony, the Hautvilles came together for
a concert in the great living-room. Not one had said to another,
"This is Madelon's last night at home, and we have been wroth with
her; let us bury the hatchet, and raise our voices with one accord in
our old songs;" but one impulse had seemed to move them all, as one
wind moves the forest trees who are kin to one another, and they were
all together at twilight, even Eugene and his bride.

Burr Gordon came also, but he and Madelon did not sit apart that
evening. The weather was cool, even for late September, and an early
frost was threatened. A great fire blazed on the hearth. Burr and
Dorothy, on the settle in the chimney-corner, listened to the
Hautville chorus, and Burr looked always at Madelon and Dorothy at
Eugene. The Hautvilles stood together before the fire, old David with
his bass-viol at his side, like the wife of his bosom; Louis holding
his violin on his shoulder, like a child, pressing his dark cheek
against it, and Eugene and Abner and Richard and Madelon uplifting
their voices in the old songs and fugues.

The doors and windows were shut. Nobody heard nor saw Lot Gordon when
he crept like a fox round the house, and came under a window and
rested his chin on the sill and remained there looking at Madelon.
She wore that night a soft gown of crimson wool, which clung about
her limbs and her bosom, and showed her bare throat swelling with
song into new curves which were indeed those of music itself. Lot, as
he looked at her, saw her with the full meaning of her beauty as
never Burr could, and as she could never see herself, for there is no
looking-glass on earth like a vain love when it rises above the
slight of its own desire. Greater praise than she would ever know
again in her whole life went up for Madelon outside that window, as
she sang, but she neither knew it nor missed anything when Lot went
away.

At ten o'clock the concert ceased. Lot slunk away noiselessly, and
soon Eugene and Dorothy went home, and Burr, lingering for a
good-night kiss or two in the door.

Madelon set bread to rise that night, and fulfilled her little round
of nightly tasks for the last time. Her father and brothers went to
bed and left her there--all but Richard. He remained in a corner of
the settle, his slim length flung out carelessly, his head tipped
back as if he were asleep; but his black eyes flashed bright under
their lids at his sister whenever she did not look at him. Madelon
said not a word until her tasks were done; then she came and stood in
front of Richard, and looked at him, frowning a little, for her pride
was stung at his treatment of her, but holding out her hand. "Can't
you bid me good-night, Richard?" said she, and tried to smile at him
with that old loving comradeship which he had disowned.

The boy maintained his sullen silence for a moment, and Madelon
waited. Then suddenly he cried, "Good-night," with sharp intonations,
like the response of a surly dog, and sprang up and thrust something
hard into her hand, with such roughness that it hurt her, and she
started.

"'Tis a wedding-present for you," Richard said, savagely, with
averted face. "I thought the one I gave you before would not serve
for two weddings. Though there be but one bride, there should be
different gifts."

Madelon gave one look at Richard; then she opened her hand, and there
on her reddened palm lay a little gold pencil, which the boy must
have spent all his little savings to buy. Madelon held it out to him.
"Take it back," said she; "I want no presents with words like that to
sweeten them."

Richard's clenched hand hung by his side. He shook his head sullenly.

"Take it!" said Madelon; but he made no motion to do so.

"Then I shall let it fall on the floor," said Madelon.

"Let it," returned Richard, and forthwith the little gold pencil
rolled on the floor under the settle, and Madelon turned away with a
white face. But before she had reached the door Richard was at her
side and his hand on her arm. "Oh, Madelon!" he said, striving to
keep the sobs back. Then Madelon turned and laid a hand on each of
his shoulders, and held him away, looking at him.

"Why did you speak to me like that?" said she; and then, without
waiting for an answer, drew the boy's head down to her bosom, and
held it there a moment, stroking his hair. "If ever you are sick
after I am gone," said she, "I will come and take care of you; and if
you don't get good things to eat I will see to that, too;" and then
she kissed Richard's dark head, and put him away gently, bidding him
with a tender laugh "not to be a baby," and went over to the settle
and picked up the little gold pencil, and praised it and said she
would treasure it all her life.

And then she bade Richard follow her into the best room, and opened
the carved oak chest and displayed six beautiful shirts made of
linen, which she had herself spun and woven and wrought with finest
needlework in bands and bosoms, for a parting gift to him, because he
was the nearest of all her brothers, though she must not say so. "The
others have shirts enough," said she; "I have seen to that, for I
have meant to do my duty to you all, but none of the others have
bosoms and wristbands stitched like these, and the linen is extra
fine."

That night Richard would not go to his chamber, which he shared with
his brother Louis, lest he wake and spy his face flushed with tears,
but crept stealthily back down-stairs, and, all unbeknown to any one,
lay all night on the settle in the living-room. He slept little, and
often waked and wept in the darkness like a child rather than one of
the fiery Hautville brothers.

When wrath with a beloved one is stilled in the human heart and love
takes its place, it is with a threefold increase, a great rending of
spirit, and a cruel turning of weapons against one's self. Richard
was one who would always deal with entireties, being capable of no
divisions nor subtleties of praise or blame. Whereas his anger had
been fierce against his sister that she should love and marry the man
who had flouted her, now it was turned wholly against himself for his
injustice and ill-treatment of her. He racked himself with the memory
of his surly words and looks; and those six shirts of fine linen,
with the cunning needlework in band and bosom, seemed the veritable
scriptural coals of fire on his head. Also good and simple reasons
for his sister's course came to him as he lay there and influenced
him still more. "She had it in her mind to kill him, though 'twas the
other she struck," he said to himself; "'tis only fit that she should
make amends to him for that and keep his house for him, and bake and
brew and spin and weave for him."  Richard in the darkness nodded his
head in agreement with his own argument, and yet he hated Burr as
well as ever, and the next morning when he saw him stand beside his
sister before Parson Fair, he clenched his slender brown hands until
the sinews stood out, and his black eyes still flashed hostility at
him. Yet when he looked at Madelon's face his own softened, and he
set his mouth hard to keep back the quiver in it. Madelon wore not
the silk of green and gold in which she had planned to be wedded to
Lot; that she could not bring her mind to do, since the old wretched
dreams and imaginations seemed to cling to the garment and desecrate
it for this. She wore instead a sober gown of a satin sheen with the
rich purplish-red hue of a plum, which set off the dark bloom of her
face by suggestion rather than contrast; but all the boy Richard
noted of her costume was his little gold pencil slung on the long
gold chain around her neck.

Madelon and Burr were married quite early in the morning, in the best
room of the Hautville house, and nobody outside the two families was
bidden to the wedding. After the marriage the bride tied on a
white-muslin apron and passed cake and currant wine; and the great
Hautvilles sitting in sober state around the room, Elvira Gordon in
her black satin and pearls, pretty Dorothy, and Parson Fair partook.

Then the bride went up to her chamber and put on a pelisse of stuff
like her gown, lined with canary-colored satin, and a little cap of
otter and a great muff which she had fashioned herself out of skins
which her brothers had brought home, and took over her arm, since the
day was frosty, a long tippet of otter which she could wind round her
throat, if need be, and came down all equipped for her wedding-journey.

In front of the Hautville house stood waiting a smart chaise with a
fine young horse in the shafts, and the bride and groom came out and
got in and drove away. But first, while Burr was gathering up the
reins, David Hautville's hoarse voice through the open door besought
him to wait, and presently the old man came striding forth with the
skin of a mighty bear which he had slain single-handed years ago, and
which had been his chiefest treasure next to his viol ever since,
kept beside his bed, whence no one dared remove it. He flung it up
into the chaise, and tucked it well in over his daughter's knees.
"Oh, father, I will not take your bearskin!" Madelon cried, and the
tears came into her eyes, for this touched her more than anything;
and the memory of aught that she had ever lacked in tenderness
towards them all seemed to smite her in the face.

"'Tis a sharp day for the time of year, and there'll be a frost
to-night," was all old David Hautville said, and strode back into the
house, keeping his face well turned away.

The horse that Burr drove was a young animal that he had purchased
lately. It was of the stock of the Morgans, and stood with the
faithfulness of a sentinel; but when the signal to start was given
stepped out proudly as if to a battle charge, with eager tossings of
heavy mane and high flings of knees and hoofs; and yet, when fairly
on the road, never broke the swift precision of his course.

"He's got a fine horse there," Abner Hautville said, in his emphatic
bass, as he watched them out of sight; and he further declared that
for his part he would be willing to trade the roan for him. Then the
boy Richard turned upon him, with a cry that was something between a
sob and an oath: "Yes, trade off the roan and all we've got left to
him, I'll warrant ye will!" he choked out. Then he was gone, pelting
off madly across the fields, with his bold and innocent young heart,
that had as yet known no fiercer passion than this for his sister,
all aflame with grief and angry jealousy, as of one who sees his best
haled off before his eyes, and still with awed submission to a power
which he recognizes and understands not.




Chapter XXIX


As Burr and Madelon, setting forth on their wedding-journey, drove
down the village street, they met many whom they knew; and had it not
been for their self-engrossment they could not have failed to notice
and wonder at the cold greetings they received, and the many averted
faces which greeted them not at all.

Indeed, Burr did remark upon it when they met Daniel Plympton, who
nodded with a surly air and turned his fat and pleasant countenance
resolutely away, with a gesture that seemed to belie his own
identity.

"What's come across Dan'l?" he said, laughing, for at that time
coldness from the outside world seemed but provocative of amusement.
Then he sang out gayly to the Morgan horse, and they flew along the
road, under the outreaching branches, red and gold and russet, past
old landmarks and houses and more familiar faces which bore strange
looks towards them, and yet surprised them not, for a strangeness was
over all the old sights and ways for them both. To the bride and
groom, riding through the village where they had been born and bred,
and whence all their earthly imaginations had sprung, came an
experience like a resurrection. They saw it all: the paths their feet
had trodden, the doors they had entered, the friends they had known
from childhood, but all seemed no longer the same, since their own
conditions of life had changed; and change in one's self is the vital
spring of change in all besides.

As they rode along old associations lost their holds over them in
their new world, which was the outcome of the old, and would in its
turn wax old again. Burr looked at his own home, as he went by, as if
he had never seen it; even his memory of himself and his childhood
days was dim, and he and Madelon, glancing at Lot's windows and
having his image forced, as it were, upon their consciousness,
regarded it as they might have done an actor in some old drama of
history in which they also had taken part, but which had long since
passed off the stage.

They left the house behind and were swiftly out of sight, over the
crest of a long hill with a great spread of golden maple branches
closing after them like a curtain, and neither of them dreamed in
what straits Lot Gordon lay behind his vacant windows--and all
through this love and bliss and paradise of theirs.

The smart chaise and the Morgan horse had scarcely disappeared before
Margaret Bean came hurriedly out of Lot Gordon's house and went
rattling in her starched draperies towards the village; and soon
after that the doctor was seen driving thither furiously in his
tilting sulky, while windows were opened and spying heads thrust out
all along his course.

An hour later everybody knew that Lot Gordon, some said by a fall in
climbing over a stone wall, some said by a severe fit of coughing,
had caused his old wound to beset him again with danger of his life.
That night, indeed, the tide of rancorous gossip swelled high. The
spirit of persecution and righteous retribution which finds easy
birth in New England villages was fast getting to itself feet and
hands and tongue and a whole body of active powers.

A stormy bridal night had Burr and Madelon known had they been at
home; and had Lot Gordon died during the next three days, in which he
lay in imminent danger, there had been fleet horses on the track of
the swift Morgan, and the wedding-journey had come to a close.

Yet the Hautville men heard nothing of the bitterness which was
gathering towards Madelon and Burr, for people, fearing their fierce
tempers, hesitated until the time was come to disclose it to them.
Even old Luke Basset dared not carry news to them. The tongues were
always hushed when one of them drew near; and as for Eugene, who,
having a wife, might perhaps have discovered it, he and Dorothy took
the stage coach for Boston the day after the marriage, and were
paying a visit at Dorothy's aunt's there.

After three days Lot Gordon was reported to be no longer hovering
between life and death, and yet it was said on good authority,
through the doctor's wife in fact, that he might at any time, by an
injudicious step or a harder coughing-spell, end his life through the
opening of that old wound, for which they held either Madelon or
Burr, or perhaps both, accountable; and public indignation swelled
higher and higher. It was resolved that when the bridal couple
returned a constant espionage should be kept upon them, and in case
of Lot's death active measures should be taken.

"We ain't goin' to have a man murdered to death in our midst by no
French and Injuns nowadays and let it slide," proclaimed a fiery
spirit in the store one night. Then when the door opened and Abner
Hautville, dark and warlike in his carriage as any fighting chief,
appeared, the man asked ostentatiously for a "quart of m'lasses, and
not so black and gritty as the last was nuther," transferring the
rancor in his tone to an inoffensive object with Machiavellian
policy.

However, Margaret Bean's husband was in the store that night, and
heard it all. He had been sent thither for a half-pound of ginger,
and told not to linger; but linger he did, disposing his old bones
with a stiff fling upon a handy half-barrel and listening to every
word with a shrewd sense, for which no one would have given him
credit, that he could by repetition and enlargement, if necessary,
appease his wife's wrath at his delay. The workings of the human mind
towards selfish ends even in the simplest organization have an art
beyond all mechanism, and can astonish the wisest when revealed.

Nobody who saw old man Bean pottering homeward that night, his back
bent with age, yet moving with a childlike shuffle, carrying his
parcel of ginger with tight clutch lest he drop it, like one whose
weariness of body must make up for feebleness of mind, dreamed what a
diplomat he was in his humble walk of life, and what an adept still
in doubles and turns and twists and dodges towards his own petty
ends.

A sweeter morsel than any sugar old man Bean, overborne with a sense
of naughtiness and disobedience, like a child, carried home to his
wife to quiet her chiding tongue.

Hardly had he entered the door when he heard afar the swift rattle of
her starched skirts, like a very warning note of hostility, and cut
in ahead of her reproaches with a triumphant manner.

"Pretty doin's there's goin' to be," said he; "never was nothin' like
it in this town. That's what I stayed for. Thought ye'd orter know."

"What do you mean?" asked Margaret Bean, staring.

"Ye know what the doctor says about _him_?"  The old man jerked his
head towards the door.

Margaret nodded.

"Well, they're goin' to have 'em both hung for murder the minute he
draws his last breath."

"Can't till they're tried," said Margaret, with a sniff of scorn at
her husband's lack of legal knowledge.

"Well, they're goin' to clap 'em into jail the minute they git home,
an' keep 'em there till they can hang 'em," persisted old man Bean.

"They ain't."

"I tell ye they are!"

Old man Bean had a cup of tea, plentifully sweetened with molasses,
made from the ginger which he had purchased, and went to bed happy
and peaceful, as one who has worked innocently and well his small
powers to his own advantage; and soon after that Lot also heard the
news which he had brought.

Margaret Bean said to herself that it was her duty; and her duty, and
a great devouring thirst of curiosity, overcame her natural fear of
injuring the sick man.

Lot Gordon was still in bed, but propped up on pillows, with a candle
on the stand at his side, reading one of his leather-covered books.
Margaret Bean shrank back when she had delivered herself of her news,
for the flash in Lot's eyes was like lightning; and she waited in
trembling certainty as for thunder.

"I tell ye 'tis a lie!" cried Lot Gordon. "Do ye hear, 'tis a lie! Go
yourself and tell them so from me. The wound has naught to do with
this. It was naught but a scratch, for I had not courage enough to
strike deep, much as I wanted to be quit of the world and the fools
in it. Go you down to the store and tell the gossips that have no
affairs of their own, and must needs pry on their neighbors so. Dare
any one of them to turn knife on his own flesh for the first time and
strike deeper! The next time I'll do better. Tell them so! The fools!
Sodom and Gomorrah, and fire from Heaven for wickedness! Lord, why
not fire from Heaven for damned foolishness, that does more harm to
the world than the shattering of all the commandments into
stone-dust!"

"I felt that 'twas my duty to let you know, sir," stammered Margaret
Bean, backing farther and farther away from him.

"Tell the fools that I say, and I'll swear to it, and so will the
doctor swear, that 'twas not the wound that has been my ailment, but
my cursed lungs; but if 'twas 'twould be naught to them, for I struck
the blow myself. I tell you that neither the one nor the other of
them struck the blow--it was I. Do you hear? It was I!"

"Yes, sir," said Margaret Bean, trembling, her eyes big, her white
face elongated in her starched cap ruffles.

"Go to bed!" said Lot, savagely, and the old woman scuttled out, glad
to be gone.

Never before had Lot addressed her so. "I believe he did do it
himself," she told her husband next morning, for she could not wake
him to intelligence that night; "he's jest ugly 'nough to."

The next day at early dawn Lot's bell, which was kept on his stand
beside the bed, in case he should be worse in the night and need
assistance, tinkled sharply.

"Send your husband after the doctor," Lot ordered, peremptorily, when
Margaret answered it; and presently early risers saw old man Bean
advancing in a rapid shuffle towards the doctor's, and soon the
doctor himself whirled past, his back bent to the rapid motion of his
gig. The report that Lot Gordon was worse went through the village
like wildfire. A crowd collected in the store as soon as the shutters
were down; there was a knot of men before the lawyer's office waiting
for him to come; and several hot-headed young fellows pressed into
the stable and urged upon Silas Beers that he should keep the old
white racer in readiness for an emergency that day, and also several
others which, if not as fleet, had good staying powers.

When the doctor entered Lot Gordon's chamber Margaret Bean followed,
tremblingly officious, in his wake, with a bowl and spoon in hand.

"I want to see the doctor alone," said Lot; and the old woman
retreated before his coldly imperious order. "Stay out in the
kitchen," ordered Lot, further, "and don't come through the entry; I
shall hear you if you do."

"Yes, sir," replied Margaret Bean, and obeyed, nor dared listen at
the door, as was her wont, so terrified was she lest Lot could indeed
hear and had heard in times past.

The doctor, redolent of herbs and drugs, set his medicine-chest on
the floor, and advanced upon Lot, who waved him back with a
half-laugh.

"Lord, let's have none of that nonsense this morning," he said. "Sit
down; I want to talk to you."

The doctor was gray and unshaven and haggard as ever, from a midnight
vigil, the crumbs of his hasty breakfast were on his waistcoat; his
eyes were bright as steel under heavy, frowning brows.

"Are ye worse? Has it come on again?" he demanded.

"No; sit down."

The doctor snatched up his medicine-chest with a surly exclamation.

"Where are you going?" asked Lot.

"Back to my breakfast. I'll not be called out for nothing by you or
any other man after I've been out all night. If you want a gossip,
get the parson; he's got time enough on his hands. A man don't have
to work so many hours a day saving souls as he does saving bodies."

Lot laughed. "And neither souls nor bodies saved by either of you,
after all," said he, "for the Lord saves the one, if he has so
ordained it; and as for the other, your nostrums only work so long as
death does not choose to come."

"Have it your own way; save your own soul and your own body, as ye
please, for all me," said the doctor, who was adjudged capable when
crossed of being surly to a dying man; and he made for the door.

"For God's sake stop," cried Lot, "and come back here and listen! I
did not call you for nothing. The lives and deaths of more than one
are at stake; come back here!"

The doctor clamped his medicine-chest hard on the floor. "Be quick
about it, then," said he, and sat down in a chair at Lot's bedside.

Lot fumbled under his pillow and produced a folded paper which he
handed to the doctor. "I want you to sign this," said he.

The doctor scowled over the paper, got out his iron-bowed spectacles,
adjusted them, and read aloud:

"I, Justinus Emmons, practising doctor of medicine, do hereby declare
that the death of Lot Gordon of Ware Centre will, when it takes
place, be due to phthisis, and phthisis alone, and not in any degree,
however small, to the wound inflicted by himself some months since.
And, furthermore, I declare that his death will follow from the
natural progress of the disease of phthisis, which has not in any
respect been accelerated by his self-inflicted wound."

"You want me to sign this, do you?" said the doctor.

"I will call in Margaret Bean and her husband for witnesses," said
Lot.

"You think I am going to sign this?"

"I want it in addition to the certificate of the cause of death which
you will have to make out after my decease. 'Tis an unnecessary
formality, but I would have it so," Lot returned.

The doctor dashed the paper on the bed. "If you think I am going to
subscribe to a lie for you, or any other man, you're mistaken," he
cried. "It was enough for me to hold my tongue when you made that
fool statement of yours that wouldn't have deceived a man with the
brains of an ox."

"My death will be due to phthisis; my left lung is almost consumed,
and you know it," affirmed Lot.

"And I tell you," said the doctor, stoutly, "that your death from
phthisis might not have occurred for ten years to come. Does a tree
die because half its boughs are gone? When you die, you die of that
wound. The evil was greater than I thought at the time. It takes less
to kill a diseased man than a sound one."

"Then my death will be due to my disease and not to my wound, if it
would not have killed a sound man," cried Lot, eagerly.

"I tell you, your death will be due to that wound that Madelon
Hautville, with maybe your cousin at her back, gave you."

Lot's face glared white at the doctor. "I gave the wound to myself!"

The doctor laughed.

"I tell you, I gave the wound myself!"

"Take your wound into court, and see what they say."

"What do you mean?"

"I'll give any man who will stab himself in just the same place, with
the knife held in just the same way, every dollar I have in the
world."

"You can't prove it."

"I can prove it."

"I can do away with your proof," said Lot, in a strange voice. The
doctor looked at him sharply.

"Then you will not sign this paper?" Lot said, presently.

"No, I will not; and I tell you, once for all, when you die I make
out my certificate as it should be."

"How?"

"By a wound from a knife or other sharp instrument, inflicted by a
person or persons unknown."

Lot's face, towards the doctor, looked as if death had already struck
it; but he spoke firmly. "How long will it be, first?" he asked.

"I don't know."

"Approximate."

"A false step may do it."

"I can lie still!"

"A coughing-spell may do it."

"I will not cough!"

"More than that, a thought may do it, if it stirs your heart too
much. I tell you as I should want to be told myself: your life hangs
by a thread."

"Sometimes a thread does not break," Lot said, with a meditative
light in his eyes.

"That's true enough."

"This may not."

"True enough."

"How long will you give it to last, before you sign this paper?"

"A year."

"Then you will sign this if I live a year from to-day?"

"No, I will not sign it, for you may have another stab on New-year's
day, if you seem likely to live so long," said the doctor, shortly;
"but I will promise you not to make out your certificate of death
from this wound."

"How great a chance of life have I?" Lot asked, hoarsely, after a
minute's pause.

"Small."

"Yet there is one?"

"Yes."

The doctor opened his chest, and began selecting some bottles.

"I want no more of your nostrums," said Lot.

"Very well," said the doctor, replacing the bottles. "I would not
make out that certificate sooner than necessary--that is all."

"Dose death and go to the root of the matter," said Lot. "Then you
won't sign this paper?"

"No," replied the doctor, with a great emphasis of negation.

"There is one thing you will do," said he.

"What?" asked the doctor, suspiciously.

"If I die within a year, to your truest belief, from any other cause
than this wound now in my side you will say so."

"Of course I will do that," replied the doctor, staring at him.

"And you will in such a case let this wound drop into oblivion, you
will hold your peace concerning it, 'forever after?'"

"Of course I will."

"Swear to it?"

"I swear. But what in--"

Lot smiled. "Some time, when you have leisure, write a treatise on
'Who killed the man?'" he said, as if to turn the subject, "and keep
going back to first causes. You'll find startling results; you may
decide that 'twas your duty to sign the paper."

"I have no time for treatises," returned the doctor, gruffly.

"You may trace the killing back to yourself."

"I'm not afraid of it. Good-day."

"Shake hands with me, doctor," pleaded Lot, with a curious change of
tone, "to show you bear no grudge for the breakfast you lost."

The doctor stared a second, then went up to him with extended hand,
looking at him seriously. He thought Lot's illness had begun to
affect his mind.

"Keep yourself quiet, and you may outlive the best of us," he said,
soothingly, as if to a child or a woman, shook Lot's lean hand
kindly, repeated his good-day, and was gone.

Lot waited until he heard the outer door close. Then he tinkled his
bell for Margaret Bean. "When are they coming home?" he asked,
shortly, when she stood beside him.

"His mother said she was expectin' of 'em Saturday."

"Get my clothes out of the closet, will you," said Lot.

"You ain't a-goin' to get up?"

"Yes, I'm better; get the clothes."

When Margaret Bean had laid the clothes out ready for him, and was
gone, Lot laid still a moment, reflecting, with his eyes on the
ceiling. He wished to cough, but with an effort he checked it,
gasping once or twice. "Saturday," he said, aloud. "To-day is
Wednesday--three days. Can I wait?"  He paused; then as if answering
another self, he said, "No; I could die a thousand deaths in that
time. I can't wait."

Lot Gordon got up, moving by inches, with infinite care and pains,
dressed himself, crawled out of his bedroom into his library, which
was adjoining, and sat down at his desk. Margaret Bean came timidly
to the door, and inquired if he did not want some breakfast. She had
to repeat her query three times, he was writing so busily, and then
he answered her "no" as if his thoughts were elsewhere. The old woman
hungrily eyed the paper upon which he was scribbling, and went away
with lingering backward glances.

Lot Gordon, bending painfully over his desk, using his quill pen,
with wary motions of hand and wrist alone, that he might not jar his
wounded side, wrote a letter to the bride upon her wedding-journey.

"Madelon," wrote Lot, "I pray you to pardon what I have done, and
what I am about to do. The danger of blood-guiltiness and death have
I brought upon you, and I now save you in the only way I know. I pray
you, when you read this, and know what I have done, that you think of
me with what charity you may, and that the love which caused the deed
may be its saving grace."

Lot sat looking at what he had written for a moment, then tore it up,
and wrote again:

"Madelon,--Alive I claimed nothing, dead I claim your memory, for the
sake of the love for which I died."

And, after a moment, tore up that also.

And then he wrote again, with quivering lips, yet breathing
guardedly:

"Madelon,--The love that was set betwixt man and woman that the race
might not die is one love, but there is another. That have I found
and found through you, and bless you for it, though death be needful
to its keeping. There is another birth than that of the flesh,
through this so great love, which can upon itself beget immortality
of love unto the understanding of all which is above. A greater end
of love than the life of worlds there is, which is love itself. That
end have I attained through this great love in my own soul which you
have shown me, else should I have never known it there, and died so,
having lived to myself alone, and been no true lover.

   "Lot Gordon."

And hesitated, reading it over; but at length tore that into shreds,
and wrote yet again:

"Dear Child,--I pray you when I am gone that you wear the pretty
gowns and the trinkets which I offered you once, for I would fain
give you for your happiness more than my poor life."

Tears of self-pity fell from Lot's eyes as he wrote the last; then he
laughed scornfully at himself, and tore that up. "Self dies hard,"
said he.

He wrote no more to Madelon, but now to Burr:

"Dear Cousin," he wrote, "I have this day discovered that my life is
in imminent danger from the wound. If my death comes in that wise
there will be trouble. I take the only way to save her, but I pray
you, upon your honor, that you do not let her know, for even your
love cannot sweeten her life fully for her if she knows; for love has
taught me the heart of this woman. To you alone, for the sake of the
honor of our blood, which has never been shed by our own hands
before, I disclose this; for I would be set right in the eyes of one
man when I am dead."

Lot Gordon pondered long over that; but finally tore up that as he
had torn the others, and gathered up all the fragments and crawled
across the room with them, and threw them on the hearthfire.

Then, leaving them blazing there, he returned to his desk, and wrote:

"_To all whom it may concern, or to all whom in their own estimation
it may concern, this:_

"I, Lot Gordon, of Ware Centre, being weary of life, which is a
dream, have resolved to force the waking. Having once before
attempted in vain to take my life, I now attempt it again, and this
time not in vain, for my hand has grown skilful with practice. I take
my life because of no wrong done me by man or woman, nor because of
any vain love; I take it solely because my days upon this earth being
numbered through my distress of the lungs, I have not the courage to
see death approach by inches, and prefer to meet him at one bound. I
have lived unto myself, with no man accountable, and I die unto
myself, with no man accountable; and this is the truth with my last
breath.

   "Lot Gordon."

This last Lot folded neatly and addressed it "To my fellow-townsmen,"
and laid it in a conspicuous place on his desk, and then wrote on
another sheet and put that in his pocket. Then he opened a drawer of
the desk, and took out all the trinkets which he had offered Madelon,
in their pretty cases, and with them in his hands crept out of the
room, and up-stairs, into the chamber which he had caused to be
decked out so newly and grandly when he had thought to marry her.
There was a great carven chest in a corner of the room, which Lot
unlocked, and took from thence all those rich fabrics which he had
bought for Madelon. And then he laid them all--the silken stuffs and
plumes and fine linens and jewels--out on the great bed, under the
grand canopy, and placed on the top the sheet of paper on which he
had last written, "For Madelon Gordon."

Margaret Bean had listened when Lot climbed the stairs. She heard him
when he came down again, entered his library, and shut the door. She
waited a long time. For some reason which she did not herself know
she felt cold with terror. She would not let her husband leave her
alone in the kitchen for a moment. At last, when it was nearly noon,
she bade him keep close at her heels, and went to the library door
and knocked, and when no answer came, knocked again and again and
again, louder and louder and louder. Then she made her husband open
the door, with fierce urgings, and peered around his shoulder into
the room. Then she gave one great shriek, and caught the old man by
the arm with a frantic clutch, and was out of the house with him and
screaming up the street.

Saturday morning Burr and Madelon came riding into the village. As
they passed up the street everybody whom they met saluted them with a
manner which had in it something respectful, apologetic, and solemn.
The lovers felt no wonder at such return of cordiality, seeing in
everything but reflections of their own moods, and knew not what it
meant until they reached home.

Then Elvira Gordon, meeting them at the door, told them that Lot was
dead by his own hand, by a knife-thrust which crossed the old wound
in his side; and she dwelt upon the reason for his deed: that he had
been slowly dying from the disease of his lungs, and had not the
courage to die by inches, which reason now all the town believed,
since the doctor had said no word in contradiction, and never would,
being mindful of his oath.

Madelon listened, white and still, saying not a word; and she said
nothing when, up in their chamber, whither she went to take off her
bonnet, Burr, who had followed, took her in his arms, and they stood
together, looking at each other and trembling. Knowing not, and never
to know, the whole which he had done for them, they yet knew enough.
Suddenly, in the light of their own love another greater showed
revealed; and each exalted the image of Lot Gordon above the other,
and was acquaint with the spirit of what he had written and kept
back; for love that so outspeeds self and death needs no speech nor
written sign to prove its being.


THE END








        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MADELON: A NOVEL ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

