


Transcribed from the 1878 Macmillan and Co. edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





UPPINGHAM BY THE SEA.


A Narrative of the Year at Borth.

BY
J. H. S.

[Greek text].

London:
MACMILLAN AND CO.

1878.
[_All Rights reserved_.]

CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS,
CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.

EDUARDO THRING,

_SCHOLAE UPPINGHAMIENSIS CONDITORI ALTERI_,
_OB CIVES SERVATOS_:

ET

MAGISTRIS ADJUTORIBUS,
QUI,
SALUTE COMMUNI IN ULTIMUM ADDUCTA DISCRIMEN,
DE RE PUBLICA
NON DESPERAVERUNT.




PREFACE.


In the spring of 1876 and of 1877, letters under the heading "Uppingham
by the Sea" were published in _The Times_ newspaper, and were read with
interest by friends of the school.  We have thought the following
narrative would be best introduced to those readers under a name already
pleasantly familiar to them, and have borrowed, with the writer's
permission, the title of his sketches for our own more detailed account
of the same events.

The readers whom we have in view will demand no apology for the attempt
to supply a circumstantial record of so memorable an episode in the
school's history.  It deserves indeed an abler historian; but one
qualification at any rate may be claimed by the present writer: an eye-
witness from first to last, but a minor actor only in the scenes he
chronicles, he enjoyed good opportunities of watching the play, and risks
no personal modesty in relating what he saw.

The best purpose of the narrative will have been served if any Uppingham
boy, as he reads these pages, finds in them a new reason for loyalty to
the society whose name he bears.

JUNE 27TH, 1878,
FOUNDER'S DAY.




CHAPTER I.--EXILES, OLD AND NEW.


   "_O what have we ta'en_?" _said the fisher-prince_,
      "_What have we ta'en this morning's tide_?
   _Get thee down to the wave_, _my carl_,
      _And row me the net to the meadow's-side_."

   _In he waded, the fisher-carl_,
      _And_ "_Here_," _quoth he_, "_is a wondrous thing_!
   _A cradle_, _prince_, _and a fair man-child_,
      _Goodly to see as the son of a king_!"

   _The fisher-prince he caught the word_,
      _And_ "_Hail_," _he cried_, "_to the king to be_!
   _Stranger he comes from the storm and the night_;
   _But his fame shall wax, and his name be bright_,
      _While the hills look down on the Cymry sea_."

   FINDING OF TALIESIN.

Elphin, son of Gwyddno, the prince who ruled the coasts between the Dovey
and the Ystwith, came down on a May-day morning to his father's fishing-
weir.  All that was taken that morning was to be Elphin's, had Gwyddno
said.  Not a fish was taken that day; and Elphin, who was ever a luckless
youth, would have gone home empty-handed, but that one of his men found,
entangled in the poles of the weir, a coracle, and a fair child in it.
This was none other than he who was to be the father of Cymry minstrelsy,
and whom then and there his rescuers named Taliesin, which means Radiant
Brow.  His mother, Ceridwen, seeking to be rid of her infant, but loath
to have the child's blood on her head, had launched him in this sea proof
cradle, to take the chance of wind and wave.  The spot where he came to
land bears at this day the name of Taliesin.  On the hill-top above it
men show the grave where the bard reposes and "glories in his namesake
shore."

* * * * *

There is something magnetic in a famous site: it attracts again a like
history to the old stage.  Thirteen centuries and a half after the
finding of Taliesin, the same shore became once again an asylum for other
outcasts, whose fortunes we propose to chronicle.

But since the day when they drifted to land the cradle of the bard, the
waves have ebbed away from Gwyddno's weir, and left a broad stretch of
marsh and meadow between it and the present coast, where stands the
fishing village of Borth.  The village fringes the sea-line with half a
mile of straggling cottages; but the eye is caught at once by a massive
building of white stone, standing at the head of the long street, and
forming a landmark in the plain.  This building is the Cambrian Hotel,
reared on a scale that would suggest the neighbourhood of a populous
health-resort.  But the melancholy silence which haunts its doors is
rarely broken, between season and season, by the presence of guests,
unless it be some chance sportsman in quest of marsh-fowl, or a
land-agent in quest of rents.

When, therefore, on the 15th of March, 1876, a party of four visitors--the
Rev. Edward Thring, Headmaster of Uppingham School, one of the Trustees
of the school, and two of the masters--were seen mounting the steps of
the porch, it was a sight to make the villagers wonder by what chance so
many guests came to knock at the door in that dead season.  Had the wind
blown them hither?  It blew a hurricane that day on the bleak coasts of
Cardigan Bay; but it was a shrewder storm yet which had swept this
windfall to the doors of Borth.

The story must be briefly told.  On November 2nd, 1875, Uppingham School
was dispersed on account of a fever which had attacked both town and
school, not without fatal casualties.  On January 28th, 1876, the school
met again.  In the interval the school-houses had been put in complete
sanitary order, and though the efforts made to amend the general drainage
of the town had been only on a small and tentative scale, it was thought
that the school, if secure on its own premises, might safely be recalled,
in spite of remaining deficiencies outside those limits.  But, _tua res
agitur_--the term began with three weeks of watchful quiet, and then the
blow fell again.  A boy sickened of the same fever; then, after an
interval of suspense, two or three fresh cases made it clear that this
was no accident.  An inspection of the town drainage, ordered by the
authorities, revealed certain permanent sources of danger.  It was clear
that the interests of school and town, in matters of hygiene as in
others, were not separable; perhaps the best fruit of the sequel has been
the mutual conviction that those interests are one.

Meanwhile the new illustration of this connection of interests had a
formidable significance for the Uppingham masters.  Men looked at one
another as those do who do not like to give a name to their fears.  For
what could be done?  The school could not be dismissed again.  How many
would return to a site twice declared untenable?  But neither could it be
kept on the spot: for there came in unmistakable evidence that, in that
case, the school would dissolve itself, and that, perhaps, irrevocably,
through the withdrawal of its scholars by their parents from the dreaded
neighbourhood.  Already the trickling had begun; something must be done
before the banks broke, and the results and hopes of more than twenty
long working years were poured out to waste.

When the crisis was perceived, a project which had been already the
unspoken thought in responsible quarters, but which would have sounded
like a counsel of despair had the situation been less acute, was suddenly
started in common talk and warmly entertained.  Why should we not
anticipate calamity by flight?  Before the school melted away, and left
us teaching empty benches, why should we not flit, master and scholar
together, and preserve the school abroad for a securer future afterwards
at home?

In a space of time to be measured rather by hours than days, this project
passed through the stages of conception, discussion, and resolve, to the
first step in its execution.  On Tuesday, March 7th, a notice was issued
to parents and guardians that the school would break up that day week for
a premature Easter holiday, and at the end of the usual three weeks
reassemble in some other locality, of which nothing could as yet be
specified except that it was to be healthier than that we were leaving.

The proposed experiment--to transport a large public school from its
native seat and all its appliances and plant to a strange site of which
not even the name was yet known, except as one of several possible spots,
and to do this at a few days' notice--was no doubt a novel one.  But the
resolve, if rapidly formed and daring, was none the less deliberate and
sane.  Its authors must not be charged either with panic or a passion for
adventure.  All the data of a judgment were in view, and delay could add
no new fact, except one which would make any decision nugatory because
too late.  It was wisdom in those with whom lay the cast of the die, to
take their determination while a school remained for which they could
determine anything.

It was a sharp remedy, however.  For on the morrow of this resolve the
owners of so many good houses, fields, and gardens, all the outward and
visible of Uppingham School, became, for a term without assignable limit,
landless and homeless men, and the Headmaster almost as much disburdened
of his titular realm as if he were a bishop _in partibus_ or the chief of
a nomad caravan.  It was a sharp remedy; but those who submitted to it
breathed the freer at having broken prison, and felt something, not
indeed of the recklessness which inspires adventure, but of the elation
which sustains it:

   Why now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark;
   The storm is up, and all is on the hazard!

There was cited at this time a somewhat similar event in the history of
Rugby School.  Dr. Arnold, in a like emergency, had removed the school,
or all who chose to go, in numerous detachments under the care severally
of himself and others of his masters to various distant spots, among
others his own house in the Lake country, where they spent some two
months, and returned to Rugby when the danger was over.  It was felt,
however, that this incident furnished no real precedent for the present
venture.  What we were proposing was not to arrange a number of
independent reading-parties in scattered country retreats.  Such a plan
would hardly have been practicable with a system in which, as in our
case, the division of the school for teaching purposes has no reference
to the division into boarding-houses.  It was proposed to pluck up the
school by the roots and transplant it bodily to strange soil; to take
with us the entire body of masters, with, probably, their families, and
every boy who was ready to follow; to provide teaching for the latter,
not only without loss in the amount, but without interruption of the
existing system in any branch; and to guarantee the supply of everything
necessary for the corporate life of three hundred boys, who had to be
housed, fed, taught, disciplined, and (not the easiest of tasks) amused,
on a single spot, and one as bare of all the wonted appliances of public
school life as that yet uncertain place was like to prove, of which the
recommendation for our residence would be that no one else cared to
reside there.




CHAPTER II.--A CHARTER OF SETTLEMENT.


   _Habet populus Romanus ad quos gubernacula rei publicae deferat_: _qui
   ubicunque terrarum sunt_, _ibi omne est rei publicae praesidium_, _vel
   potius ipsa res publica_.

   CICERO.

   HAMLET.  _Is not parchment made of sheep-skins_?

   HORATIO.  _Ay_, _my lord, and of calf-skins too_.

   HAMLET.  _They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that_.

   SHAKESPEARE.

The Trustees of the School met at Uppingham on March 11th.  This was the
earliest opportunity of consulting them collectively on the resolution to
break up the school and to migrate, which had been taken on the 7th.  They
sanctioned the breaking up of the school.  On the question of its removal
elsewhere they recorded no opinion.

Meanwhile a reconnaissance was being made by one of our body, who was
despatched to visit, as in a private capacity, Borth, and two or three
other spots on the Welsh coasts, while inquiries were also made in other
directions.

On Monday, 13th, the Headmaster left Uppingham for a visit to the sites
which promised most favourably.  A deep snow on the ground made the
departure from home seem the more cheerless, but it had melted from the
Welsh hills before we reached them.  On Tuesday, the party--which now
consisted of the Headmaster, two of the staff, and one of the Trustees
(whose services on this occasion, and many others arising out of it, we
find it easier to remember than to acknowledge as they deserve)--stayed a
night at the inland watering-place of Llandrindod, one of the suggested
sites.  The bleak moors round it were uninviting enough that squally
March day.  But the question of settling here was dismissed at once;
there was not sufficient house-room in the place.  So next morning we
bore down upon Borth.

The first sight of the place seemed to yield us assurance of having
reached our goal.  The hotel is a long oblong building with two slight
retiring wings, beyond which extends a square walled enclosure of what
was then green turf; Cambrian Terrace overlooks the enclosure at right
angles to the hotel, the whole reminding us remotely of a college
quadrangle.  On entering the hotel, the eye seized on the straight roomy
corridors which traverse it, and the wide solid staircase, as features of
high strategic importance.  A tour of the rooms was made at once, and an
exact estimate taken of the possible number of beds.  Besides two other
members of the staff, who joined the pioneers at Borth, the school
medical officer had come down to meet us, and reported on what lay within
his province.  Meanwhile two of the party were conducted by mine host to
explore a "cricket-ground" close to the hotel, or at least a plot of
ground to which adhered a fading tradition of a match between two local
elevens.  The "pitch" was conjecturally identified among some rough
hillocks, over the sandy turf of which swept a wild northwester, "shrill,
chill, with flakes of foam," and now and then a driving hailstorm across
the shelterless plain.  So little hospitable was our welcome to a home
from which we were sometime to part not without regretful memories.

Next day, March 16th, a contract was signed, which gave us the tenancy of
the hotel till July 21st, with power to renew the contract at will for a
further term after the summer holidays.  Our landlord, Mr. C. Mytton, was
to provide board (according to a specified dietary) and bed (at least bed-
room) for all who could be lodged in his walls, and board (with light and
firing) for the whole party; to supply the service for the kitchen, and
to undertake the laundry.  Servants for attendance on the boys were to be
brought by the masters.  The payment was to be 1 pound a head per week
for all who were lodged and boarded, or boarded only, in the hotel.  For
washing, and one or two other matters, an extra charge was admitted.  We
have only to add that the bargain was one with which both parties, under
their respective circumstances, had reason to be satisfied; and that the
arrangement worked not more stiffly than could be expected where the
large margin of the unforeseen left so much to subsequent interpretation.
Even Dido and Hiarbas were not agreed about the precise width of a bull's-
hide.  We do not, however, wish it to be inferred from this classical
parallel, that our settlers claim to have rivalled the adroitness of the
Punic queen in her dealings with the barbarian prince:

   [Greek text] {12}




CHAPTER III.--TRANSFORMATIONS.


   _Your snail is your only right house-builder_; _for he builds his
   house out of the stuff of his own vitals_, _and therefore wherever he
   travel he carries his own roof above him_.  _But I have known men_,
   _spacious in the possession of bricks and mortar_, _who have not so
   much made their houses as their houses have made them_.  _Turn such an
   one out of his home_, _and he is a bare_ "_O without a figure_,"
   _counting for nothing in the sum of things_.  _He only is truly
   himself who has nature in him_, _when the old shell is cracked_, _to
   build up a new one about him out of the pith and substance of
   himself_.

Ten days after the reconnaissance described in the last chapter, the
pioneers of the school were again upon the ground.

On Monday, March 27th, a goods train of eighteen trucks, chartered by the
Uppingham masters, was unloading three hundred bedsteads, with their
bedding, on Borth platform.  These were to be distributed among the
quarters of their respective owners, in some dozen different houses,
which we had engaged in addition to the hotel.  The workmen were mostly
Welshmen, anxious to be doing, but understanding imperfectly the speech
of their employers.  With the eagerness of their temperament, they went
at the trucks, and Babel began.  Amid a confused roar of contradictory
exhortations, with energetic gesture, and faces full of animation and
fire, they were hauling away, to any and every place, the ton-loads of
mattresses, and the fragments of unnumbered bedsteads.  It was time for
the owners to interpose; and those of the school party who were present,
knowing that time was very precious, and that example is better than
precept, especially precept in a foreign language, put their own hands to
the work, the Headmaster being foremost, and earned a labouring man's
wage at unloading the trucks and carrying the goods to their billets.
Some of our new acquaintances watched the scene with a shocked surprise
that authorities should share in the manual labour, instead of looking on
and paying for it.  But their feelings at last determined to admiration.
"Why, sirs," they exclaimed, "you get it done as if you were used to move
every three weeks."  But, in fact, there was so much to be done, and so
few days to do it in, that the exigencies of the work spared neither age,
sex, nor degree of our party.  None were exempt, and those who were not
employed in porterage and rough carpentry might be found shifting
furniture, or stitching curtains, or jointing together bedsteads.

Meanwhile, workmen in and round the hotel were as busy as
stage-carpenters preparing a transformation scene.  First, by the
elimination of carpets and furniture, the interior was reduced to a
_tabula rasa_.  Then, in the somewhat weather-beaten top story,
plastering and surface-washing went briskly on.  Our hosts assured us no
hands could be found for this work, but the Headmaster made a descent
upon Aberystwith and returned with the required number.  A contractor was
fitting the large coffee-rooms, the billiard-room and others, and the
ground-floor corridor from end to end, with long narrow tables--plain
deal boards on wooden trestles--for the accommodation of three hundred
diners.  Outside, the stables were converted into the school carpentery,
and the coach-house into a gymnasium.  Above all, a wooden school-room,
eighty-three feet by twenty, had been designed, and its site marked out
on the north side of the enclosure behind the hotel.

Then there was the care of providing supplementary house-room for many
purposes: rooms for music practice, and for the boys' studies (of which
we shall have more to say), and for hospital uses.  Ordinary "sick-room"
accommodation was soon obtained by paying for it, but a fever hospital
was also a requirement which, with our experiences, we were not likely to
forget, and this was less easy to secure.  We had to scour the
neighbourhood, knocking at the door of many a farmhouse and country
homestead, before we were provided.

The house-room being secured, came the labour of furnishing; the
distribution of tables, benches, bookshelves, &c, for the class-rooms,
and of furniture (in many cases a minimum) for the needs of masters and
their families; the ticketing of the bed-room doors, the beds, the chests
of drawers, and each drawer in them, with the name of the occupant--with
many like minutiae, which it took longer to provide than it does to
detail them.  The task was not rendered easier by being shared in part
with our hosts, who had hardly taken the measure of our requirements.  It
became necessary at the last moment to telegraph to the Potteries for a
large consignment of bed-room ware, which, in spite of protestations, had
been laid in only in half quantities.  The world of school has marched
forward since the days when three or four basins sufficed for the toilet
of a dozen boys.

While the elementary needs of the colony were being attended to, its more
advanced wants were not neglected.  There were those whom the anxiety of
providing for the school amusements, and in particular its cricket,
suffered not to sleep.  We believe that the first piece of school
property which arrived on the scene was the big roller from the cricket-
field.  Resolved to gather no moss in inglorious ease at home, it had
mounted a North-Western truck, and travelled down to Bow Street station,
where it was to disembark for action.  It cost the Company's servants a
long struggle to land it, but once again on terra firma it worked with a
will and achieved wonders, reducing a piece of raw meadow land in a few
weeks' space to a cricket-field which left little to be desired.  This
meadow lay within a few hundred yards of Bow Street station, four miles
by rail from Borth.  It is the property of Sir Pryse Pryse, of Gogerddan,
who gave the school the use of it at a peppercorn rent.

This was but one of the many acts of unreserved generosity shown by this
gentleman to the school.  It is not often that the opportunity offers of
winning so much and such hearty gratitude as our neighbour of Gogerddan
has won by his prompt liberality; still less often is the opportunity
occupied with such thoughtful and ungrudging kindness.

We had help in the same kind from the Bishop of St. David's, who put at
our service a field close to the hotel; a rather wild one, but in which
little plots and patches for a practising wicket were discovered by our
experts.  The firm sands to the north were reported to yield an excellent
"wicket;" with the serious deduction, however, that the pitch was worn
out and needed to be changed every half-dozen balls.

Among such cares the week rolled away only too speedily, and brought the
day of the school's arrival upon us.  If we have failed, as we have, to
convey a true impression of the serious labour and anxieties which
crowded its hours, we will quote the summary of a writer who described it
at the time, and knew what he was describing: "It was like shaking the
alphabet in a bag, and bringing out the letters into words and sentences;
such was the sense of absolute confusion turned into intelligent shape."
{19}




CHAPTER IV.


   _Gesta ducis celebro_, _Rutulis qui primus ab oris_
   _Cambriae_, _odoratu profugus_, _Borthonia venit_
   _Litora_; _multum ille et sanis vexatus et aegris_,
   _Vi Superum_, _quibus haud curae gravis aura mephitis_:
   _Multa quoque et loculo passus_, _dum conderet urbem_
   _Inferretque deos Cymris_.

   AN EPIC FRAGMENT.

   [Greek text].

The careful general who has completed his disposition without one
discoverable flaw, who has foreseen all emergencies, and anticipated
every possible combination, may await the action with a certain moral
confidence of success.  But he would be a man of no human fibre, were he
not to feel some disquiet in his inmost soul when he gets upon horseback
with his enemy in sight, and listens for the boom of the first gun.  Not
very different, except for the absence of a like confidence in the
completeness of their dispositions, were the emotions of the masters who
manned the platform of Borth Station, when the gray afternoon of Tuesday,
April 4th, drew sombrely towards its close.  The station was crowded with
spectators from Aberystwith and Borth itself, curious to watch the entry
of the boys.  Expectation was stimulated by the arrival of a train, which
set all the crowd on tip-toe, and then swept through the station--a mere
goods train.  Half an hour's longer waiting, and the right train drew up,
and discharged Uppingham School on the remote Welsh platform.  It struck
a spark of home feeling in the midst of the lonely landscape, and the
chill of strange surroundings, to see well-known faces at the windows,
and to meet the grasp of familiar hands.  But there was no time for
sentiment that stirring evening.  The station was cleared with all speed
of boys and spectators, the former turning in to tea at those endless
tables, the latter strolling away to carry home their first impressions
of their invaders.  Then one group of masters and servants set to work to
sort the luggage which cumbered the platform, while others received it at
the hotel door, and distributed it to the various billets.  Light was
scant, hands were not too numerous, and the work was not done without
some confusion.  But it was done; and the tired workers went to their
beds, thankful for what was finished, and full of good hopes for the work
which was yet to be begun.

And the boys--how did they feel?  As they stepped out from the railway
carriage into those bare, vasty corridors and curtainless dormitories,
did some little sense of desolateness in the new prospect temper its
excitement?  Did some homesickness arise in the exile as he pondered on
the retirement and comfort of the "house" at Uppingham, and his
individual ownership of the separate cubicle, and the study which was
"his castle?"  He was a unit now, not of a household, but of a camp.
Small blame to him if life seemed to have lost its landmarks, and things
round him to be "all nohow," as he sat down in some bare hall upon a
schoolfellow's book-box (wondering whether he should ever see his own),
to while away with a story-book the listless interval before bed-time,
under the niggard light of a smoking lamp, or a candle flickering in the
draught.  What exactly he felt or thought, however, we do not pretend to
know.  We only know that there was not one of them but felt proud to be
out campaigning with his school, and would have counted "ten years of
peaceful life" not more than worth his share in that honourable venture.

There was no work for them next morning (their masters were busy enough
providing for the physical needs of the colony), and they were free to
explore their new country, to ramble up the headlands or along the margin
of the marsh.  The arrivals of last night were but the first instalment
of the school, about half the number.  The same train brought in a new
freight this evening, and the scene on the platform was similar, but more
tranquil.  By a special train after midnight came in a few more from the
most distant homes, and the muster was complete.  The number, two hundred
and ninety, fell but slightly below the full complement of the school.
Putting out of account the names of those who would in any case have left
the school that Easter, no more than three, we believe, failed to follow
us down to Borth.  So unanimous an adhesion of the school to its leaders
no one had been sanguine enough to reckon on.  It increased no doubt at
the moment the difficulties of making provision, but withal it made the
task better worth the effort.

Next morning the school was called together, and the Headmaster addressed
them, feeling, perhaps, somewhat like a general publishing a manifesto to
his troops before a campaign.  It was a great experiment, he said, in
which they were sharing; let them do their best to make the result a
happy one for themselves, and for the people among whom they had come.
They were "making history," for this experience was a wholly new one,
which might not impossibly prove helpful some day to others in like
circumstances.

It is pleasant to record that the appeal was not wasted.

At the dinner-hour to-day, the full numbers being now on the spot, the
resources of the commissariat were put to the test.  Some anxiety was
relieved when the supply proved sufficient; it would have been small
cause for reproach if the caterers had failed in their estimate on the
first experiment.  But of the commissariat we shall say more presently.

The secondary necessities of life, fire and light, were not forthcoming
with quite the same promptness.  There was a twilight period in many
houses before lamps were furnished in sufficient abundance.  The place of
fuel was supplied by the genial weather of the first week; and perhaps
few were aware of what we were doing without.  Next week the east winds
and the coal arrived together.

The hotel laundry found the task it had undertaken beyond its strength.
No wonder.  Three hundred sets of _articles de linge_ reach a figure of
which our hosts had hardly grasped the significance.  We are sometimes
told that Gaels and Cymry cannot count.  At any rate, when the bales of
linen came pouring in upon them, heaping every table and piling all the
floor, and still flowing in faster than room could be found, the
laundresses, brave workers though they were, felt that the game was lost:

   They stand in pause where they should first begin,
   And all neglect.

One poor nymph was discovered by a compassionate visitor dissolved in
tears over her wash-tub.  Such misery could not be permitted; and we
transferred half the task at once to the laundries of Aberystwith.

On the afternoon of this day took place the distribution of "studies."
That is to say, some sixty or eighty boys (a number more than doubled
afterwards), in order to relieve the pressure on our sitting-rooms, were
billeted upon some of the village people, who let their rooms for the
purpose.  From two to six boys were assigned to each room according to
its capacity.  We shall speak again of these studies.  Here we will only
pause to thank our good landladies for the intrepidity with which they
threw their doors open to the invasion, the more so as they mostly
claimed to belong to the category of "poor widows"--a qualification upon
which they were disposed to set a price in arranging their charges.  Their
daring proved no indiscretion.  The writer, who has the honour of knowing
them all, was the depositary of many and emphatic testimonies on their
part to the cordial relations between them and "the children."  This
endearing term was exchanged for another by one good old lady, who
appealed to him against the "very wicked boys," whom she charged with
having "foolished" her.  The complication traced to ignorance of one
another's speech (the boys spoke no Welsh, and she would have done more
wisely to speak no English), and a _modus vivendi_ was easily restored.
Poor soul! she took a pathetic farewell of them when their sojourn ended:
"They must forgive her for having a quick temper; she had had much
trouble; her husband and four sons had gone down at sea."

On Friday came a piece of cheering news.  Some sympathisers were
intending to appeal to parents of boys in the school for subscriptions to
a fund, which should help to defray the expense incurred by the masters
in moving and resettling the school.  The appeal met with a liberal
response in many quarters; a large sum was raised, though from a number
of subscribers smaller than the promoters of the fund expected.  Men, who
were feeling the double pressure at once of keen and novel cares, and of
an outlay already large, which no one could see to the end of, will not
forget that well-timed succour.  Not least will it be remembered as a
"material guarantee" that the subscribers believed the cause they aided
to be worth a costly effort to save.

The week closed with an old scene on a new stage--a football match on Sir
Pryse's field at Bow Street.  It was the last of the house-matches, which
had been interrupted at Uppingham to be played out here.  The sight of
the school swarming into the railway carriages, which carried us to the
four-mile-distant ground, and then the mimic war of the red and white
jerseys contrasting the gray Gogerddan woodlands which overhang the
meadow, and the shouts of the English boys blending with the excited but
unintelligible cries of the Welsh rustic children, who were rapt
spectators of the game, brought home to us the piquant contrast between
our unchanged school habits and the novelty of their framework.

The weather of this first week was dry and genial; and it had no
pleasanter moments than those spent on the beach at sunset, whither the
school flocked down after tea for half an hour's leisure in the after-
glow.  There is plenty of amusement for them on this broad reach of sand
and shingle.  Some are groping for shells or for pebbles, which the
lapidary will transform for a trifle into dazzling jewels; others are
playing ducks and drakes on the waves, or entertaining themselves like
Prospero's elves,

   That on the sands, with printless feet,
   Do chase the ebbing Neptune, and do fly him
   When he comes back again.

More pensive spirits saunter up and down the grassy terrace which
overlooks the beach, and watch the shifting line of dark figures seen
against the white wall of the breaker, or note the fugitive tints on the
dimpling surface of the water, or the wet margin of the tide.  A group of
villagers is clustered round the water-fountain a few yards away; the
children chatter about us as they fill their pitchers; and the old women,
creeping homewards, cast a glance under their bonnets at the boys, and
exchange muttered comments with their gossips.  Soon the cliffs of the
southern headland grow duskier and more remote; the sea fades to a cold
uniform gray; the colours of the brown twilight marsh and the violet
hills are lost in one another; and so, with a refreshing breath of
idyllic peacefulness, the stirring week came to an end.  "Its evening
closed on a quiet scene of school routine, as if doubt and risk, turmoil
and confusion and fear, weary head and weary hand, had not been known in
the place.  The wrestling-match against time was over, and happy dreams
came down on Uppingham by the Sea."




CHAPTER V.--THE NEW COUNTRY.


   _All places that the eye of Heaven visits_,
   _Are to a wise man ports and happy havens_.

   RICHARD II.

The primitive man, after he has satisfied the claims of appetite,
stitched his skin-mantle, and thatched a hut, may begin to spare time for
reflection on the quality and flavour of the prey he has eaten, or the
picturesqueness of his cabin.  Till then his estimate of things is
quantitative.  He asks not of what sort his food is, but whether there is
enough of it, and regards less the cut of his coat than its thickness.

The analogy of our circumstances must be our excuse for postponing so
long a description of our new settlement, its physical surroundings, and
the complexion of our domestic and social life.  Not in truth that we had
returned to barbarism: but who could dilate on the beauty of mountain
scenery, in sight of which he was perhaps to starve; who would criticise
the pattern of his dinner-service, or be fastidious in carpets and wall-
paper, before he could reckon upon dinner, or call shelter his own?

But a week is over, and we have all settled into our berths.  The boys
have found that there will be dinner every day; the masters that no one
will have to pitch his tent on a sand-dune, or spread a straw litter in a
bathing-machine.  The level of comfort was, of course, not uniform.  How
should it be?  Probably there is a choice of corners in a workhouse or
casual-ward.  Some of our party tasted the painful pleasures of the poor
in the scant accommodation and naked simplicity of cottage lodgings.  It
was long after our arrival that we discovered a valued friend still
sitting on the corner of his packing-case, and brewing his coffee on a
washhand-stand.  The fire smoked all day; but this vice in the apartment
was neutralised by a broken window.  Yet he should be quite happy, he
said, if he could get a glazier _and_ a sweep (like smoke and draught,
one would not do without the other), a bolster, an occasional clean
towel, and a little warm water in the morning.

Those who had brought a family with them into camp were more seriously
troubled with the cares of providing quarters, and pondered regretfully
on the peace and roominess of home.  Still as we are leaving no one
houseless or dinnerless, we may turn aside to describe at more leisure
the place we lived in and the manner of our life.

The stage on which our little history was enacted is a maritime plain of
irregular semicircular shape, with a sea-front of five miles, and a depth
inland of from two to three miles.  This plain, a dead level stretch of
peat, of which part is coming under cultivation, while part is still
marsh, is surrounded by a ring of hills, which rise in successive well-
defined ranges of increasing height, till they culminate in the summits
of Cader Idris on one side and Plinlimmon on the other.

The River Dovey, which cleaves the circle of mountains, flows in a broad
estuary along the base of the northward hills, under which, at the mouths
of the estuary, lies the little port of Aberdovey.  At the other end of
the arc formed by the coastline, close under the slopes of the promontory
which closes the plain at its north-west corner, stands the village of
Borth, three-quarters of a mile of straggling dwellings, which vary in
scale and character from the primitive mud-cabin of the squatter to the
stately hotel which formed the headquarters of the school.  The little
town is irregular even to quaintness, without being picturesque.  Its
houses are not grouped according to size and character, but dropped as it
were anyhow, in chance collocations, tall and low, thatched and slated
together.  Two or three gigantesque meeting-houses, featureless and
sombre, domineer over the roofs around them.  One or two others of a less
puritan design, and not out of character with the church on a knoll a
furlong off, compensate their severer rivals.  The shape of the village
is determined by the narrow ridge of terra firma, the mere heaping of the
tides, between the quaking marsh and the encroaching sea.  The nidus of
the present settlement is the tiny hamlet of Old Borth, perched on a spur
of the promontory, and well out of reach of flood tides.  We are not sure
that the mother may not outlive her colony, unless substantial measures
are taken to guard against another 30th of January.  Near Old Borth,
through a gap in the hills, comes the River Lery, a trout-stream known to
our anglers, thanks again to Sir Pryse who owns it.  It races bubbling
round the furze-clad knoll, whose Welsh name is translated Otter's
Island, on which stands the church, and then is silenced in a blank
straight-cut channel, which conveys it through the marsh into the estuary
at Ynyslas.  Up the gorge of the Lery runs the railway, which carried us
so often past the massive church and steep pine-grown graveyard of
Langfihangel-geneur-glyn, and across the broad meadows of Bow Street, to
the civilisation of Aberystwith.  For Aberystwith was our Capua, and used
to draw large parties on many a blank afternoon for marketing or
amusement.

Then there was the beach, four miles of it, from the rocks of Borth Head,
where the waves could be watched breaking on the seaweed-covered reef,
and sending up columns of white spray against the black face of the
cliffs, away to the yellow sand dunes near the Dovey's mouth, and the
reaches of wet sands where we noted on summer days "the landscape winking
through the heat," almost with the effect of a mirage.  These sands, firm
and sound under foot, were a famous walking-ground at all times; but they
changed their character very much with the seasons; at one time
retreating and laying bare a beach of shingle under the pebble ridge; at
another, swinging back to cover them up again.  In the former state of
the shore a suggestive phenomenon might be observed.  At low-water mark
there appeared certain dark shapeless lumps, which might be taken for
rocks at a distance, but were in fact the roots and stumps of a submerged
pine-forest.  Remains of the same forest are found in the marsh.  Wood
can be cut from the buried trunks, looking as fresh in fibre as if the
tree still grew.  Here is the verification of the legend (or is it,
perhaps, the suggestion of it?) which records the fate of the Lost
Lowland Hundred.  Once on a time (the Cymric bards answer for it), a
flourishing tract of country stretched at the foot of the hills which are
now washed by the tides of Cardigan Bay.  The fishermen of Borth, as they
creep past the headlands in their fishing-smacks, have seen deep down in
the clear waters, the firmly-cemented stones of a causeway, which must
once have traversed the plain, and the line of which may be not
indistinctly descried stretching far out to seaward from the mouth of a
little combe.  It is true that geologists whom we have consulted ridicule
the fancy of masonry offering such resistance to the tides, and explain
it away as a pebble-ridge built up by the action of currents.  And
perhaps we might mention in this connection, that one of our party, on
the first view, was half persuaded he had seen a sea-serpent.  Well, this
prosperous country, defended against the sea by embankments, was during
the heroic age of Wales laid under water by the opening of the sluices in
a drunken frolic.  A fragment of it, the marsh between the pebble-ridge
of Borth and the hills, would seem to have been recovered; but it enjoys
a precarious safety, and even within our experience the sea gave a
meaning threat of claiming his own again.  But that is a story which must
be told in its own place.

Such then were the geographical details of the spot in which we had
settled, and they made up a landscape, which, if it can be more than
rivalled in other parts of the Principality, has yet a characteristic and
impressive beauty.  The following extract may serve, for lack of a better
rendering, to describe how the scene looked to the eyes of someone who
watched it on a June afternoon from the grassy slopes of Borth Head:

   My eyes run on with the tide which drifts inland up the estuary, and,
   farther than vision can really follow, track the march of its glancing
   ripples, as they swim on past shoal and sand-dune and morass up to the
   dewy gates of the Spring, in among green-clad river meadows and crisp
   close-skirted woodlands which the salt breath of sea-winds restrains
   from a richer luxuriance, on past springing knolls plumed with dark
   firs, and dimpling valleys mellow with the contrasted gold of the
   oak's young leafage.  Above these, hills moulded on a grander scale
   heave up their broad shoulders to the sunlight, which is reflected in
   pale but tender hues of blue or violet or rose from their bare rock
   masses, or the slopes hardly less bare, which are swept by great
   winds, and browsed yet closer by climbing mountain sheep.  At this and
   the other point the bosses of the hills are lighted with the sparkle
   of gorse-thickets, or dusky with heather not yet kindled into bloom.
   Lower down there are belts of woodland, fencing off the pastures which
   strew the lowest terraces of the mountains from the barren wastes
   above them, and these pastures are brightly flecked with patches of
   white-walled homesteads down to the brown edge of the marsh.  And so,
   ridge after ridge, the hills enclose the scene in a half-circle, of
   which this breezy headland, our "specular mount," is an extreme horn.
   But what the eye reposes on at last is the broad floor of marsh-land
   between mountain and sea.  A broad smooth floor, which would be vacant
   and dull enough had not Nature taken thought to drape its formlessness
   the more lovingly and richly.  She has unrolled on it a carpet of
   various and solemn-tinted stuffs, where pale breadths of rusted bents
   sometimes mellow into strips of verdurous pasture, sometimes deepen
   into belts of embrowned peat-beds, sometimes take a yellower
   barrenness in parched flats, still briny and unreclaimed, and shaggy
   with bristling reeds.  It is a wilderness, but not unrelieved with
   here and there an oasis, where, like islands left high and dry in a
   deserted ocean bed, one and another rocky knoll lift up above the
   waste flats around them some acres of sweet grass, or a broad field of
   flowering mustard, shining with a splendour as of cloth of gold, and
   fringed with a loop or two of silver braid by the river winding at the
   base.  There is animate life, too, sprinkled not stintedly over its
   surface, not only of visitant sea-fowl from the shore, or solitude-
   loving creatures native to the place--plover and duck and long-winged
   herons, but also of cattle and horses grazing on the cultivated edges
   of the marsh, which make us look for the homes of their human masters
   at no great distance.  Why there they are, lying overlooked at our
   feet all the while, a straggle of lowly white-roofed dwellings
   clinging to the long pebble ridge like barnacles on a rock, breathing
   a thin smoke from their scattered chimneys, whence the blessed smell
   of peat-fires is wafted through the dry air to our nostrils.  But one
   great house I notice with a crowd about its door-steps, and a flag
   waving over them a device I have somewhere seen before, where the
   kitchen chimney smokes with a most hospitable volume; guests must be
   plenty there.  Yes; and if further signs of life be needed, you may
   listen to the puff of a farmer's steam-engine planted in the swamp,
   and see the glitter of the steel ropes, with which it draws its
   ploughshares, resistless as fate, through the oozy fallows.  Well, if
   it is come to this, the farmers and their engines will soon civilise
   away the beauty of this romantic wild.  But shall we complain?  If
   they have begun to drain these intractable marshes, then there is a
   chance for other places, where the interest on the cost of drainage
   will be less problematical than here.




CHAPTER VI.--MAKESHIFTS.


   [Greek text].

From our chapter on the geographical features of our settlement we pass
on to describe how the settlers were housed and organised.

If a school be an institution for teaching purposes, its school-room and
class-rooms should be the most essential portion of its plant.  Without
discussing the adequacy of the definition, we will begin with these.  We
were not ill provided; with an exception or two, the rooms appropriated
for class-rooms answered the purpose well.  Some of them were spacious;
the rest were large enough for the wants of the classes, limited to an
average of twenty.  Nor would a Government Inspector have justly measured
this adequacy by the "cubic capacity," if he failed to take into account
the exhilarating five minutes' breathing time upon the beach, at eleven
o'clock.  There was a rare pleasure in those moments of escape from Greek
verbs to the sparkle of the tide and the scent of the sea breeze.

What Germans call the "real" subjects, were also provided for.  The
modern languages were taught mostly in the class-rooms of the classical
masters.  Music took up her quarters in several scattered dwellings.
Wales is the home of song, and our musicians were very welcome to make
the cottage walls resound to violin or key-board.  We remember well the
affectionate reverence with which one aged custodian spoke of the
"pianass" she was proud to house; she cherished them as if they had been
tame elephants.  Several concerts were given during our stay--but in the
Assembly Rooms of Aberystwith; our wooden school-room was found, on the
first experiment, unfit for the purpose, from the want of resonance.  The
makeshift gymnasium and carpentery, in the stables and coach-house, have
been mentioned before.  If among "real studies" we may include the
cricket, this was, as we saw, well cared for; while the instructor in
swimming had nothing to complain of, with four miles of good beach, and
the Irish Channel before him.

If the accommodation during school hours was adequate, it was less easy
to find elbow-room for the boys at other times.  It was well enough from
May to August under the ample roof of blue summer weather; but in the
rainy season (and at Borth, as elsewhere, that winter was a wet one) we
should have been sorely cramped but for relief afforded by the "studies"
noticed in a previous chapter.  It is time we should describe them.
Studies they were not, in the sense in which the word is understood at
Uppingham, where a school law declares that "a boy's study is his
castle," and confers upon him what Aristotle calls the "unspeakable"
delight of the "sense of private property."  At Borth this could not be.
In very rare cases was a room the one and indivisible belonging of a
single owner; often as many as six shared the table and fireplace.  Some
of these tenements had at least the less solid merit of looking
picturesque.  Peeping into a Welsh interior, with its stone
kitchen-floor, polished wainscoting, and oak furniture, its walls hung
with German prints of imaginative battle-pieces and Nonconforming
worthies, and its kitchen-dresser with ranks of ancestral crockery, vivid
in light and colour, which catches the eyes first of all things through
the open door, "This," one was tempted to cry, "were the study for me!
Here would I sit in the shelter of the wooden screen which keeps away
draughts and noisy company, and turn the pages of my Livy for the tale of
Cincinnatus, and deeds of rustic heroes; or hear old Horace descant on
the gracious simplicity of life among the Sabines."

The boys thought quite otherwise.  The kitchen was generally the last
room to be chosen.  Perhaps the idyllic attractions did not balance the
drawback of living in the thoroughfare of the house.  Nor could one fail
to sympathise with those who preferred the garret, a poor thing but their
own, in which two studious souls could hob-nob, or even the austere
whitewash, narrow skylight, and niggard dimensions of some monastic cell,
which held just the one student, his table, and his books.  The editor of
the School Magazine, writing a month after our arrival, finds it "a queer
new feeling to do the old work in a strange place, to miss the accustomed
pictures on the walls, the accustomed column of books rising on either
hand--even the familiar table-cloth and carpet, and to sit instead inside
the framework of a six-foot bed, with roof and walls forming the queerest
possible combinations of lines and angles, and hung with three different
patterns of paper."  To woo the muses in a garret is the common fate of
genius; but most of the "students" (for so their landladies, misled by a
name, called the occupants of a study) were better off than this literary
gentleman.  When fires came to be lighted in the winter, there was a
cheerful domesticity in the sight of the red coals, which is unknown to
the solitude of Uppingham studies, with their hot-water pipe that warms
but not exhilarates.  In particular, one cheery well-furnished parlour,
where a blazing hearth threw its light over the well-worn bindings of a
select library brought with us from the Sixth-Form-room, and on the well-
contented faces of its two custodians, burns as a bright spot in our
memory of those winter days.

Thus we managed things even better than if we had listened to another
ingenious writer, with whose proposal we will close this topic.  It was
this: "Let two hundred bathing-machines be brought together from
Llandudno and other watering-places within reach, and ranged along the
beach.  Let one machine be assigned to each boy, and let them be filled
up with book-shelves, table, chairs, &c.  Thus the whole difficulty will
be solved in a moment.  And the plan has this further advantage, that
when the time comes for returning to Uppingham, the bathing-machines
would be simply formed in line, and driven across the country to
Rutlandshire, and all further trouble in the way of furniture-vans and
families-removing be cut away at one stroke."




CHAPTER VII.--THE COMMISSARIAT.


   _To feed were best at home_.

   MACBETH.

   [Greek verse]

   ILIAD IX.

   PRINCE HENRY.  _Doth it not show vilely in me to desire small beer_?

   POINS.  _Why_, _a prince should not be so loosely studied as to
   remember so weak a composition_.

   PRINCE HENRY.  _Belike then my appetite was not princely got_; _for_,
   _by my troth_, _I do now remember the poor creature_, _small beer_.
   _But_, _indeed_, _these humble considerations make me out of love with
   my greatness_.

   2 HENRY IV.

"Who ought to take the command, in the event of anything happening to
your lordship?" asked Wellington's officers on an occasion in the
Peninsular War.  "Beresford," the great strategist answered, after
reflection.  And then, in answer to their surprised looks: "If it were a
question of handling troops, some of you fellows might do as well,
perhaps better than he; but what we now want is someone to _feed_ our
men." {46}

This story, and the countenance of the epic and royal personages of our
mottoes, is our excuse for passing on to treat of the ignoble topic of
knives and forks, and to describe how three times a day our colony was
fed.  It is a topic which could not be left outside a narrative which
seeks to "show how fields were won."

If our readers will follow the master of the week as he makes his round
of the tea-tables at a quarter to seven on a winter evening, he will
witness a cheerful scene not wanting in picturesqueness.  The vista of
the corridor is filled with three very long and very narrow tables, and
the boys of as many houses seated at them.  The subdued light, which
streams from numerous but feeble oil-lamps through the atmosphere of
fragrant vapour steamed up by the tea-urns, falls with Rembrandtesque
contrast of light and shadow on the long ranks of faces.  There is that
hum of quiet animation which seems always to exhale along with the aroma
of the Chinese leaf.  From the urn, where the house matron mounts guard
up to the Sixth Form end of the table, where the head of the house is
jotting down the list of absentees from the roll-call, the cloth is
thickly studded with the viands in tins and jars, rich and various in
colour, with which the schoolboy adds succulence to his meal.  We open a
door out of the dim corridor, and enter a room with three more houses
seated round its walls.  The sense of animation rises with the warmth and
brightness of the fire which roars in the grate.  We collect the lists,
and move on to another and another room, till we have seen the last of
the eleven houses in a severely simple servants'-hall on the basement
floor.  Thence we return to the wind and rain outside.

If we came here at dinner-time, we should see the housemaster at the head
of his table, and his wife or members of his family at the other end.  The
scene would be quite wanting in the picturesque, but no sense of comfort
would make amends for it.  For it is dark, especially in the centre of
the corridor, and the carver of those vast joints never knows when he
will strike his elbow against the walls or passers-by; while the
incidence of draughts is clearly enough defined by here and there a coat-
collar turned up in self-defence; for neither the glass front door, nor
the wooden porch, nor our massive porter can effectually keep out the
weather.  Dinner here is a stern bit of the day's work, to be discharged
with a serious fortitude.

We have described how we eat, but said nothing yet of what was eaten.  Yet
our practical narrative cannot ignore the matter.  Certain delicate
subjects, however, are best treated dialectically, and perhaps we could
not here do better than record a dialogue which we think we must have
overheard between Grumbler and Cheerful, two dramatic characters not
unknown to readers of the School Magazine some year ago:

   _Cheer_.  Have you read that jolly letter in _The Times_, on
   "Uppingham by the Sea?"

   _Grumb_.  Yes, I have; and the writer says, "The commissariat was on
   the whole good."  I must say that surprises me.

   _Cheer_.  Why where was it at fault, then?

   _Grumb_.  Where?  It was at fault all round.  Look at the
   puddings--everlastingly smoked!

   _Cheer_.  Yes; but the commissariat is not puddings.

   _Grumb_.  Well then, the coals--all chips and small dust; at least,
   when there _were_ any.

   _Cheer_.  But the commissariat is not coals.

   _Grumb_.  Then the cold plates your gravy froze on!

   _Cheer_.  My good fellow, who ever heard of hot plates on a picnic?

   _Grumb_.  How about the vegetables then, that never came to table
   except to make believe there was something in the Irish stew? or what
   do you call the thing they sometimes served out for butter?

   _Cheer_.  Ah! well! "a rose by any other name"--you know the rest.  But
   still, the commissariat isn't bad because the butter was so sometimes.

   _Grumb_.  Oh! of course, you can say the Commissariat (if you spell it
   with a big C) doesn't mean the meat, or the soup, or the puddings, or
   the greens, or the butter, or the coals, or the rest of it--but if it
   isn't these, I should like to know what it is.

   _Cheer_. (_loftily_).  My good friend, it is easy for you to say this
   thing or the other was not to your fancy, but it was not quite so easy
   a matter for our landlord to provide a daily supply of meat, bread,
   and dairy stuff for some four hundred people; especially as it had to
   be organised for the occasion, without previous experience.  I take it
   if you knew how the farmers had to be coaxed to sell us their butter,
   how green things couldn't be had in the markets for love or money, and
   if you knew how many miles of railway those beeves travelled to and
   fro between pasture, slaughter-house, and kitchen, before their weary
   joints rested on our table, I say you would thank the commissariat
   that you hadn't something worth grumbling about.  I am glad we never
   were on famine rations.  I asked to live, not to live well.

   _Grumb_. (_a trifle ashamed, but dogged_).  Why, of course, I don't
   mean to say things might not have been worse.  Still I stick to it,
   they were not nice.

   _Cheer_.  But you'll admit the commissariat did its work: the army was
   fed.  After all, the proof of a pudding is _not_ the eating of it, it
   is how you feel after it.  Now, people are not starved who look the
   strong healthy fellows ours did when they went home after the first
   term of it.  No 'famine marks' in those firm, brown faces, eh?  And
   then, tell me, did the Rutland pastures ever yield such juicy mutton,
   or flow so abundantly with milk?

   _Grumb_.  Enough, enough; you have it.  Only I won't be told I was
   revelling in comfort when I was doing nothing of the kind.  I'll bear
   it, but I won't grin and say I like it; I'll say nothing against it if
   it's better not, but I shan't say what is untrue in favour of it.
   [_Exeunt arm-in-arm_.]

Our two interlocutors fairly exhaust the facts of the case between them,
and the historian, who can serve no purpose by trying to think things
better or worse than they were, will silence neither.  We give our honest
praise to the organisers of the food supply for their effectual
performance of a very heavy, vexatious, and precarious task, the scale of
which we have been brought by inquiry to estimate at its true magnitude.
At the same time we will spare such sympathy as the dignity of the matter
demands for the sufferers from tough beef, tub butter, smoked puddings,
cold potatoes, and congealed gravy, and not mislead any refugee
schoolmaster of the future into the belief that he can dine in the
wilderness as comfortably as in Pall Mall.




CHAPTER VIII.--DIVERSIONS AT BORTH: NEW SOIL, NEW FLOWERS.


   _There be delights_, _there be recreations and jolly pastimes that
   will fetch the day about from sun to sun_, _and rock the tedious year
   as in a delightful dream_.

   MILTON, "AREOPAGITICA."

   _O summer day_, _beside the joyous sea_!
      _O summer day_, _so wonderful and white_,
      _So full of gladness and so full of pain_!
   _For ever and for ever shalt thou be_
      _To some the gravestone of a dead delight_,
      _To some the landmark of a new domain_.

   LONGFELLOW.

Housed, fed, and taught; what more does the school need done for it?  "Is
that all?" some of the English public will exclaim.  "Then you have done
nothing.  What about the boys' sports?"  We foresaw the question, and
when we left home some people felt uneasy as to what would happen to a
school separated from its fives-courts and playing-fields.  True, there
was to be a beach, and the boys could amuse themselves by throwing stones
into the sea: but when there were no more stones to throw--what then?  The
prospect was a blank one.

Well, as we have seen, things came right enough as regarded the cricket.
Players had to content themselves with fewer games, for the ground could
only be reached on half-holidays.  On the other hand, the season of 1876
gained a character of its own from the novelty of its matches against
Welsh teams.  One of these was the eleven of Shrewsbury School.  With
this ancient seat of learning our troubles brought us into genial
intercourse, and a few months later we met them again on the football-
field.  Both matches were played at Shrewsbury; in the former we gained a
victory over our kind hosts, the latter was a drawn game.

The athletics were held on the straight reach of road beyond Old Borth;
the steeple-chases in the fields which border it.  At the prize-giving,
the "champion" was hoisted as usual, and carried round the hotel, instead
of along the _via sacra_ of the Uppingham triumph, with the proper
tumultuary rites.  For the make-believe of paper-chases we had the
realities of hare-hunting, of which we will speak again in its season.
Grounds for football were found when the autumn came; the best was a
meadow just below Old Borth, of excellent turf, which dries quickly after
rain; though the peaty soil, lately reclaimed from the marsh, would quake
under the outset of the players.

The village boys, fired by a novel example, began to hold their own
athletics.  One might see the corduroyed urchins scrambling down the
street in a footrace, or jerking their awkward little limbs over a
roadside ditch.  Our boys looked on as men look at a monkey, half amused,
half indignant at the antics "which imitated humanity so abominably."

If we were little worse off than at home in the appliances for games,
there were other recreations which were proper to the place, and clear
gain to the immigrants.  For example, the fishing in the Lery, along
whose banks groups of anglers might be seen strolling, whipping the water
to the full entertainment of themselves and the fish, or now and then
blessing Sir Pryse, as the angler landed his first trout from our good
friend's waters.  Yet we had our old sportsmen too, who could kill trout
as well as amuse themselves, and bring home a delicate dish for a half-
holiday tea.  For masters, there was a little shooting to be had on the
land of some friendly neighbours; and on the no-man's-land of the coast,
a variety of sea-fowl fell to our guns, and were stuffed to enrich our
museum with a "Borth Collection."  We must not forget the Rink at
Aberystwith, for which parties used to be formed on half-holidays; nor
the Golf, which the long strip of rough ground along the shore tempted us
to introduce.  The "links" were famous in extent and variety of ground,
but the game, in spite of patronage in high quarters, did not become
popular.  There were also recreations of a more intellectual kind:
archaeological visits to "British camps," or others of those Cymric
monuments, which were just then provoking Lord F. Hervey's
incomprehensible spleen; scientific rambles in quest of rare shells,
seaweeds, or the varieties of a new flora; and rambles, half-scientific,
half-predatory, along the woody cliffs of the Lery, whence adventurers
would return with news of a hawk's nest discovered, but not reached, or
the more substantial result of snakes, and such venomous "beasties,"
captured and brought home in a bag.  The rocks under Borth Head were good
hunting-grounds, and supplied sea-monsters for an aquarium, which the
Headmaster built and presented to the school.  One of the first prizes
was a small octopus, which his captor, having no other vessel handy,
brought home floating in his cap.  In the aquarium, however, spite of
this good beginning, we have to record a failure.  "The masters could
not, and the boys would not, attend to it; and our best octopus, after
coming to the top of the water, and spitting a last farewell at sundry
lookers-on, died; and with him died the attempt."

We are quoting from a letter of a correspondent to _The Times_, and we
cannot better conclude this part of the subject than by a graphic
paragraph from the same hand:

   Again, there were the birds, many always on shore and marsh; but when
   the herring-fry passed up the bay the birds positively possessed it.
   There was a wilderness of glistening wings in the air, a restless bank
   of floating feathers on the sea--a mile of wings and glancing foam of
   life, with many a strange wild cry, giving the high notes to the deep
   bass of the waves.  How often from the marsh, or somewhere, dreamland
   or ghostland, came the plaintive wail of the curlews; then the
   dotterels would run and flit about the sands; and, not least, the
   herons, measuring out their dominions with their lordly arch of wings
   in leisurely pride of sovereignty, passed grandly on their way; or,
   ever and anon, a thousand plover, as with one soul, would turn and
   glance in the sun far away.  All this was a new revelation to many
   boys, whose sole ideas of birds had been sparrows, thrushes, perhaps,
   and ducks at so much a couple, and a duck-pond.

In our enumeration, however, of fish and fowl we had almost forgotten "a
portent of the wave," which was a nine hours' wonder with us.  A stray
seal, revisiting the familiar shore, and unaware of the change which had
transformed his quiet haunts was encountered by one of our party as he
cruised round Borth Head in his fishing-boat.  We are glad to record that
the _rencontre_ ended without bloodshed.  It was a sportsman and a
naturalist who had crossed the poor seal's path; but he remembered that
he, too, was a stranger in the land, and he could not lift rifle against
the

   Sea-worn face, sad as mortality,

which leaned from the ledge of rock to look at him.  So the monster
passed on his way unharmed.

We have detailed at length enough of the diversions and interests which
lay close at our own doors.  But these delights pale by the side of those
red-letter days when we went far afield to keep a holiday among the
mountains.  We shall not see the like of those days again!  On such
mornings, the hotel steps and the esplanade would be dotted with anxious
groups waiting for breakfast, and observing the omens of the sky.  If
these are favourable, a little before eight a broad stream sets towards
the station, and fills the sunny platform with a vivacious crowd.
Masters, who organise the several expeditions, use the interval to count
heads and sort their parties.  The benevolent Cambrian railway supplies
spare carriages and return tickets at single fares.  Presently the train
is sighted sliding down the winding incline from Langfihangel; it picks
us all up--near two hundred souls, it may be--moves out into the open
plain, still glittering with the morning dew, and reaching Glandovey,
drops half its passengers at the junction to explore the northward coast,
while it carries the rest to Machynlleth and Cemmes Road.  Here and there
it sows little companies of explorers at some mountain's foot or river's
mouth.  One band assails Cader Idris from the rich vale of Dolgelley, and
meets on the summit another which has scaled it from Tal-y-llyn.  Each
party is convinced that their ascent was the more creditable in point of
speed, and that they enjoyed the more magnificent views.  One, however,
claims an advantage which can be more easily gauged; they have haled a
hamper of luncheon with them to the peak, with infinite pains.  During
the descent this hamper (but that was after luncheon) slipped from its
carrier's hand, and plunged beyond recovery down the Fox' Walk.
Meanwhile, others are befogged on the broad top of Aran Mowddy, but will
be anxious to explain this evening, that if the view from the summit was
lost in mist, that was more than made amends for by "the enchanting
glimpses caught through the cloudrifts in the descent."  The day wears
on, and signs of fatigue appear.  Some are wondering what Miss Roberts of
the famous "Lion" at Dolgelley has got for their dinner.  Small boys
begin to declare that they could go on at this pace for any time you
like; this is nothing to what they did last year in the Highlands;
something like mountains _there_, you know!  The sun is far in the west
when the knot of adventurous reconnoitrers who have gone farthest afield
mount the train at Portmadoc.  Nearer home they thrust heads out of
window to rally their friends who join them on the poverty of their
exploits.  These, taciturn with weariness or hunger, find they haven't
their best repartees at command.  But they are all smiles and good humour
again at the news that young So-and-so, with two or three more, who had
strayed from their party, were sighted rushing along, all dust up to
their eyes, to catch the train as it moved out of the station.  There is
no other to-night; but our good hostess, we know, will give the
youngsters tea, put them to bed, and forward them prepaid next morning.
At length the last station has poured in its tributary to the volume of
the returning multitude, and the train glides softly on between the
brimming estuary and the marsh golden with sunset.  The full stream is
peaceably disgorged again through the narrow station-door, and
distributes itself along the tea-tables.  Sleep comes down upon tired
limbs and easy consciences, and the day's glory throws the rich shadows
of some Midsummer Night's Dream far into the bright dawn of another
working day.

It was never professed that on these occasions we were doing other than
taking a holiday.  If, together with mountain air and the scent of
heather, a boy drank in a love and understanding of Nature, and felt,
possibly for the first time, the inspiration of beauty, then probably
hours were never spent in a class-room to more profit than were these on
the slopes of Cader or Plinlimmon, or along the banks of Mowddy.




CHAPTER IX.--THE FIRST TERM: MAKING HISTORY.


   "_Happy is the people which has no history_."  _Stands this too among
   the beatitudes_?  _Surely this were a fit evangel only for sheep and
   oxen_, _or for such human kine as covet the fat pastures rather than
   the high places of existence_.  _For whoso is ill-content to live long
   and see good days_, _save he may also live much and see great days_,
   _will not be so tamely gospelled_, _seeing that every past is mother
   of a future_, _and that there is no history but is a prophecy as
   well_.

In our late digression on the conditions and circumstances of our life at
Borth, we have somewhat anticipated the narrative of events.  But it was
a plan agreeable to the facts of the case, that narrative should pass
into description at the point where the stream of our little history,
after descending the rapid of alarms and difficulties, abrupt resolves
and swift action, fell quietly again into the smooth channel of a new
routine.  Not that the story of the succeeding months was really
uneventful.  If our readers suppose that from this point onward we led a
prosperous untroubled existence, it will be due to the illusion, which,
in fiction, makes us cheerful over the woes of the struggling hero,
because we have glanced at the end of the book, and view the present
trouble in the light of the successful issue: what the end would be we
did not know, nor when it would come.  And if, to resume our metaphor,
the current of the enterprise flowed for the most part smoothly, there
were rocks underneath which those who saw them could not forget, though
they seldom raised an eddy on the surface.  Here, however, we must ask
the reader to believe us that it was so, without demanding explanations,
which at this date would be inconvenient.  We will go on then to notice
the chief incidents of the term.

The wooden school-room, the slow completion of which had been watched
with some impatience, was ready for use on April 29th.  On the next day,
being Sunday, we inaugurated it by reuniting under its shelter our
scattered congregations, hitherto distributed over the three largest
rooms at our disposal.  It was not a noble building, being,
architecturally, a long shed of rough planks against the bowling-green
wall, which was whitewashed for the better lighting of the room.  But it
was apt to the conditions of a colony, looking as it did like a log-house
in a backwoods-clearing.  Internally it was well lighted and ventilated,
and just sufficient for our numbers.  _Heureusement il n'y on a pas
beaucoup_.  This was not the only occasion on which we were thankful for
the school's self-imposed limit of numbers.  The completion of this poor
structure was a fact of which those who have but little knowledge of
school affairs will appreciate the value.  It was a new burden on an
embarrassed exchequer, but not a gratuitous one.  It is not too much to
say that the social life of the school would have been of a different and
lower stamp, and its organisation crude and ineffective, if there had
been no place of assembly where we could meet for common occasions, for
roll-call, prayers, addresses, lectures, entertainments--no place to
furnish the visible unity, which is so large an influence in a healthy
social life.  And did the school ever feel surer of its oneness, or more
proud of its name, than when it sat on those rude benches within the
ruder walls of their makeshift great school-room?

The next day, May 1st, is the Uppingham Encoenia, the commemoration of
the Chapel opening.  It forced one to contrast the wooden walls in which
the Saint's-day's service was held, with the high rooftree and the deep
buttresses, which this year would not echo the chanting procession.  The
anniversary rites lapsed of necessity.  An accidental piece of ceremony
marked this day; for that morning a flagstaff was erected on the terrace
in front of the hotel, and a flag run up, by the lowering of which the
hour of dinner or roll-call could be signalled to ramblers on the shore
or the hill.  On the 19th of the month we hoisted with much cheering our
own colours: a banner, on which some of the ladies had worked the
Founder's device, the antique schoolmaster and his ring of scholars.  The
flags (there were three in all) were carried home with us, and the faded
and tattered folds which had fought with the sou'-wester, now droop in a
graceful canopy at one end of the great school-room.

By the middle of June the new church of Borth, so opportunely built in
time for our settlement, was declared ready.  It was courteously placed
at our disposal for two services on Sunday before the hours of the parish
services.  The building exactly held us, with a little pinching.  The
first occasion of our using it was a confirmation held by the Bishop of
St. David's.  The Bishop, whose early connections are with this
neighbourhood, and who had already in his capacity of landowner given us
proof of his goodwill, seemed to rejoice in the occasion of expressing
his sympathy with the immigrants into his quiet home.  The kindness of
the visit was not slight; for the journey, to and fro, from difficulties
of transport, demanded two days.  We have the more reason to be grateful
for his willing sacrifice of time, because, in view of the interval since
the last confirmation and of the long sojourn in Wales before us, we
should otherwise have suffered a kind of mitigated excommunication.

June 29th and 30th were the days of the "Old Boys' Match," the annual
reunion of the Past and Present School.  There seemed no reason why
absence from our native soil should sever our ties with the Past.  Quite
the contrary.  _Ubi Caesar ibi patria_, thought our Old Boys, who,
indeed, never before felt so glad to claim their heritage in the fortunes
of Uppingham.  The game, which was like other games of cricket, and need
not be described, was played on the Gogerddan field, where the
Headmaster, in lieu of his customary supper, not practicable at Borth,
gave a luncheon each day.  On the first day, as the company rose from
table, a signal was given to the school to draw up to the tent, outside
which the guests were standing.  They formed a kind of hollow square to
see what would happen, and an old Uppinghamian (Mr. R. L. Nettleship,
Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford) came forward and presented an "Address
from the Old Boys at Oxford, to the Headmaster and Masters of Uppingham
School."  He noticed briefly the circumstances under which it had been
drawn up, explaining why (through lack of time to concert matters with
the sister university) it had come from Oxford only, and added that they
hoped shortly to give something more substantial than parchment.  "What
they could offer was a slight thing, it was true, yet one which their old
Headmaster and his coadjutors would not think valueless."  He proceeded
to read the address, which ran thus:

   "We, the undersigned old members of Uppingham School, now resident at
   Oxford, write to express our deep sympathy with the Headmaster and
   Masters of Uppingham School in the great difficulties with which they
   have lately had to contend.  Feeling as we do, that though we have
   left the school, we still, in the truest sense, belong to it, we can
   but testify our gratitude to those whose courage and skill have
   carried it safely through such a crisis, and converted a great
   misfortune into a proof that it is strong enough to defy accidents.
   Our confidence in the Headmaster is, as always, entire and unabated,
   and we are sure that the school which he has so successfully led to
   Borth will come back under the same leadership, with its vigour
   undiminished, to its home at Uppingham." {66}

In reply the Headmaster said, addressing himself to the memorialists and
the school, "the past and future (for what we are doing has a past and
future), I thank you for this with all my heart, for this which you call
'a slight thing.'  It is a slight thing; but yet, like a flag which
armies have rallied round and have died for, it can give spirit and
endurance and confidence.  Yes, it is true, as you say, that these have
been hard times, as those know who have had day by day to watch ruin
coming closer and closer, with no hope, no room for escape.  Like men in
the story tied to the stake in front of the advancing tide, we had to see
wave on wave coming up to bring a slow but sure destruction."  Then,
after speaking of the incidents which ended in our coming to this spot,
he continued: "We have been brought by our troubles much before the eyes
of the public.  They speak of 'the fierce light that beats upon a
throne,' but that is hardly so intolerable as the fierce light that beats
upon a great calamity.  Yet I trust that fierce light may prove to the
school a refining fire.  Certainly the present school has behaved
worthily under their novel circumstances; they have shown themselves true
sons of Uppingham.  You of the past school see round you your successors,
and you may be proud of them; at least we have suffered no trouble
through those you see before you here.

"The end of all this which of us knows?  But we have faith that it shall
be good.  Though all seems to fail and perish, all our work to die, yet I
am sure there shall be no real death of the life of the school, but that
it shall have its resurrection."

The words were meant for the ears to which they were addressed.  If to
readers remote from the facts and the feeling of the hour they perhaps
strike a note of scarcely intelligible emotion yet our story cannot spare
them.  To us who heard them they were an expressive summary of many
thoughts, and fears, and hopes of that time, which our narrative cannot
give expression to otherwise than in this indirect fashion.  Had those
thoughts and hopes been other, we should not, perhaps, have had this
story to tell.

The choir gave an _al fresco_ concert on the night of the second day of
the match in the grass close.  The resonance from the surrounding
buildings made the songs very effective for an outdoor entertainment.

_Surgit amari aliquid_.  Just at this time came news of a new fever case
at Uppingham.  We knew what might be the significance of the news, and
began to make up our minds for another term at Borth.

On July 5th a public concert was given by the choir, and attended by the
rest of the school, at Aberystwith.  It was the second of two given in
support of the new church at Borth, to the debt on which the proceeds
were devoted.  The first was held in the Assembly Room of the Queen's
Hotel, a beautiful room, with fine acoustic properties.  We cannot say as
much for the Temperance Hall, in which the second was given.  It is a
structure of the very severest Georgian architecture.  "Why," asks a
reporter, "should water-drinkers allow it to be supposed that the graces
of art are all in the hands of Bacchus?"  The journey to and fro by rail
was, in the popular estimate, an integral part of the entertainment; its
charm lay in the uncertainty as to whether the laden train would be able
to climb the abrupt incline to Langfihangel, or would keep on the rickety
rails as it spun down the same curve in returning.  Otherwise, that the
school should make a railway journey _en masse_ to hold an evening
concert seemed, under our nomad conditions, to be only in the common
course of things.

One concert we held in the wooden school-room on the 22nd of May; on that
occasion (we quote the magazine's reporter) "All the members of the choir
might be seen flocking to the school-room, with candle and candlestick in
hand, to furnish light for the performance.  The candles were arranged in
sevens on wooden shelves all down the sides of the room, and though the
whole spectacle had its laughable side, as most things have, the general
effect was far from bad.  It was cheerful enough; in fact, only a
Christmas-tree and some more disorder was needed to turn the
entertainment into as good an imitation of a happy school-treat as you
would get at a day's notice."  But the music sounded dully in the timber
walls, and the experiment was not repeated.

Meanwhile a new inroad of care had for the last fortnight, since the late
news from Uppingham, disquieted the colony.  Major Tulloch, a Government
Inspector, who, on behalf of the Local Sanitary Board, had reported on
the state of the town of Uppingham, had expressed a strong opinion that
the school ought not to return thither before Christmas.  In consequence
of this a memorial was sent from the masters to the Trustees, requesting
them to reverse their decision of June 17th, which recalled the school in
September.  At a meeting of the Trustees, on July 14th, the following
resolution was passed:

   Resolved--"That, while in the opinion of the Trustees there is nothing
   in the present condition of the town of Uppingham which calls upon
   them to rescind their resolution of the 17th ult, yet, having regard
   to a memorial addressed to them by the whole body of the assistant-
   masters, they are willing, in compliance with the same, that the
   school shall remain at Borth during the autumn term."

Arrangements were at once begun for returning to camp after the holidays.
The responsibility for this step, which was thus devolved upon the
masters, though it was accepted without hesitation, was felt to be no
light one.  Our engagement with the lessee of the hotel had provided for
a renewal of the contract at will; but there remained the owners of some
thirty houses, large and small, with whom we should have to reckon.  They
would have us in their hands, and might, if so minded, "turn our
necessity to glorious gain."  Then, too, many of the lodging-houses,
excellent as airy summer pavilions, did not promise much comfort in
winter time, to those who remembered how in the spring weeks the curtains
and everything movable within doors

   Fluttered in the besieging wind's uproar,
   And the long carpets rose along the gusty floor.

Moreover, natives who knew, threatened us with rain all day and every
day, from the beginning of September till the end of October, after which
it would be dry.  Others, who also knew, promised us fine weather till
the latter date, and then wet till Christmas.  Putting the two assurances
together, one inferred that weather at Borth would be like weather in
general.  However, in prospect of winds and wet, the open porch of the
hotel was walled up with planks so as to put another door between the
sou'-wester and the diners in the corridor.  Also a long lean-to shed,
like a cloister without windows, was run along two sides of the bowling-
green wall.  The outlay on the latter yielded no adequate return.  It
afforded some shelter for chapel roll-call, and for the few minutes'
lounge before evening prayers, except when it rained hard enough, and
then the water poured through the contractor's felt roof.  It was too
narrow to be used, as was hoped, for games; unless, indeed, we had turned
it into a skittle-alley.  But then skittles is a game of low connections.
Finally, well-wishers were solemn in their warnings that the drainage of
the spot was defective (which, indeed, was no otherwise than true, till
we brought about a reform), and that our settlement by the sea was
nothing if it was not healthy.

The outlook then was not unclouded.  But one bright day we had before we
said good-bye to the past, and fronted the future cares.  Sir Pryse had
invited the school to spend a day with him at Gogerddan, Thursday, July
20th, the last day of term.  Room was found for all his guests to dine
together in a large barn near the house, where, from the high and narrow
windows, the light fell in picturesque mellowness on the close-packed
ranks.  A match was played in the grounds between the school and an
Aberystwith eleven; the rest whiled away the afternoon right pleasantly
among the flowers and grass-slopes.  At a pause in the game there was a
gathering on the lawn to watch the execution of a little surprise which
the cricketers had prepared for our host.  From a box which had been
perilously smuggled in, was produced a memorial gift (it consisted of a
study-clock and inkstand), which "the cricketers of Uppingham begged Sir
Pryse to accept, as a slight acknowledgment of his special liberality to
themselves;" for so it was set forth in an address which the captain of
the eleven proceeded to read to him.  Our host, as much startled as if
the present and the address had been shot at him out of a cannon,
answered in a brief but not the less effective speech.  Then, as if to
relieve the warmth of feeling generated between us, a piano was run into
the bow of an open window, and the choir outside delivered themselves of
some hearty music.  Soon the evening train was carrying us home for the
reading of the class-list and the prize-giving.  In the customary
address, the Headmaster could congratulate the school on having borne
themselves well during the great time in the school's history which this
day brought to a close: he called on them to "come back with the soldier
spirit" to face whatever remained.

There was dark work going on in the street that night.  When dawn broke,
it disclosed an array of flags, streamers, and devices, along the
approach to the station, where "the special" was waiting.  Prominent
among the devices was the motto, _Au revoir_.  For the feeling it spoke,
all were grateful; but not all rejoiced in the occasion of it.  The train
moved out of the station with the school, to a boy, on board of it, to
the sound of a farewell cheer, and so the curtain fell on the first act
of the play.




CHAPTER X.--A WINTER CAMPAIGN.


   _Sanitas sanitation, omnia sanitas_.

   _The farmer vext packed up his beds and chairs_,
   _And all his household stuff_, _and with his boy_
   _Betwixt his knees_, _his wife upon the tilt_,
   _Sets forth_, _and meets a friend_, _who hails him_, "_What_!
   _You're flitting_!"  "_Yes_, _we're flitting_," _says the ghost_
   (_For they had packed the thing among the beds_).
   "_Oh_, _well_," _says he_, "_you flitting with us too_--
   _Jack_, _turn the horses' heads and home again_."

   TENNYSON, "WALKING TO THE MAIL."

September 15th and 16th were the days of the school's return to Borth.  We
slipped at once and easily into the groove of last term's routine,
filling our old quarters and several additional houses.  Some building
operations needed for the winter's sojourn have been mentioned by
anticipation.  Our medical officer, also, and the ready pickaxe of
"Sanitary Tom" (as the boys called the navvy who was his stout ally), had
been at work laying bare the subterranean geography of our premises and
making all right.  At his instance, the proprietor ran out an extended
culvert into the sea beyond low-water mark, a grand engineering work,
which remains the one permanent monument of our settlement.  Having in
mind some ancient aspersions on the wholesomeness of Borth we are glad to
bear testimony to the present adequate sanitation of the place.

We do not write for the scientific, and yet we must notice (we hope
without wounding an unprofessional ear) the beautiful economy of natural
forces by which that sanitation is effected.  The channel of the Lery,
between which and the sea the hotel is built, runs parallel to the
coastline, till it meets at right angles the estuary of the Dovey.  The
same tide which washes the beach also fills the Lery channel and the
adjoining ditches.  When the ebb has set in the water in the latter
stands for a time at a higher level than on the beach.  Reflecting on
this, our engineers cut a duct between the Lery and the sea, so as to
draw the water from the river down the main drainage artery, performing
twice daily a most effective flushing.

Some of us would have preferred to leave a more dignified memorial of
ourselves, forgetting, perhaps, that it is a Cloaca which is the most
impressive witness to the civilised resources of an ancient king.  So an
offer was made to the proprietors that, if they would find the tools and
directors of the work, the school would provide the labourers for the
making of a road between the village and the church, an interval of a
furlong of marshy land, bridged at that time by a makeshift causeway.
They did not, however, see their way to accept our amateur industry, and
the project fell through.

With the arrival of the boys came also news, that on the day before,
September 14th, the engineers had broken ground at Uppingham:

      _Ea vox audita laborum_
   _Prima tulit finem_.

We had waited not without some impatience for the first sound of the
pickaxe; and its echoes were welcomed as promising an end to our exile.

The new term opened smilingly.  The smooth working order into which
everything fell at once contrasted pleasantly with the anxious bustle of
the entry in April.  A glorious autumn was settling on the hills, draping
them from head to foot with a red mantle of the withering bracken, which
slowly burnt itself out along their slopes.  There was sun and daylight
enough for many rambles along old paths or new ones before the year was
fairly dead.

Our prosperity was suddenly staggered.  Just five weeks after the return
a case of scarlet fever occurred, followed in the course of the week by
half-a-dozen more.  An outbreak of this kind is too common an incident in
a large school to merit much surprise or great alarm.  But then our
circumstances were exceptional.  If the infection spread, it might be
difficult to find hospital room; to communicate it to the villagers, as
might easily befall, would be an unhappy return for their own ready
hospitality; and then how miserable to have fled from sickness at
Uppingham, and find it had followed us to Borth, as if, like the haunted
family of the poem, "we had packed the thing among the beds."  Already
there came news which raised unspoken doubts of our returning home after
Christmas.  How, then, if we could not stay here?  The question was hard
to answer.

It is, however, a well-recognised fact that epidemics of this kind are
very much under the control of scientific precautions, and as we had good
advice on the spot, no time was lost in stamping out the plague.  War is
not made with rose-water (it certainly was not rose-water which reeked
along our passages), and fever germs can be exterminated, it seems, by
nothing less exasperatingly unsavoury than carbolic acid, an agency which
was laid on without any ruth.  Grumblers were offered the alternative of
being smoked with sulphur.  Some complained of sore throats, contracted,
they said, from the fumes of the disinfectant, and declared that the
remedy, like vaccination, was only a mitigated form of the disorder.  The
landlords of our studies looked on with irresolute wonder, when some of
us sprinkled their floors with a potent decoction poured from watering-
pots.  Most of them regarded it as a kind of magical rite into which it
would not be seemly to inquire.  In one house a practical seaman, late
home from a cruise, took a less reverent view of the lustration, and
uttered hints of what he would do to the perpetrators' heads if their
acid touched his carpets again.  Probably the best disinfectant applied
was the clear strong wind, which ten days after the first case succeeded
the previous relaxing weather.  All windows and doors were ordered wide
open for the free passage of the blast; and the boys were directed to
bring down their rugs, great-coats, and dressing-gowns, and anything of
the kind which might be supposed to harbour mischief, and spread them for
purification on the pebbles of the beach.  It will be believed the scene
was a quaint one, however it might remind the scholar of the idyllic
laundry scene by the Phaeacian shore, where Nausicaa and her maidens:

   [Greek verse]

Whether it was these purgations, or the fumes of the carbolic which
exorcised the infection, or whether the pest was starved out by the
immediate and careful isolation of the cases that occurred, we must leave
doctors to determine.  It is certain that the epidemic came to an end in
less than ten days after the first case.  That we were able to apply the
most necessary of measures, that of isolating at once all cases declared
or suspected, we owe to the readiness of the villagers to put house-room
at our service, a readiness on which we certainly had no right to
calculate.  The rent we might pay them was no measure of the service
rendered.  If a panic had closed their doors, our situation would have
been worse than critical.

The cause of the outbreak could not be confidently assigned, but since
the most probable theory traced it to a recent railway excursion made by
some school parties, these expeditions were discontinued for a time.  This
was no great privation, for the year was closing in.

About this time, October 16th, the appointment of new "Praepostors" was
made, to fill up vacancies in the body.  In speaking as usual on the
occasion, the Headmaster called attention to the experiment in
self-government which our special circumstances were affording.  There
would be little reason for our recording the occasion, were it not that
since that date the monitorial system in public schools has been
canvassed in the Press, on occasion of an untoward incident of recent
notoriety, and has been described by some as the parent of the "grossest
tyranny," ruinous to the future of any school from which the institution
is inseparable.  We had thought this view of the system obsolete, or
correct only of schools subject to obsolete conditions.  If we were
mistaken, it may be worth while to record an experience which tends to a
less pessimistic conclusion.

It will easily be understood that the mechanical organisation of the
school was greatly deranged by the removal from home.  The boys of the
several houses were no longer locally separated, nor in the same
immediate contact with their housemasters; they were restrained by few
bolt-and-bar securities, "lock-up" being for the most part impracticable,
and were allowed a larger liberty in many less definable ways.  At the
same time they were exposed to no little discomfort, and during the rainy
months to much monotony, the very conditions which promote bullying and
other mischief.  Further, the same causes which reduced the control of
masters, also embarrassed the upper boys in their monitorial duties.  Thus
the school was left in a quite unusual degree to its self-government, and
that government had to act at a disadvantage.

Yet the result was that all went well.  The boys did not bully one
another, and they gave their masters no sort of trouble.  Old rules had
to be relaxed, because they could not be enforced, but no licence came of
it; new rules had to be made, which might seem vexatious and not very
intelligible restrictions, but there was no tendency to break them.  Of
course wrong things were done at Borth as elsewhere; but if we were to
record the few misdeeds which occur to us, their insignificance would
provoke a smile; while we have good evidence for the belief that the rate
of undetected offences was not increased.

These are the facts we have to record.  Different explanations will
suggest themselves to others, but among observers on the spot there was
but one opinion--that the prosperous result was due to the system of self-
government, "monitorial system," or whatever we name the institution,
which rests on the assumption that English boys are capable of
responsibility and authority, and will prove trustworthy if their masters
are willing to trust them.  We do not forget that other factors entered
into the cause; one which cannot be ignored was the consciousness of the
boys that the school was on its trial, and that a public one.  But people
cannot acquire self-control merely by the removal of restraints, or
behave well, for a long time together and in spite of tedium, simply
because they would like to do so.  The truth is, that in a time which
might have been anarchical, we lived on the fruits of a long-established
order; and it is fair to add that at the end of thirteen months there
were no visible symptoms that discipline was wearing threadbare.

Shall we, for writing this, be taxed with the vain-glory for which public
schools are at times reproached?  We must brave the charge, then; for the
facts seem to furnish evidence of a kind so rarely obtainable, that to
omit them from this chapter in school life would be hardly excusable.  An
experiment so crucial as that to which we were submitted does not occur
once in fifty years.

But enough of serious matters.  Let us go out and forget them in a run
with Sir Pryse's harriers, along the breezy gorse-covered downs of the
Gogerddan estate.  We take the train which arrives just after we have
risen from dinner, and land at the upland village of Langfihangel.  It is
a Saturday afternoon, the 21st of October, the day is clear and sunny,
and several ladies are of the party.  A few hundred yards from the
station we met the hounds, and Sir Pryse's man who hunts them.  The owner
is not with them, but (by his good leave) yonder tall, lithe fellow, the
best runner in the school, acts as Master of Hounds.  He promises us good
sport, having heard from the huntsman of a hare which is "waiting for
us."  As they prepare to cast off, the non-effectives separate from the
runners, and climb a round-topped hill which commands the country.  The
fields are spread like a map under us; nothing on the face of the country
escapes our eyes.  The hare that was "waiting for us" has grown tired of
it, and left the rendezvous, but another is soon started, and a stout
one.  She is of the mountain breed, as are many in this country; they
could not otherwise have held out so long before the pursuit of such
runners, to say nothing of the hounds.  The "tally-ho" comes cheerly up
to us from the valley through the crisp October air, and we see puss
scudding along up the hedgerow, the hounds and the foremost runners in
the next field, the rest thinning out and straggling behind them.  Among
these we recognise with glee a friend or two, who years ago were in the
first flight of every Uppingham paper-chase (_si nunc foret illa
uventus_), labouring across a turnip-field, or held by the leg in a gorse-
cover.  A check gives them a chance of coming up again with huntsman and
master.  We won't spoil the chance by halloing where the hare went,
though, from our vantage-ground, we can view her throughout.  Our friends
have just got in line with the leaders, and are finding their breath
again for a second burst, when the scent is recovered; the chase sweeps
up the ridge, and over it out of our sight, away, perhaps, towards the
moorland spurs of Plinlimmon.  We descend the hill homewards, leaving
puss to her doom, whatever it may be.  For these runs sometimes had a
fatal termination.  In the school serial is told the story of a
magnificent day, of which, however, the runners did not witness the end,
for "time was drawing late, and we were far from the station, so had to
leave the hounds under the charge of the huntsman alone, and as the hare
was now exhausted, they soon killed her.  We were on the scent for over
two hours, and ran about twelve miles."  These days took place two or
three times a week; for good practical reasons the "field" was restricted
in numbers.

After the short and sharp battle with the scarlet fever narrated above,
the term went on very peacefully, but with a growing expectation that
this would not be the last one in Wales.  News from Uppingham of the
unpreparedness of the place to receive us left little room for doubt, but
the question was not decided (at least, officially) even at the date of
the break-up.  The prospect of a fresh period of makeshift life was not a
welcome one; but the worst had been faced by this time, and found, after
all, not hard to deal with.  The long dark evenings of November proved a
less difficulty than was anticipated.  With afternoon school shifted to
the hour of sunset, and with meetings of the Debating and other societies
on half-holiday evenings, the dark hours did not hang heavily, and the
expected tedium of an Arctic winter was not experienced.  The term closed
with a concert given in the Assembly Room at Aberystwith, December 13th,
and another on the next night in the Temperance Hall at popular prices.
On the 14th, a team of Old Boys played the usual football match against
the Present School, and were beaten by two goals to one.  That evening
the class-list was read and the prizes given.  If the boys hoped to
gather from the Headmaster's speech an intimation of where they would
meet him after Christmas they were disappointed.  The government had as
yet no communication to make.  Next morning, in the darkness before dawn,
the special train carried them to their homes, to await with curiosity
their next marching orders.




CHAPTER XI.--LUDIBRIA MARIS.


   _Sit down_, _and hear the last of our sea-sorrow_.

   "THE TEMPEST."

   _They said_, "_and why should this thing be_?
   _What danger lowers by land or sea_?
   _They ring the tune of Enderby_."

   JEAN INGELOW.

"England, when she goes to war," said a Prime Minister not long ago, "has
not to consider whether she will be able to fight a second or a third
campaign."  We remembered that we were Englishmen; and on January 19th,
1877, went down again with a good courage for our third campaign on the
Welsh coast.  A furious gale was howling that day among the hills of
Cardiganshire, recalling to the memory of some of us the stormy Ides of
March, when the pioneers of our little army first set foot in Borth.
_Omina principiis inesse solent_.  This gale was sounding the key-note
of the term's adventures.

The cause of our return to Borth for a third term is briefly told.  We
had gone home at Christmas, uncertain whether we should meet again there
or at Uppingham.  Dr. Acland, of Oxford, to whose active sympathy with
the school in its perplexities we must at least gratefully allude, had
undertaken on our behalf to inspect the sanitary condition of Uppingham,
and give us his judgment on the expediency of reassembling there.  His
judgment was submitted to the attention of the Trustees at their meeting,
on December 22nd, when it was resolved that, "In the face of Dr. Acland's
report, the Trustees deeply regret they cannot at present recall the
school to Uppingham."  So we went back to the sea.

Our numbers this term just missed by one the normal total of three
hundred.  In the two preceding terms they had been smaller by some five
or six.  The camp at Borth, therefore, had not suffered from want of
recruits.  Indeed, it was now foreseen that the return to Uppingham would
be for about one-third of the school a first arrival there.

The beginning of the end of our exile seemed to be marked by the reduced
number of masters' families in camp.  Some had gone into winter quarters
at Aberystwith; some had already resettled at Uppingham.  Our connection
with home began to be retightened also by parochial and other common
transactions, in which we took our share from a distance.  Not, indeed,
that the connection had ever been discontinued.  We had left too precious
pledges behind us.  The deserted gardens did not waste all their
sweetness on the air which we had exchanged for a "fresher clime."  A
thin intermittent stream of their products found its way along the nine
hours of railway through most of the year.  Flowers, fruit, and
vegetables might raise tantalising memories of the pleasant places where
they grew, but were not the less welcome to dwellers in this somewhat
austere tract where they did not grow or grew very niggardly.  The
traffic in these delicacies drew the attention of the London and North-
Western Railway Company, whose officials called to account one of our
servants for travelling with an excess of personal luggage.  The artless
contrabandist, besides his own modest pack, had fourteen several hampers
and boxes under his charge.  This was checked.  But who was the miscreant
who systematically staved in and pounded into such odd shapes the little
tin boxes in which our rose-fanciers had their choice blooms sent them by
post?  Post Office authorities thought the damage was caused by "the
pressure of the letters."  We did not, and remonstrated, till the
practice, whoever was the criminal, was stopped.  Besides these gracious
souvenirs of home, there were from time to time business matters which we
had to transact as parishioners and ratepayers.  One was sensible of an
almost humorous contrast, when we discussed our interests in the Midlands
in a room overlooking the coast and hills of Cardiganshire, where one
turned from watching the waves breaking crisply on the beach, to study a
map of some property in Rutland pastures.  It has been accounted a signal
proof of Roman self-confidence, that bidders could be found for a piece
of land on which Hannibal was encamped at the moment of sale.  The
situations are not quite parallel.  But people who could seriously
debate, as we did, on the purchase of a freehold at a time when not even
their Rome was their own, clearly had not despaired of their country.

With the exception of the moving incidents to be immediately narrated,
the tale of this term's life differs little from that of the preceding.
The round of work and play was much the same; the harriers were out
again, football went on as before, till superseded by the "athletics,"
and a match was played on March 7th against Shrewsbury School on their
ground, of which the result was a drawn battle.

Our difficulties this term were with the elements.  In novels of school
life, where the scene is laid on the coast, the hero always imperils his
bones in an escapade upon the cliffs.  The heroes of our romance knew
what was expected of them.  Accordingly, two new boys of a week's
standing start one afternoon for a ramble on Borth Head and are missing
at tea-time.  Search parties are organised at once (it was not the first
occasion, for the writer remembers sharing in a wild-goose chase which
lasted four hours of the night, along and under the same cliffs); while
one skirted the marsh to Taliesin, another explored the coast.  The
latter party at nine o'clock in the evening discovered the involuntary
tenants perched upon a rock a little way up the cliff.  They had climbed
to it to escape the tide which had cut them off, and here they sat,
telling stones in turn, they said, to while away the time till the tide
should retire.  Before the waters went, however, darkness came; and
either from fear of breaking bones in the descent or suspicion of some
fresh treachery in the mysterious sea, they clung to their perch,
blessing the mildness of a January night without wind or frost, but
blessing with still more fervency the lanterns of their rescuers.  They
had passed five hours in this anxious situation.

This was the sportive prelude of more serious trouble.  _Nunquam
imprudentibus imber incidit_: as the servant perhaps reflected, who, on
Monday, January 29th, was conveying the dinner of his master's family
from the Hotel kitchen to Cambrian Terrace.  As he crossed the gusty
street between them, the harpies of the storm swept the dinner from dish,
and rolled a prime joint over and over in the dust.  A leg of mutton was
following, but he caught it dexterously by the knuckle-end as it fell,
and rescued so much from the wreck.  Such incidents are significant:
trifles light as air, no doubt, but at least they showed which way the
wind blew.  And did it not blow? for three days the sou'-wester had been
heaping up the sea-water against the shores of Cardigan Bay.  People
remembered with misgivings that an expected high tide coincided in time
with the gale, and shook their heads significantly as they went to bed on
the eve of January 30th.

In the half light before sunrise, the classes, emerging from the school-
room after morning prayers, found the street between them and the Terrace
threaded by a stream of salt water, which was pouring over the sea-wall
in momently increasing volume.  Skirting or jumping the obstruction they
reached the class-rooms, and work began.  But before morning school was
over the stream had become a river, and thrifty housewives were keeping
out the flood from their ground-floors by impromptu dams.  Those who were
well placed saw a memorable sight that morn, as the terrible white
rollers came remorselessly in, sheeting the black cliff sides in the
distance with columns of spouted foam, then thundering on the low sea-
wall, licking up or battening down the stakes of its palisades, and
scattering apart and volleying before it the pebbles built in between
them, till the village street was heaped with the ruins of the barrier
over which the waters swept victoriously into the level plain beyond:

   The feet had hardly time to flee
   Before it brake against the knee,
   And all the world was in the sea.

Those who were looking inland saw how

         Along the river's bed
   A mighty eygre reared its head
   And up the Lery raging sped.

And though they could not see how the tenants of the low-lying hamlet of
Ynislas fled to their upper storey as the tide plunged them into twelve
feet of water; how it breached the railway beyond, sapping four miles of
embankment, and sweeping the bodies of a drowned flock of sheep far
inland to the very foot of the hills; yet they saw enough to make them
recall the grim memories of the historic shore, and doubt if our fortunes
were not about to add a chapter to the legend of the Lost Lowland
Hundred.

For an hour the narrow ridge on which the village stands was swept by a
storm of foam, while, from moment to moment, a wave exploding against the
crest of the ridge, would leap in through the intervals between the
houses, and carrying along a drift of sea-weed and shingle, splintered
timber, and wrecked peat-stacks, go eddying down into the drowned
pastures beyond.  Yet when the ebb came, and men began to count their
losses, there were but few to record.  The embankment at the south end of
the village had been beaten flat, and the road behind it buried under a
silt of shingle; the nearest houses to it had been flooded and threatened
with collapse, so that the owners were offering them next day on easy
terms; from our hospital, which stood in this quarter, the one patient
and his nurse were rescued on the backs of waders; the foundations of a
chapel, which was building on lower ground, were reported sapped, and a
staunch Churchman of our Welsh acquaintance stood rapturously contrasting
the fate of the conventicle with the security of his own place of worship
on the neighbouring knoll.  "If Borth goes, the church won't, anyhow!" he
cried, in self-forgetting fervour.  No lives were lost, though several
were barely saved.  One of our party rescued his dog, already straining
at his chain to escape a watery grave; another saved (dearer than life
itself) his favourite violin.  A fisherman, surprised in his kitchen, was
flung down and nearly strangled between door and doorpost by the rush of
a wave through the window.  A neighbour was drifted out of his house on
the top of one wave, and scrambled back to find the door slammed and held
against him by another.  Rueful groups of women stood in the street,
sobbing over armfuls of what one feared might be drowned infants, but
were, in fact, the little pigs which they had plucked alive and
remonstrant from the flooded styes.  In short, if many were frightened,
few could plead to being hurt.

Meanwhile, the boys had found their way from the class-rooms upon bridges
of railway-sleepers requisitioned from the station-yard.  We could not
but enjoy that "something not altogether unpleasing to us in the
calamities of our neighbours," but the "humorous ruth," with which we
contemplated the comical incidents of the disaster was exchanged in good
time for practical pity.  There was to be another high tide that evening,
and how would the village stand this second storm of its broken defences?
So the order was given to assemble in the street after dinner, and work
at the repair of the breaches.  The street looked like an ant-hill, as
the workers, divided into gangs by houses, with the housemaster at the
head of his gang, swarmed on the roadway, clearing it from the _debris_
with pickaxe, spade, and a multitude of hands; re-stacking the cottagers'
store of peat-sods, which the waves had sown broadcast; forming chains
across the beach to pass up from hand to hand the large pebbles at low-
water mark, to build in between the palisades; or cutting down the old
stakes and driving in new ones.  This last was the most attractive branch
of the service.  How enviable was he whom a reputation as a woodman
secured the enjoyment of an axe, and the genial employ of hewing and
hammering!  This was much to be preferred to cutting your hands in moving
rubbish or standing still to hand wet stones in a freezing wind.  However,
the pleasure of helping other people was common to all; and many of the
young hearts, which tasted that pleasure in this rough day's labour, will
have gained an impulse of prompt helpfulness that may serve them in other
and ruder storms than that which shook the frail homes of these friendly
villagers.

We do not know how our defences would have stood the test of battle.  They
were not put to the proof, for the wind, veering to the north that
morning, and blowing strongly all day, reduced again the volume of the
water in the bay, and the following tides came and went harmlessly.  But
had the morrow repeated the terrors of this day, we should hardly have
been up to witness them, for (_proh pudor_!) we rewarded ourselves for
our exertions by a lie-a-bed next morning in place of early school.

Elsewhere the storm-wave had worked more havoc.  At Ynyslas, a flock of
one hundred and fifteen sheep were caught in their pastures, and drowned,
the farmer rescuing only eleven.  The cottagers were driven to their
lofts, while the tide snatched away their furniture, doors,
window-frames, and tables, and strewed them along the railway banks.
There was flotsam and jetsam on what was now once more the coast-line at
the village of Taliesin, where in old days the bard's cradle had been
washed ashore; here one poor woman recovered her parlour-table of heavy
oak; her chairs had travelled farther yet to the door of a farmhouse in
the extreme corner of the marsh.  These people were greater sufferers
than our villagers, but we could only help them by a subscription to
replace their losses.

For ourselves, we suffered nothing except a temporary scarcity of coals
and oil from the interruption of the railway traffic.  It was a fortnight
before the next train ran on the stretch between us and Machynlleth, and
in the meanwhile the gap was bridged by a coach service.  From four miles
of embankment the ballast had been sapped away, and the sleepers and
rails collapsing into the void presented a dismal picture of wreck.

Yes, we suffered one other privation.  It was long before our football-
field rose again from the deeps, and was dry enough for play.  Its
goalposts pricking up mournfully through the floods were a landmark which
the boys recognised with rueful eyes in the midst of the drowned and
deformed landscape.

More substantial measures than the patching up of the barricades in which
we assisted must be taken if Borth is to remain permanently in the roll
of Welsh villages.  Our storm-wave was but part of a system of aggression
which the sea is carrying out upon these coasts.  Older residents
remember a coach-road under the promontory, where now there is nothing
but rock and seaweed, and look forward gloomily to a day when Borth will
be "disturbed;" for so they euphemistically describe the catastrophe
which is finally to wash it away.  But an acquaintance of ours, who
claims one of the longest memories in the place, is more confident.  He
has known Borth seventy years and as he has never seen it destroyed
during all that time, does not think it will be now.  His own house is
safe on the hill of Old Borth, so he judges with all the calm of
conscious security.  His conviction, however, is not shared by his
townsfolk, who were soon busy holding meetings, and considering schemes
for the provision of something better than these moral guarantees.
Heartily do we hope that funds and measures will be found to save our
friends from another and more calamitous "disturbance."  But a letter
from Borth, a year later, speaks of the sea as again threatening their
security.  "We are not afraid of him, though," the correspondent, one of
our landladies, devoutly adds, "for he is under a Master."  All the same,
we should like to hear of a stout sea-wall as well.

Once again the elements caused us alarm.  A heavy gale got up in the
evening of February 19th, and roared all night upon the roof of the
hotel, tearing up the fluttering tiles in patches, and sending them
adrift through the air, till the master who slept under the leads, in
charge of the top storey, began to doubt whether the straining roof would
last overhead till morning.  It was small consolation that this time he
and his neighbours should at least "die a dry death," so the inmates of
the floor were summoned from their beds in the small hours to spend the
rest of the night in a bivouack on the ground-floor.  One or another of
those luckless youngsters will, in after days, remember, as a cheerful
incident, the arrival on the scene of the Headmaster, with a store of
biscuits and such supplies as could be requisitioned at the moment, to
provision the watch.  Your schoolboy, he reflected, is hungry at all
times; what must he be at night when dragged from bed to save his life,
and forced to sit up, rather cold and very empty, for several hours
before daybreak.  Solaced, however, by these beguilements, the hours
passed cheerfully away.




CHAPTER XII.--FAREWELL.


      _The primal sympathy_,
   _Which_, _having been_, _must ever be_.

   WORDSWORTH.

Thenceforward the weeks rolled smoothly on, unmarked by moving incident,
till they gladdened us with the growing light of spring, and brought us
within near sight of our home.  Must the truth be told?  We are all of us
loyal sons of Uppingham, but not all of us were glad to find our return
to the mother-country was at last arriving.  So far away from the
offence, we need not fear attainder if we confess, some few of us, that
our hearts were not whole in their welcome of the long-deferred event.  It
belonged to the irony that waits on all lives which are not too dull a
material for fortune's jests, that we should cease to desire our home
just when long patience and often-thwarted efforts, and

   The slow, sad hours which bring us all things ill,
   And all good things from evil,

had brought its coveted security at last within our reach.  For so it was
with some of us.  Perhaps the air of sea and mountain had got into the
blood, and infected it with a certain disrelish for the restraints, the
even decorum, and the tamer surroundings of our life in the Midlands.
Well, we are not the only emigrants who have preferred their backwoods to
the streets of the mother city, nor the first campaigners who have come
back to home-quarters a trifle spoiled by adventure.  And, moreover,
while everything about us was a reminder of what we must forego, there
was nothing to tell us of what a greeting our townsmen were preparing for
us, or of the solid mutual good which filled the vista beyond that
auspicious welcome.

However, alike for those who were impatient and those who were half
reluctant to attain it, the equal-handed hours brought the end of our
exile.  On one of our last evenings, April 6th, a reading was given in
the school-room, "A Midsummer Night's Dream" with Mendelssohn's music; no
unfit close, we said, to our _annns mirabilis_.  For, indeed, its
incidents had been "such stuff as dreams are made of," as whimsical if
not quite as harmless, as if their plot had been directed by the blithe
goblin of Shakespeare's fantasy.  The chorus of readers and of singers
were so far encouraged by their success, as to offer a second recital as
a farewell entertainment to the good people of Borth.  They enjoyed it
hugely.  Doubtless some of the simpler members of that audience would
follow the drift of the Sassenach poet only at a certain distance; but
Bottom's "transformed scalp," a pasteboard ass's-head, come all the way
from Nathan's, was eloquent without help of an interpreter.  "Oh! that
donkey, he was beautiful," was the dramatic criticism of an esteemed
friend, a fisher's wife.  The criticism was at least sincere; from the
moment of the monster's entry she had been in one rapture of laughter,
till her "face was like a wet cloak ill laid up."  Well, the kind soul
had reason good enough for her merriment.  But had the reason been less,
our neighbours would not have lost the occasion of dropping the shyness
of intercourse in a frank outburst of good fellowship.

But we took a more solemn farewell on the morrow, the 10th of April.  The
parts were reversed now, and we were the spectators.  Just at sundown of
a day of clear spring weather, the school was gathered at their doors
watching a long procession of villagers advancing up the street towards
them.  We had heard whispers in the morning of a "demonstration," and now
it was come.  Through the dust we caught sight of banners flying at the
head of the column; under them marched the choir of children singing, and
behind them the whole village was a-foot.  The people of Borth, of every
age and degree, from the first householders and yeomen of the place to
the fishermen's boys and girls, had come to wish us God speed.  Reaching
the school quarters they halted, the boys lining the roadway on each side
of them, and filling the broad flight of steps before the hotel doors.
When the cheers for "Uppingham" and our answering cheers for "Borth" had
rung out across the sands to seaward, there was an interval, filled up
with songs by the children, while they waited the arrival of the
spokesmen, whom they had charged with their valediction.  When these
arrived, a deputation of the villagers moved into the school-room shed,
and there presented a brief address, which ran thus: "We, the inhabitants
of Borth, beg to tender our most sincere thanks to Dr. Thring, and all
the masters and scholars of the celebrated Uppingham School, for the very
many generous acts and kindly feelings exhibited to us during their
sojourn here."  The address was introduced and explained by speeches
marked by refined feeling, and delivered with a noticeable grace of
manner.  We will here cite, though for another reason, a few words of the
speaker who moved the address; he commented on the discipline which (from
the evidence of their conduct when at large) seemed to rule the school;
naively but pointedly he noted that no offence had ever been given; "No
boy had laughed at the villagers, if they were old and queer-looking or
queerly dressed; there had been no disorder, no shabby act, nothing
_un_decent" (so he put it in his unpractised English) "during the whole
twelve months we had spent among them."  We give his testimony without
note or comment, sure that the facts would not be better told in words
less simple.  They were little things he witnessed to; was it a little
thing that the witness could be truly borne?

The boys were not present to hear the speeches, but they will like well
to remember the scene without doors at that unlooked-for reunion of
school and village.  It was a scene made up of homely elements enough,
but somehow, in our own memory at least, few pictures will remain printed
in such fast colours.  Clearly, as on that evening, we shall always see,
distinct in the quiet light of the afterglow, the ranks of serious faces,
touched and stilled by the surprise of a contagious sympathy, as English
boys and Welsh cottagers looked each other in the face, and felt, if for
the space of a few heartbeats only, an outflash of that ancient kinship
which binds man and man together more than race and circumstance divide.

It pleases the smaller kind of criticism to cheapen the meaning of such
incidents as this, and explain them by the easy reference to interested
and conventional motives.  Wiser men will take occasion to rejoice that
human nature is after all so kind; and if this be error, we would rather
err with the wise.  Take once again our thanks, kind people of Borth, if
our thanks are worth your taking.  You showed us no little kindness in a
strange land, and the day is far off when we shall forget the friendly,
gentle people whose name is the memorial of a great ill escaped, of much
good enjoyed, in the days that are over, and the landmark of who knows
what greater good in the days that are to be.




CONCLUSION.


   _Perhaps poetry and romance are as plentiful as ever in the world_,
   _except for those phlegmatic natures_, _who_, _I suspect_, _would in
   any age have regarded them as a dull form of erroneous thinking_.
   _They exist very easily in the same room with the microscope_, _and
   even in railway carriages_: _what banishes them is the vacuum in
   gentleman and lady passengers_.  _How should all the apparatus of
   heaven and earth_, _from the farthest firmament to the tender bosom of
   the mother who nourished us_, _make poetry for a mind that has no
   movements of awe and tenderness_, _no sense of fellowship which
   thrills from the near to the distant, and back again from the distant
   to the near_?

   GEORGE ELIOT.

   [Greek verse]

   ANTIGONE.

All is over now; April was just a twelfth-night old when the school
departed.  Some of our company have lingered on for business, a few from
reluctance to have done with it.  But to-day the last group has taken
wing for the Midlands.  Old "Borth," the colley dog, followed them to the
station, and poked his nose into the carriage to take his leave.  Old
Borth--we had almost forgotten him, and that had been deep ingratitude
for he was not the least warm-hearted of our friends in Wales.  His
master lived two miles away; but soon after our arrival, Borth had come
down from the hills to attach himself to our fortunes, and henceforth
became, as it were, our familiar, the pet of the regiment, like the goat
of the "23rd."  He knew his position, and was a stickler for formalities;
he had a wag of the tail for every boy who wore the image of the
venerable schoolmaster upon his cap; but if he met him bare-headed, or,
by any chance, in an indistinctive head-gear, he would cut that boy dead,
were he never so much the same urchin from whose hand he had yesterday
eaten a cheese-cake.  That was his official rebuke for the irregularity.
By day, Borth would bask in some sunny corner of our quarters; at night,
he has been known to venture on a nearer intimacy where doors were left
open.  We found you once ourselves, Borth, curled up and asleep upon our
own bed.  You woke up, shook yourself with a modest, but not startled
manner, and walked quietly away, like a gentleman.

Ah! kind friend, you showed us the sincerest of flatteries, that of
imitation.  You left a comfortable home for chance quarters and uncertain
fare, that you might be one of us, an outcast among outcasts.  Now we
must part, for our home will spare us no longer, as neither will yours
spare you.  And so the last good-bye is said, and you are limping away to
your hills again, with dejection expressed in every fibre of your frame,
from the drooping ears to the last hair on your tail.

All is over, and the place is very silent, except for the clink of
hammers where they are breaking down our wooden walls, and, seaward, the
cry and splash of gull and tern dipping for their prey in the shoal of
herring-fry which is wandering about the bay.  Close inshore a porpoise
is wallowing, like the jolly sea-pig that he is, in his berth of
glistening water.  The wild creatures seem to have grown tamer since
there are no strollers to keep them aloof.  This morning, as we passed
his pool, the stately heron let us come within twenty yards of him before
he got leisurely upon the wing.  The village seems even quieter; the
people at their doors betray, to our fancy, a certain lassitude as if,
like merrymakers on the morrow of a revel, they felt somewhat sleepy and
sorry, now that the stirring social year is over, and the little fishing
town has returned to its "old solitary nothingness."

Yes, the silence has come down again; but it is a silence full of voices.
For, as it often happens that, when things without are stillest, men hear
most audibly the tumult of their own brains, so is it now with us.  Action
is ended, and memory begins to work.  Into the vacuum which the silence
makes, the stream of our little history pours in a long backwater.  Our
thoughts go back to the beginning of it, the hour when, as we were
sailing prosperously under press of canvas, the blast struck us suddenly
out of a sunny sky.  We live again the slow months of enforced vacation,
and the brief spell of apparent security, broken by the second stroke.  We
recall the slow and painful sickening of hope, amid the frustration of
attempted remedies; the watchings and communings by late firesides; the
morning questionings and bulletins; the deepening of fears, until the
moment when the sharp pressure of calamity became the liberating touch,
and made a hazardous adventure seem a welcome alternative.  Not less
distinctly we remember the zest with which the wretched waiting for evil
tidings was exchanged for hopeful activity; the rush of preparations; the
anxiety which watched their passage through the ordeal of practice; the
growing sense of security; the mellowing down of novelty and privation
into routine and ease; the contrast, all the while, between the outward
peace of the colony, and the secret difficulties of finance and
commissariat; the long intermittent crisis which gave the administrative
no rest; the hopes and efforts for our return home, and the reversal of
them; all this, and--and--very much else as well, which was of acutest
interest at the time, and which it will become convenient to describe
only when it will be of interest to no one.  All this passes before us in
the series of a long dissolving view, full of bright lights, and only
less full of unlovely shadows.

And, somehow, as we review the past this evening, pacing the beach in the
twilight, the fact accomplished seems to us not smaller, but greater than
when we lived in it.  There are moments some would say of illusion, some
of vision--when the things most familiar to our eyes and thoughts,
whether in nature or human society, surprise us with a dignity and beauty
not discovered in them before.  That glamour is in the air this evening.
Perhaps the night-wind, which creeps to us from over the grassy tomb of
Taliesin, warrior and bard has touched the fancy with a breath out of his
heroic days.  What wonder if it were so?  Thirteen centuries ago the hero
became the guardian of the shore; but the story which ends to-day is,
perhaps, as worthy note as any he has watched from his hill-side.  Those
who rate the dignity of human action by other standards than the breadth
and conspicuousness of its stage, will not mock us because we find some
stuff of romance in the homely circumstance and not always epic passages
of this modern episode of school.

But if the stranger who may read the tale will spare his scorn--those for
whom we shall tell it would forgive even a bolder word; for some of them
were themselves a part of it, and others will make it a part of their
heritage in the past.  English schools have always honoured their
traditions, counting them the better part of their wealth.  Some have
majestic memories of royal benefactors, or can point to a muster-roll of
splendid names, whose greatness was cradled in their walls.  Such
traditions are not ours.  A past, not brief, but not memorable, has
denied us these.  But a tradition we have henceforward which is all our
own and wholly single in its kind.  We persuade ourselves that in far-off
years those who bear our name will say that, in the memory of a great
disaster overcome, no mean heirloom has been left them.  They will not be
ashamed of a generation which, in an hour of extreme peril, did not
despair of the commonwealth, but dared to trust their faith in a further
destiny, and saved for those who should come after them a cause which
must else have perished in the dark.  _Stet fortuna domus_.  And stand it
will if there is assurance in augury.  For the fairy legend has a truth
in fact, and the luck of a house, grasped daringly and held fast in an
act of venturous hardihood, will not break or be lost again until the
sons forget to guard it.

Here and there, at any rate, among the posterity which will sometime fill
our ranks, there will not be wanting generous and gifted spirits,
_illustres animae nostrumque in nomen iturae_, who will rejoice in making
good the forecast that the venture was not made in vain.  They will
possess more worthily the good which an elder race foresaw and laboured
not all unworthily to preserve.  To their safe keeping we commend as
under a seal, the legacy of hopes which are better left unspoken now.




APPENDIX.


HOW WE LEFT BORTH.


(_From_ "_The Cambrian News_.")

On Tuesday evening, April 10, the inhabitants of Borth, almost to a man,
turned out to take part in a farewell demonstration to the masters and
scholars of Uppingham School, after their twelve months' residence in
Wales.  Shortly after seven o'clock a procession of the inhabitants was
formed, and, headed by a flag-bearer, made its way to the square in front
of the Cambrian Hotel, where several songs were sung by the assembly
under the schoolmaster's (Mr. Jones's) direction; and at the conclusion a
hearty round of cheers was given for the Uppingham School, who
immediately responded by making the place ring again with three
enthusiastic cheers for Borth.  The assembly then adjourned to the wooden
building in the hotel-yard, when Mr. Jones, Brynowen, was voted to the
chair on the proposition of Mr. Lewis, Post Office, seconded by Mr.
Jones, Neptune Baths.

The CHAIRMAN said, as the meeting was aware, the object of the
demonstration--and he was exceedingly glad to see such a popular
demonstration--was, that the Borth people might have a chance of giving
public expression to the kind feeling of respect they entertained for Mr.
Thring, the masters, and scholars of Uppingham School before they left
Borth, after a twelve months' sojourn there.  (Cheers.)  When some twelve
months ago a rumour came to Borth respecting the advent of Uppingham
School, a few old women and nervous people, in the innocence of their
hearts, were afraid they would be swamped by an inundation of Goths and
Vandals.  (Laughter.)  The meeting would, however, agree with him that
kinder-hearted gentlemen than the masters, and better-behaved boys than
the scholars, could not be found.  (Hear, hear.)  There had been no town-
and-gown feeling existing similar to what prevailed in places of greater
pretensions.  The people of the village and the School had pulled
together in a friendly manner, and everything had gone on quite smoothly.
(Hear.)  After referring to the progress of the School under the
headmastership of Mr. Thring, and remarking that the older schools would
have to look to their laurels, as Uppingham was treading close upon their
heels, the Chairman said that in some fifteen or twenty years to come
many of the boys would be in Parliament, some of them officers in the
army or navy, fighting the battles of the nation, some of them would be
barristers, seeing that the people got fair play in the courts of law,
others would no doubt be eminent merchants, importing the produce of
foreign countries, whilst others would be surgeons, like Dr. Childs--(loud
cheering)--and physicians.  They would therefore exercise an influence
over the destinies of the nation.  (Cheers.)  The people of Borth were
exceedingly sorry that the school was going away.  Its members would be
missed very much indeed.  He owed the Uppingham people no ill-feeling,
but if a case of smallpox, the cholera, or some other virulent disease
broke out in that place and prevented the return of the school, he was
sure that Borth people would not feel at all sorry.  (Laughter and
cheers.)  There was the name of a gentleman whom he might mention.  That
gentleman had earned the gratitude of the Borth people perhaps more than
anyone else.  He referred to Dr. Childs.  (Applause.)  He had acted the
part of the Good Samaritan thoroughly, responding as readily to the call
of the sick and suffering at midnight as at noon.  (Cheers.)  He would
detain them no longer, but ask Mr. Lewis to submit a proposition to the
meeting.

Mr. LEWIS, Post Office, said he had very great pleasure in reading the
resolution, because he knew it would be heartily responded to by everyone
present.  It was as follows:--"We, the inhabitants of Borth, beg to
tender our most sincere thanks to Dr. Thring, and all the masters and
scholars of the celebrated Uppingham School, for the very many generous
acts and kindly feelings exhibited towards us during their sojourn here."
Mr. Lewis followed by commenting upon the excellent discipline which
evidently ruled the school, judging from their exemplary conduct out of
school.  He was not aware of any shabby, mean, or ungenerous act
committed by the young gentlemen during the whole twelve months they had
been at Borth.  (Applause.)  The meeting would remember the assistance
rendered in the terrific storm in February.  Even the ladies came out and
helped the people in their distress--(loud applause)--thereby setting an
excellent example to the women of Borth.  (Cheers.)  They had not only
worked as hard as they could, but subscribed money among themselves which
they distributed to the most needy of those who had sustained loss by the
storm.  (Applause.)  The money then distributed would pass into other
hands in a short time, but the kind feelings the act engendered would
last for ever.  (Applause.)  He only hoped that each and all connected
with Uppingham School would enjoy long, prosperous, and useful lives.
(Loud applause.)

Mr. JONES, The Baths, expressed the fears he once entertained, in common
with others, that the Uppingham School would take Borth by storm, an
opinion he had to change entirely after the boys had been there a week,
for instead of laughing at the quaintness of some of the Welsh costumes
or the peculiarities of the nation, they had obtained the goodwill of the
inhabitants by their gentleness of demeanour, and completely won their
hearts on that memorable day when masters and scholars, young and old,
turned out to assist in reducing, as much as possible, the ill-effects of
the storm.  (Cheers.)  He did not exactly wish that some contagious
disease would break out at Uppingham, but he hoped that when the School
got back it would repent, and so return to Borth.  (Laughter and cheers.)

Speeches were also made by Mr. Thomas G. Thomas and Mr. R. Pritchard
Roberts, Garibaldi House.

The Rev. E. THRING, M.A., then rose amid cheers and said: Mr. Chairman
and our friends at Borth, I have made many speeches in my life since I
have been master of this school.  Two-and-twenty years of
school-mastering gives a good deal of exercise for the tongue from time
to time; but never in my life have I stood up to make any speech which I
feel so little capable of making as I do to-night; not from want of
practice, but because the feelings you have aroused in us are such--and
our sojourn here has been such a boon to us (cheers)--that it is
impossible for me to tell you the value we set on living here, and the
welcome we have received.  (Applause.)  I never heard anything sweeter to
my ear than your singing to-night.  The time it must have taken, the
goodwill manifested in the songs, and altogether the circumstances under
which they were delivered, and we on our last day here, made them go down
into my heart, and into all our hearts with peculiar power.  (Cheers.)
Never in my life have I had such testimony to the school which I cared so
much for, as the testimony you have given to-night.  We get our
reputation in the English world, but what is that compared to the inner
life to which you have borne witness.  What signifies it whether we know
much or little in comparison with the fact that we have a character of
life which you like.  It is life answering unto life across all those
ties, both of nationality--for I grieve I cannot speak in your native
tongue--and also of distance which set gulfs between man and man, but
cannot separate life when it is true.  (Hear, hear.)  If your life is
true, and our lives are true, then it flows across and we meet as
to-night one united body of living men.  (Cheers.)  And this is what
gives a peculiar value to our being here.  You know as none can know what
this school is.  We came among you as strangers, and you looked upon us
with the eyes of strangers; we stayed among you as friends, and we part
from you as friends.  (Cheers.)  Everybody knows that the one thing on
earth which makes life pleasant is the friendly atmosphere in which men
live--the one thing that makes it hateful is to be surrounded by
thoroughly bitter hearts.  There is an old saying that "stone walls do
not a prison make, nor iron bars a cage."  No, the life within can make
any place enjoyable--nay, happy.  Yet, I think it is better to be in
happy surroundings too.  Of this, however, you may be sure: those
glorious hills of yours, this sea, and all the happy hours we have spent
wandering about, will not easily pass out of our minds.  The jewel of a
friendly spirit has also been set in very bright surroundings.  We do
rejoice in the life we have had here, and all that we have found.
(Cheers.)  You have spoken to-night of the good conduct of the school,
and have said that we have caused no trouble since our stay here.  That
like many other questions, has two sides.  Is it not a great credit to
this place that when between a hundred and seventy and a hundred and
eighty strange boys have been put into your cottages and homes, there has
not arisen a single difficulty for the whole year?  I say it is quite as
much a feather in your caps as in ours.  I am proud of it--very proud of
it.  (Applause.)  I would also refer to the extensive power which lies in
a great school.  It is quite true that some few years hence, these boys
whom you have looked on with interest will be schoolmasters, barristers,
and leaders in every part of the world.  (Applause.)  There is not a
quarter of the globe where we have not our representative.  It is now,
and not in the future only, that I may venture to say that there is no
part of this globe where men are to be found, where, here and there,
Borth has not been heard of this year.  (Cheers.)  I will mention two
facts only which may interest you.  This very week, quite unconscious of
this meeting to-night, I sent a letter to North Canada, with, I may say,
a very glowing account of Borth in it--(cheers)--and the day before
yesterday, having a little leisure, I wrote to the Lieutenant-Governor of
the North-West Provinces of India, when I mentioned Borth in equally warm
terms.  (Applause.)  That, I need not say, is going on all around us.
These three hundred pens of our school are busy day by day giving to
their friends their own views of our life here, and I may no doubt say
that on the whole they are pleasant views.  (Cheers.)  It is not only a
pleasant fact to mention, but I hold that where life is working well with
life it is a real power for good that goes out into all lands, a sort of
missionary force traversing this earth, speaking of us as capable of
coming here, and of the welcome you have given us.  (Hear, hear.)  That,
however, would be a slight thing if we did not leave behind us, as I am
sure we do, that feeling of happy life which we take away with us.
(Cheers.)  For my own part, at all events, if I leave, it is not the last
time I hope to spend in Borth.  (Applause.)  I know no place that has
been more attractive to me, no place where, if I can, I shall more
readily come back to--not, I hope, next time as an exile, but coming from
home to happy holiday to spend it pleasantly among my friends here.
(Applause.)

MR. LEWIS proposed a hearty vote of thanks to Dr. Childs for his
gratuitous attendance on the sick in his professional capacity.  (Loud
cheers.)

DR. CHILDS referred to the pleasure experienced in doing a kindly action,
and afterwards humorously added that at one time he thought of setting up
in practice at Borth, but finding the place so healthy he had given up
the idea.  (Laughter and cheers.)  He should, however, know where to send
his convalescent patients in future.  He should recommend them to take
the first train, and spend a week on the sands at Borth, with an
occasional dip in the Neptune Baths.  (Loud laughter and cheers.)  Three
cheers were given for the ladies of Uppingham School, and the assembly
separated after singing the National Anthem.



HOW WE CAME BACK TO UPPINGHAM.


(_From the_ SCHOOL MAGAZINE.)

(_Signifer, statue signum, hic manebimus optime_.)

Who has not known the moment when, as he looked on some familiar
landscape, its homely features and sober colouring have suddenly, under
some chance inspiration of the changing sky, become alive with an
unexpected beauty: its unambitious hills take on them the dignity of
mountains, its woods and streams swell and broaden with a majesty not
their own.  Though, perhaps, it is their own, if Nature, like Man, is
most herself when seen in her best self; if her brightest moments are her
truest.

Shall we be thought fanciful if we confess that we felt something of this
same kind when, returning from a year-long exile, in the last gleams of a
bright May evening we turned the corner of the High Street of Uppingham,
and came face to face with our welcome.  The old street, seen again at
last after so many months of banishment, the same and not the same; the
old, homely street--forgive us, walls and roofs of Uppingham, and forgive
us, you who tenant them, if sometimes perhaps to some of us, as our eyes
swept the grand range of Welsh mountain-tops, or travelled out over
limitless sea distances, there would rise forbidden feelings of
reluctance to exchange these fair things for the bounded views and less
unstinted beauties of our midland home: forgive us, as you may the more
readily because these thoughts, if any such lingered, were charmed away
on the instant by the sight of the real Uppingham.  There lay the path to
our home, an avenue of triumphal arches soaring on pillars of greenery,
plumed with sheaves of banners, and enscrolled with such words as those
to whom they spoke will know how to read and remember.  Our eyes could
follow through arch after arch the reaches of the gently-winding street,
alive from end to end with waving flags, green boughs, and fanciful
devices, till the quiet golden light in the western sky closed the vista,
and glorified with such a touch of its own mellow splendour the ranges of
brown gables and their floating banners, that for a moment we half
dreamed ourselves spectators of an historic pageant in some "dim, rich
city" of old-world renown.  Only for a moment, though; for when we drop
our eyes to the street below us, those are our own townsfolk,
well-remembered faces, that throng every doorstep and fill the
overflowing pavements and swarming roadway.  Yes, they are our own
townsfolk, and they are taking care to let us know it--such a welcome
they have made ready for us.

We hardly know how to describe with the epic dignity which it merits the
act by which they testified their joy at our return.  We who saw the
sight were reminded of an incident in the AEneid--

   Instar montis equum divina Palladis arte
   Aedificant, sectaque intexunt abiete costas;
   Votum pro reditu simulant.

   * * * * *

      Pueri circum innuptaeque puellae
   Sacra canuut, funemque manu contingere gaudent.

But the ill-starred folk of Troy could not have shown more enthusiasm in
haling within their walls the fatal wooden horse, than did the men and
boys of Uppingham, who harnessed themselves, some four-score of them, to
that guileless structure, which, though indeed it has some other name, we
will call at present our triumphal car.  They harnessed themselves to it
at the east-end of the town, and drew it with the pomp of a swarming
multitude all the length of the long street to its western mouth and half
the way back again.  On went that unwieldy car of triumph, bearing a
freight of eager faces behind its windows, and carrying a crowd of
sitters, precariously clustered wherever a perch could be found on its
swaying roof, under the verdant span of the arches and the flow of the
streamers:

   Ilia subit mediaeque minans inlabitur urbi.

On it went, with the hum of applauding voices increasing round it, till
the popular fervour found articulate utterance in a burst of jubilant
music.  There swept past our ears, first, the moving strains of "Auld
lang syne," and then, as if in answer to the appeal to "Auld
acquaintance," came the jocund chorus "There is nae luck about the
house"--most eloquent assurance that we were welcome home.  And then in
turn the music died down, and the crowd round the now halted procession
cheered with a will for "the school," "the Headmaster and the masters,"
and the school taking up with zest the genial challenge, returned the
blessing with such a shout as if they meant the echoes of that merry
evening to make amends in full to street and houses for their fourteen
months of silence.

It was "all over but the shouting:" but that was not over till some hours
of dusk had gathered over school and town.  For first the multitude
besieged the well-known mighty gates, behind which lies the studious
quiet of the Schoolhouse Quad.  When they were admitted they came in like
a flood, and filled the space within; but for all they were so many,
there was an orderliness and quietude in the strange assemblage which
made their presence there seem not strange at all, and they listened like
one man to the words in which the Headmaster, who came out to meet them,
framed his thanks for this unequivocal welcome.  This done, they flowed
out again, and streamed across the valley and up the hill to carry the
same message of goodwill to the distant houses, and so with more cheering
and more speeches came to an end a day of happiest omen for the joint
fortunes of Uppingham School and Town.

A few additional details are needed to complete our account.  A friend,
remarkable for his plain common-sense, reminds us that the epic vehicle
we so indistinctly describe, was the Seaton 'bus, and that the music was
due to "the splendid band connected with Mrs. Edmonds' menagerie, which
happened to be in the town."  We are not in a position to deny either
statement, or another to the effect that "the conveyances which
accompanied the 'bus formed a procession of considerable length," having
been halted by arrangement outside the town, and formed into file for the
entry.  When the same friend hazards some further criticism on a
confusion of dates and incidents in our narrative, in which he finds the
events of two days, a Friday and a Saturday, presented as in a single
scene, we feel it time to silence him by an appeal, which he does not
follow, to the "truer historic sense" and the "massive grouping" of
imaginative history.



THE ADDRESS.


On Tuesday of the next week, May 8, an address was presented by a
deputation of the townspeople to the Headmaster and assistant masters.
The ceremony took place in the school-room, the body of which was almost
filled by those who had assembled to support their deputation, while the
masters, their families, and the Sixth Form were seated on the tiers of
the orchestra.  The deputation coming forward, Mr. Bell said that Mr.
Hawthorn and himself had been requested by their fellow townsmen to
undertake the presentation of an address, in explanation of which he
would make a few remarks.  In an appreciative speech he reviewed the
circumstances which had given rise to the present occasion, gave some
explanation of the form and terms of the address, and took occasion to
add that although the ladies were not mentioned in the address, the
townspeople were not unmindful of the energetic way in which they had
seconded the efforts of the masters.

MR. HAWTHORN said he had been asked to read the Address, but that he was
unwilling to do so without some slight expression of the feelings with
which he and others took part in the presentation of it.  Though they
were met to congratulate the school, they felt, he said, that there were
good grounds to congratulate themselves as townsmen.  The absence of the
school had pressed with greater or less severity on many tradesmen, being
felt more especially by a large number of the poorer inhabitants, and had
made it evident to many how poor a place Uppingham would be without a
school upon its present important scale.  But they valued the School on
other grounds too; they recognize the advantage of the presence among
them of so many representatives of liberal education and its broader
views on matters of public interest.  To the Headmaster it must be a
cause for rejoicing and thankfulness that the labour of his life had been
saved from a sudden and unfortunate conclusion.  To him and his assistant
masters, the parents, and the boys, by whose loyal adherence the time of
trial had been happily passed through, their congratulations were
offered.  He proceeded to read the address, which was received with much
applause by the townspeople.  It is a handsomely illuminated document, to
which between sixty and seventy names are attached; the terms of it are
as follows:

"_To the Rev. Edward Thring, M.A., Headmaster, and to the Assistant
Masters of Uppingham School_.

"Gentlemen,--We, the undersigned residents in Uppingham, have great
pleasure in meeting you with a hearty welcome on the re-assembling of the
school in full numbers in its native home, and gladly avail ourselves of
this opportunity of conveying to you our congratulations that the period
of anxiety and trial through which you have so successfully passed has
clearly demonstrated the sound principles upon which the school has been
conducted, and which have raised it to its present eminence as one of the
great schools of the country, and have won for it the confidence of
parents in all parts of the kingdom, many of whom have entrusted their
sons to your care at Borth, and are continuing that trust now that you
are returning to your homes.

"We desire also to express our sense of the courage and enterprise
manifested in removing the school from Uppingham at the time of the
anxious crisis in February, 1876.

"And we pray Almighty God that it may please Him to bless the school, and
that under His guidance those who from time to time leave the school may
as scholars and Christian gentlemen uphold its fame in whatever sphere
they may be placed.

"_Uppingham_, _May_, 1877."

The HEADMASTER then rose and said: "Mr. Bell, Mr. Hawthorn, and friends
in Uppingham,--Home is home, and you may be quite sure that we, at all
events, who went through exile felt it indeed to be home when we came
back again.  (Applause.)  It does not signify what the circumstances may
be, but it is not possible to live long in a place and to have your home
there without taking root in it, and having fibres sent deep which cannot
be torn up without pain.  (Applause.)  We are very grateful, therefore,
for the hearty, the enthusiastic welcome you gave us on our return.
(Cheers.)  Assuredly as our eyes looked on this pleasant hill and the
familiar fields, we felt a deep thankfulness for the great peril passed,
the page of life turned, and a year such as never can come again closed
with success.  (Applause.)  And it is a pleasant spot to look on when you
come down the dip of the valley before you near Uppingham, and look up
and see the ancient homes crowning the brow of the hill--it is a fair
sight to any eye, even to a stranger's eye, the pleasant homes of
Uppingham, with the church and its spire in the midst, the spire of the
school chapel beyond, each adding, methinks, to the beauty of the other,
and both alike in their upward spring and their holy worship.  It _is_ a
pleasant spot to look on, and you made your old picturesque street very
beautiful with your decorations and that bright outbreak of welcome which
greeted us as we came in.  (Cheers.)  The school hardly knew what we
meant--they did not know when we asked them to cheer at the top of the
hill; but as the stream of life wound round and came in sight of that
avenue of arches and flags, then they understood what was meant, and they
were ready enough to second it.  (Cheers.)  We were very thankful, also,
that you recognise in that address--that able address and pleasing to
receive--how hard it was to go, how great a risk had to be faced to save
the school; for that was what was at stake.  I do not say that in years
to come there should not again have been a school as great as this, or
greater; but this I am sure of, that we were in the very last week of the
life of this present school; that at the beginning of the week, when it
was decided to go, there was news from different quarters that made it
absolutely certain that another Monday would have seen no school here.
For a school is not a mere machine which can be set going to order, and
which anybody who happens at the time to have the mastery of can deal
with like a machine.  "I can call spirits from the vasty deep," says
Shakespeare in one of his plays; and the rejoinder comes, "Why, so can I,
or so can any man; but will they come when you do call for them?"
(Laughter and cheers.)  Now that is just what they won't do; and we
simply had no choice; we lay absolutely helpless before the fact that
ruin stared us in the face, and we could not stir hand or foot to stop it
unless we had been able then to find a door of escape.  This present
school was at an end, and neither I nor some others amongst us could have
set foot again in Uppingham as our home.  Now I do assure you ruin is a
hard thing to look on after a life-work of many years of labour--not a
less hard thing because the sun rose as usual, and it was all peace, and
the buildings looked as of old, and the fields were just as they had
always been; but an invisible barrier had risen up, and we had no place
here any more.  To see the four-and-twenty years of life go at a
touch--indeed it was hard to think of.  "For my part, I have built my
heart in the courses of the wall"--(cheers)--and nothing short of this
impelled us to that dire necessity of leaping in the dark, to go we did
not know where, and when we found the _where_, not knowing who would
follow us.  But it was worth while to run any risk--to face any danger--to
keep together the life of this place, and that its name should not go out
in England.  (Loud cheers.)  We did not know who would follow us, and it
was a day to be remembered--a day of much cheer, though full of labour
and trial and fear also, when on that 4th of April three hundred came in.
(Loud applause.)  Not above two or three that night were wanting of those
who were going to remain at the school.  (Cheers.)  Well have you taken
in your address that staunch adherence of parent and boy as the proudest
honour that a school can boast of (cheers), and well have you noted that
at Borth also the entries kept level with the leavings, and that we have
brought back this year--this day--almost a hundred boys who had never
seen Uppingham.  (Renewed cheering.)  This was worth fighting for; this
is worth rejoicing.  The school was saved, and we and you to-night once
more meet together as one body.  (Loud applause.)  We are united now as
we never have been before methinks (cheers); for never before, to my
knowledge, in England, have town and school been so completely welded
together as your welcome to us home and our presence here together to-
night shows us to be now.  (Loud and long-continued applause.)  There
have been many blessings in this great trial, but certainly not least do
I set that, that we and you are once more met as one.  Your work and ours
is so mixed up--our work so mixed with yours, and yours with ours--that
it is not possible that anything should go out of this place, any life
come forth from it, which does not to a great degree bring honour or
discredit to both; and I do think (what was said to-night) that we are
here together to work in the highest way, not as a matter of pecuniary
advantage only in a place like this, but simply that we, one with
another, should push forward life and make it crown that living edifice
of truth, which, as it seems to me, is town and school working together.
And what a type that town is.  "A city set upon a hill cannot be hid;"
and surely as a school and a home, a home of learning and light, this
place is both actually and figuratively set upon its hill.  Everything of
the past year has gone out into land after land, in letters and papers
and narratives on all sides: the busy-boy mind and the busy-boy pen
photographs most accurately all the minute incidents that interest their
opening life, and it passes out everywhere.  I know that in India, and
China, and Australia, and Canada--and I might go on with half the
countries in the world--there has been talk in many a distant home of
what has happened here.  It may very well be that at this moment your
names are on many lips as letters of English news have come in lately
from England, and your welcome of us will travel out to the ends of the
earth, so great is the power of "a city set upon a hill."  And when you
pray that we may be Christian gentlemen in the life that is coming, I say
it lies a great deal in your own hands.  Help us by so smoothing our path
in all ways so that your honour may be our honour and your work our work,
and that as we are grateful to you to-night so the world outside may be
grateful to you also for work hereafter, and that none shall go out of
Uppingham School and shall not carry wherever he goes a thankful memory
of Uppingham town, and that whenever the name of Uppingham is heard in
any part of the world it shall be that of an honoured place, with no
divided interest, but one place working wisely, so that the world may be
grateful for good work done, as we to-night are grateful for the welcome
given, grateful for the lightening of our burdens, grateful for the
possibility of good work in the future, most grateful for the happy homes
you have given us in welcoming us home so fervently.  I thank you most
heartily in the name of the school and the masters and myself for this
address, which I trust will for ever remain not the least honoured relic
of this school."

The Headmaster sat down again amid much cheering from the audience of
townspeople, to which the small party of boys present found voice to make
no ineffective answer in three salutes 'for Uppingham town.'

* * * * *

CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS, CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.




Footnotes:


{12}  "Prom. Vinct.," 904.

{19}  _The Times_, Friday, April 14th, 1876.

{46}  "Fifty Years of my Life," Albemarle, p. 308.

{66}  Believers in augury are too seldom confronted with the negative
instance.  May we then invite their attention to the following?  The
address was published in a paragraph of _The Times_, but the words "under
the same leadership" were omitted.  Nevertheless, to the discredit of
omination, under the same leadership the school did return.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UPPINGHAM BY THE SEA: A NARRATIVE OF THE YEAR AT BORTH ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

