








THE HEART

OF

The New Thought



WRITTEN BY

ELLA WHEELER WILCOX


Associate Editor of "NEW THOUGHT."



ELEVENTH THOUSAND



PUBLISHED BY

THE PSYCHIC RESEARCH COMPANY

TEMPLE CHAMBERS

TEMPLE AVE., E.C.,

LONDON, ENG.


1903




Copyright

THE PSYCHIC RESEARCH COMPANY.


All Rights Reserved.



NOTICE: This work is protected by Copyright, and simultaneous initial
publication in United States of America, Canada, Great Britain, France,
Germany, Russia and other countries.  All rights reserved.




Publishers' Preface

This book is noteworthy as an interpretation of "New Thought."

That which was vague, mystic, unreal, has become, in the hands of Mrs.
Wilcox, a lovable philosophy of simplest construction.

The backbone of this philosophy is The Power of Right Thought.

Startling as are some of the tenets expressed, they are provably true
here and now.

It is possible that the very simplicity of this book will encourage
careless criticism from those who believe that genius and ambiguity are
twin.

But Mrs. Wilcox is ever the voice of the people: what she says is
practical; what she thinks is clear; what she feels is plain.

Let the people judge this book.




  Contents:


  Let the Past Go
  The Sowing of the Seed
  Old Clothes
  High Noon
  Obstacles
  Thought Force
  Opulence
  Eternity
  Morning Influences
  The Philosophy of Happiness
  A Worn Out Creed
  Common Sense
  Literature
  Optimism
  Preparation
  Dividends
  Royalty
  Heredity
  Invincibility
  Faces
  The Object of Life
  Wisdom
  Self-Conquest
  The Important Trifles
  Concentration
  Destiny
  Sympathy
  The Breath
  Generosity
  Woman's Opportunity
  Balance




THE HEART OF

THE NEW THOUGHT


Let the Past Go

Do not begin the new year by recounting to yourself or others all your
losses and sorrows.

Let the past go.

Should some good friend present you with material for a lovely garment,
would you insult her by throwing it aside and describing the beautiful
garments you had worn out in past times?

The new year has given you the fabric for a fresh start in life, why
dwell upon the events which have gone, the joys, blessings and
advantages of the past!

Do not tell me it is too late to be successful or happy.  Do not tell
me you are sick or broken in spirit, the spirit cannot be sick or
broken, because it is of God.

It is your mind which makes your body sick.  Let the spirit assert
itself and demand health and hope and happiness in this new year.

Forget the money you have lost, the mistakes you have made, the
injuries you have received, the disappointments you have experienced.

Real sorrow, the sorrow which comes from the death of dear ones, or
some great cross well borne, you need not forget.  But think of these
things as sent to enrich your nature, and to make you more human and
sympathetic.  You are missing them if you permit yourself instead to
grow melancholy and irritable.

It is weak and unreasonable to imagine destiny has selected you for
special suffering.

Sorrow is no respecter of persons.  Say to yourself with the beginning
of this year that you are going to consider all your troubles as an
education for your mind and soul; and that out of the experiences which
you have passed through you are going to build a noble and splendid
character, and a successful career.

Do not tell me you are too old.

Age is all imagination.  Ignore years and they will ignore you.

Eat moderately, and bathe freely in water as cold as nature's rainfall.
Exercise thoroughly and regularly.

Be alive, from crown to toe.  Breathe deeply, filling every cell of the
lungs for at least five minutes, morning and night, and when you draw
in long, full breaths, believe you are inhaling health, wisdom and
success.

Anticipate good health.  If it does not come at once, consider it a
mere temporary delay, and continue to expect it.

Regard any physical ailment as a passing inconvenience, no more.

Never for an instant believe you are permanently ill or disabled.

The young men of France are studying alchemy, hoping to learn the
secret of the transmutation of gold.

If you will study your own spirit and its limitless powers, you will
gain a greater secret than any alchemist ever held; a secret which
shall give you whatever you desire.

Think of your body as the silver jewel box, your mind as the silk
lining, your spirit as the gem.  Keep the box burnished and clear of
dust, but remember always that the jewel within is the precious part of
it.

Think of yourself as on the threshold of unparalleled success.  A
whole, clear, glorious year lies before you!  In a year you can regain
health, fortune, restfulness, happiness!

Push on!  Achieve, achieve!




The Sowing of the Seed

When you start in the "New Thought" do not expect sudden illumination.
Do not imagine that you are to become perfectly well, perfectly
cheerful, successful, and a healer, in a few days.

Remember all growth is slow.

Mushrooms spring up in a night, but oaks grow with deliberation and
endure for centuries.

Mental and spiritual power must be gained by degrees.

If you attained maturity before you entered this field of "New Thought"
it is folly to suppose a complete transformation of your whole being
will take place in a week--a month--or a year.

All you can reasonably look for is a gradual improvement, just as you
might do if you were attempting to take up music or a science.

The New Thought is a science, the Science of Right Thinking.  But the
brain cells which have been shaped by the old thoughts of despondency
and fear, cannot all at once be reformed.

It will be a case of "Try, try again."

Make your daily assertions, "I am love, health, wisdom, cheerfulness,
power for good, prosperity, success, usefulness, opulence."

Never fail to assert these things at least twice a day; twenty times is
better.  But if you do not attain to all immediately, if your life does
not at once exemplify your words, let it not discourage you.

The saying of the words is the watering of the seeds.

After a time they will begin to sprout, after a longer time to cover
the barren earth with grain, after a still longer time to yield a
harvest.

If you have been accustomed to feeling prejudices and dislikes easily,
you will not all at once find it easy to illustrate your assertion, "I
am love."  If you have indulged yourself in thoughts of disease, the
old aches and pains will intrude even while you say "I am health!"

If you have groveled in fear and a belief that you were born to poverty
and failure, courage and success and opulence will be of slow growth.
Yet they will grow and materialize, as surely as you insist and persist.

Declare they are yours, right in the face of the worst disasters.
There is nothing so confuses and flustrates misfortune as to stare it
down with hopeful unflinching eyes.

If you waken some morning in the depths of despondency and gloom, do
not say to yourself:

"I may as well give up this effort to adopt the New Thought--I have
made a failure of it evidently----."  Instead sit down quietly, and
assert calmly that you are cheerfulness, hope, courage, faith and
success.

Realize that your despondency is only temporary; an old habit, which is
reasserting itself, but over which you will gradually gain the
ascendency.  Then go forth into the world and busy yourself in some
useful occupation, and before you know it is on the way, hope will
creep into your heart, and the gray cloud will lift from your mind.
Physical pains will loosen their hold, and conditions of poverty will
change to prosperity.

Your mind is your own to educate and direct.

You can do it by the aid of the Spirit, but you must be satisfied to
work slowly.

Be patient and persistent.




Old Clothes

As you go over your wardrobe in the spring or fall, do not keep any
old, useless, or even questionable, garments, for "fear you might need
them another year."

Give them to the ragman, or send them to the county or city poor house.
There is nothing that will keep you in a rut of shabbiness more than
clinging to old clothes.

It is useless to say that you cannot afford new garments.

It is because you have harped upon this idea that you are still in
straitened circumstances.

You believe neither in God or yourself.

Possibly you were brought up to think yourself a mere worm of earth,
born to poverty and sorrow.

If you were, it will of course require a continued effort to train your
mind to the new thought, the thought of your divine inheritance of all
God's vast universe of wealth.

But you can do it.

Begin by giving away your old clothes.  There may be people, poor
relations, or some struggling mother of half-clad children, to whom
your old garments will seem like new raiment, and to whom they will
bring hope and happiness.

As a rule, it is not well to give people your discarded clothing.

It has a tendency to lower their self-respect and to make them look to
you, instead of to themselves, for support.

It all depends upon whom the people are and how you do it.

If you can find employment for them, and arouse their hope and
self-confidence and ambition, it is better than carloads of clothing or
furniture or provisions.

But little children, suffering from cold, or hard-working, over-taxed
men and women, will not be harmed, and may be temporarily cheered and
encouraged by your gifts.

No matter if you still need your frayed-out garments--do not keep them.

Your thoughts of poverty and trouble have impregnated them so that you
will continue to produce the same despondent mind stuff while you wear
these garments.

Get rid of them, and believe that you are to soon procure fresh,
becoming raiment.

Rouse all your energies, and go straight ahead with that purpose in
mind.

You will be surprised to find how soon the opportunity presents itself
for you to obtain what you need.

There is new strength, repose of mind and inspiration in fresh apparel.

God gives Nature new garments every season.  We are a part of Nature.

He gives us the qualities and the opportunities to obtain suitable
covering for our changing needs, if we believe in the one, and use the
other.

When I read of a wealthy man who boasts that he has worn one hat seven
years, or a woman in affluent circumstances who has worn one bonnet for
various seasons, I feel sorry for their ignorance and ashamed of their
penuriousness.

Look at the apple-tree, with its delicate spring drapery, its luxurious
summer foliage, its autumn richness of coloring, its winter draperies
of white!  Surely the Creator did not intend the tree to have more
variety than man!

The tree trusts, and grows, and takes storm and sun as divinely sent,
and believes in its right to new apparel, and it comes.

It will come to you if you do the same.




High Noon

Every woman who passes thirty ought to keep her brain, heart and mind
alive and warm with human sympathy and emotion.  She ought to interest
herself in the lives of others, and make her friendship valuable to the
young.

She should keep her body supple, and avoid losing the lines of grace:
and she should select some study or work to occupy her spare hours and
to lend a zest to the coming years.  Every woman in the comfortable
walks in life can find time for such a study.  No woman of tact, charm,
refinement and feeling need ever let her husband, unless she has
married a clod, become indifferent or commonplace in his treatment of
her.  Man reflects to an astonishing degree woman's sentiments for him.

Keep sentiment alive in your own heart, madam, and in the heart of your
husband.  If he sees that other men admire you he will be more alert to
the necessity of remaining your lover.

Take the happy, safe, medium path between a gray and a gay life by
keeping it radiant and bright.  Read and think and talk of cheerful,
hopeful, interesting subjects.  Avoid small gossip, and be careful in
your criticism of neighbors.  Sometimes we must criticise, but speak
_to_ people whose faults you feel a word of counsel may amend, not _of_
them to others.

Make your life after it reaches its noon, glorious with sunlight, rich
with harvests, and bright with color.  Be alive in mind, heart and
body.  Be joyous without giddiness, loving without silliness,
attractive without being flirtatious, attentive to others' needs
without being officious, and instructive without too great a display of
erudition.

Be a noble, loving, lovable woman.

It is never too late in life to make anew start.  No matter how small a
beginning may be, it is so much begun for a new incarnation if it is
cut off here by death.

If I were one hundred years old, and in possession of my faculties, I
would not hesitate to undertake a new enterprise which offered a hope
of bettering my condition.

Thought is eternal in its effects, and every hopeful thought which
enters the mind sets vibrations in motion, which shall help minds
millions of miles distant and lives yet unborn.

It is folly to mourn over a failure to provide opportunities and
luxuries for children.  We have only to look at the children of the
rich, to see how little enduring happiness money gives, and how seldom
great advantages result in great characters.  The majority of the
really great people of the world, in all lines of achievement, have
sprung from poverty.  I do not mean from pauper homes, but from the
homes where only the mere necessities of life could be obtained, and
where early in their youth the children felt it necessary to go into
the world and make their own way.  Self-dependence, self-reliance,
energy, ambition, were all developed in this way.

How rarely do we find these qualities in the children of wealth.  How
rarely do great philosophers, great statesman, great thinkers and great
_characters_ develop from the wealthy classes.

Pauperism--infant labor--the wage-earning women--are all evils which
ought to be abolished.  But next to that evil I believe the worst thing
possible for a human soul is to be born to wealth.  It is an obstacle
to greatness which few are strong enough to surmount, and it rarely
results in happiness to the recipient.




Obstacles

However great the obstacles between you and your goal may be or have
been, do not lay the blame of your failure upon them.

Other people have succeeded in overcoming just as great obstacles.

Remove such hindrances from the path for others, if you can, or tell
them a way to go around.  Even lead them a little distance and cheer
them on.

But so far as you yourself are concerned, do not stop to excuse any
delinquency or half-heartedness or defeat by the plea of circumstance
or environment.

The great nature makes its own environment, and dominates circumstance.

It all depends upon the amount of force in your own soul.

While you apply this rule to yourself and make no scapegoat of "fate,"
you must have consideration for the weakness of others, and you must
try and better the conditions of the world as you go along.

You are robust and possessed of all your limbs.  You can mount over the
great boulder which has fallen in the road to success, and go on your
way to your goal all the stronger for the experience.

But behind you comes a one-legged man--a blind man--a man bowed to the
earth with a heavy burden, which he cannot lay down.

It will require weeks, months, years of effort on their part to climb
over that rock which you surmounted in a few hours.

So it is right and just for you to call other strong ones to your aid
and roll the boulder away or blast it out of the path.

That is just exactly the way you should think of the present industrial
conditions.

In spite of them, the strong, well-poised, earnest and determined soul
can reach any desired success.

But there are boulders in the road which do not belong there, boulders
which cause hundreds of the pilgrims who are lame or blind or burdened,
to fall by the wayside and perish.

It is your duty to aid in removing these obstacles and in making the
road a safe and clear thoroughfare for all who journey.

Do not sit down by the roadside and say you have been hindered by these
difficulties, that is to confess yourself weak.

Do not mount over them and rush to your goal and say coldly to the
throngs behind you, "Oh, everybody can climb over that rock who really
tries--didn't I?"  That is to announce yourself selfish and
unsympathetic.

No doubt the lame, the blind and the burdened _could_ attain the goal
despite the rocks if they were fired by a consciousness of the divine
force within them; that consciousness can achieve _all things under all
circumstances_.

But there will always be thousands of pilgrims toiling wearily toward
the goal who have not come to this realization.

If there are unjust, unfair and unkind restrictions placed about them,
see to it that you do all in your power to right what is wrong.

But never wait to attain your own success because of these restrictions
or obstacles.

Believe absolutely in your own God-given power to overcome anything and
everything.

Think of yourself as performing miracles with God's aid.

Desire success so intensely that you attract if as the magnet attracts
the steel.

Help to adjust things as you go along, but never for a moment believe
that the lack of adjustment can cause you to fail.




Thought Force

Your spirit and mine are both part of the stupendous cause.  We have
always been, and always will be.  First in one form, then in another.

Every thought, word and deed is helping decide your next place in the
Creator's magnificent universe.  You will be beautiful or ugly, wise or
ignorant, fortunate or unfortunate, according to what use you make of
yourself here and now.

Unselfish thoughts, training your mind to desire only universal good,
the cultivation of the highest attributes, such as love, honesty,
gratitude, faith, reverence and good will, all mean a life of
usefulness and happiness in another incarnation, as well as
satisfaction and self-respect in this sphere.

Even if you escape the immediate results of the opposite course of
action here, you must face the law of _cause and effect_ in the next
state.  It is inevitable.  God, the maker of all things, does not
change His laws.  "As you sow you reap."  "As a man thinketh so is he."
There is no "revenge" in God's mind.  He simply makes His laws, and we
work our destinies for good or ill according to our adherence to them
or violation of them.

Each one of us is a needed part of His great plan.  Let each soul say:
"He has need of me or I would not be.  I am here to strengthen the
plan."  Remember that always in your most discouraged hours.

The Creator makes no mistakes.

There is a divine purpose in your being on earth.  Think of yourself as
necessary to the great design.  It is an inspiring thought.  And then
consider the immensity of the universe and how accurately the Maker
planned it all.

Do not associate with pessimists.  If you are unfortunate enough to be
the son or daughter, husband or wife of one, put cotton (either real or
spiritual) in your ears, and shut out the poison words of
discouragement and despondency.

No tie of blood or law should compel you to listen to what means
discomfort and disaster to you.

Get out and away, into the society of optimistic people.

Before you go, insist on saying cheerful, hopeful and bright things,
sowing the seed, as it were, in the mental ground behind you.  But do
not sit down to see it grow.

Never feel that it is your duty to stay closely and continuously in the
atmosphere of the despondent.

You might as well think it your duty to stay in deep water with one who
would not make the least effort to swim.

Get on shore and throw out a life-line, but do not remain and be
dragged under.

If you find any one determined to talk failure and sickness and
misfortune and disaster, walk away.

You would not permit the dearest person on earth to administer slow
poison to you if you knew it.  Then why think it your duty to take
mental potions which paralyze your courage and kill your ambition?

Despondency is one phase of immorality.  It is blasphemous and an
insult to the Creator.

You are justified in avoiding the people who send you from their
presence with less hope and force and strength to cope with life's
problems than when you met them.

Do what you can to change their current of thought.  But do not
associate intimately with them until they have learned to keep
silent--at least, if they cannot speak hopefully.

Learn how to walk, how to poise your body, how to breathe, how to hold
your head, how to focus your mind on things of universal importance.
Believe your tender, loving thoughts and wishes for good to all
humanity have power to help the struggling souls of earth to rise to
higher and better conditions.  No matter how limited your sphere of
action may seem to you and how small your town appears on the map, if
you develop your mental and spiritual forces through _love thoughts_
you can be a power to move the world along.  Rise up and realize your
strength.  Not only will you be more useful and happy, but you will
grow more beautiful and keep your youth.




Opulence

Do not go through the world talking poverty and asking every one you
deal with to show you special consideration because you are "poor" and
"unfortunate."

If you do this with an idea of saving a few dollars here and there, you
will always have to do it, because you are creating poverty conditions
by your constant assertions.

It is a curious fact that the people who are always demanding
consideration in money matters demand the best that is going at the
same time.

I have known a woman to make a plea for cut prices in a boarding house
because she was so poor, yet she wanted the sunniest room and the best
location the house afforded.

It is the charity patients who make the most complaint of a physician's
skill or a nurse's attention.

If you cannot afford to do certain things, or buy certain objects,
don't.  But when you decide you must, decide, too, that you will pay
the price, and make no whining plea of poverty.

There are two extremes of people in the world, one as distasteful as
the other.  One is represented by the man who boasts of the costliness
of every possession, and invites the whole world to behold his opulence
and expenditure.

His clothes, his house, his servants, his habits, seem no different to
the observer from his neighbor's, yet, according to his story, they
cost ten times the amount.

The other extreme is the man who dresses well, lives well, enjoys all
the comforts and pleasures of his associates, yet talks poverty
continually, and expects the entire community to show him consideration
in consequence.

Another thing to avoid is the role of the chronically injured person.

We all know him.

He has a continual grievance.  He has been cheated, abused, wronged,
insulted, disappointed and deceived.  We wonder how or why he has
managed to exist, as we listen to the story of his troubles.

No one ever treats him fairly, either in business or social life.
Everybody is ungrateful, unkind, selfish, and he could not be made to
believe that these experiences were of his own making.

All of us meet with occasional blows from fate, in the form of insults,
or ingratitude, or trickery from an unexpected source.

But if we get nothing else but those disappointing experiences from
life, we may rest assured the fault lies somewhere in ourselves.

We are not sending out the right kind of mental stuff, or we would get
better returns.

  You never can tell what your thoughts will do
    In bringing you hate or love,
  For thoughts are things, and their airy wings
    Are swift as a carrier dove.
  They follow the law of the universe--
    Each thing must create its kind,
  And they speed o'er the track to bring you back
    Whatever went out from your mind.


In the main, we must of necessity get from humanity what we give to it.
If we question our ability to win friends or love, people will also
question it.

If we doubt our own judgment and discretion in business, others will
doubt it, and the shrewd and unprincipled will take the opportunity
given by our doubts of ourselves, to spring upon us.

If in consequence we distrust every person we meet, we create an
unwholesome and unfortunate atmosphere about ourselves, which will
bring to us the unworthy and deceitful.  Stand firm in the universe.
Believe in yourself.  Believe in others.

If you make a mistake, consider it only an incident.

If some one wrongs you, cheats, misuses or insults you, let it pass as
one of the lessons you had to learn, but do not imagine that you are
selected by fate for only such lessons.  Keep wholesome, hopeful and
sympathetic with the world at large, whatever individuals may do.
Expect life to use you better every year, and it will not disappoint
you in the long run.  For life is what we make it.




Eternity

Do you know what a wonderfully complicated thing a human being is?
Every feature, every portion of your body, every motion you make,
reflects your mental organization.

I know a woman past middle life who has always been on the opposite
side of every question discussed in her presence.

She was agnostic with the orthodox, reverential with atheists, liberal
with the narrow, bigoted with the liberal.

Whatever belief any one expressed on any subject, she invariably took
the other extreme.  She loved to disagree with her fellow-men.  It was
her pastime.

Now, to walk with that woman in silence is merely to carry on a
wordless argument.

You cannot regulate your steps so they will harmonize with hers.  She
will be just ahead or just behind you, and if you want to turn to the
left, she pulls to the right.  A promenade with her is more exhausting
than a day's labor.

She is not conscious of it, and would think anyone very unreasonable
and unjust who told her of her peculiarities.

I know a woman who all her life has been looking afar for happiness and
peace and content, and has never found any of them, because she did not
look in her own soul.

She was a restless girl, and she married, believing in domestic life
lay the goal of her dreams.  But she was not happy there, and sighed
for freedom.  She wanted to move, and did move, once, twice, thrice, to
different points of the United States.  She was discontented with each
change.  She is to-day possessed of all comforts and luxuries which
life can afford, yet she is the same restless soul.  She likes to read,
but it is always the book which she does not possess which she craves.
If she is in the library with shelves book-filled, she goes into the
garret and hunts in old boxes for a book or a paper which has been cast
aside.

If she is in a picture gallery, she wants to go to the window and look
out on the street, but when she is on the street it bores her, and she
longs to go in the house.

If a member of the family is absent, she gets no enjoyment out of the
society of those at home; yet when that absent one returns her mind
strays elsewhere, seeking some imagined happiness not found here.

I wonder if such souls ever find it, even in the spirit realm, or if
they go on there seeking and always seeking something just beyond.  It
is a great gift to learn to enjoy the present--to get all there is out
of it, and to think of to-day as a piece of eternity.  Begin now to
teach yourself this great art if you have not thought of it before.  To
be able to enjoy heaven, one must learn first to enjoy earth.




Morning Influences

What do you think about the very first thing in the morning?

Your thoughts during the first half-hour of the morning will greatly
influence the entire day.  You may not realize this, but it is
nevertheless a fact.

If you set out with worry, and depression, and bitterness of soul
toward fate or man, you are giving the key note to a day of discords
and misfortunes.

If you think peace, hope and happiness, you are sounding a note of
harmony and success.

The result may not be felt at once, but it will not fail to make itself
evident eventually.

Control your morning thoughts.  You can do it.

The first moment on waking, no matter what your mood, say to yourself:
"I will get all the comfort and pleasure possible out of this day, and
I will do something to add to the measure of the world's happiness or
well-being.  I will control myself when tempted to be irritable or
unhappy, I will look for the bright side of every event."

Once you say these things over to yourself in a calm, earnest way, you
will begin to feel more cheerful.  The worries and troubles of the
coming day will seem less colossal.

Then say: "I shall be given help to meet anything that comes to-day.
Everything will be for the best.  I shall succeed in whatever I
undertake.  I cannot fail."

Do not let it discourage you if the moment you leave your room you
encounter a trouble or a disaster.  This usually happens.  When we make
any boasts, spiritually or physically, we are put to the test.  The
occult forces about us are not unlike human beings.  When a school-boy
boasts of his strength, and says he can "lick any boy in school," he
generally gets a chance to prove it.

When we declare we are brave enough to overcome any fate, we find our
strength put to the test at once.

But that is all right.  Prove your words to be true.  Regard the
troubles and cares you encounter as the "punching bags" of fate, given
you to develop your spiritual muscle.

Go at them with courage and keep to your morning resolve.

By and by the troubles will lessen, and you will find yourself master
of Circumstances.




The Philosophy of Happiness

There are natures born to happiness just as there are born musicians,
mechanics and mathematicians.

They are usually children who came into life under right pre-natal
conditions.  That is, children conceived and born in love.

The mother who thanks God for the little life she is about to bring to
earth, gives her child a more blessed endowment than if it were heir to
a kingdom or a fortune.

As the majority of people, however, born under "civilized" conditions,
are unwelcome to their mothers, it is rarely we encounter one who has a
birthright of happiness.

Youth possesses a certain buoyancy and exhilaration which passes for
happiness, until the real disposition of the individual asserts itself
with the passing of time.

Good health and strong vitality are great aids to happiness; yet that
they, wealth and honors added, do not produce that much desired state
of mind we have but to look about us to observe.

One who is not born a musician needs to toil more assiduously to
acquire skill in the art, however strong his desire or great his taste,
than the natural genius.

So the man not endowed with joyous impulses needs to set himself the
task of acquiring the habit of happiness.  I believe it can be done.
To the sad or restless or discontented being I would say: Begin each
morning by resolving to find something in the day to enjoy.  Look in
each experience which comes to you for some grain of happiness.  You
will be surprised to find how much that has seemed hopelessly
disagreeable possesses either an instructive or an amusing side.

There is a certain happiness to be found in the most disagreeable duty
when you stop to realize that you are getting it out of the way.

If it is one of those duties which has the uncomfortable habit of
repeating itself continually, you can at least say you are learning
patience and perseverance, which are two great virtues and essential to
any permanent happiness in life.

Do not anticipate the happiness of to-morrow, but discover it in
to-day.  Unless you are in the profound depths of some great sorrow,
you will find it if you look for it.

Think of yourself each morning as an explorer in a new realm.  I know a
man whose time is gold, and he carefully arranged his plans to take
three hours for a certain pleasure.  He lost his way and missed his
pleasure, but was full of exuberant delight over his "new experience."
"I saw places and met with adventures I might have missed my whole
life."  He was a true philosopher and optimist and such a man gets the
very kernel out of the nut of life.

I know a woman who had since her birth every material blessing, health,
wealth, position, travel and a luxurious home.  She was forever
complaining of the cares and responsibilities of the latter.  Finally
she prevailed upon the family to rent the home for a series of years
and to live in hotels.  Now she goes about posing as a martyr, "a
homeless woman."  It is impossible for such a selfishly perverted
nature to know happiness.

A child should be taught from its earliest life to find entertainment
in every kind of condition or weather.  If it hears its elders cursing
and bemoaning a rainy day the child's plastic mind is quick to receive
the impression that a rainy day is a disaster.

How much better to expatiate in its presence on the blessing of rain,
and to teach it the enjoyment of all nature's varying moods, which
other young animals feel.

Happiness must come from within in order to respond to that which comes
from without, just as there must be a musical ear and temperament to
enjoy music.

Cultivate happiness as an art or science.




A Worn Out Creed

I have a letter from an "orthodox Christian," who says the only hope
for humanity lies in the "old-fashioned religion."

Then he proceeds to tell me how carefully he has studied human nature,
"in business, in social life, and in himself," and that he finds it all
vile--selfish--sinful.

Of course he does, because he studies it from a false and harmful
standpoint, and looks for "the worm of earth" and "the poor, miserable
sinner," instead of the _divine_ man.

We find what we look for in this world.

I have always been looking for the noble qualities in human beings, and
I have found them.

There are great souls all along the highway of life, and there are
great qualities even in the people who seem common and weak to us
ordinarily.

One of the grandest souls I know is a man who served his term in prison
for sins committed while in drink.

He was not "born bad", he simply drifted into bad company and formed
bad habits.

He paid the awful penalty of five years behind prison bars, but the
divine man within him asserted itself, and today I have no friend I
feel prouder to call that name.

Mr. John L. Tait, secretary of the Central Howard Association, of
Chicago, writes me regarding his knowledge of ex-convicts:


According to my experience with a number of men of this class during
the last two years, more than 90 per cent of them are worthy of the
most cordial support and assistance.


If this can be said of men who have been criminals, surely humanity is
not so vile as my "orthodox" correspondent would have me believe.

A "Christian" of that order ought to be put under restraint, and not
allowed to associate with mankind.

He carries a moral malaria with him, which poisons the air.

He suggests evil to minds which have not thought it.

He is a dangerous hypnotist, while pretending to be a disciple of
Christ.

The man who believes that all men are vicious, selfish and immoral is
_projecting pernicious mind stuff_ into space, which is as dangerous to
the peace of the community as dynamite bombs.

The world has been kept back too long by this false, unholy and
blasphemous "religion."

It is not the religion of Christ--it is the religion of ignorant
translators, ignorant readers.

Thank God, its supremacy is past.  A wholesome and holy religion has
taken its place with the intelligent progressive minds of the day, a
religion which says: "I am all goodness, love, truth, mercy, health.  I
am a necessary part of God's universe.  I am a divine soul, and only
good can come through me or to me.  God made me, and He could make
nothing but goodness and purity and worth.  I am the reflection of all
His qualities."

This is the "new" religion; yet it is older than the universe.  It is
God's own thought put into practical form.




Common Sense

If you are suffering from physical ills, ask yourself if it is not your
own fault.

There is scarcely one person in one hundred who does not over eat or
drink.

I know an entire family who complain of gastric troubles, yet who keep
the coffee pot continually on the range and drink large quantities of
that beverage at least twice a day.

No one can be well who does that.  Almost every human ailment can be
traced to foolish diet.

Eat only two meals in twenty-four hours.  If you are not engaged in
active physical labor, make it one meal.  Drink two or three or four
quarts of milk at intervals during the day to supply good blood to the
system.

You will thrive upon it, and you will not miss the other two meals
after the first week.

And your ailments will gradually disappear.

Meantime, if you are self-supporting, your bank account will increase.

Think of the waste of money which goes into indigestible food!  It is
appalling when you consider it.  Heaven speed the time when men and
women find out how little money it requires to sustain the body in good
health and keep the brain clear and the eye bright!

The heavy drinker is to-day looked upon with pity and scorn.  The time
will come when the heavy eater will be similarly regarded.

Once find the delight of a simple diet, the benefit to body and mind
and purse, and life will assume new interest, and toil will be robbed
of its drudgery, for it will cease to be a mere matter of toiling for a
bare existence.

Again, are you unhappy?  Stop and ask yourself why.  If you have a
great sorrow, time will be your consoler.  And there is an ennobling
and enriching effect of sorrow well borne.

It is the education of the soul.  But if you are unhappy over petty
worries and trials, you are wearing yourself to no avail; and if you
are allowing small things to irritate and harass you and to spoil the
beautiful days for you, take yourself in hand and change your ways.

You can do it if you choose.  It is pitiful to observe what sort of
troubles most unhappy people are afflicted with.  I have seen a
beautiful young woman grow care lined and faded just from imagining she
was being "slighted" or neglected by her acquaintances.

Some one nodded coldly to her, another one spoke superciliously, a
third failed to invite her, a fourth did not pay her a call, and so
on--always a grievance to relate until one is prepared to look
sympathetic at sight of her.

And such petty, petty grievances for this great, good life to be marred
by!

And all the result of her own disposition.  Had she chosen to look for
appreciation and attention and good will she would have found it
everywhere.

Then, about your temper?  Is it flying loose over a trifle?  Are you
making yourself and every one else wretched if a chair is out of place,
or a meal a moment late, or some member of the family is tardy at
dinner, or your shoe string is in a tangle or your collar button
mislaid?

Do you go to pieces nervously if you are obliged to repeat a remark to
some one who did not understand you?  I have known a home to be ruined
by just such infinitesimal annoyances.  It is a habit, like the drug or
alcohol habit--this irritability.

All you need do is to stop it.  Keep your voice from rising, and speak
slowly and calmly when you feel yourself giving way to it.  Realize how
ridiculous and disagreeable you will be if you continue, what an
unlovely and hideous old age you are preparing for yourself.  And
realize that a loose temper is a sign of vulgarity and lack of culture.

Think of the value of each day of life, how much it means and what
possibilities of happiness and usefulness it contains if well spent.

But if you stuff yourself like an anaconda, dwell on the small worries
and grow angry at the least trifle, you are committing as great and
inexcusable a folly as if you flung your furniture and garments and
food and fuel into the sea in a spirit of wanton cruelty.  You are
wasting life for nothing.  Every sick, gloomy day you pass is a sin
against life.  Get health, be cheerful, keep calm.

Clear your mind of every gloomy, selfish angry or revengeful thought.
Allow no resentment or grudge toward man or fate to stay in your heart
over night.

Wake in the morning with a blessing for every living thing on your lips
and in your soul.  Say to yourself: "Health, luck, usefulness, success,
are mine.  I claim them."  Keep thinking that thought, no matter what
happens, just as you would put one foot before another if you had a
mountain to climb.  Keep on, keep on, and suddenly you will find you
are on the heights, luck beside you.

Whoever follows this recipe _cannot fail_ of happiness, good fortune
and a useful life.  But saying the words over _once_ and then drifting
back to anger, selfishness, revenge and gloom will do no good.

The words must be said over and over, and _thought_ and _lived_ when
not said.




Literature

The world is full of "New Thought" Literature.  It is helpful and
inspiring to read.

It is worth many dollars to any one who will _live_ its philosophy.

I talked to a man who has been studying along these lines for some
years.

"Oh, I know all that philosophy," he said; "it is nothing new.  I am
perfectly familiar with it."

Yet this man was continually allowing himself to grow angry over the
least trifle; he was quick to see and speak of the faults in others; he
was demanding more of those he associated with in the way of
consideration and justice than he was willing to give, and he was
untidy in his person and improvident in his use of money.

Now it is the merest waste of time for this man to read "New Thought"
literature or practice "deep breathing", since he will not put into
daily and hourly practice what is taught by the New Religion.

He is like the orthodox Christian who mumbles through the Lord's Prayer
and then goes forth to do exactly as he would not be done by in
business, social and domestic life.

_Man is what he thinks_.  Not what he says, reads or hears.  By
persistent thinking you can undo any condition which exists.  You can
free yourself from any chains, whether of poverty, sin, ill health or
unhappiness.  If you have been thinking these thoughts half a lifetime
you must not expect to batter down the walls you have built, in a week,
or a month, or a year.  You must work and wait, and grow discouraged
and stumble and pick yourself up and go on again.

You cannot in an hour gain control over a temper which you have let fly
loose for twenty years.  But you can control it eventually, and learn
to think of a burst of anger as a vulgarity like drunkenness or
profanity, something you could not descend to.

If you have allowed yourself to think despondent thoughts and believe
that poverty and sickness were your portion for years, it will take
time to train your mind to more cheerful and hopeful ideas; but you can
do it by repeated assertions and by reading and thinking and living the
beautiful New Thought Philosophy.




Optimism

Not long ago I read the following gloomy bit of pessimism from the pen
of a man bright enough to know better than to add to the mental malaria
of the world.  He said:


Life is a hopeless battle in which we are foredoomed to defeat.  And
the prize for which we strive "to have and to hold"--what is it?  A
thing that is neither enjoyed while had, nor missed when lost.  So
worthless it is, so unsatisfying, so inadequate to purpose, so false to
hope and at its best so brief, that for consolation and compensation we
set up fantastic faiths of an aftertime in a better world from which no
confirming whisper has ever reached us out of the void.  Heaven is a
prophecy uttered by the lips of despair, but Hell is an inference from
history.


This is morbid and unwholesome talk which can do no human being any
good to utter, or listen to.

But it can depress and discourage the weak and struggling souls, who
are striving to make the best of circumstances, and it can nerve to
suicide the hand of some half-crazed being, who needed only a word of
encouragement and cheer to brace up and win the race.

This is the unpardonable sin--to talk discouragingly to human souls,
hungering for hope.

When the man without brains does it, he can be pardoned for knowing no
better.

When the man with brains does it, he should be ashamed to look his
fellow mortals in the eyes.

It is a sin ten times deeper dyed than giving a stone to those who ask
for bread.

It is giving poison to those who plead for a cup of cold water.

Fortunately the remarks above quoted contain not one atom of truth!

The writer may speak for himself, but he has no right to speak for
others.

It is all very well for a man who is marked with smallpox to say his
face has not one unscarred inch on the surface of it.  But he has no
premises to stand upon when he says there is not a face in the world
which is free from smallpox scars.

Life is not "a hopeless battle in which we are doomed to defeat."

Life is a glorious privilege, and we can make anything we choose of it,
if we begin early and are in deep earnest, and realize our own divine
powers.

Nothing can hinder us or stay us.  We can do and be whatsoever we will.

The prize of life is not "a thing which is neither enjoyed while had
nor missed when lost."

It is enjoyed by millions of souls to-day--this great prize of life.  I
for one declare that for every day of misery in my existence I have had
a week of joy and happiness.  For every hour of pain, I have had a day
of pleasure.  For every moment of worry, an hour of content.

I cannot be the only soul so endowed with the appreciation of life!  I
know scores of happy people who enjoy the many delights of earth, and
there are thousands whom I do not know.

Of course "life is not missed when lost"--because it is never lost.  It
is indestructible.

Life ever was, and ever will be.  It is a continuous performance.

It is not "worthless" to the wholesome, normal mind.  It is full of
interest, and rich with opportunities for usefulness.

When any man says his life is worthless, it is because he has eyes and
sees not, and ears and hears not.

It is his own fault, not the fault of God, fate or accident.

If every life seems at times "unsatisfactory" and "inadequate" it is
only due to the cry of the immortal soul longing for larger
opportunities and fewer limitations.

Neither is life "false to hope."  He who trusts the divine Source of
Life, shall find his hopes more than realized here upon earth.  I but
voice the knowledge of thousands of souls, when I make this assertion.
I know whereof I speak.

All that our dearest hopes desire will come to us, if we believe in
ourselves as rightful heirs to Divine Opulence, and work and think
always on those lines.

If "no whisper has ever reached us out of the void" confirming our
faith in immortality, then one-third of the seemingly intelligent and
sane beings of our acquaintance must be fools or liars.  For we have
the assertion of fully this number that such whispers have come,
besides the Biblical statistics of numerous messages from the other
realm.  "As it was in the beginning, is now and shall be ever more,
world without end, Amen."




Preparation

Every day I hear middle-aged people bemoaning the fact that they were
not given advantages or did not seize the opportunities for an
education in early youth.

They believe that their lives would be happier, better and more useful
had an education been obtained.

Scarcely one of these people realizes that middle life is the
schooltime for old age, and that just as important an opportunity is
being missed or ignored day by day for the storing up of valuable
knowledge which will be of great importance in rendering old age
endurable.

Youth is the season to acquire knowledge, middle life is the time to
acquire wisdom.

Old age is the season to enjoy both, but wisdom is far the more
important of the two.

By wisdom I mean the philosophy which enables us to control our
tempers, curb our tendency to severe criticism, and cultivate our
sympathies.

The majority of people after thirty-five consider themselves privileged
to be cross, irritable, critical and severe, because they have lived
longer than the young, because they have had more trials and
disappointments, and because they believe they understand the world
better.

Those are excellent reasons why they should be patient, kind, broad and
sympathetic.

The longer we live the more we should realize the folly and vulgarity
of ill-temper, the cruelty of severe criticism and the necessity for a
broad-minded view of life, manners, morals and customs.

Unless we adapt ourselves to the changing habits of the world, unless
we adopt some of the new ideas that are constantly coming to the front,
we will find ourselves carping, disagreeable and lonely old people as
the years go by.

The world will not stand still for us.  Society will not wear the same
clothes or follow the same pleasures, or think the same thoughts when
we are eighty that were prevalent when we were thirty.  We must keep
moving with the world or stand still and solitary.

After thirty we must seize every hour and educate ourselves to grow
into agreeable old age.

It requires at least twenty years to become well educated in book and
college lore.  If we begin to study at seven we are rarely through with
all our common schools, seminaries, high schools and colleges have to
offer under a score of years.

The education for old age needs fully as many years.  We need to begin
at thirty to be tolerant, patient, serene, trustful, sympathetic and
liberal.  Then, at fifty, we may hope to have "graduated with honors"
from life's school of wisdom, and to be prepared for another score or
two of years of usefulness and enjoyment in the practice of these
qualities.

Instead of wasting our time in bemoaning the loss of early
opportunities for obtaining an education, let us devote ourselves to
the cultivation of wisdom, since that is free to all who possess
self-control, will power, faith and perseverance.

Begin to-day, at home.  Be more tolerant of the faults of the other
members of your household.  Restrain your criticisms on the conduct of
your neighbors.

Try and realize the causes which led some people who have gone wrong to
err.  Look for the admirable qualities in every one you meet.
Sympathize with the world.  Be interested in progress, be interested in
the young.  Keep in touch with each new generation, and do not allow
yourself to grow old in thought or feeling.

Educate yourself for a charming old age.  There is no time to lose.




Dividends

  Our thoughts are shaping unmade spheres,
    And, like a blessing or a curse,
  They thunder down the formless years
    And ring throughout the universe.


The more we realize the tremendous responsibility of our mental
emanations the better for the world and ourselves.  The sooner we teach
little children what a mighty truth lies in the Bible phrase "As a man
thinketh, so is he," the better for future generations.

If a man thinks sickness, poverty and misfortune, he will meet them and
claim them all eventually as his own.  But he will not acknowledge the
close relationship, he will deny his own children and declare they were
sent to him by an evil fate.

Walter Atkinson tells us that "he who hates is an assassin."

Every kindergarten and public school teacher ought to embody this idea
in the daily lessons for children.

It may not be possible to teach a child to "love every neighbor as
himself," for that is the most difficult of Commandments to follow to
the letter; but it is possible to eliminate hatred from a nature if we
awaken sympathy for the object of dislike.

That which we pity we cannot hate.  The wonderful Intelligence which
set this superb system of worlds in action must have been inspired by
love for all it created.

So much grandeur and magnificence, so much perfection of detail, could
only spring from Love.

Whatever is out of harmony in our little world has been caused by man's
substituting hate and fear for love and faith.

Every time we allow either hate or fear to dominate our minds we
disarrange the order of the universe and make trouble for humanity, and
ourselves.

It may be a little late in reaching us, but it is sure to come back to
the Mind which sent forth the cause.

Every time we entertain thoughts of love, sympathy, forgiveness and
faith we add to the well-being of the world, and create fortunate and
successful conditions for ourselves.

Those, too, may be late in coming to us--BUT THEY WILL COME.

Right thinking is not attained in a day or a week.

We must train the mind to reject the brood of despondent, resentful,
fearful and prejudiced thoughts which approach it, and to invite and
entertain cheerful, broad and wholesome thoughts instead, just as we
overcome false tones and cultivate musical ones in educating the voice
for singing.

When we once realize that by driving away pessimistic, angry and bitter
thoughts we drive away sickness and misfortune to a great extent, and
that by seeking the kinder and happier frame of mind we seek at the
same time success and health and good luck, we will find a new impetus
in the control of our mental forces.

For we all love to be paid for our worthy deeds, even while we believe
in being good for good's sake only.  And nothing in life is surer than
this:

RIGHT THINKING PAYS LARGE DIVIDENDS.

_Think_ success, prosperity, usefulness.  It is much more profitable
than thinking self-destruction or the effort at self-destruction for
that is an act which aims at an impossibility.  You can destroy the
body, but the _you_ who suffers in mind and spirit will suffer still,
and live still.  You will only change your location from one state to
another.  You did not make yourself, you cannot unmake yourself.  You
can merely put yourself among the spiritual tramps who hang about the
earth's borders, because they have not prepared a better place for
themselves.

Suicide is cheap, vulgar and cowardly.  Because you have made a wreck
of a portion of this life, do not make a wreck of the next.

Mend up your broken life here, go along bravely and with sympathy and
love in your heart, determined to help everybody you can, and to better
your condition as soon as possible.  Men have done this after fifty,
and lived thirty good years to enjoy the results.

Do not feel hurt by the people who slight you, or who refer to your
erring past.  Be sorry for them.  I would rather be a tender-hearted
reformed sinner than a hard-hearted model of good behavior.

I would rather learn sympathy through sin than never learn it at all.

There is nothing we cannot live down, and rise above, and overcome.
There is nothing we cannot be in the way of nobility and worth.




Royalty

We get what we give.  I have never known this rule to fail in the long
run.  If we give sympathy, appreciation, goodwill, charitable thoughts,
admiration and love--we receive all these back from humanity in time.

We may bestow them unworthily, as the sower of good seed may cast it on
a rocky surface, but the winds of heaven will scatter it broadcast,
and, while the rock remains barren, the fields shall yield a golden
harvest.

_The seed must be good_, however.

If I say to myself without any real regard for another in my heart, "I
want that person to like me, I will do all in my power to please him,"
I need not be surprised if my efforts fail or prove of only temporary
efficacy.

Neither need I feel surprised or pained if I find by-and-by that other
people are bestowing policy friendship upon me, actions with no feeling
for a foundation.

No matter how kind and useful I make my conduct toward an individual,
if in my secret heart I am criticising him severely and condemning him,
I must expect criticism and condemnation from others as my portion.

We reap what we sow.  Some harvests are longer in growing than others,
but they all grow in time.

Servility in love, or friendship, or duty, is never commendable.  I do
not believe God Himself feels complimented when the beings He created
as the highest type of His workmanship declare themselves worthless
worms, unworthy of His regard!

We are heirs of God's kingdom, and rightful inheritors of happiness,
and health, and success.  What monarch would feel pleasure in having
his children crawl in the dust, saying, "We are less than nothing,
miserable, unworthy creatures?"

Would he not prefer to hear them say, proudly: "We are of royal blood"?

We ought always to believe in our best selves, in our right to love and
be loved, to give and receive happiness, and to toil and be rewarded.
And then we should bestow our love, our gifts and our toil with no
anxious thought about the returns.  If we chance to love a loveless
individual, to give to one bankrupt in gratitude, to toil for the
unappreciative, it is but a temporary deprivation for us.  The love,
the gratitude and the recompense will all come to us in time from some
source, or many sources.  It cannot fail.




Heredity

American parents, as a rule, can be put in two extreme classes, those
who render the children insufferably conceited and unbearable by
overestimating their abilities and overpraising their achievements, and
those who render them morbid and self-depreciating by a lack of
wholesome praise.

It is rare indeed, when we find parents wise and sensible enough to
strengthen the best that is in their children by discreet praise, and
at the same time to control the undesirable qualities by judicious and
kind criticism.

I heard a grandmother not long ago telling callers in the presence of a
small boy what a naughty, bad child he was, and how impossible it
seemed to make him mind.  Wretched seed to sow in the little mind, and
the harvest is sure to be sorrow.

I have heard parents and older children, expatiate on the one stupid
trait and the one plain feature of a bright and handsome child,
intending to keep it from forming too good an opinion of itself.

To all young people I would say, cultivate a belief in yourself.  Base
it on self-respect and confidence in God's love for his own handiwork.
Say to yourself, "I will be what I will to be."  Not because your human
will is all-powerful, but because the Divine will is back of you.
Analyze your own abilities and find what you are best fitted to do.

Then get about the task of doing your chosen work to the very best of
your ability, and do not for an instant doubt your own capabilities.
Perhaps they may be dwarfed and enfeebled by years of morbid thought;
but if you persist in a self-respecting and self-reliant and
God-trusting course of thinking your powers will increase and your
capabilities strengthen.

It is no easy matter to overcome a habit of self-depreciation.

It is like straightening out a limb which has been twisted by a false
attitude or correcting a habit of sitting round-shouldered.

It requires a steady and persistent effort.  When the depressing and
doubtful thoughts come drive them away like malaria-breeding insects.
Say, "This is not complimentary to my Maker.  I am His work.  I must be
worthy of my own respect and of that of others.  I must and will
succeed."




Invincibility

If we persistently desire good things to come to us for unselfish
purposes, and at the same time faithfully perform the duties which lie
nearest, we will eventually find our desires being realized in the most
unexpected manner.

Our thought force has proved to be a wedge, opening the seemingly
inaccessible Wall of Circumstance.

To read good books, to think and ponder on what you read, to cultivate
every agreeable quality you observe in others, and to weed from your
nature every unworthy and disagreeable trait, to study humanity with an
idea of being helpful and sympathetic, all these efforts will help you
to the ultimate attainment of your wishes.

It is a proven fact that if we devote a few moments each day to
reaching exercises, standing with loose garments and stretching the
body muscles to reach some point above us, we increase our stature.

Just so if we mentally and spiritually are continually reaching to a
higher plane we are growing.

Every least thought of the brain is a chisel, chipping away at our
characters, and our characters are building our destinies.

The incessant and persistent demand of our hearts and minds MUST be
granted.




That Mental Chisel

During a trolley ride through a thrifty New England locality, where
church spires were almost as plentiful as trees, I studied the faces of
the people who came into the car during my two hours' journey.

The day was beautiful, and all along the route our numbers were
recruited by bevies of women, young, middle aged and old, who were bent
on shopping expeditions or setting forth to make social calls.

They went and came at each village through which our coach of democracy
passed, and they represented all classes.

The young girls were lovely, as young girls are the world over: their
complexion possessed that soft tender luster, peculiar to seashore
localities, for the salty breath of Father Neptune is the greatest of
cosmetics.  Many of the young faces were formed in classic mould, their
features clearly cut and refined, and severe, like the thoughts and
principles of their ancestors.

Often I observed a mother and some female relative, presumably an aunt,
in company with a young relative; and always the sharpening and
withering process of the years of set and unelastic thought was
discernible upon their faces, which had once been young, and classic
and attractive.

In the entire two hours I saw but three lovely faces which were matured
by time.

I saw scores of well-dressed and evidently well-cared-for women of
middle age, whose countenances were furrowed, drawn, pinched, sallow,
and worn, beyond excuse; for time, sorrow, and sickness are not
plausible excuses for such ravages upon a face God drew in lines of
beauty.

Time should mature a woman's beauty as it does that of a tree.  Sorrow
should glorify it as does the frost the tree, and sickness should not
be allowed to lay a lingering touch upon it, until death calls the
spirit away.

Without question the great majority of the women I saw were earnest
orthodox Christians.

I heard snatches of conversation regarding Church and Charities and I
have no doubt that each woman among them believed herself to be a
disciple of Christ.

Yet where was the result of the loving, tender, sweet spirit of
Christ's teaching?

It surely was not visible upon those pinched and worried faces? and
those faces were certain and truthful chronicles of the work done by
the minds within.

One face said to me in every line, "I talk about God's goodness and
loving-kindness, but I worry over the dust in the spare room, I fret
about our expenses, I am troubled about my lungs, and I fear my husband
has an unregenerate heart.  I never know an hour's peace, for even in
my sleep, I worry, worry, worry, but of course I know I will be saved
by the blood of Christ!"

Another said, "I am in God's fold, well and safe, but I hate and
despise my nearest neighbor, for she wears clothes that I am sure she
cannot pay for, and her children are always dressed better than mine.
I quarrel with my domestics, and am always in trouble of some kind,
just because human beings are so full of sin and no one but myself is
ever right.  I shall be so glad to leave this world of woe and go to
heaven, but I hope I will not meet many of my present acquaintances
there!"

Another said, "If I only had good health--but I was born to sickness
and suffering, and it is God's will that I should suffer!"

Oh the pity of it, and to imagine this is religion!

Thank God the wave of "New Thought" is sweeping over the land, and
washing away those old blasphemous errors of mistaken creeds.

The "New Thought" is to give us a new race of beautiful middle-aged and
old people.

To-day in any part of the land among rich, poor, ignorant or
intellectual, orthodox or materialists the beautiful mature face is
rarer than a white blackbird in the woods.

It is impossible to be plain, ugly, or uninteresting in late life, if
the mind keeps itself occupied with right thinking.

The withered and drawn face of fifty indicates withered emotions and
drawn and perverted ambitions.

The dried and sallow face tells its story of dried up sympathies and
hopes.

The furrowed face tells of acid cares eating into the heart.

All this is irreligious! yet all this prevails extensively in our most
conservative and churchy communities.

He who in truth trusts God cannot worry.

He who loves God and mankind, cannot become dried and withered at
fifty, for love will re-create his blood, and renew the fires of his
eye.

He who understands his own divine nature will grow more beautiful with
the passing of time, for the God within will become each year more
visible.

The really reverent soul accepts its sorrows as blessings in disguise,
and he who so accepts them is beautified and glorified by them, within
and without.

Are you growing more attractive as you advance in life?  Is your eye
softer and deeper, is your mouth kinder, your expression more
sympathetic, or are you screwing up your face in tense knots of worry?
Are your eyes growing hopeless and dull, is your mouth drooping at the
corners, and becoming a set thin line in the centre, and is your skin
dry, and sallow, and parched?

Study yourself and answer these questions to your own soul, for in the
answer depends the decision whether you really love and trust God, and
believe in your own immortal spirit, or whether you are a mere impostor
in the court of faith.




The Object of Life

What do you believe to be the object of your life?

To be happy and successful, perhaps you are thinking, even if you do
not answer in those words.

That is the idea of the many.  Meanwhile others, who have been educated
in the melancholy faith of their ancestors, believe the object of this
life is to be miserable, poor, and full of sorrow, that they may wear a
crown of glory hereafter.

But the clear thinker and careful observer must realize that there is
one and only one main object in life--_the building of character_.

He who sets out in early youth with that ambition and purpose, and
keeps to it, will not only attain his object, but he will, too, attain
happiness and true success--for there is no such thing as failure for
the man or woman of character.

We often apply the two words character and success, unworthily.

We speak of a man of "much character" when he is merely self-assertive
and stubborn, and we call a man successful, who has accumulated a
fortune, or achieved fame and a position, by doubtful methods.

Then what is character, and what is success?

Character is the result of the cultivation of the highest and noblest
qualities in human nature, and putting those qualities to practical use.

Success is the conquest of the lower and baser self, and the ability to
be useful to one's fellow men.

There are men of brain, wealth and position who are failures, and there
are men of limited abilities and in humble places who are yet
successful, inasmuch as they make the utmost of themselves, and their
opportunities.

It makes no difference how lowly your sphere in life may be, and no
matter how limited your environment, you can build your character if
you will.  You need no outlay of money, no assistance from those in
power, no influence.

Character Building must be done alone, and by yourself.  The ground
must be cleansed of debris, and the structure must be erected stone by
stone.

It is dull, slow, hard work, especially the preparation.

All preparation is drudgery.

When this little whirling globe of ours began to cool in space think
what a task lay before it!  Think of the mass of chaos, which had to
slowly shape itself into mighty, green, glad and snow-capped mountains,
fertile vales, and noble forests.

Each one of us is a little world, whirling alone on an individual
orbit, but the divine power is within us, to grow into symmetry,
beauty, and perfection if we only realize it.

And the happiness of the work, once we begin it, is beyond the power of
description.

There is no other satisfaction can compare with that of looking back
across the years and finding that you have grown in self-control, in
charity of judgment, in a sense of justice, in generosity, and in
unselfishness.

If you are conscious of this growth, let no lack of material success
for one moment disturb you.  That will come, enough for your need, in
time.

The man of symmetrically developed character is never a pauper.

He is never dependent for more than a temporary period.

To possess character is to be useful, and to be useful is to be
independent, and to be useful and independent, is to be happy, even in
the midst of sorrow; for sorrow is not necessarily unhappiness.

The man who has made the development of a noble and harmonious
character the business of his life, accepts his sorrows as means of
greater growth, and finds in them an exaltation of spirit which is
closely allied to happiness.

To such a nature, absolute wretchedness would only be possible through
the loss of self-respect; the lowering of an ideal or the failure of a
principle.

Would you be happy and successful?  Then set yourself to _build
character_.

Seek to be worthy of your own highest commendation.




Wisdom

A great many people are attracted to the New Thought of the day, by its
declaration of our right to material wealth, and by its claim that the
mind of man can create, command, and control conditions which produce
wealth.

There is no question concerning the truth of this claim.

But woe unto him who cultivates his mental and spiritual powers only
for this purpose.

His gold shall turn to dross, his pleasure to Dead Sea fruit.

He shall be as one who drags a beautiful garment through the mud of the
streets, and while clothed in purple and fine linen is yet a repulsive
object.

Into the Great Scheme of Existence, as first conceived by the Creator,
money did not enter.

He made this beautiful Universe, and all that it contains was meant for
the enjoyment of His creatures.

There was no millionaire and no pauper soul created by God.

Each soul contains the spark of the divine spirit, and by the
realization of that spark, and all it means, whatever is desired by
mortal man may come to him.

But wise is he who remembers the injunction, "Seek first the kingdom of
heaven and all other things shall be added unto you."

Wise is he who understands the meaning of the words, "Unto him that
hath, more shall be given."

Not until you obtain the faculty of being happy through your spiritual
and mental faculties, independent of material conditions, not until you
learn to value wealth only as a means of helpfulness, can you safely
turn your powers of concentration upon the idea of opulence.

To demand, assert, and command wealth for its mere sensual benefits, to
focus your mind upon it because you desire to shine, lead, and triumph,
is to play spiritual football with spiritual dynamite.

You may obtain what you seek, you may accumulate riches, but at the
cost of all that is worth living for.

The merely ignorant, or stupid, or wholly material man who stumbles
into a fortune, through inheritance, dogged persistent industry, or
chance, may enjoy it in his own fashion, and do no harm in the world.

But the man who knows and who has developed his spiritual powers only
for the purpose of commanding material gain, might better have a
millstone tied about his neck.  For he makes himself a spiritual
outcast, and his money shall never bring him happiness.

Make, therefore, your assertion of opulence the last in your list, as
you make Love first.

Call unto yourself spiritual insight, absolute unselfishness, desire
for universal good, wisdom, justice, and usefulness, and last of all
opulence.

Think of yourself as possessed of all these qualities before you
picture financial independence.

For without love for your kind, without the desire for usefulness and
the spiritual insight and the wisdom to be just before being generous,
your money would bring you only temporary pleasure, and would do the
world no good.

Neither should you labor under the impression that God's work is lying
undone because you have no fortune to command and wisely distribute
where most needed.  Rest assured if you do the work which lies nearest
to you, relieve such distress as is possible to you, and keep your
faith in the ultimate justice of God's ways, that the world will move
on, and humanity will slowly attain its destined goal, even if you
never become a millionaire.




Self Conquest

Every New Idea, or supposed New Idea, is a light which attracts the
moths.

The "New Thought" is no exception.

About it flutter hysterical women, unbalanced men: the erratic and the
irresponsible.

The possibilities of performing miracles, of healing the sick,
hypnotizing the well, transforming poverty into wealth, and changing
age to youth, are the rays of light which flicker through the darkness
and draw them into the circle of radiance.

The self-indulgent fat woman subscribes to New Thought literature, pays
for a course of lectures, and goes forth into the ranks of the
unbelievers, proclaiming her power to become a sylph, and to cause
others to become sylphs.

The extravagant and inconsiderate rush forth after having heard a
discourse upon the power of mind over matter, and declare that they
possess the secret of accumulating a fortune by occult means.

The lovers of the marvelous believe that they will become great healers
in a brief space of time.

Not one of these moth converts realizes that the very first step to
take in the direction of "New Thought" is self-conquest.

The gourmand does not know that self-indulgence and a gross appetite
are incompatible with mental or spiritual growth, and will be
insurmountable obstacles in her path toward symmetry.

The spendthrift does not take into consideration the fact that good
sense, thrift and industry, must aid his mental assertion of wealth,
and the miracle lover does not understand that something greater and
more difficult is required than a mere wish to heal before healing
powers can be obtained.

That the physical body and material conditions can be dominated by the
divine spirit in man, is an incontrovertible fact.

But first, last and always, the lesser self must be subjugated, and the
weak and unworthy qualities overcome.

The woman who desires to reduce her flesh cannot do so by reading
occult literature, or joining mystic circles, or attending lectures,
unless she permeates herself so thoroughly with spiritual truths that
she no longer craves six courses at dinner, and three meals a day, and
unless she overcomes her dislike for exercise.

The man who wishes to control circumstances must love better things
than money before he can succeed.  He must love, and respect, and
believe in his Creator, and trust the Divine Man within himself, and he
must illustrate this love and trust by his daily conduct, and in his
home circle, and in his business relations.

Once in a century, perhaps, is a man born with great powers already
developed to heal the sick, or to do other seeming miracles.  Such
beings are old souls, who have obtained diplomas in former lives; but
the majority of us are still in school, and we cannot become "seniors"
until we pass through the lower grades.

We must change ourselves before we can change material conditions: we
must heal our own thoughts and make them sane and normal, before we can
heal bodily disease in others.

It is not an immediate process.  I have heard an old lady declare that
she "got religion" in the twinkling of an eye, and she believed all
people would be damned and burn in hell fire, who did not pass through
this sudden illumination.

It is possible that the religion which can worship a God cruel enough
to burn his children in fire, can only be obtained in the twinkling of
an eye; but the reverent, wholesome, and beautiful religion of "New
Thought" must be grown into little by little, through patience, faith,
and practice.

All that it claims to do it can do, but not instantaneously, not
rapidly.  We must first make ourselves over; after absolute control of
our minds has been obtained, then, and only then, may we hope to
influence circumstances and health.




The Important Trifles

You will find, in the effort to reach a higher spirituality in your
daily life, that the small things try your patience and your strength
more than the greater ones.

Home life, like business life, is composed of an accumulation of
trifles.

There are people who bear great sorrows with resignation, and seem to
gain a certain dignity and force of character through trouble, but who
are utterly vanquished by trivial annoyances.

The old-fashioned orthodox "Christian" was frequently of this order.

Death, poverty, and misfortune he bore without complaining, and became
ofttimes a more agreeable companion in times of deepest sorrow.

He regarded all such experiences as the will of God, and bowed to them.

Yet, if his dinner was late, his coffee below the standard, if his
eye-glasses were misplaced, or his toe trodden upon, he become a raging
lion, and his roar drove his affrighted household into dark corners.

There have been neighborhood Angels, who watched beside the dying
sinner, sustained orphans and widows, and endured great troubles
sublimely like martyrs.  But if a dusty shoe trod upon a freshly washed
floor, or husband or child came tardily to the breakfast-table, or
lingered outside the door after regulation hour for retiring--lo, the
Angel became a virago, or a droning mosquito with persistent sting.

The New Philosophy demands serenity and patience through small trials,
as well as fortitude in meeting life's larger ills.

It demands, too, that we seek to avoid giving others unnecessary
irritation by a thoughtless disregard of the importance of trifles.

A man is more likely to keep calm if he wakes in the night and
discovers that the house is on fire, than he is if, on being fully
prepared to retire, he finds the only mug on the third story is missing
from his wash-stand, or the cake of toilet-soap he asked for the day
before has been forgotten.

A mother bears the affliction of a crippled child with more equanimity
than she is able to bring to bear upon the continual thoughtlessness of
a strong one.

To be kind, means to be thoughtful.

The kindest and most loving heart will sometimes forget and be
careless; but it cannot be perpetually forgetful and careless of
another's wishes and needs, even in the merest trifles.




Concentration

The New Thought includes _concentration of thought_, in its teaching;
and he who learns that important art is not liable to frequently forget
small or large duties.

It is he who scatters, instead of concentrates his mind powers, who
keeps himself and others in a state of continual irritation by
forgetting, mislaying, and losing, three petty vices which do much to
mar domestic or business life.

Concentration is a most difficult acquirement for the mature mind which
has been allowed to grow in the habit of thought scattering.

Wise is the mother, and as sure as wise, who teaches her child to
finish each task begun before attempting another, for that is the first
step in concentration.

Prentice Mulford, that great and good pioneer in the field of practical
New Thought, tells us to apply our whole mental powers to whatever we
do, even if it is merely the tying of a shoe, and to think of nothing
else until that shoe is tied, then to utterly forget the shoe string,
when we turn to another duty or employment.  The next lesson in
concentration he gives us, is to repeat the word often, to impress it
upon the mind.

And then to declare each day that "Concentration is mine" will aid
still farther in the acquisition of this great and important quality.

Meanwhile, since we can be so fortunate as to always surround ourselves
with others who have acquired it, the student of the Higher Philosophy
must learn to be serene and self-poised when he encounters life's pigmy
worries.

He must carry his religion into his bedroom and his office, and not
forget it utterly when he loses his collar-button, or misses his car,
or finds his office boy has taken a parcel to the wrong address.

To build character necessitates a constant watch upon ourselves.  The
New Thought is not a religion of Sundays, but of every day.




Destiny

Never say that you wish your situation were different!  Never wish you
had some other person's life or troubles or worries.

Accept your own as a _working basis_, the best for you.

Then go ahead and _change whatever_ displeases you.

Remember you are the maker and moulder of your own destiny.  You do not
recall the fact, but you brought about the present conditions of your
destiny in former incarnations.

Even if you do not believe this, you must acknowledge that _you are
here_, and that the situation in which you find yourself seems to be
inevitable for the present.

But it is not inevitable for the future, unless you lie down in the
furrow and whine, and wish you were a millionaire, or a genius, and
rail at the partiality of Providence.

There is no partiality in the Universe.

The whole scheme is well balanced.  If you were allowed to change lots
with anyone on the face of the earth, you would complain and find fault
in a short time.

One of our best known millionaires, born to opulence, complains that he
has been robbed of the privilege of making his own fortune.

He is no happier than you.  His confession betrays his weakness of
character just as your repining and fault-finding betrays yours.

The real worth-while character thanks God for its destiny and says, "I
will show the world what I can do with my life."

Not long ago there was a great trotting-race at Brighton Beach.  The
blind conqueror "Rythmic" won five consecutive races.

Think of it!  He did not, like a mortal man, shrink back and say "I am
blind--that is a terrible destiny--I am cursed of God--I will not try
to win the race."  He just trusted the hand of the _Master at the
reins_, did his best, and won the honors of the season.

We are all blind racers on the track of earth.  The king, the
millionaire, the statesman, the lawmaker, the beggar, the laborer, the
cripple, we are all in the dark.  The only thing is to trust the hand
of the Master, and _do our best_.

Believe your position is the right starting point for _you_, merely the
starting point.

It is the shapeless block of stone from which you are to fashion the
perfect statue.

Or it is the mere mud from which you are to mould the clay image, and
later that is to be put into enduring marble.

What is uglier or more unattractive than mud?

Yet think of the glorious conceptions which it imprisons.

Take the mud of your present environment and thank God for it, and make
the image of the future you desire.

You can do it--you must do it--you will do it.




Sympathy

Are you of a sympathetic nature?

If so, do not let your sympathies help to add to the world's miseries.

That may seem a strange expression, but it can be explained if you will
listen.

Much of the misery in the world is the result of imagination.

All of it is the result of selfishness and ignorance.

But hundreds and thousands of people believe themselves sick, sorrowful
and poverty stricken, who would be well, glad and prosperous, if they
only thought themselves so.

Every time you pour out your sympathy upon these self-made sufferers,
you add to their burden of wrong thought, and make it just so much more
difficult for them to rise out of their troubles.

I do not believe all the misfortune in the world is caused by wrong
thinking in this life, or can be done away with by right thinking.  The
three-year-old child who toddles in front of a trolley car and loses a
leg, while the tired mother is bending over the washtub to keep the
wolf of hunger at bay, cannot be blamed for wrong thinking as the cause
of its trouble.  Neither can the deaf mute or the child born blind or
deformed.  We must go farther back, to former lives, to find the first
cause of such misfortunes.

No "New Thought," no amount of optimistic theology or philosophy can
restore the child's leg, or ears, or eyes.  It is utter nonsense to say
that miracles like these can be performed.

There are scores of individuals whom we meet handicapped in life's race
by such dire calamities that we spontaneously pour forth our sympathy.

But, even to these, it were kinder and wiser to give diverting
thoughts, and a new outlook, and to open up avenues for pleasure, and
entertainment, and profit, in place of tears and condolence.

Sympathy, without alleviating actions to a sufferer, is like a cloud
without rain to the parched earth.

But the great majority of people whom we encounter are making their own
crosses, and we who offer them sympathy, and condolence, are but adding
to the burden's weight.

I do not recommend coldness, indifference, or ridicule as a substitute
for sympathy.  But instead of leading the sick man on to tell you the
details of his illness, and to describe all his symptoms, while your
own body responds with sympathetic aches and pains as you listen, it is
kinder to divert his attention to some cheerful and merry topic, or to
refer to some case like his own which resulted in perfect restoration
to health.  Instead of going down into his underground cave of
depression, bring him out into the wholesome sunlight of your own
healthful state, even if for a moment only, and impress upon his mind
that health belongs to him, and must return to him.

To the man in business trouble the same advice applies.

Tell him you are sorry for him, but do not take on his despondency to
prove it.

Talk of the future and all the possibilities it holds for a determined
man or woman.

Make him laugh.  Speak of trouble as the gymnasium where our moral
muscles are developed.  Answer him that everything he desires is his if
he will be persistent and determined in demanding his own.  If you put
force in your words you will leave an impression.

Do not go away from the house of trouble in tears, but leave the
troubled ones you called upon smiling as you depart.

That is true sympathy.




The Breath

A man reproved me for my interest in New Thought creeds.

"The old religion I learned at my mother's knee is good enough for me!"
he said.  "It is good enough for anybody!"

Yet this man's mother had always "enjoyed poor health," as the old lady
expressed it, and the man himself was forever talking of his diseases,
his ill luck, his poverty, which he said he had been enabled to endure
only through the sustaining power of the religion "learned at his
mother's knee."

It would be difficult to convince the man that had his mother taught
him the creed of the "New Religion" he could have changed all these
unfortunate conditions.

Life-long ill health would have been impossible for his mother, or for
him.

The old fashioned religion allowed and still allows a human being to
breathe like a canary bird.

Little children go to Sunday-School all their young lives, and grow up
to be devout church members, and never hear one word about the
importance of _deep breathing_.

Possibly you may think breathing lessons belong to physical culture,
and have no place in religious teachings.

There is where you err.

In order to develop your whole being, you must learn how to control
body and mind through the spirit.

Thousands of years ago, men who gave their entire lives to the study of
these things learned the great importance of deep breathing as an aid
to religious meditation.

By this practice, systematically observed, the body is calmed, the mind
is brought into subjection, and the spirit rises into control.

And in addition, absolute health is achieved.

A large portion of our physical ailments result from unused lung cells,
and consequent imperfect circulation of the blood.

Fill the lungs full--every cell--with fresh air, two or three times
daily, and do not overload the digestive organs, and sickness will fly
away to the dark regions where it belongs.

At least ten minutes morning and night should be given to the breathing
exercises.

Sit upright in a comfortable chair, alone, facing the east in the
morning and the west at night, because great magnetic force comes from
the direction of the sun.

Have a window or a door opening to the outer air.

Place your hands lightly on your knees, and close your eyes and mouth.
Leave your spine free, not touching the chair.  Wear no compressing
garments or bands.

Inflate the chest and abdominal regions as you inhale deep breaths
through the nostrils, while counting seven slowly.

Exhale while you count seven.  Repeat this exercise seven times.

Think as you inhale of whatever qualities you would like to possess,
and believe that you are inhaling them.  Select seven qualities--Love,
Health, Wisdom, Usefulness, Power to Do Good, Success, Opulence--will
cover the average human desires.  The very unworldly will substitute
spiritual knowledge for opulence.  Fill your mind with the idea that
you are drawing in these qualities with your breaths, and exhaling all
that is weak or unworthy.  After a few moments you will be conscious of
a security and peace new and uplifting.

And after a few weeks of steady, persistent practice of these
exercises, you will find life growing more beautiful to you, and your
strength will be increased tenfold, both physically and spiritually.




Generosity

Have you ever observed how invariably your "last dollar" is restored to
you, with additions, when you have given it for some worthy purpose?

Even if the purpose did not prove to be a worthy one, yet if you
thought it so, and gave your last dollar with spontaneous sympathy and
good will, you were not long left penniless.

Money is much like a man.  If you do not hold it too jealously it
returns to you the more readily.

Never hesitate to give aid where you feel there is sore and pressing
need, for fear you will be left in want yourself.  You will not be.

This does not mean that indiscriminate charity is commendable.  It does
not mean that you should lend money to everyone who asks, or lift and
carry the burdens of everyone who is ready to lean upon you.

It is as wrong to encourage the man addicted to the vice of borrowing,
as the one with the vice of alcohol or drugs.

One depends upon his acquaintances to tide him over hard places,
instead of upon his own strength of character, and the other depends
upon stimulants for the same purpose.  The too ready lender is almost
as great an evil to humanity as rum or opium, since he too helps a man
to kill his own better nature and destroy his self-respect.

If you were able and willing to pay rents of all the poor people you
know, and clothe their children, you would soon produce a condition of
settled pauperism among them.  Large and frequent favors of a financial
nature are an injury to anyone, even if it is your son or brother.

Let no man lean on anyone save God and his own divine self.

But little helps, when they are unexpected, arouse hope and awaken new
faith and new ambition in a discouraged soul.

Look about you for such souls, the worn and weary father of a brood of
hungry children, the widow struggling with adverse fate in an effort to
clothe and educate a child, the tired shop girl who uses all her
earnings to sustain her parents, the ambitious boy or girl eager for a
chance in life, and the poor cripple or invalid seeking health.  You
will find them all about you.  Do not be afraid to use a dollar here or
there to give these worthy ones a happy surprise, no matter how poor
you are.

It is an insult to the Opulent Creator to suppose you will suffer want
and poverty if you help those who are in temporary misfortune.

You will not.

Ofttimes we read and hear of the open-handed generous man who "helped
everybody," and who "never refused to aid a needy brother," and who
ended his life in penury because of his generosity.

Never believe these tales until you investigate them.  Invariably you
will find not generosity but extravagance and utter lack of
forethought, caused the man's financial ruin.

I recall a gifted young woman who gave freely to all who asked her
assistance and who died a lingering death as a charity patient in a
hospital.

Yet this young woman had expended ten dollars on foolish and rapid
living where she gave one in charity; it was her wasteful extravagance,
not her open heart of sympathy, which made her a pauper.

It has been my observation that dollars planted in the soil of
benevolence grow into harvests of prosperity.  The man who is not
afraid to use his small means to assist others need not fear poverty.




Woman's Opportunity

The greatest opportunity to better the world which can come to any
woman is through the experience of maternity.

The power of prenatal influence which a mother possesses is
awe-inspiring to realize.

It has been said upon excellent authority that Napoleon's mother read
Roman history with absorbing interest during the months preceding his
birth.

Think of the nations and the centuries influenced by that one woman's
mental concentration!  The geography of the world was changed by her
power of focused thought.

In all probability Napoleon's mother did not know what she was doing;
she was not conscious of the destiny her mind was shaping for her
unborn child, nor of the law governing such conditions.

Women have been strangely ignorant of this vital truth; until recent
years it has not been considered a "proper" theme for tongue or pen,
and to-day the great majority of young women marry absolutely
uninformed upon the subject of prenatal influence.

Men are equally oblivious of any knowledge regarding the matter, and
consequently make no special effort to keep the expectant mother of
their offspring happy, hopeful, or free of anxiety and worry during
this period.  Often they do not strive to aid them in their own
attempts to bestow a desirable temperament upon the unborn child, but
heedlessly and needlessly aggravate or grieve the mind which is
stamping its impress upon an unborn soul.

It is just here that the "New Thought" can perform its greatest
miracles of good.

Even the woman who has not been enlightened upon the law of
ante-birth-influence will, if a true disciple of the Religion of
Right-living, bring healthy and helpful children into the world,
because her normal state of mind will be inclusive of those three
qualities; and her continued and repeated assertions of her own divine
nature will shape the brain of her child in optimistic and reverential
mould.

There is the old law of the continual falling of the drop of water upon
the stone to be verified in the spiritual plane.  Continual assertions
of a mother that her child will be all that she desires it to be, will
wear away the stone of inherited tendencies, and bring into physical
being a malleable nature wholly amenable to the after influences and
efforts she may bring to bear upon it.

It is a tremendous responsibility which rests upon the woman who knows
she is to be a mother of a human being.

A hundred ancestors may have contributed certain qualities to that
invisible and formless atom which contains an immortal soul, yet the
mother's mind has the power to remake and rebuild all those
characteristics, and to place over them her own dominating impulse,
whether for good or ill.

Surely, if success in the arts or the sciences is worthy of years of
devoted attention and interested effort, the moulding of a noble human
being is worth eight or nine months of concentrated thought and
unflagging zeal of purpose.

Every expectant mother should set herself about the important business
God has entrusted her with, unafraid, and confident of her divine
mission.  She should direct her mind into wholesome and optimistic
channels; she should read inspiring books and think loving and large
thoughts.  She should pray and aspire! and always should she carry in
her mind the ideal of the child she would mother, and command from the
great Source of all Opulence the qualities she would desire to
perpetuate.

And they will be given.




Balance

Avoid all strained and abstruse language, when conversing with people
who may not have entered this realm of thought.

Do not allow anyone to think of you as a lunatic, or a crank,
unnecessarily.  Of course there are people in the world who consider
everyone a lunatic who holds an opinion differing from their own.

But it can do you, or your philosophy, no good to thrust its most
difficult phases before the minds of the unawakened, by vague and high
flown expressions.

I once chanced to call upon a lady who had, quite unknown to me,
entered upon the study of Christian Science.

She remarked to me, almost as soon as the greetings were exchanged, "I
had a claim to meet for three days this week, but I have come through
it and am victorious."

I supposed the lady referred to some business matter, perhaps a legal
affair, and waited an explanation.

After considerable rambling conversation, I managed to grasp the fact
that the woman had been sick in the house three days, but now was well.
She considered her illness a mere "claim" her "mortal mind" had made
which she had to meet and combat.

All this sort of talk is very ridiculous.  We need not talk about every
ailment which attacks us as we move along toward the condition of
perfect health which belongs to us!  But if we do speak of
indisposition, let us use common sense language.

What we want to realize is, that we are in the body, but that the
spirit can control bodily conditions, if we give it the ascendency, to
the extent of keeping us well, moral, useful, and comfortable even in
the midst of sickness, vice, indolence and poverty.

We can rise above these false elements, and subjugate them.

Meanwhile we cannot live without food, clothes and money.

Despise and ignore these vulgar things as we may assume to do, we yet
must have them.

It brings only ridicule upon ourselves and our ideas to make this
pretense of despising the necessities of life.

To make them secondary in our thoughts to spiritual knowledge is right
and wise, but this is better illustrated by our lives and conduct than
by our words.












        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HEART OF THE NEW THOUGHT ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

