







[Illustration: HARPER'S ROUND TABLE]

Copyright, 1895, by HARPER A BROTHERS. All Rights Reserved.

       *       *       *       *       *

PUBLISHED WEEKLY. NEW YORK, TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 24, 1895. FIVE CENTS A
COPY.

VOL. XVI.--NO. 830. TWO DOLLARS A YEAR.

       *       *       *       *       *




[Illustration]

AN OWN RELATION.

BY SOPHIE SWETT.


The country-week girl came up the lane with her head in the air, so
Gideon, who was watching her from the crotch in the old sweet-apple
tree, afterwards remarked to little Adoniram.

After some hesitation Gideon dropped down at her feet. Aunt Esther had
especially enjoined it upon him to be kind to the country-week girl.
Aunt Esther _would_ remember that he used to get under the bed when a
girl came to see Phemie; but that was when he was small.

"Is this Sweet Apple Hill? Be you Trueworthys?" demanded the girl,
looking critically at Gideon.

"Yes, 'm," said Gideon, and then reddened and scorned himself because he
had been overpolite. But the girl was tall for fourteen--"Grazella
Hickins, aged fourteen," the letter from the Country-week Committee had
read--and she wore a wide sash and a scarlet feather in her hat and
carried a pink parasol.

Phemie, who came around the corner of the house just then, saw at a
glance that the finery was shabby, but Gideon thought that Grazella
Hickins was very stylish.

Grazella dropped her bundle upon the grass opposite the front gate and
seated herself upon it, meditatively. She did not arise from it as
Phemie opened the gate, but she surveyed her with an air of friendly
criticism; Phemie was fourteen too.

"I like your looks real well," she remarked at length, with a trifle of
condescension. Her glance sought Gideon and little Adoniram, who peeped
from behind the friendly shelter of the big black-currant bush. "I think
boys are kind of--middling," she added. It was evident that a more
severe adjective than this had been withheld only from motives of
politeness. "I've got an own relation, though, that's an awful nice
boy--awful smart too; you never know what he's going to do next."

Little Adoniram pricked up his ears; Aunt Esther had been known to say
that of him without meaning to be complimentary. City standards of
behavior seemed to be cheerfully different from those of Bayberry
Corner.

"I wouldn't have said a word if Jicksy could have come too," continued
Grazella, and her snapping black eyes slowly filled with tears. "A
cousin is a real comfort."

"Do you mean that you didn't want to come?" asked Phemie, in a
disappointed tone.

"I'm in the newspaper business; 'twas kind of risky to leave it;
there's so many pushin' in. But they don't want me to home; mother she's
married again, and _he_ don't like me. Jicksy is all I've got that's
really my own. If he could have come too--"

She swallowed a lump in her throat with determination, and raised her
eyes to the old sweet apple-tree whose fruit was yellowing in the August
sunshine.

"Are them apples?" she asked. "They ain't near so shiny and handsome as
Judy Magrath keeps on her stand; Judy shines 'em with her apron. I never
was in the country before, and I don't know as I'm going to like it. But
I'm run down, they say, and I've got a holler cough, so I had to come."

Phemie had almost begun to wish that they had not taken a country-week
girl; but now she noticed, suddenly, the meagreness of the tall form,
and the deep hollows under the snapping black eyes, and repented. It was
proverbial that people grew plump and strong on Sweet Apple Hill.

Aunt Esther came out, and the girl's manner softened under the influence
of her tactful kindness. She seemed to like Grandpa Trueworthy too; she
said she had a grandpa once, and 'twas the most she ever did have that
was like other folks.

But, after all, it was she and Gideon who seemed most congenial. Gideon
explained, with a gravely approving wag of the head, that she was
"business." Gideon flattered himself that he had abilities in that line,
and he was cultivating them diligently. He had not expected to get any
hints from a girl; but the country-week girl was assistant at a
newspaper stand, and she also "tended" for Judy Magrath when Judy, as
she explained with sad and severe head-shakings, was obliged to go to a
funeral; but it was Judy's only infirmity, she added, very charitably.

Of course girls did not generally have such business opportunities as
these, and it was Gideon's opinion that she was "considerable of a girl,
anyhow." It must be confessed that Aunt Esther was a little anxious, and
the minister expressed a doubtful hope that she would not prove "a
corrupting influence." Gideon told Grazella all his business plans,
which Phemie never cared to listen to. It was after tea one evening, and
he and Grazella were sitting on the orchard wall, while Phemie and
little Adoniram shook the old damson-plum-tree. He told her of the
contract he had made with the owners of the canning factory at Bayberry
Port, to supply them with berries for the whole season, and, what he
wouldn't tell any fellow, of the great find he had made--a blackberry
thicket over on the other side of Doughnut Hill, almost an acre, and the
berries just beginning to ripen! He was going to sell the plums off his
trees, too, and, later on, his crab-apples, he'd got a business opening,
she'd better believe.

Grazella's eyes snapped, and her thin, sallow cheeks reddened suddenly.
"You'd ought to have a partner!" she cried.

Gideon shook his head doubtfully. "It's awful risky takin' partners," he
said. "If they ain't smart, you have to do all the work; if they are,
they are apt to cheat you."

"Jicksy!" suggested Grazella, wistfully, breathlessly. "I--I've got a
job for him up here--a little one; I didn't tell, because I was afraid
your aunt wouldn't ask me to stay another week if she knew; she's scairt
of me, and I expect she'd be scairter of Jicksy." (The country-week
girl's eyes were sharp.) "Mr. Snell, across the field, said he'd give
him his board to help him take care of his cattle, and I heard they were
wanting a boy to blow the organ in church. It wouldn't suit Jicksy to
throw away his talents workin' for his board; but he's crazy for the
country, and the doctor said 'twould be the makin' of him, account of
his heart beatin' too fast, and whatever he has to eat he always thinks
it enough to go 'round amongst a dozen that's poorer than him. He could
blow the organ, for when he belonged to the show he blew up the fat
man--all the ingy-rubber fixin's that made him fat, you know, every day:
and once he worked for a balloon-man. But if you'd take him for a
partner in your business--"

Grazella's eyes were so anxious that Gideon found it hard to shake his
head with the proper decision, although he felt strongly doubtful
whether Jicksy were "the man for his money."

"He's coming up to Mr. Snell's, anyway," said Grazella, made hopeful by
Gideon's evident weakness. "And when you see how smart he is, you'll say
you wouldn't have nobody else for a partner! He ain't jest common folks,
like you and me, anyhow, Jicksy ain't; his adopted father was a
lion-tamer in a circus, awful famous and talented, and Jicksy himself
has rode elephants and camels, and travelled 'round in the
boa-constructor's cage, and his own uncle is the wild man of the South
Seas!"

Gideon's prudent mind still hesitated; he doubted whether these
wonderful opportunities especially fitted a boy for the berry business.

Nevertheless, when Jicksy arrived, he succeeded in convincing Gideon of
his desirability as a partner, and this in spite of the fact that his
appearance was not pleasing. His face was so thin and wizened that it
made him look like a little old man, and his black hair standing upright
above the snapping black eyes, that were remarkably like Grazella's,
gave him a fierce and combative aspect. Farmer Snell professed himself
satisfied; he said he was up an' comin' if he wa'n't very
likely-lookin'. And he secured the position of organ-blower at the
village church, an easy matter, because it was not coveted by the
Bayberry boys, owing to the fact that the wind in the ancient instrument
would occasionally give out with an appalling screech, and the luckless
and innocent blower was always soundly cuffed therefor by the sexton,
who held that this summary measure was necessary to preserve the public
respect for the organ--which the parish hoped to sell to a struggling
young church at the Port as soon as it could afford a new one.

And Aunt Esther did invite Grazella to stay another week. The neighbors
thought the reason that she gave a very queer one--because she was kept
awake nights by the hard little cough in the room next hers.

Gideon had been influenced by Jicksy's ready tongue. He confided to
Phemie that there ought to be one good talker in a business firm, and
also by the fact that he didn't expect an equal share of the profits,
but realized the value of Gideon's capital and experience. (Gideon had
seven dollars and fifty-nine cents, which he kept tucked away under the
ticking of his bed and counted over every night.)

Jicksy wasn't extravagant either, as Gideon had feared that he would be.
He discovered at once that they were paying Steve Pennyphair, the
stage-driver, too much for carrying the berries to the Port. Freedom
Towle, the milkman, would carry them among his cans for half as much.
Gideon had thought of asking Towle, but the fact was Bobby Towle often
went on the route instead of his father, and Bobby was known to be
greedy. Jicksy managed that difficulty by fastening some canvas (old
hay-caps) securely over the tops of the baskets. Gideon had thought of
the plan; he had lain awake half of two nights reckoning how large a
hole the price of canvas enough would make in that seven dollars and
fifty-nine cents; he hadn't thought of these old hay-caps that Jicksy
had found in the barn chamber.

Jicksy was truly honest, and before the end of the second week of the
partnership he began to wonder whether an ability to think of things
ought not to offset experience; and he had brought home from the Port
library a very large book on the relations of capital and labor. But
before he had settled these knotty problems of the partnership in his
mind something happened that caused a great excitement at Bayberry
Corner, and made many people say they were glad they had known better
than to take country-week children, for if the girl had not been sent to
Sweet Apple Hill the boy would not have come. Jicksy had gone to the
canning factory at the Port to collect a bill, and he had not returned.
The amount of the bill was twenty-four dollars and sixty-four cents;
Gideon had "done" the addition seven times over, and then had Phemie do
it; strangely enough, thought Gideon, Phemie had "a head for figures."
He had run a pitchfork into his foot, so he could not go and collect the
money himself, and although he had a prudent mind, he had not thought of
distrusting his partner. But he had heard from the factory that Jicksy
had collected the money--and he had disappeared.

As soon as the fact became known there was another development; the
minister's watch was also missing. Jicksy had blown the organ for three
services with fidelity and success; only once had that fatal scream
interrupted the devotions of the congregation, and then it was in a mild
and mitigated form. But after the evening service the minister had
thrust his watch, which he kept on the desk while he preached, into the
absurd little pocket with a tight little elastic and a blue ribbon bow
which his wife had made in the embroidered cover of his sermon-case. He
explained that he put it there because he knew that his wife liked to
have him (he was young and newly married), and therefore he was sure
that his memory was not at fault. He had carelessly left the sermon-case
on the desk, where the sexton had found it--without the watch. The boy
who blew the organ was the only one who had an opportunity to take it.
It was the day after this loss that Jicksy took "French leave"; he had
"killed two birds with one stone," Bayberry people said.

Grazella's eyes snapped continually; grandpa said she was as hoppin' as
a parched pea. She said folks had ought to be ashamed of themselves that
could b'lieve such things of Jicksy. The probabilities of the case made
no impression whatever on Grazella's mind.

The minister's wife, who had taken a fancy to the girl, offered her
consolation at the sewing circle, which met at the Trueworthys' two days
after Jicksy's departure.

"You mustn't think we hold you responsible for what he has done," she
said, gently. "He is only your cousin."

Grazella stood up, her little bony cheeks aflame. "He ain't neither only
my cousin. I just let on, because he'd got up in the world, and I didn't
want folks heavin' it at him that he had a sister that tended for Judy
Magrath. He's my own brother as ever was in the world, and when folks
are thinkin' he's a _thief_, I just want 'em to know that he's my
brother. Jicksy is smarter'n other folks, and you never know what he'll
do next; but I told Gideon that he'd find him an awful square partner,
and I stick to it--now."

There were melancholy head-shakings in the sewing circle; in fact, the
whole circle shook its head as one woman; but it was whispered that the
girl was probably honest; that the little scamp had deceived her, as he
deceived others.

But at that very time an exciting rumor was circulating about Bayberry
Corner. Iky Snell shouted it at the open window of the room where the
sewing circle sat at supper.

A boy had been seen on the turnpike-road coming towards Sweet Apple
Hill, leading a giraffe.

"Looks as if he had a circus procession all to himself," declared Iky,
enviously; and if several persons who had seen him were not very greatly
mistaken, the boy was Jicksy.

"If some boys should come home leadin' a giraffe, why, I might be kind
of surprised," remarked grandpa; "but it does seem jest like Jicksy."

Grazella, who had been trying to swallow blackberry tart mingled with
tears, tried very hard to be calm, though her thin little face paled and
flushed. "You never know what Jicksy will do next," she said, proudly.

Sweet Apple Hill turned out; so did half Bayberry Corner; every one ran
towards the turnpike-road; even the sewing-circle supper-table was
deserted in undignified haste.

It _was_ Jicksy, footsore and begrimed, and accommodating his gait to
the tread of a creature whose body seemed to be set upon stilts, and
whose neck might, as Phemie declared, be tied into a double bow-knot.
The animal was lame, and its head wagged in a curious fashion.

Gideon, seeing his partner afar off, felt a thrill of delight in his
honesty, which seemed probable since he was returning, but it was
followed by a painful doubt concerning his "business bump." Jicksy had
wished to buy Aaron Green's old horse, which Aaron would sell for twenty
dollars. It was a good horse for the money, and it could easily be kept
on their little farm; and the old blue cart in the barn could be
repaired at very small expense, and perhaps what Jicksy said was
true--that you had to have some style to a business to advertise it.
Nevertheless, Gideon had not consented to buy Aaron Green's horse; he
had felt that the twenty-four dollars and sixty-four cents must go under
his bed-ticking with the seven dollars and fifty-nine cents, where he
could count it every night. He felt a wild fear that Jicksy had bought
the giraffe to draw the blue cart, following his theory that there was
nothing like attracting attention to your business.

"I didn't run away!" Jicksy was saying angrily, as Gideon pressed
through the crowd. "Gid understood that it was business that kept me,
didn't you Gid?" But Gideon looked away; he couldn't say that he had
understood, and he was certain that he didn't understand now about that
giraffe.

"I heard that McColloh's show was stranded down to Westport; that's the
show I b'longed to once; couldn't pay their bills, and the sheriff was
after 'em; I thought maybe I could get a horse, cheap." There was
silence as the crowd listened to Jicksy's explanation; only now and then
a shrill question interrupted him. "Foot it? Of course I did." (It was
twenty miles to Westport.) "I wasn't goin' to fool away the firm's
money. Comin' back I had the giraffe; they're slow travellers, and
Squashy is lame. There wasn't any horse that I could buy--trained horses
and Shetland-ponies, and they were selling high. Squashy is lame and
old, and sometimes he gets ugly." (The crowd withdrew from Squashy's
vicinity.) "Me and Nick Pridgett could always manage him. Nick is
partner in a show now, and it's down to Hebron. I saw that in the paper.
When Jim McColloh says to me, 'There's old Squashy; gets on to his tears
worse than ever; you can have him for twenty dollars if you want him.' A
giraffe for twenty dollars! If you knew the show business as well as I
do you'd know that was a big bargain." Jicksy addressed this remark to
Gideon, but his partner was unresponsive; he saw, in fancy, the giraffe
harnessed to the old blue cart, the equipage was attended by crowds; but
the berry business was not a circus. "Quicker 'n scat I give him the
money," pursued Jicksy, and Gideon groaned. "Then I telegraphed to Nick
Pridgett, 'Will you pay fifty dollars for Squashy?' 'Bring him along and
the money is yours,' telegraphs Nick. So I'm bringin' him along." The
crowd cheered; Gideon's face brightened; this _was_ business. "And I've
got to bring him along pretty lively," continued Jicksy, "for there
isn't a building in town big enough to hold him, unless it's the
church."

That made every one think of the watch; but, queerly enough, just at
that moment the minister was seen running in a very undignified manner
up the lane. In dressing to officiate at a wedding at the Port he had
discovered his watch, chain, and all, in one of his coat-tail pockets.
He said that, knowing it was his duty to put it in some unusual place,
and being absent-minded, he had stowed it away there.

Grazella hushed every one's exclamations before they reached Jicksy's
ears. She said her cousin was proud, and she didn't want him to know
that he had been suspected of stealing. Her cousin! The sewing-circle
ladies looked at each other; but she held her head in the air, and
looked so stern that no one dared, or had the heart to contradict her.
Jicksy was up in the world again, and she was not going to have him
dragged down by a sister who had tended for Judy Magrath! When Jicksy
returned from Westport, bringing a dollar's worth of blue paint to paint
the old cart, the partnership was settled upon a firm basis. Jicksy said
Bayberry Corner was a place that suited him "down to the ground," and
the minister's wife had taken Grazella to live with her. That made him
want to stay; they hadn't any real own folks, but just each other.
Gideon said that seeing Jicksy had put some capital into the business,
as you might say, henceforth they would share and share alike.




FOUR YOUNG RUSSIAN HEROES.

BY V. GRIBAYEDOFF.


[Illustration: Decorative T]

[Illustration: THE FOUR CABIN BOYS.]

The death last spring, at Astrakhan, in southeastern Russia, of Captain
Nicholas Novikoff, a retired naval officer, recalls some of the
principal events of the Crimean war. Novikoff was the last survivor of a
famous quartet of heroes. They were cabin-boys on board ships of the
Russian Black Sea fleet at the outbreak of the war against Turkey, in
1853, and their ages ranged at the time from twelve to fourteen years.
The other three were Vasili Rinitzik, Ivan Robert, and Sergius
Farasiouk.

The day after the Russian defeat at the Alma, on September 20, 1854,
Menschikoff, Commander-in-chief, sent peremptory orders to Admiral
Korniloff in Sebastopol, the great Crimean port of war, to sink in the
passage, at the entry of the "Roads," his five oldest line-of-battle
ships and two frigates, in order to prevent the Anglo-French fleet from
forcing an entrance. These orders were carried out on the night of
September 22d. The doomed vessels, pierced with holes, sank in the
roadstead in the presence of their crews, drawn up in parade formation
alongshore. Scarcely a dry eye watched the mournful event. The sailors
and marines who had humbled the Turk but a few months before in the
harbor of Sinope now bent their energies to the defense of Russia's
great stronghold. The men who had navigated and fought the Czar's
proudest men-of-war were assigned to the duty of throwing up
intrenchments, constructing subterranean mines, handling heavy siege
ordnance, and of performing numerous other tasks incident to warfare
ashore.

Among those brave defenders of the great fortress, our four young heroes
soon distinguished themselves by their splendid courage and devotion.
Their share in the defense of Sebastopol was a modest one, but it
consisted, nevertheless, of eleven months' arduous service in the
casemates of the Malakhoff and the Redan, during which time two of their
number were seriously disabled. Novikoff made the finest record of all
by creeping, unperceived during a fog, close to the advance ranks of the
British, opposite the Redan fort, late in June of 1855, and discovering
the pickets asleep. He promptly returned with the information, and this
enabled the besieged to make a successful sally, resulting in the
capture of forty Englishmen.

Farasiouk and Rinitzik were engaged in the Malakhoff fort in the
transport of munitions, but during the great bombardment in June 18th
they were suddenly called to help man a fifty-pound gun, and performed
this duty with such pluck and fortitude that Admiral Nakhimoff
personally complimented them, and promised them the Cross of Merit. The
final assault on the fortress, which culminated in its capture, saw the
boys on the ramparts one night, almost in the front ranks of the
defenders. Two of them, Robert and Farasiouk, had just recovered from
wounds received three weeks earlier. They had been sent to the Redan
fort to aid in the establishment of a lazeretto, and, when the English
rather unexpectedly appeared on the parapets in great force, every
available man among the defenders, including even the hospital
assistants, rushed to the front. The overwhelming defeat of Colonel
Wyndham's columns was due to the desperate bravery of the Redan's
defenders, who, though greatly outnumbered, fought like demons. The four
cabin-boys were in the thick of the fight, Novikoff especially
distinguishing himself by deftly tripping up an English lieutenant, and
forcing him at the pistol's point to surrender his sword.

At the conclusion of peace, among the first to benefit from the imperial
good-will and gratitude were the four sailor lads. The Emperor pinned a
gold medal on each boy's breast, and took them under his special
protection. Although they were of humble birth, he placed them in the
School of Naval Cadets at St. Petersburg, and launched them on an
honorable career in the service of their country. Three of them lived to
attain the rank of Captain in the Russian navy. The fourth, Farasiouk,
was drowned shortly after his promotion to lieutenant in the very harbor
of Sebastopol, which he had helped so bravely to defend.




GREAT MEN'S SONS.

BY ELBRIDGE S. BROOKS.

THE SON OF CROMWELL.


In the famous old English village of St. Ives--famous because of a
certain nursery rhyme concerning a man who, travelling toward the town,
met seven wives with their cats and kits--there once lived a farmer who,
later in his life, became more famous than St. Ives itself.

Out West they would have called him a ranchman. He was really a cattle
farmer, with a big grazing farm that lay along the river Ouse, in what
is termed "the fen country" of England. Here, where the Ouse slipped
thickly and lazily through those low, green, boggy, marshy fields called
the fens, this farmer raised his beef, his pork, and his mutton; and
here lived his son Richard, as lazy and sluggish of nature as the river
along whose banks he lounged or fished or wandered as a boy, until it
was time to send him off to Felsted School, in Essex, where his
brothers, before and after him, were placed for such education as those
days provided.

A slow, good-natured, easy-going fellow was this boy Dick--"lazy Dick,"
his father often called him. He was neither as bright in mind or manner
as his younger brother Harry, nor as promising a lad as his elder
brother Robert. Robin was what this elder brother was called; he was the
delight and hope of his fond father--then called by his neighbors "the
Lord of the Fens," because of the stand he took against the King's
threatened "improvement" of the marshy fen-lands. To-day the world
honors and revels that sturdy farmer of the fens as Britain's mightiest
man--Oliver Cromwell, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England.

We catch a few glimpses--not many, unfortunately--of the quiet home at
St. Ives, in which the Cromwell boys and girls lived. It was a happy and
united home, blessed with a mother whom her children revered, and having
as its head a father they honored and never dared to disobey.

But fathers in those days--two hundred and fifty years and more
ago--though stern in their ways with children, were as fond and as
loving as are the fathers of to-day, and Cromwell the farmer, Cromwell
the General, Cromwell the Lord Protector, loved his children dearly, and
labored for their good alike in the great palace at Whitehall as in the
low, timber-framed house upon the one street of St. Ives, where the
willows shivered in the wind, and the cattle grazed and fattened upon
the wide marshy meadows that lined the sluggish Ouse.

How little Dick Cromwell fared as a boy at St. Ives we have little means
of knowing. When he was ten years old--in the year 1636--the Cromwells
moved into a bigger house at Ely, fifteen miles away. It was called Ely
from the eels that wriggled about in the muddy Ouse, and is that famous
cathedral town of the fens where King Canute, who tried to order back
the tide, once bade his rowers stop his boat that he might hear the
monks of the cathedral sing.

Probably boy Dick thought more of bobbing for eels in the Ouse than of
King Canute and the monks; for there were no monks singing in England
when Richard Cromwell was a boy. There was soon to be no King in
England, either, and in that great uprising against principalities and
powers Dick Cromwell's father was to bear an important part.

We would like to know more of Richard Cromwell's boyhood. We would like
to know how he lived and what he did as a small boy on that cattle farm
among the fens at St. Ives, and at the more spacious homestead in the
shadow of the great gray towers of Ely Cathedral. We would like to know
whether he liked sport, as most boys do, or whether he was too lazy to
exert himself at play. We would like to know how he studied, and what he
learned at the Free Grammar School at Felsted, where, one after the
other, four of the Cromwell boys were sent; whether he loved football as
much as his father did, and became a champion full-back as his father
did when he was a boy.

I am afraid Richard Cromwell was just as careless at his books as at the
later duties that came to him; for, from things that have come down to
us, we know how his busy father, who was as ambitious for his boys as
all fathers are, had but little patience with lazybones anywhere, and
reproved boy Dick for his carelessness as he found fault with young Mr.
Dick, in later years, for his shiftless ways.

Troublesome times came to England. The people rose in defence of their
rights. The King fell. The throne and crown were abolished. The
Parliament bent before the iron will of the people's champion, and from
the Captain of a troop and the General of an army the determined farmer
of the fens took the helm and steered his country through reefs and
breakers, until, under the leadership of Oliver Cromwell, the
commonwealth of England became the first power in Europe, unconquerable
on the land, invincible on the sea.

Step by step Cromwell rose to power. Against his own desire he rose, the
one strong man in England. And, as he advanced, his family rose with him
into notice and position. One by one the older boys died. Robert, a
promising lad of seventeen, died at Felsted School; Oliver, the second
son, named for his father and a Captain in the cavalry, died just before
the great victory of Marston Moor, and Richard Cromwell thus became the
eldest living son, heir to the estates, successor in power, but never
heir to the fame that his mighty father attained.

For there was in "lazy Dick" nothing of his father's masterful manner or
genius in leadership, nothing of the display and vast hospitality that
made famous his ancestor, known as "the Golden Knight of Hinchinbrook,"
nothing of the dash and daring that marked his more remote ancestor,
"Diamond Dick," who unhorsed all his rivals at a tournament, and so
defended the king's colors that the pleased monarch, bluff King Henry
the Eighth, called the victorious champion his "diamond."

We are not even certain that Richard Cromwell fought in the wars against
the King, as did his brother Oliver and Henry. We cannot find that he
desired either the position or prominence that his father's rise to
greatness gave him. Richard Cromwell cared only to live and die a
quiet, inoffensive, lazy country squire. At any other time in the
history of the world he might easily have lived unknown, unhonored, and
unsung. It was his father's fame that brought him into notice; it was
because he had neither the will, the inclination, nor the ability to
take up his father's work, and carry it forward for the greatness and
glory of England, that to-day the world holds in such slight esteem this
quiet son of Cromwell.

We should not blame people for not doing what they cannot do. It may be,
indeed, that "lazy Dick" was not shiftless, though he was lazy, nor a
numbskull simply because he was not great. Richard Cromwell liked to
take things easy; he hated to be bothered; he liked to keep out of
trouble, and was willing to let the world wag as it would so long as he
had a comfortable home and nothing particular to do.

There is nothing really bad in this; but boys and men of that stamp, you
know, never help the world along. And I am afraid that "lazy Dick,"
notwithstanding all his opportunities and the high position to which he
was finally advanced, never did anything to help the world along. If a
good thing came in his way he took it, enjoyed it if he could, and got
out of it if it proved troublesome and laborious.

When he was twenty his father tried to make him a lawyer; but he soon
dropped that profession. He offered him a command in the army, but Dick
seems never to have accepted it. When he was twenty-three he married a
nice girl in Hampshire. Oliver Cromwell loved her dearly, but he and her
father had their hands full trying to make Dick "toe the mark."

[Illustration: RICHARD PREFERRED HUNTING TO POLITICS.]

Whenever he could, Richard Cromwell would slip away from the work his
father wished him to do and go out hunting, or have a good time with
other rich do-nothings at his Hampshire farm. He disliked the almost
kingly court of his father at Whitehall Palace, and though sent to
Parliament, he did little and said less. And when he was made one of his
father's chief advisers--a privy councillor--his counsels amounted to
nothing, and his position was simply what politicians call a sinecure.

When, at last, his great father's life went out, and England was left
without a head, Richard Cromwell was named as his successor, and made
Lord Protector. Lazy Dick became King of England, without the title, but
with more of power than many a King before and after him possessed.

But he had neither the skill nor the sense to hold what the people had
given him. I doubt if he cared either for the place or the power. And
they were his but a short time. Dissatisfaction broke into revolt. The
nation was divided. The King came to his own again. Charles the Second
was placed upon the throne from which his father had been hurled, and
Richard Cromwell, without a word of protest, without striking a blow for
his power, stepped quietly down from the Lord Protector's chair his
father had set up, and slipped back into private life, too weak to be
defended by his friends, too insignificant to be persecuted by his foes.

He lived to be an old, old man, and died at eighty-six amid his
rose-gardens at Cheshunt, near London, unhonored and disregarded by the
England his father had liberated, but which the son was too weak to
uphold as a free commonwealth.

We must not be too bard on "lazy Dick." He had not a spark of greatness
in him, and should not be blamed for failing to maintain his father's
glory. It is a hard thing for a small son to live up to the fame of a
great father. And yet the world does not take lack of ability into
account. Richard Cromwell to-day has no place in the world's esteem. His
name lives because he was his father's son; because he was a failure
where his father had been a success; and because his life was so sad and
stupid a sequel to the people's stand for liberty in the days made
glorious in English history by the might and power, the grandeur and
manliness, the strength and patriotism of England's greatest man--Oliver
Cromwell, great father of a small son.




ITS MEANING.

(_Tommy loq._)


  Upon the quiet river,
    Enamelled and serene,
  Great flakes of oil are floating
    In blue and pink and green.

  "They look like maps all colored
    In my geography,
  Blue China, and green Ireland,
    And pink Algiers I see.

  "And still I think the meaning
    Of all this oil I've found;
  It's this--a school of sardines
    Right here is swimming round."

  R. K. M.




THE WATERMELON TIDE.

BY EARLE TRACY.


The great still tide that comes from the Gulf when no one is expecting
it reached up through the marshes one summer night, and spread itself
over the banks of the bayou, and found numberless things in places of
safety, and when it was ready to go out again it took them along.

Among its discoveries was a schooner-load of watermelons, about which
Captain Lazare and the boss of the big farm had disagreed so radically
that the melons had been left in a pile on the landing to wait for other
transport. The tide charged itself with them, and when morning broke
they were on their way to New Orleans.

Bascom had been tossing in his sleep as the little _Mystery_ did when
the tide went in one direction along Potosi Channel and the wind went in
the other. With the first glimmer of light he was up and down at the
beach.

"Me, but it's been high," he gasped, coming up from his first plunge and
leaning back in the water as if it were a steamer-chair. "It would be
beautiful to run out with in the _Mystery_--an' me goin' to pick figs
all day in them dumb ole trees! I wish the canning factory would bust!"

Bascom was ready for the hardest kind of work at sea, but things on
shore were unutterably lifeless to him, and how Captain Tony could have
contracted to sell his figs instead of letting the birds take care of
them was past Bascom's understanding.

While he was floating and thinking mournfully of the figs, one of the
watermelons struck him softly on the cheek. He bounded clear out of the
water with fright, and as he made for shore another melon came up under
him and sent him pelting through the shoals. He was not followed, and
when he felt grass under his feet, and realized that he had fled
shoreward for safety and that he had not been hurt at all, he felt very
queer.

"If they was popusses they'd be a-splashin'," he reasoned; "an' if they
was sharks they'd have eaten me--least-ways they wouldn't have been so
polite about lettin' me excuse myse'f. I wonder what they is?"

He moved gingerly into the deep water again, and at last swam out to
investigate. He could see two or three dark round surfaces letting the
tide sway them easily away from shore. At his approach they neither
dived nor turned to attack him. "They mighty tame," said Bascom, laying
his hand on one. "They--_they's watermelons_!"

"Where did you come from?" he asked, taking the nearest in his arms.
"What po' dumb idiot let you get away like this? Did you ax permission
to come here visitin' me? I'm mighty glad to see you, anyways. You's
jus' who I was a-thinkin' of."

He capered round them for a while, then gathered them all in a line
within his arm. They were too many for him, but the wrestle to keep them
from bobbing over or under and getting away was sheer delight. "Three
melons!" he repeated; "cooled in this high tide! Three of 'em! What'll
Captain Tony say?"

He was so interested in thinking of Captain Tony's surprise that the
outside melon escaped from him, and he could not get it again without
losing the other two.

"I'll come back for you," he promised; "you can't go far 'thouten your
fins grow." He took the other two and put them under a clump of
palmettoes, where they would make no new acquaintances while he was
gone. "Don't know as anybody else is up," he said; "but they might be.
It was a terrible hot night."

As he waded out again over the sharp oyster-shells the sky had grown
blue instead of gray, and a brightness sprang across the water, touching
hundreds and hundreds of glistening green watermelons undulating with
the falling tide.

Bascom's heart stood still. He stopped right where he was, and his brown
face grew tense with round-eyed wonder. The water lapped against his
breast. He almost let it take him off his feet. "I knowed they was
called watermelons," he said, slowly, "but I never caught 'em growing in
the water by night before. How's we goin' to get 'em in.'"

He looked from the melons toward the shore, where Captain Tony's long
seine hung on the poles beside the submerged pier. "Usses can haul 'em
in," he said.

Although it was exceedingly early there was no time to lose. It would
take two good hours to get the melons in, and the people on the bay
would be only too glad to help in the rescuing as soon as they woke up.
"Folkses is always so interested in what I find," Bascom grumbled; but
for once no one troubled him. He roused Captain Tony, and they hitched
the net between two boats and, rowing apart, circled around the melons
with it, gathering them in, until they were fairly rafting them before
it toward the shore. The net bulged in a great crescent, and Bascom
could hardly keep his boat abreast of the Captain's. The weight they
were towing made it seem as if his oars were pulling through stiff clay.
No net on all the coast had ever had such a full haul before. Bascom and
the Captain exulted in it, even while their faces grew scarlet.

"We can'd take in anoder one," the Captain declared; "de net can'd stan'
de strain." And closing together as much as the mass between them would
permit, they pulled ashore and rolled the melons out in a line upon the
beach. The tide was going out so fast that each haul made a separate
rank farther and farther out from the high drift-mark in the grass.

It was glorious hard work, and before it was finished the sun had turned
the water violet, then red, then gold and blue, and yet no one had come
to take a share in the salvage, and no one had come to claim the melons.
"I tell you," said Bascom, as he wheeled the last barrow-load up from
the beach--"I tell you they's mascots, and they's come right in from the
deep sea. Do you reckon they's too many of 'em for usses to eat?"

The Captain straightened himself, and measured the heap of cracked
melons, which he had left out as he piled the good ones symmetrically
under one of the live-oaks. "Yo' boy," he said, "if yo' jus' made way
wid de busted ones I'd be paintin' a black ring roun' de mas' of de
little _Mystery_ 'fo' sunset, an' w'ad would I do 'boud pickin' de figs
faw de cannin' factory?"

"O-h-h," groaned Bascom, "I'd forgot about the figs. Can't they wait
till we take these melons off in the _Mystery_ and sell 'em?"

"De melons can wait, ya-as, now we got dem all safe," said the Captain.
"De cracked ones will not keep noway, an' de good ones will las' bettah
dan de figs. An' w'ad is mo' to de point, dere is de ownah of de melons
to consult."

"But he isn't here," Bascom said, "an' we don't know where he is. They
didn't bring his address with 'em when they come in on the tide."

"I reckon I know his address," the Captain answered, "an' maybe yo'
would, also, if yo' let yo'se'f t'ink 'boud id. De big tide washed dem
off de landin' up de bayou. Lazare was a-tellin' me yestahday dat he an'
de boss ad de big fahm had a quahl boud de price o' melons, an' Lazare,
who was to have take dem in de _Alphonsine_, he go off mad, an' de
melons dey stay in a pile on de landin', an' I was t'inkin' boud goin'
up to see de boss me aftah de figs was pick'. I reckon now de bes' way
is faw me to go ad once while yo' pick de figs."

"But we ought to start right now while the tide is goin' out," objected
Bascom.

"Dere will be oder tides, an' dey is waitin' faw de figs ad de factory,"
said the Captain, "so I fink yo' bettah go to pickin', boy"; and without
stopping for further persuasion from Bascom he got into his skiff and
headed toward the mouth of Bayou Porto.

As Bascom carried the last of the melons to add to the heap it slipped
from his hands accidentally, and split into rich red pieces on the sand.
"U-m," he said; "lucky it was a cracked one." He took it up to eat it in
the shade of the live-oak. "Too bad," he added, "after you was so
enterprisin' to start out by yourse'f that me an' Captain Tony couldn't
agree to take you right along. Queer how folkses can't agree 'bout you.
If it wasn't for them dumb ole figs! S'pose when I'm done eatin' I _got_
to go up an' go to pickin'. Seems like such a sailor as Captain Tony
hadn't ought to fuss with things on shore."

His arms were aching from the heavy pull, and they did not feel drawn
toward the sticky figs, and mud daubers were sure to be in the trees
ready to sting interfering people, and he had not finished with the
melon when Peter Pierre, or Peter _Peer_, as the Creoles pronounce it,
came hopping leisurely along the beach, with one leg wrapped around the
other like a stork's. He was a neighbor's boy, and had been sent to
borrow Captain Tony's axe. There would be no morning coffee at his house
until Captain Tony's axe had chopped wood enough to build a fire.

"H-o!" said Peter Peer.

"H-o!" replied Bascom.

"Whose is dose melons?" cried Peter Peer. "Wheah did dey come from?"

"Came down the bayou," said Bascom. "They's mine. Mine an' Captain
Tony's."

"Gimme one?"

"Nop," said Bascom.

"Sell one?"

"N-nop, I reckon not. They ain't so many as they look."

"Heap o' cracked ones," said Peter Peer. "I'll trade yo' my play boat
faw one."

"Eatin' the cracked ones," said Bascom, taking another mouthful; "they's
mighty sweet."

"Yo' can'd eat dem _all_!" cried Peter Peer, his eyes rolling hungrily
from side to side.

"Look a-here, kid," said Bascom; "if you want one so bad I'll tell you
what I'll do. I'll let you pick figs for 'em. I was wantin' to pick 'em
myse'f, but it looks like I got to stay and take charge of these. I'll
give you a cracked melon for every basket of figs you pick."

"All right," said Peter Peer; "gimme de basket."

Bascom gave him a corner of melon to seal the bargain and keep the
basket from looking too large, and Peter Peer was soon whistling in the
trees behind the Captain's house. Bascom had scarcely settled himself
under the live-oak when Sonny Ladnier and his younger brother came in
sight with their red-sailed cat-boat, bent on an early trip to Potosi.
They saw the pile of melons, and it drew them like an undertow.

"Wheah yo' ged all dem melons?" they shouted.

"Growed 'em," replied Bascom; "do you want some?"

"Yo' bet yo'!" cried Sonny, tying up the boat. "Hand one ovah."

"What for?"

"W'at faw? W'y, to eat."

"I mean, what will you give me?" Bascom explained.

"Two bits faw two."

Bascom shook his head. There was only one way in which those melons
could be had. After some argument Sonny and his little brother repaired
to the fig-trees, each with a chunk of melon in one hand and a basket in
the other. Sonny Ladnier was big enough to have tried to bully Bascom,
but the people on the bay had a respectable fondness for him, not to
mention his partner.

During the hour, Narcisse Fontaine, big Noel Roget, Rubier Peer, who
came to look for Peter, and Patrice Rodriguez, with his pointed beard
and his reputation for duelling, added themselves to Bascom's force
behind the Captain's house, and the figs were fairly charmed from the
trees. Bascom did not think it safe to leave the melon pile for more
than a moment at a time, and he was sitting alone beside it, and had
just cleaved open the crack of a long striped "rattlesnake," when a
strange schooner passed by a length or two, then came about, and
anchored off the point. She was the _Luna May_, from Pass Christian, and
he had never seen her before. As three men got down in her tender he
could hear their voices as plainly as if they were talking to him.

"'Cose dey sell dem. Wat dey have dem faw?"

"Bud we got no money. We spen' it all las' night."

"We can trade 'im out of some. I give my knife faw one o' dem big ones.
It's a terrib' hot day. Dat little chap be mighty easy to bargain wid.
_Yo'_ see."

"You see," echoed Bascom, chuckling, as they left their skiff, and came
sauntering up to him. "Somethin' I can do for you gentlemans to-day?" he
inquired.

"Whose is dese melons?" asked the first schooner-man.

"Mine, jus' now," said Bascom.

"Aw, get away."

"Well, they is."

"Den I reckon yo' lookin' faw a chance to get rid o' some o' dem."

"Not as I knows on," Bascom said.

"Wat?" cried the second schooner-man. "I'll give yo' dis." He took out a
big Spanish pocket-knife that opened with a spring. "Yo' can have it faw
t'ree of dem."

"I don't reckon I need any knife," Bascom said.

"Aw," said the third schooner-man, impatiently, "a lot of dem is good
faw not'ing. He got to give us some. If he ain't got de sense to trade
faw dem we take dem."

He spread Bascom out swiftly with his hands, and sat down on him,
directing his mates to pile melons in their skiff. After the first
instant Bascom did not offer the slightest resistance. He lay gathering
breath against the weight of the man on his chest, and when he was quite
sure of himself he lit it out again in a terrific howl for help. The man
clapped a hand on his mouth, but Bascom had no need to speak again. A
posse of men and boys came dashing round the house, some of them putting
down the baskets, and others brandishing sticks as they ran.

The schooner-men jumped into their skiff, but Patrice and Rubier and
Noel and Sonny Ladnier rushed into the water after them, and brought
them back. A dozen hands rescued the stolen melons, while with Irish
expletives and Creole fierceness Patrice pounded the biggest man as a
preparation to bidding them good-by. The crowd was following his
example, and it would have gone hard with the strangers if Bascom had
not had a different mind.

[Illustration: "MAKE 'EM PICK YOUR FIGS!" HE SHOUTED, "MAKE EM PICK YOUR
FIGS!"]

"Make 'em pick your figs!" he shouted. "Make 'em pick your figs! They'll
look handsome in the trees! Make 'em pick for you!"

The cry found favor, and the verdict became, "If yo' want to go free yo'
got to pick de figs!"

When Captain Tony and the boss of the big farm approached the point, and
saw a strange schooner anchored there, the Captain felt anxious. "I hope
de boys not havin' troubl'," he said. "I don' see w'at dat boat wan'
stop dere faw."

As they landed, Bascom met them and explained. "I've got the crew of
that schooner pickin' figs for me, an' some of the boys from round here
is watchin' that they do it lively. They was honin' for some cracked
watermelons, an' I thought they'd better do a little work, seein' as
they got out of temper."

The boss was a Northern man. He looked at Bascom's agile weather-beaten
figure, and they all went round to see the force of overseers and the
three men in the trees. "That's about the way I have to work it," he
said. "More overseers than men; but how do yours manage to make the men
work so lively?"

"Ho!" said Bascom, "easy enough. They're workin' by the job. Can't go
till they're done."

But it was not until Patrice told why the strangers sat so glum and warm
and active in the trees that the Captain and the boss understood.

"Yo' boy," said the Captain, as they went back to the melon-pile, "an'
yo' nevah picked a fig yo'se'f?"

"Not a one," said Bascom, candidly. "The boys came along at first an'
wanted to pick for cracked melons, an' then 'bout the time they was
gettin' tired this schooner hove in sight. After I begun to have
comp'ny, looked like it was best for me to watch the melons."

"And before?" laughed the boss.

"I'd had the misfortune to drop one," Bascom said. "It busted, and I was
lookin' after the pieces."

The boss clapped Bascom on the shoulder. "You're the man I've been
hunting for down here," he declared. "Don't you want to come up and help
me run the farm?"

Bascom looked over at the little _Mystery_, the deep blue of the bay,
and the tree fringe on Deer Island, beyond which lay the Gulf.

"I reckon they'd have to be a mighty long calm," he answered; "wouldn't
they, Cap'n Tony?"

"They suah would," the Captain agreed. "In sailin' weathah me an'
Bascom mostly sails."

They counted the melons as they loaded them on board the _Mystery_,
agreed on a rate of salvage and a price, and arranged for future
dealings as the crop went on. The schooner-men finished their work, and
Bascom paid off the overseers generously; then the _Mystery_ raced the
_Luna May_ to the bridge, and passed through first.

"Well," sighed Bascom, when they had left the figs at the
canning-factory, and their faces were turned toward the welcome reaches
between Potosi and New Orleans, "if it hadn't a-been for that honey of a
tide I'd be up in them dumb ole trees a-studyin' 'bout pickin' dem
figs."




OAKLEIGH.

BY ELLEN DOUGLAS DELAND.


CHAPTER XIV.

It was true, then. Neal had gone.

Cynthia went to her mother's room and told her what Janet had said.

"It is what I feared," cried Mrs. Franklin: "he has left me forever! My
dear and only brother! And where is he? Cynthia, Cynthia, why did he go?
It almost makes me think he may have taken the money."

"Mamma, how can you!" exclaimed Cynthia, indignantly. "Neal never took
it. I--I--oh, I _know_ he didn't take it! Can't you believe me, mamma?"
She was crying.

"Dear child," said Mrs. Franklin, looking at her affectionately, "you
have more faith in him than I have. But this running away is so much
against him, Cynthia. If he had been innocent, would he not have braved
it out?"

"No; he is so proud, mamma. That is the reason he went, I am sure. He
thought papa suspected him. Oh, why did papa ever think it? Why did he
say anything to Edith for Janet to hear?"

"Hush, dear. Your father spoke thoughtlessly, but it was natural; of
course it was natural. But Neal should not have gone. It is a false kind
of pride. If he is innocent he should have the pride of innocence and
stay here."

It was what they all said. Cynthia went from one to the other, trying to
convince them and to imbue them with her own belief in Neal, but she
could not. Even Jack, her beloved twin-brother, was on the other side.

"Of course I want to believe in Neal, Cynth," he said. "I like him, and
I never supposed before he'd do a low-down thing like this. In fact, I
can't really believe it now. But why on earth did the fellow run away?
If he came by the money all fair and square, why under the sun didn't he
say so, instead of shutting himself up like an oyster, and never letting
on where he got it?"

"He had his reasons," persisted Cynthia. "Oh, Jack, can't you believe
me? You always used to believe me."

"Well, you used to tell a fellow more than you do now. You get mighty
shut up yourself now and then. You won't tell me what you're going to do
with Aunt Betsey's money, or why you didn't buy a watch, or anything.
I'm sure I don't want you to if you don't want to, but there's no reason
why I should always think as you do."

If they had not been sitting side by side Jack could not have failed to
notice the peculiar expression that came into Cynthia's face when he
mentioned Aunt Betsey's present. They were on the stone wall which
crossed the river path. Bob was with them, darting hither and thither,
perhaps in the vain hope of finding his master.

"I don't need a watch, I've told you over and over again," said Cynthia.
"But oh, Jack, I wish you would agree with me! Indeed, Neal is honest."

"I believe he is myself, on the whole," said Jack at last; "but it's a
mighty queer thing he doesn't own up and tell where he got that money,
and he's a great ass not to. You see, the postmaster thinks that perhaps
the package did come from Aunt Betsey, and Neal paid gold just a few
days later. Of course it looks queer."

It was the same way with Edith. She would not be convinced, and after a
vain argument with her Cynthia retired to the only place where she was
sure of being undisturbed, and cried until her eyes smarted and her head
ached. It was to the garret that she went when she wished to be alone,
and, amid the piles of empty paper boxes and bars of soap and all the
varied possessions that were stored there, she sat and thought over the
matter.

[Illustration: "OUGHT I TO TELL?" SHE SAID AGAIN AND AGAIN.]

"Ought I to tell?" she said again and again, speaking in a hoarse
whisper. "Oh, why did I ever promise?"

For Cynthia had at last prevailed upon Neal to borrow her money to pay
Bronson with, and had promised that she would not tell, and Cynthia had
a very strict sense of honor.

"Ought I to tell?" she repeated. "No; a promise is a promise, and I have
no right to break it. I was silly, I was idiotic ever to promise such a
thing, but how did I know it was coming out this way? Perhaps he will
come back soon; then I can make him tell."

But Neal did not come back. Instead of that, the next morning Mrs.
Franklin received a letter from him. He repeated the same words. He
could not stay where he was insulted. If they could not believe him he
would go. He had a perfect right to use the money which he had paid for
the money-order, and he would never condescend to explain where he got
it. He was visiting a friend at present, but he was going at once in
search of some work. He intended to support himself henceforth.

It was a very absurd letter, and it made Mr. Franklin more angry than
ever and his wife more distressed.

"It is perfect nonsense," said he. "The boy is not of age and he can be
stopped. I will write at once to his guardians. In the mean time we will
look him up in Boston; from the postmark I suppose he is there."

"One of his guardians is abroad, and the other is that Quaker cousin of
my mother's," sighed Mrs. Franklin.

"Give me his address, and don't worry, Hester. The affair will come
around all right, I have no doubt. He is a headstrong boy and he needs a
leash."

They could not find him in Boston. On going to the houses of his various
friends there they learned that he had spent the night with one of them,
but had left to go to his guardian in Philadelphia, they said.

"I am inclined to let it stand as it is," said Mr. Franklin, when he
returned; "if he has gone to Philadelphia let him stay there. His old
guardian will probably keep him in better order than we can; perhaps it
will be better not to interfere. I don't want to prejudice him against
the boy, and yet how can I explain why he left here? He can tell his own
story."

His wife, however, wrote a letter to her brother, and addressed it to
the care of her cousin, William Carpenter, of Philadelphia. She hoped
for an answer, but none came, and in a few days Mr. Franklin wrote to
Mr. Carpenter, asking if his brother-in-law had arrived, and then,
without waiting for a reply, he concluded to go himself to Philadelphia.

The following Sunday was Easter day--it came late this year. Cynthia,
sitting in the Franklin pew, saw to her dismay Tony Bronson on the other
side of the church. He was with the Morgans.

"Dear me," thought Cynthia, "there will be more trouble now that he has
come, for he will tell hateful things about Neal, I'm sure. I do hope
Edith won't see him."

Her thoughts wandered during the service. When it was over, and the
congregation streamed out of church into the mild spring air, the
Morgans invited Edith to come home with them to dinner. This she agreed
to do, much to her sister's disgust; but Cynthia was still further
incensed when Edith came back that afternoon and announced, in a
would-be careless manner, that she had promised to drive with Tony
Bronson the next day.

"Why, Edith!" said Cynthia, indignantly; "I shouldn't think you would
have anything to do with that Bronson. He has been hateful to Neal."

"I don't know why you should say that," returned Edith; "any one would
say that he had been exceedingly nice to Neal. He lent him all that
money, I'm sure. And, besides, what difference does it make? Neal has
behaved badly and run away. There is no reason why we should give up
people that Neal doesn't happen to like. Papa said the other day that
Tony Bronson was a very good sort of fellow, because he wasn't in that
last scrape of Neal's."

"Papa doesn't know a thing about him, and, at any rate, papa wouldn't
let you go to drive if he were at home. You know he wouldn't."

Mrs. Franklin came into the room just at this moment.

"Would not let Edith go to drive, Cynthia?" she said. "What do you mean,
dear?"

"Go to drive with strange men like that Bronson."

"What nonsense!" said Edith, crossly; "of course I can go. Papa never in
his life forbade my going to drive with any of the boys. How silly you
are, Cynthia!"

"Were you going to drive with Tony Bronson, Edith?" asked her
stepmother.

"Yes, I _am_ going, to-morrow."

"I think I agree with Cynthia, then. I hardly think your father would
wish you to go."

"Why, how perfectly absurd!" exclaimed Edith, growing very angry. "There
has never been any question of my going to drive with any one who asked
me. Do you suppose I am going to give it up now?"

"I suppose you are, Edith," said Mrs. Franklin, quietly, but with
decision. "In your father's absence you are in my charge, and I do not
consider it desirable for you to drive with Mr. Bronson, nor with any
other young man whom you know so slightly. It is not in good taste, to
say the least. Please oblige me by giving it up this time. If I am
mistaken in your father's views on the subject you can go after he gets
home."

"I won't give it up!" exclaimed Edith, hotly. "Tony Bronson will be gone
when papa gets home, and, besides, what can I tell him? I've said I
would go."

"It is always possible to break an engagement of that kind," said her
mother; "you can tell him that you find I have made other plans for
you."

"I sha'n't tell him any such thing, Mrs. Franklin. I think it is too
bad. You have no right to order me."

"No right, Edith? I have at least a right to be spoken to with respect,
and you will oblige me by doing so. Please send a note to Mr. Bronson by
the man to-night."

She left the room, and Cynthia, who had restrained herself with great
difficulty, now gave vent to her feelings.

"I don't see how you can be so horrid to mamma, Edith. What are you
thinking of? And when she is so worried about Neal, too."

"Neal! Why should we suffer for Neal? She has no right to order me; I
won't be treated that way. The idea of it not being in good taste to
drive with Tony Bronson!"

"Don't be so absurd, Edith. Why, even I know papa wouldn't want you to.
It's very different from going with the Brenton boys that we have known
all our lives. You think I'm such an infant, but I know that much, and
any other time you would yourself. It is just because it is that hateful
Bronson. I can't understand what you and Gertrude see in him. You are
both so silly about him."

"I am not silly. I think he is very nice, that's all. I wish you
wouldn't interfere, Cynthia. You are silly to have such a prejudice
against him. I suppose I shall have to write that note, and I do hate to
give in to Mrs. Franklin. Oh, why, why, _why_ did papa marry again?"

She raised her voice irritably as she said this, and added: "All this
fuss about Neal and everything! We never should have had it if the
Gordons hadn't come into the family. Oh, I beg your pardon, I didn't see
you." For standing in the doorway was her stepmother.

"I am sorry that the coming of the Gordons has caused you so much
trouble, Edith. We--we are unfortunate."

She turned away and went up stairs.

"Edith, I don't see how you can," exclaimed Cynthia. "Mamma had so much
trouble when she was a young girl, and she was so alone until she came
here, and now all this about Neal. Really, I don't see how you can."

And she ran after her mother.

Edith, left alone, was a prey to conflicting emotions. She knew she had
done wrong--very wrong. She was really sorry for the grief that Mrs.
Franklin was suffering on Neal's account, and she had not wanted to hurt
her.

"Of course, I did not intend her to hear me. How did I know she was
there? It makes me so angry to think that I can't do what I want."

That was the gist of the whole matter. Edith wanted her own way, and she
was determined to have it. She sat for a long time, thinking it all
over. She did not make any great effort to quench her resentment, and
so, of course, it became more intense. After a while she went to the
desk.

"I simply can't write him that I won't go," she said to herself. "How
they would all laugh if I said Mrs. Franklin 'had made other plans for
me,' as if I were Janet's age! No, I'll write Gertrude that I'll come
down and spend the day with her, and perhaps when I get there I can
induce Tony to play tennis, or something, instead of going to drive.
I'll try and get out of it, as long as I must, but I'm going to have a
good time of some sort."

She wrote the note, and it was sent to the Morgans' that night. Mrs.
Franklin supposed, of course, that it was merely to give up the drive;
so she was surprised when Edith announced that she was going to spend
the next day with Gertrude. However, she raised no objections, nor
indeed did she have any. Her mind was too full of Neal to think of much
else. Even the altercation with Edith failed to make any lasting
impression. Hester longed for her husband to return and tell her what he
had learned.

Cynthia did not take it so quietly.

"I think you are a goose, Edith," she said, the next morning. "Every one
will think you are running after Tony Bronson. You were there to dinner
yesterday, and now you are going again to-day."

Edith was greatly incensed.

"I am _not_ running after him. How can you say such things? I often go
there two days in succession."

And she went off holding her head very high, being driven to the village
by Jack. Arrived at the Morgans', she was warmly greeted by all.

"So good of you to come," murmured Bronson; "now we can start from here
on our drive, and go over to Blue Hill."

"I think I can't go to drive to-day. I--I thought perhaps we could play
tennis instead."

"Oh, Miss Edith! After your promise? I am not going to let you off so
easily. No, indeed; we are going to drive. It is a fine day, and I've
engaged a gay little mare at the livery-stable."

Edith remonstrated feebly, but Bronson would not listen.

When she and Gertrude were alone she said:

"Why don't you go too? We might all go to Blue Hill."

"No indeed!" laughed Gertrude. "I am not going a step. I haven't been
asked, and I wouldn't intrude."

"But it would be such fun," persisted Edith; "you know we used to go in
a crowd, and walk up the hill."

"Times have changed," returned her friend, pointedly. "This time you are
asked to go alone. If it were any one but you, Edith, I should be wildly
jealous."

Edith blushed and looked conscious, and afterwards when Bronson renewed
his pleading she consented to go with him. Unless they chanced to meet
some of the family, why need she tell that she had been to drive at all?

Thus she deceived herself into thinking that she was doing no wrong, and
gave herself up to the enjoyment of the moment.

That afternoon Mrs. Parker, Miss Betsey Trinkett's old friend, called at
Oakleigh.

"So glad to find you at home, Mrs. Franklin," she said. "I met Edith a
while ago, and she did look so sweet and pretty, driving with that nice
young man that stays at the Morgans'. What's his name?"

"You cannot mean Mr. Bronson?"

"Bronson, yes; that's it--Bronson. Yes, they were driving away over
towards Milton. And now do tell me about your brother. They say all
kinds of things in Brenton, but you can't believe half of them. I dare
say you know just where he is, after all."

"My brother went to Philadelphia, Mrs. Parker," said her hostess,
controlling herself with difficulty. The shock of hearing that Edith had
directly disobeyed her was almost too much for her.

"To Philadelphia! Have you friends there?"

"Yes, I have a cousin."

"Well, now, I'm glad to hear that! I'll just tell people and stop their
tongues; they do say so much they don't mean. Why, only this afternoon
somebody said they'd been told that Neal Gordon had been seen walking
over the Boston road. That's the very reason I came up here, to see if
it was true, and here he is away off in Philadelphia!"

"The Boston road?"

"Yes, and to think of his being in Philadelphia all the time! Well, I
must be going, Mrs. Franklin. Edith did look sweet. You dress her so
prettily. I always did think those girls needed a mother. Here's
Cynthia."

Walking up across the green from the river came Cynthia, with a paper in
her hand which she was reading. At sight of Mrs. Parker and her mother
standing at the carriage door, she hastily thrust the paper into her
pocket.

Cynthia had been after wild-flowers to plant in the bed she had for
them. She was in the woods not far from home when a small and ragged boy
approached her.

"Be you Cynthy?" he asked.

She looked up from her digging, startled.

"Yes," she said.

"Then here's for yer, and yer not to tell nobody."

So saying, the messenger disappeared as rapidly and mysteriously as he
had come.

Cynthia opened the crushed and dirty paper, and to her astonishment
found Neal's handwriting within.

"Meet me on Brenton Island near the bridge, Tuesday, as early as you
can. And don't tell I am here. Remember, _don't tell_."

The last words were heavily underlined.

Cynthia's heart stood still from excitement. Neal so near, and his
sister not to know it! But she would prevail upon him to come home. He
could not refuse her after all they had been through on his account.

Full of hope, she gathered up her trowel and her basket of plants and
ran towards the house. Fortunately that tiresome Mrs. Parker was there,
and so her mother would not notice her excitement. For once Cynthia was
glad to see the lady. Since her escapade of the year before she had
always been somewhat ashamed of meeting her.

An hour or two later a closed carriage came slowly up the avenue. Dennis
Morgan was on the box with the coachman. Inside were Gertrude, Dr.
Farley, and Edith, and Edith was unconscious.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration: Mr. & Mrs. Tumble-bug.]

BY WILLIAM HAMILTON GIBSON.


Of all the insects which occasionally claim our attention in our country
rambles, there is probably no example more entitled to our distinguished
consideration than the plebeian, commonly despised, but admittedly
amusing beetle known the country over as the funny "tumble-bug." As we
see him now, so he has always been the same in appearance, the same in
habits, yet how has he fallen from grace! how humbled in the eyes of man
from that original high estate when, in ancient Egypt, he enjoyed the
prestige above all insects, where, as the sacred "scarabæus," he was
dignified as the emblem of immortality, and worshipped as a god! The
archæological history of Egypt is rich in reminders of his former
eminence. Not only do we see his familiar shape (as shown in our
initial design) everywhere among those ancient hieroglyphs engraved in
the rock or pictured on the crumbling papyrus; but it is especially in
association with death and the tomb that his important significance is
emphasized. The dark mortuary passages and chambers hewn in solid rock
often hundreds of feet below the surface, where still sleep the mummied
remains of an entire ancient people, and which honeycomb the earth
beneath the feet of the traveller in certain parts of Egypt, are still
eloquent in tribute to the sacred scarab. The lantern of the antiquarian
explorer in those dark dungeons of death discloses the suggestive figure
of this beetle everywhere engraved in high relief upon the walls,
perhaps enlivened with brilliant color still as fresh as when painted
three thousand years ago, emblazoned in gold and gorgeous hues upon the
sarcophagus and the mummy-case within, and again upon the outer covers
of the winding-sheet, finally, in the form of small ornaments the size
of nature, beautifully carved on precious stones enclosed within the
wrappings of the mummy itself.

What other insect has been thus glorified and immortalized? For the sake
of its proud lineage, if nothing else, is not our poor tumble-bug
deserving of our more than passing attention? An insect which has thus
been distinguished by an entire great people of antiquity has some
claims on our respect and consideration.

But aside from his historical fame, he will well repay our careful
study, and serve to while away a pleasant hour in the observance of his
queer habits. He is now no longer the awe-inspiring sacred scarab, but
Mr. Tumble-bug, or rather "Mr. and Mrs. Tumble-bug," for a tumble-bug
always pictured in the ancient hieroglyph is rarely to be seen in its
natural haunts. Mr. and Mrs. Tumble-bug are devoted and inseparable, and
as a rule vie with each other in the solicitude for that precious
rolling ball with which the insects are always associated. From June to
autumn we may find our tumble-bugs. There are a number of species
included in the group of Scarabæus to which they belong. Two species are
particularly familiar, one of a lustrous bronzy hue, with a very rounded
track, usually found at work on the country highway in the track of the
horse, and the other, the true typical tumble-bug, a flat-backed,
jet-black lustrous species which we naturally associate with the
barn-yard and cow-pasture. The latter may be taken as an illustrative
example of his class, and his ways are identical with that of his
ancient sacred congener and present inhabitant of Egypt.

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. TUMBLE-BUG ROLLING THE BALL.]

When we first see them they are generally manipulating the ball--a small
mass of manure in which an egg has been laid, and which by rolling in
the dust has now become round and firmly incrusted and smooth. Let us
follow the couple in their apparently aimless though no less expeditious
and vehement labors. They have now brought their globular charge through
the grassy stubble, and have reached a clear spot of earth with
scattered weeds. Of course we all know from the books that their
intention is to find a suitable spot in which to bury this ball, and
such being the case, with what astonishing stupidity do they urge on
that labor! Here certainly is just the right spot for you, Mrs.
Tumble-bug! Stop rolling and dig! But no, she will not listen to reason.
She mounts the top of the ball, and, creeping far out upon it, pulls it
over forward with her back feet, while Mr. Tumble-bug helps her in a
most singular fashion. Does he stand up on his hind legs on the opposite
side, and push with his powerful front feet? Oh no; he stands on his
head, and pushes with his hind legs. As he pushes, and as the ball rolls
merrily on, Mrs. Tumble-bug is continually rolled around with it, and
must needs climb backwards at a lively rate to keep her place. A foot or
two is thus travelled without special incident, when a slight trouble
occurs. The ball has struck an obstacle which neither Mrs. Tumble-bug's
pull nor Mr. Tumble-bug's push can overcome. Then follow an apparent
council and interchange of Tumble-bug talk, until at length both put
their shovel-shaped heads together beneath the sphere, and over it goes
among the weeds. It is soon out again upon the open. Now, Mrs.
Tumble-bug, everything is plain-sailing for you; here is a long down
grade over the smooth clean dirt! Why, the ball would roll down itself
if you would only let it; but, no, she will _not_ let it. She pauses,
and the ball rests, and both beetles now creep about, shovelling up the
dirt here and there with their very queer little flat heads. Ah, perhaps
they are going to start that _hole_ which all the books tell us about.
But no; the place is evidently not quite satisfactory, both of them seem
so to conclude, like two souls with but a single thought. Mrs. T. is up
on the bridge in a jiffy, and Mr. T. takes his place at the helm; and
now what an easy time they will have of it down this little slope; but,
no, again; tumble-bugs don't seem to care for an easy time. A hundred
times on their travels will they pass the very best possible spot for
that burrow, a hundred times will they persist in guiding that little
world of theirs over an obstruction, when a clear path lies an inch to
the right or left of them. And here, when their labors might be so
easily lightened by a downward grade, what do they do? they deliberately
turn the ball about and hustle it along _up hill_, and that too over
dirt that is not half as promising. Up they go! Mrs. T. now seems to
have the best of it, and I sometimes have my suspicions whether she is
not playing a prank on that unsuspecting spouse working so hard at her
back, for he now has not only the ball, but Mrs. T. as well, to shove
along, for the most that she can do is to throw the weight of her body
forward, which in a steep up grade amounts to nothing as a help.

But if she is imposing on Mr. T. in thus guiding the ball up hill, she
soon gets the Roland for her Oliver. Mr. T. is put to great extra labor
by this whimsical decision of hers, and woe to Mrs. T. when that little
chance valley or inequality of surface is reached. Even though she can
see it coming and holds the wheel, she rarely seems to take advantage of
it to save herself or her ship, while Mr. T., going backward in the
rear, of course cannot be expected to know what is coming, nor be blamed
for the consequences. With kick after kick from his powerful hind feet,
united with the push of his mighty pair in front, the ball speeds up the
slope. Now for some reason he gives a backward shove of more than usual
force when it was least necessary. The ball had chanced upon the crest
of a slope, when, kick! over it goes with a pitch and a bound, and Mrs.
T. with it, though this time not on top. Happy is she if the ball simply
rolls upon her and pins her down. Such, indeed, is a frequent episode in
her experience of keeping the ball arolling, but occasionally the
tumble-ball thus started, and out of the control of her spouse at the
rear, may roll over and over for a long-distance, but never alone. No
amount of demoralization of this sort ever surprises her into losing her
grip on her precious globular bundle. When at last it fetches up against
a stone or stick, and she assures herself that she and her charge are
safe and sound, no doubt she immediately mounts to its crest to signal
the lone Mr. T. afar off, who is quickly back of her again, and both are
promptly off on a fresh journey. And so they keep it up, apparently for
sport, perhaps for an hour.

At length when they have played long enough--for there is no other
reason apparent to _homo sapiens_--they decide to plant their big dirty
pellet. The place which they have chosen is not half as promising as
many they have passed, but that doesn't seem to matter. Mrs. T. has
said, "It shall go here," and that ends it.

Then follows the most singular exhibition of excavation and burial. The
ball is now resting quietly on the dirt, and the two beetles are
apparently rummaging around beneath it, trying the ground with the sharp
edge of their shovel-shaped faces. And now, to avoid confusion, we will
dismiss Mr. T., and confine our observation strictly to the female, who
usually (in my experience) conducts the rest of the work alone.

[Illustration: SINKING THE BALL.]

[Illustration: YOUNG TUMBLE-BUG DIGGING OUT FROM HIS DUNGEON.]

She has evidently found a spot that suits her, and we expect her to
fulfil the directions of the books and entomological authorities. She
must "dig a deep hole first, and then roll the ball into it, and fill it
up again." But we will look in vain for such obedience. Instead of this
she persists in ploughing around beneath the ball, which seems at times
almost balanced on her back, until all the earth at this point is soft
and friable, and she is out of sight under it. Presently she appears
again at the surface, and as quickly disappears again, this time going
in upside down beneath the ball, which she pulls downward with her pair
of middle feet, while at the same time with hind legs and powerful
digging front legs she pushes outward and upward the loose earth which
she has accumulated. Visibly the ball sinks into the cavity moment by
moment as the earth is lowered for a space of half an inch in the
surrounding soil, and continually forced upward outside of its
circumference. In a few moments the pellet has sunk level with the
ground, and in a few moments more the loose earth pushed upward has
overtopped it and it is out of sight. Still, for hours this busy
excavator continues to dig her hole and pull the ball in after her with
shovel head and molelike digging feet, scooping out a circular well much
larger than the diameter of the ball, which slowly sinks by its own
weight, aided by her occasional downward pull as this same loosened
earth is pushed upward above it. The burrow is thus sunk several inches,
when the beetle ploughs her way to the surface and is ready for another
similar experience.

The remaining history of the ball and its change is soon told. The egg
within it soon hatches, the larva finding just a sufficiency of food to
carry it to its full growth, when it transforms to a chrysalis, and at
length to the tumble-bug like its parent. The formerly loose earth above
him is now firmly packed, but he seems to know by instinct why those
powerful front feet were given to him, and he is quickly working his way
to the surface, and in a day or so is seen in the barn-yard rolling his
ball as skilfully as his mother had done before him.

Such is the method always employed by the tumble-bug as I have seen him.
And yet I have read in many natural histories and have heard careful
observers claim that the hole is dug first and the ball rolled in.
Perhaps they vary their plan, but I doubt it. Here is a matter for some
of our boys and girls to look into.




[Illustration: THE CAMERA CLUB.]

     This Department is conducted in the interest of Amateur
     Photographers, and the Editor will be pleased to answer any
     question on the subject so far as possible. Correspondents should
     address Editor Camera Club Department.


OUR PRIZE OFFER.

The members of the Camera Club will notice that our competition this
year is confined to three subjects or classes--Marines, Landscapes, and
Figure Studies. All the prizes are in money, and there are ten prizes.
The members are not restricted as to the number of prints they may send
in, nor are they barred from any class. A member may compete in each of
the five classes, and has ten chances of winning a prize.

We want every Knight and Lady of our Camera Club to compete for these
prizes. We also want you to tell your friends about them, and get them
to join the Camera Club. A circular which tells all about the Club has
just been issued by Harper & Brothers. It tells what the Club is for,
gives prospectus for the coming year, gives the formula for plain paper,
which so many of you have been writing about, and also gives the prize
offers, rules, etc., of the competition. Copies of the circular will be
sent to any member who applies for them, and we would like each member
to help in distributing them.

Last year but few Ladies of the ROUND TABLE sent in pictures for the
prize competition. This year we want all the Ladies who belong to the
Camera Club to send in pictures. One of the Sir Knights who took a prize
last year was so encouraged by his success that he has been working
steadily all the year, and has made quite a good deal of money. A letter
received from him a few weeks ago states that he should never have
thought of making money with his camera if he had not won a prize, but
the ten-dollar check which he received for his picture suggested to him
that if he could take a picture good enough to win a prize he could take
good enough pictures to sell. He has made pictures of boats, of
children, of pets, of buildings in process of erection--in fact, of
anything which came in his way which he could get pay for, and the
result is that he has a snug sum in the bank, and looks on his camera as
a financial friend.

Working for a prize stimulates one to do his best, and even though one
should not be fortunate enough to win a prize the effort to excel will
not be lost. It will be a help in more ways than one. This year we hope
that at least half of the prizes will be carried off by our Ladies. A
camera is specially adapted to be a girl's companion and source of
pleasure. Cameras are now made so very light and compact that they are
no burden to carry, and if one uses films they are still lighter. Girls
as a rule are more careful workers than boys, and should therefore make
the best amateur photographers, for it takes care as well as skill to
produce a good picture.

Look over your pictures that you have made this summer, select those
which you think are the best, finish them up in a neat and tasteful
manner, and send them in before the competition closes. If you have none
which you think worthy of a prize, set about making some without delay.
If you do not win a prize you will have the benefit of careful
criticism, and will stand a better chance of winning another time.

Any questions in regard to the prizes, or about making pictures for the
competition, will be answered promptly.

     SIR KNIGHT ALFRED C. BAKER encloses two very pretty waterscapes,
     and asks the cause of the black marks near the edge of one of the
     pictures, and also asks to have the pictures criticised, both from
     a technical and artistic point. The black spots, as far as can be
     judged from the finished print, seems to be caused by scratches on
     the film. If so, the print can be trimmed just enough to cut them
     off from the picture. The print which is numbered 141 is the
     better picture. It has more contrast of light and shade, the
     perspective is better. The old log in the foreground and the
     stretch of shore give the effect of distances which the other
     picture lacks. Another thing which makes this picture more
     attractive than the other is the slight ripple on the water. It
     has the same effect as do clouds in the sky. If Sir Alfred will
     study the two prints he will readily see what is meant. No. 140
     would be improved if about half an inch of the foreground were
     trimmed away. No. 141 would make a very nice platinum print or
     plain-paper print.




THE BELLS OF NINE O'CLOCK.


  Sleigh-bells in winter, ship's bells at sea,
  Church bells on Sunday--oh! many bells there be--
  But the cheery bells of nine o'clock
  Are the merriest bells for me.

  School bells at nine o'clock, and straightway the street
  Breaks into music with the rush of little feet.
  Clatter, patter, swift they go, wide stands the door,
  School bells are ringing now, holidays are o'er.

  Silver bells and golden bells, and bells with iron throats,
  Cowslip bells and lily bells, and bells with tripping notes,
  Oh! many bells and merry bells, and liquid bells there be,
  But the sturdy bells of nine o'clock are the dearest bells for me.

  M. E. S.




[Illustration: THE PUDDING STICK]

     This Department is conducted in the interest of Girls and Young
     Women, and the Editor will be pleased to answer any question on
     the subject so far as possible. Correspondents should address
     Editor.


What must I wear? is a question quite often on girlish lips, and a
girl's satisfaction with herself depends a good deal on the answer to
it. Nobody enjoys being badly or strikingly dressed, and in this matter
I am much of the opinion of Mrs. John Hancock, the great lady whose
husband's signature stands out so splendidly on our Declaration of
Independence. Mrs. Hancock said in substance that she could not approve
of a girl who was indifferent to her dress, nor of one who showed that
she was thinking about it, and that she was pleased with the effect she
made. A girl must not strut about like a vain peacock; she must wear her
clothes as the plant wears its flowers--unconsciously.

If you are sensible and clear-headed girls you will not wish to have
many frocks at once. A strong serviceable serge for every-day wear, a
pretty cashmere or silk for best, a simple white frock for evening, two
or three separate waists, and an extra skirt to relieve the serge, are
sufficient for the winter wardrobe of a well-dressed young girl. In
summer one requires more changes, but print and muslin and gingham
frocks are cheap, and, if neatly made, are always appropriate. Of
under-clothing have as simple a supply as you can take care of. The
dainty girl likes to be clothed in fresh and clean garments next the
skin, and where her clothing is not seen. These garments may be of fine
and nice material, but the school-girl and the young woman should avoid
elaborate frills and puffs and tucks, embroideries and laces, for these
are easily torn, and are hard upon the laundress. Of stockings a
half-dozen pairs are necessary, of handkerchiefs two or three dozen, and
of linen for the neck and wrists enough to insure one's personal perfect
neatness on every occasion. Gloves and shoes are important parts of a
young lady's outfit. Of the former two pairs, one for best and one for
common wear, will probably be enough to have at once, and of the latter,
if you can afford it, have three or four pairs, for out-door and in-door
uses. A young woman whose gloves and boots are good of their kind, and
in nice order, will always appear well dressed. A water-proof cloak, a
thick warm jacket, and two hats, one a toque, trim and dainty, the other
a wider and more picturesque affair, with a brim, and feathers, ribbons,
or flowers for trimming, will meet all exigencies. Don't wear birds or
wings on your hats. No ROUND TABLE Lady must countenance the cruel
killing of little birds that her hat may be adorned in a barbaric
fashion. The prejudice humane people feel against the wearing of slain
birds does not extend to ostrich feathers.

[Illustration: Signature]




SOME CURIOUS FACTS CONCERNING HEARING.


An inquiry was recently made in London as to the greatest distance at
which a man's voice could be heard, leaving, of course, the telephone
out of consideration. The reply was most interesting, and was as
follows: Eighteen miles is the longest distance on record at which a
man's voice has been heard. This occurred in the Grand Cañon of the
Colorado, where one man shouting the name "Bob" at one end his voice was
plainly heard at the other end, which is eighteen miles away. Lieutenant
Foster, on Parry's third arctic expedition, found that he could converse
with a man across the harbor of Port Bowen, a distance of 6696 feet, or
about one mile and a quarter: and Sir John Franklin said that he
conversed with ease at a distance of more than a mile. Dr. Young records
that at Gibraltar the human voice has been heard at a distance of ten
miles.

Sound has remarkable force in water. Colladon, by experiments made in
the Lake of Geneva, estimated that a bell submerged in the sea might be
heard a distance of more than sixty miles. Franklin says that he heard
the striking together of two stones in the water half a mile away. Over
water or a surface of ice sound is propagated with great clearness and
strength. Dr. Hutton relates that on a quiet part of the Thames near
Chelsea he could hear a person read distinctly at the distance of 140
feet, while on the land the same could only be heard at 76 feet.
Professor Tyndall, when on Mont Blanc, found the report of a pistol-shot
no louder than the pop of a champagne bottle. Persons in a balloon can
hear voices from the earth a long time after they themselves are
inaudible to people below.




ON BOARD THE ARK.

BY ALBERT LEE.


CHAPTER VIII.

The Lion bowed in a dignified manner to the Gopher, and rapped on the
table again to bring the Parrots to order, and then the Gopher said,
very slowly and deliberately:

"When is a door not a door?"

The animals stared at one another, and whispered, and gazed up and down
the table as if they thought they might possibly derive inspiration from
the dishes. Tommy and the ex-Pirate said not a word. Presently the
Gopher repeated:

"When is a door not a door?"

But no one could guess, and after a few moments more of anxious and
strained silence the Gopher said:

"I suppose I shall have to tell you. A door is not a door when it is
ajar."

[Illustration: THE ANIMALS ROARED WITH LAUGHTER AT THE GOPHER'S JOKE.]

The animals fairly roared and shrieked with laughter. They bellowed and
howled and pounded on the table, and the Gopher became so much affected
with appreciation of his own wit that he fell over backwards, and almost
stunned a Newfoundland puppy who was trying to get his nose above the
table to see what it was all about. Tommy had never realized before what
the expression "to roar with laughter" really signified, and he
concluded he never wanted to experience such a realization again. The
noise was so great that he had to put his fingers to his ears. When the
merriment had partially subsided, the little boy leaned over to the
ex-Pirate and said:

"I have heard that joke before; haven't you?"

"Indeed I have," answered the ex-Pirate, "many a time."

"It's an awfully old one, isn't it?"

"I always suspected it was first gotten off in the Ark," said the
ex-Pirate, shaking his head knowingly; "but I did not know the Gopher
was responsible for it."

By this time the animals had recovered themselves, and some were
shouting to the Gopher for more jokes. He got up and protested that he
did not know any more; and then, suddenly pointing to the ex-Pirate, he
exclaimed:

"He's a funny one. He can _recite_ things!"

Thereupon the animals all gazed at the ex-Pirate, and the Lion said,
"Recite things."

The ex-Pirate never needed much urging to do this sort of thing, and so
when Tommy whispered to him to read the seventeenth chapter of his
autobiography which he knew his friend had in his pocket, and of which
the little boy had only heard the first few lines, the ex-Pirate arose,
and, bowing in his usual way to all his hearers, he pulled his
manuscript from his coat and began to read:

  The following day the sun rose up as usual from the East.
  The sea was calm, the sky was clear, the stormy winds had ceased;
  The _Black Avenger_ sped along before a gentle breeze,
  And the starboard watch loafed on the deck in true piratic ease.
  I took my breakfast down below, and when I came on deck
  I looked about, and far away I saw a little speck
  Upon the blue horizon, and I knew it was a sail.
  For, in matters of this nature, my eyesight could not fail.
  I called my swarthy Bo's'n, and I said to him, said I:
  "If we don't overtake that ship, I'll know the reason why;
  If we don't overtake her ere the sun shines overhead
  I'll cut the whiskers off the crew before I go to bed!"
    The Bo's'n nodded cheerfully and swore a fearful oath,
  (He called upon the Sun and Moon, and scandalized them both,)
  And then he hitched his trousers up and piped his whistle shrill,
  And made the loafing pirates heave the halyards with a will.
  The _Black Avenger_ sped along and ploughed the boiling sea,
  The rigging creaked, the sails stood out, the foam flew fast and free.
  The pirates gathered on the deck and buckled on their swords,
  Rolled up their sleeves, and combed their beards, and spoke piratic
      words.
    But suddenly the Bo's'n came a-rushing up to me,
  His face was pale, his nose was red, he spoke: "Good sir," said he,
  "Yon vessel is from Switzerland, and, verily, I fear
  We'll find she is not what she seems, as soon as we get near;
  She looks to me as though she might--might be a privateer"
  (But when he found she wasn't one, he shed a private tear.)
    Said I: "Load up the cannons, boys, with ten-pound cannon-balls;
  I care not what yon ship may be, into my hands she falls!
  We'll take her, and we'll take her guns, her captain, and her crew,
  Her cook, her cabin steward, and her precious cargo, too!"
    So the Gunner and the Gunner's Mate they lifted up the hatch,
  And they called upon the pirates who formed the starboard watch
  To help them lift the cannon-balls from out the magazine
  Where all the cannon-balls were kept, wrapped up in bombazine.
    But presently the Gunner's Mate came rushing to the rail,
  His hair was standing up on end, his face was very pale,
  He cried: "Oh, Captain, woe is me, no cannon-balls are left;
  Of shot and shell of every kind the magazine's bereft.
  There's not a piece of shrapnel, no canister or grape,
  There's not enough of buckshot to kill a good-sized ape!"
    The Bo's'n, who stood near at hand, gazed sadly at us both,
  And then he pulled his pistols out and swore a mighty oath:
  "How shall we take yon Switzer ship," he said, "without a shell?"
    "We've _got_ to fight," I answered him. "Won't cheese do just as
        well?"
  For, two days previously, you know, we met a brigantine
  From Amsterdam for Zululand, by name the _Bandoline_,
  And in her hold she carried a fine cargo, if you please,
  Consisting of a hundred thousand dozen Edam cheese.
  We took a hundred dozen and stowed them on the poop
  Between the after cannon and the Captain's chicken-coop.
  (The crew had used the cheeses and some bottles from the galley,
  The day before, to improvise a sort of bowling-alley.)
    Said I: "We'll take these Edam cheese and put them in the guns,
  And shoot them at the Switzer ship until she sinks or runs;
  For surely such proceeding will be worse than shot or shell,
  Just think of being _hit_ with cheese--say nothing of the smell!"
  The pirates laughed and vowed my scheme would give them lots of fun;
  And soon a big, red, round, Dutch cheese was rammed in every gun.
  It was not long before the _Black Avenger_ came abreast
  And hailed the ship from Switzerland with true piratic zest;
  But not a Switzer said a word, nor made they any sign,
  But all the sailors on the ship were ranged along in line,
  And leaned upon the starboard rail, with sunken pallid cheeks
  As though they had not tasted food for six or seven weeks.
  The swarthy Bo's'n hailed again, and as no answer came
  The Gunner's Mate averred it was high time to start the game.
  I spoke the word, and seven guns all loaded up with cheese
  Were fired at the Switzer ship as nicely as you please;
  And then a second volley went, and soon again a third.
  And when the smoke had cleared away we saw what had occurred.
  Each cheese had hit the Switzer ship and flattened on her decks,
  The Switzer men were wading in the cheese up to their necks.
  We waited then to see what sort of fighting they would make,
  And wondered how much cheese these Switzer sailor-men could take.
  But as we waited silence came all o'er the Switzer craft,
  And not a seaman seemed to move, or forward or abaft.
  I called the Bo's'n to the bridge, and "Take the gig," said I;
  "Go board yon ship, where all is still, and learn the reason why."
    The Bo's'n quick got in the gig with sixteen of the crew,
  He took along a cannon and an Edam cheese or two,
  And half an hour he was gone, then slowly rowed he back;
  He said to me: "Good Captain," he sobbed, "alas, alack!
  Upon that floating vessel there's no one left to fight;
  There's not a living creature, not a living thing in sight.
  No man remains to give reply to any kind of question:
  The Switzers ate up all the cheese, and died of indigestion."

There was another great demonstration of approval as soon as the
ex-Pirate had concluded, but Tommy paid little attention to the noise
this time, because he had become somewhat accustomed to it.

"You see," said the ex-Pirate, apologetically, "I could not very well
read anything like that--all about cheese--in the presence of the Welsh
Rabbit; could I?"

"Of course not," agreed Tommy; "but is it true that--"

"I say," interrupted the Gopher, leaning in front of Tommy and
addressing himself to the ex-Pirate; "I know another joke now. I know
what the Bo's'n said to the Gunner's Mate when he told him to shoot at
the ship."

"Well, what did he tell him?" asked the ex-Pirate, incautiously.

"Cheese it!" shouted the Gopher, who was immediately seized with such a
violent fit of laughter that he fell under the table, and almost buried
himself under the pile of broken soup plates.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]




[Illustration: INTERSCHOLASTIC SPORT]


[Illustration: THE CASCADILLA CREW AND BOAT-HOUSE.]

Although the Cascadilla School has not practised rowing so long as St.
Paul's, of which this Department spoke last week, it has made rapid
strides ever since the sport was introduced there two years ago, and now
boasts of a well-equipped navy. Owing to the school's location on Cayuga
Lake, aquatics will become the distinctive form of athletics there in
the future, although, as a member of the New York State Interscholastic
League, football and baseball teams are also put into the field. But it
is a good thing to have rowing developed in some of the preparatory
institutions, and I shall not regret to see some of the vast amount of
energy that now appears to be running riot in track athletics turned
into this new channel. Every large school situated near a watercourse or
a lake ought to add rowing to its list of sports, if it is possible to
do so.

The principal difficulty in the way of such progress at present lies in
the fact that so few schools have crews, that interscholastic contests
are hard to arrange. The Cascadilla oarsmen are fortunate in having the
Cornell crews to row against, and each year they get races with the
Freshmen and 'Varsity eights. Thus far they have secured no victories
over either of these rivals, but as the sport grows older with them they
should make a better showing from year to year. The Cascadilla commodore
is now negotiating with a school near Philadelphia that has taken steps
toward the organization of a crew, and it is possible that next summer
will witness the first of a series of interscholastic regattas between
these progressive institutions.

The same lack of a scholastic rival hampers rowing at St. John's
Academy, Delafield, Wisconsin, where the school eight have to seek as
their opponents the crews of Madison University. Last spring they
defeated the '97 crew by three lengths in an exciting race over the
Nagawicka course in the excellent time of 8 min. 3 sec. This victory was
all the more creditable from the fact that several of the Madison
'Varsity men had seats in the '97 boat. I have spoken of the rowing
which is done in the several schools mentioned to show that it is
possible for young men not yet in college to approximate the work
performed by older athletes. The Department has devoted space to the
description of the crews and their methods in the hope of encouraging
other institutions to take up the sport during the coming winter and
next spring. It is an excellent exercise, and a seat in the 'Varsity
boat is looked upon as the greatest athletic honor a college man may
attain, excepting, of course, a captaincy. It must be the same in every
school where rowing is practised, and the school that has a crew in the
spring is bound to have a better football team in the fall, for the
training done in the winter and the rowing done later develop new
material, and strengthen the older men.

The proposition to organize a National Interscholastic Athletic
Association, modelled upon the Inter-collegiate Association, made in
these columns in the early part of last spring, is looked upon favorably
not only by the schools and associations in this part of the country,
but also by the schools on the Pacific coast. In fact, the Westerners
have shown a much greater spirit of enterprise and sportsmanship in the
matter than have the managers of scholastic athletic interests in the
East. It is probable, however, that the apparent stagnation in this
quarter has been due to the summer vacation, and the consequent
cessation of school sports, and the absence from town of those who could
take hold of the scheme and put it through. Now that the fall term is
about to open, this matter promises to be taken up with the energy
required for such an undertaking, and all we need is the hearty
co-operation of the many interscholastic associations from every State
in the Union. On October 8th there will be a meeting of the New York
I.S.A.A., and I am assured that at that meeting the first steps towards
the formation of the National Interscholastic League will be taken.

Steps have already been taken in California toward joining the League as
soon as it shall be started, and the San Francisco newspapers are
already talking of it as though it were an accomplished fact. This is
all due to those lively young sportsmen of the Oakland High-School, who
are not only eager to enter a general association, but are anxious to
send a team of athletes to the Berkeley Oval to threaten the supremacy
of the Eastern schools in track and field sports. Here is what the San
Francisco _Call_ of September 4th says on the subject:

     The Oakland High-School decided to-day that it would join the
     National League of High-Schools, and send a team to New York next
     year to join in the national High-School contests. The team will
     consist of ten of the best athletes in the school, and the boys
     anticipate being capable of holding their own and capturing some
     of the trophies. They have received much encouragement from the
     recent tour of the Berkeley team. The Oakland High-School has for
     some time been a member of the league of which HARPER'S ROUND
     TABLE is the organ, and now that they have decided to branch out
     and seek national honors, athletics will receive a boom, as there
     is much rivalry as to who will ultimately be the ones chosen to
     uphold the honor of Oakland's High-School in the Empire State. A
     general meeting will be held in a few days, and a manager will be
     elected who will at once put into practice all the available
     material. After that the boys will commence to obtain pledges for
     financial aid, as it will require about $1600 to defray the
     expenses of the trip. The next national High-School contests will
     be held in the summer; but entries are now being made, and Oakland
     will not be dilatory in outlining the events for which she will
     seek to carry off the honors. "The sending East of our team will
     be one of the best things that ever the High-School undertook,"
     said one of the O.H.-S. athletes to-day. "It will call attention
     to our school and to Oakland, and will let thousands of people
     know that we exist who are in doubt just now as to where Oakland
     is. We have been debating the proposition of sending a team East
     all this year, but after we saw what a lot of attention was shown
     to the Berkeley team we could see no reason why we should not try
     a similar tour among the crack Eastern High-Schools. We do not
     anticipate any trouble in raising the necessary funds, as we think
     the noise we shall make will prove a very valuable advertisement
     for this city."

A good many of the statements made by the _Call_ are inaccurate, but the
main announcement, that the O.H.-S. will come East, is authentic. It
behooves the Eastern sportsmen, therefore, to get ready to receive them.
As I have said before, the ROUND TABLE will do everything in its power
to further the organization of a National Association of the schools,
and these columns are open to correspondents who care to make
suggestions for the advancement of the scheme. Perhaps a better idea of
what the Californians have actually done, and will do, can be obtained
from this letter, which came to the ROUND TABLE from the Captain of the
O.H.-S. athletic team:

     "The newspaper reports are not at all accurate, but they will
     serve to show what we have been doing lately. While they do not
     convey the exact truth, they have aroused great enthusiasm among
     the Oakland people, and we have great hopes of taking an Eastern
     tour. We are only awaiting the formation of the Big League to go
     right to work, and we have a big job on hand. I suppose that the
     Field Day will be held about the latter part of June, and that the
     list of events will be made to coincide exactly with the
     Inter-collegiate programme. If we came East we could doubtless
     make arrangements for a series of dual games with three or four of
     the crack schools in the vicinity of New York in addition to the
     Big Field Day. Of course this could all be arranged later on; what
     we are worried about now is getting started. I wish you would prod
     the schools up and get them to take immediate action. We want to
     get to work right away, for to raise $3000 is quite a job. The
     U.C. boys are in favor of the trip, and will help us in every way.
     I wish you would inform us of any steps taken in this regard, and
     also put us in touch with the officers, so we could correspond
     with them. Would it be necessary to be the winning or champion
     team of our league to join in the Field Day, or could the O.H.-S.
     alone join the League and uphold the honor of California in the
     scholastic world in the East?"

It strikes me that the New York I.S.A.A. will lose an opportunity that
may never offer again if it fails now to take the initiative in the
formation and foundation of the National Interscholastic Athletic
Association of America.

Lawrenceville opened last Thursday, and the football men went to work at
once. Some of the old players got back a week earlier, and saw to it
that the eight fields were put into shape and laid out, and now every
afternoon one may see sixteen elevens hard at work rushing and kicking
and otherwise developing new material. This system of requiring
everybody to join in the game is an excellent one. The boys at
Lawrenceville are arranged according to size, and are taught how to
play, and thus it is plain that in the course of a year or two the
Captain of the school team has plenty of good material to pick from. The
first and second teams have the additional advantage of being coached by
some of the instructors who were star football players in their college
days, and the benefit of whose experience goes largely toward making the
Lawrenceville eleven the successful one that it usually is.

Last year, for instance, Lawrenceville defeated the Hill School, 22-0,
the Yale Freshmen, 16-0, and Andover, 20-6, besides disposing of every
other school team they met. They tried to arrange a game with the
Princeton 'Varsity, but were not successful, for the reason, they
believe, that in 1893 they scored 4-8 on the orange and black champions.
Of course this is probably not the reason, for Princeton should be only
too glad to get such excellent practice even from a school team, and
this year no doubt there will be a match, and another probably with the
University of Pennsylvania.

A feature of the football record of this school, which it is pleasing to
be able to call attention to, is that in the twelve years the game has
been played there no dispute has ever arisen and no serious accident has
occurred. Moreover, as far as I am able to ascertain, no boy ever went
to the school because he could play football. All this tends to create a
genuine and healthy interest in the sport, and not only the scholars
themselves, but the graduates of the school take pride in such a record.
This is shown by the fact that the Alumni have presented a $300 cup for
class championship contests, each winning class getting its numeral
engraved upon the trophy; and an alumnus has also offered a cup to be
played for by the House teams, and to become the property of the House
winning the greatest number of times within ten years. The boys live in
Houses at Lawrenceville, as they do at Rugby and Harrow, and each House
has its eleven.

Of last year's first school team five men return: Emerson, full-back;
Dibble and Davis, half-backs; Cadwalader and Edwards, guards. This is a
first-rate nucleus, and Dibble, the new Captain, is expected to bring
forward a team equal, if not superior, to that of last year. There are
few better half-backs in the schools than Dibble. He is a great
sprinter, having covered the 100 in 10 seconds at the school games last
June. Davis, the other half-back, and Emerson, the full-back, will
surely improve this fall over their last year's style, while no better
guards are necessary than Cadwalader and Edwards. They weigh 210 and 218
pounds respectively.

The candidates for end rush are Noble and Righter, and unless some new
phenomenons develop, they will hold the positions. The tackles will have
to be taken from the incoming classes, and the hardest position to fill
will be quarter-back. Captain Dibble may well watch the play of the man
in this position, if he expects the team to be engineered as well as De
Saulles did it last year. De Saulles is a wonderful quarter-back, and
will no doubt make the Yale 'Varsity in a year or so. A large number of
new Fourth Form boys, or Seniors, have been entered this fall, and it
will be strange if in a school of 350 enough available material cannot
be trained to bring the eleven up to its usual standard of excellence.

The teams of the New England League are also in the field, and in a few
days practice games between schools will begin. Boston Latin is
scheduled to meet Charlestown High to-morrow, and English High meets
Dorchester on the same day. There is unusual promise of good new
material everywhere, and the championship matches ought to furnish good
football. Only three members of the Cambridge Manual Training School's
champion eleven are back this fall, and the candidates for positions are
mostly small, light men. Captain Murphy, however, has signified his
intention of trying to make up for the probable lightness of his team by
perfecting it in team work.

The Boston Latin School was the first to get its men into training, and
has a start of nearly a week over its rivals. Many of last year's
players have returned to school, and most of them are heavy fellows.
Lowe, one of the guards, is the biggest man of the aggregation, and
weighs 210 pounds. Eaton at centre weighs 198 pounds, and his other
guard, Nagle, tips the scales at 185. These three have played together
for B.L.S. for the past three years, and are undoubtedly the strongest
centre in the League. The tackle positions are open, and one of them
will probably be filled by Rankin, who was a substitute last year. D.
Lockin, who showed some of the best end work of any of the school
players, is back in his old position.

Captain Maguire will keep his old place at full-back, and ought to
manage to develop a strong eleven. He is familiar with the fine points
of the game, and has been a member of the team for two years past. Last
year he proved himself one of the cleverest ground-gainers in the
League, and in the game with English High his punting aided materially
toward the securing of victory. His tackling and interfering have
improved, and will doubtless grow better as the season advances.

The showing made in the early work of the English High-School players
has not been very encouraging thus far. Like the C.M.T.S. men, the
candidates are small, but all of them are apparently hard workers. It is
fortunate for Captain Callahan that there are not so very many positions
to fill, but on the other hand the vacancies occur in places where
strong and reliable players are required. If things are allowed to run
along in the slipshod way that characterized E.H.-S.'s endeavors last
year, however, the team will be a poorer one than has represented the
school for some time. Only continuous and careful work can bring the
team into championship form.

The two scholastic representatives in the A.A.U. championships at
Manhattan Field on the 14th managed to hold their ends up pretty well.
Baltazzi took second to Sweeney in the high jump, with 5 feet 10-1/2
inches, defeating Cosgrove, and Syme got first in the low hurdles. He
ran his trial heat in 26-3/5 seconds, but got the medal with 28-1/5
seconds. His victory was in some respects a repetition of his success at
Syracuse in the Metropolitan championships. There he met Sheldon and
Chase, the latter falling over the eighth hurdle. At Manhattan Field,
Cosgrove led up to the ninth hurdle in the trials, and then took a
cropper, leaving Syme to win the heat. In the finals, Syme and Cady had
it neck and neck to this same ninth, when the scholastic runner struck
the timber so heavily as to break it, but recovered in time to see Cady
go somersaulting over the tenth. Before the Yale man could recover, Syme
had breasted the tape.

  THE GRADUATE.




A NEW USE FOR A DOLL.


A new use for a doll has been discovered by an ingenious London thief. A
woman who was arrested for stealing from one of the large dry-goods
shops was found to have been carrying what everybody supposed to be a
baby; but what in reality turned out to be a huge doll with a wax face
and hollow leathern body. It was the thief's custom to conceal the
stolen articles as quickly as she got her fingers on them, gloves,
laces, and so forth, in the cavernous and spacious interior of the
"baby."




SOME STRANGE VISITING-CARDS


Calling in Corea must be a very difficult performance, if, as a London
journal has recently stated, the ordinary visiting-cards there are a
foot square. The same journal goes on to say that the savages of Dahomey
announce their visits to each other by a wooden board or the branch of a
tree artistically carved. This is sent on in advance, and the visitor,
on taking leave, pockets his card, which probably serves him for many
years. The natives of Sumatra also have a visiting-card, consisting of a
piece of wood about a foot long and decorated with a bunch of straw and
a knife.




SOME NOVEL RACES.


A London newspaper some years ago contained an account of a strange sort
of contest which two noblemen once got up for their own amusement. It
consisted of matching a flock of turkeys and a flock of geese for a race
on the London and Norwich road, in the middle of the last century. The
turkeys would insist upon flying up into the roadside trees to roost
while the geese, keeping up a steady waddle till night, reached London
from Norwich two days ahead. The same journal also mentions the feats of
the Hon. Tom Coventry's sprinting pig. In 1803 this speedy animal was
matched against a celebrated runner, and started a strong favorite on
the day of the race which she won with ease. The pig had been trained to
run the distance each day for its dinner. Another strange contest of
this time took place between two sporting noblemen, who raced against
each other on a windy day on Hampstead Heath, one running backwards in
jack-boots, and the other holding up an open umbrella, and running
forwards.




ADVERTISEMENTS.




Highest of all in Leavening Strength.--Latest U. S. Gov't Report.

[Illustration: Royal Baking Powder]




Arnold

Constable & Co

       *       *       *       *       *

Dress Goods

English and Scotch Mixed Suitings, French Boucles, Jacquards, Crepons,
Bourette and Tufted Vigognos.

English Mohairs and Mohair and Wool Mixtures.

Scotch Tartans and French Plaids, English and French Diagonals in Cloth
colors; Crepes, Cashmeres, and novelties in Silk and Wool fabrics for
evening wear.

       *       *       *       *       *

Broadway & 19th st.

NEW YORK.




Commit to Memory

the best things in Prose and Poetry, always including good Songs and
Hymns. It is surprising how little good work of this kind seems to be
done in the Schools, if one must judge from the small number of people
who can repeat, without mistake or omission, as many as =Three= good
songs or hymns.

Clear, Sharp, Definite,

and accurate Memory work is a most excellent thing, whether in School or
out of it, among all ages and all classes. But let that which is so
learned be worth learning and worth retaining. The Franklin Square Song
Collection presents a large number of

Old and New Songs

and Hymns, in great variety and very carefully selected, comprising
Sixteen Hundred in the Eight Numbers thus far issued, together with much
choice and profitable Reading Matter relating to Music and Musicians. In
the complete and varied

Table of Contents,

which is sent free on application to the Publishers, there are found
dozens of the best things in the World, which are well worth committing
to memory; and they who know most of such good things, and appreciate
and enjoy them most, are really among the best educated people in any
country. They have the best result of Education. For above Contents,
with sample pages of Music, address

Harper & Brothers, New York.




[Illustration: If afflicted with SORE EYES USE Dr. ISAAC THOMPSON'S EYE
WATER]




[Illustration: BICYCLING]

     This Department is conducted in the interest of Bicyclers, and the
     Editor will be pleased to answer any question on the subject. Our
     maps and tours contain much valuable data kindly supplied from the
     official maps and road-books of the League of American Wheelmen.
     Recognizing the value of the work being done by the L. A. W., the
     Editor will be pleased to furnish subscribers with membership
     blanks and information so far as possible.


[Illustration: Copyright, 1895, by Harper & Brothers.]

The third stage of the trip from New York to Boston by the shore road
demands our attention this week. It extends from New Haven to New
London, a distance of forty-five miles or more, and though the rider
can, if he desires, stop at Saybrook, thirty-three miles distant from
New Haven, it is wiser to make the run to New London in one day, as the
accommodations at New London are better, and the next stage, from New
London to Shannuck, which comes on the next day, is much lighter.

Leaving New Haven and going eastward the rider should keep always to the
right on going into the suburbs of the city, and continue to the south
of Fair Haven through East Haven. One and a half or two miles out of
East Haven the road crosses the railroad track, and then runs on another
mile into Branford, which is eight miles from New Haven. From Branford
the road is, in the main, easily followed, the general tendency being to
keep in the vicinity of the railroad, and near the shore of Long Island
Sound. It is well for the rider, where possible, outside of villages, to
take the side path, as the road is not in the best of condition in
certain places, and the side path is usually very good. From Branford to
Stony Creek is a distance of about three miles. Thence to Leetes Island,
two miles further, where the road is clear, there is little to be
described. There are almost no hills of importance, and the side path
usually offers a very good substitute for the road itself when the
latter becomes sandy.

From Leetes Island to Guilford, about three miles further on, the road
winds about a good deal, crossing the railroad track twice before
entering Guilford in order to make a detour to the north and cross a
creek. After leaving Guilford the road runs down close by the shore, and
keeps its position in passing East River and Madison. Between Madison
and Clinton, and between Clinton and Grove Beach, a distance altogether
of between five and six miles, the road is fair in general and very poor
in spots. The side path should be taken wherever available, but,
everything considered, it is not one of the best bicycle roads that
could be desired. From Grove Beach into Saybrook, a distance of six
miles, the rider passes through Westbrook, and the road does not alter
its condition, being in the main fair, but very sandy in spots.

If possible, the rider should start from New Haven early in the morning,
and make Saybrook some time about noon, stopping there for lunch or
dinner. This is a distance of thirty-three miles altogether. To be sure,
it only leaves a run of thirteen or fourteen miles to New London, but
the accommodations there are so much better than along the line that it
is advisable to try and reach it, and at the same time it is always well
to do more than half the journey in the morning. Leaving Saybrook the
rider should proceed, still on the turnpike, to the Connecticut River
bank at Lyme Ferry. Crossing by this he turns to the right and runs into
Lyme over a capital road. Thence the road runs along over a reasonably
good bit of country to the north of the railroad into South Lyme, five
miles further on, with the exception of a spot a mile or more beyond
Black Hall, where the road crosses a creek and is poor riding for a
short space. From South Lyme to Niantic is about three miles, and after
passing East Lyme, a short distance out of Niantic, the rider crosses a
long bridge over an inlet of the Sound. From this point, keeping to the
left just after crossing the bridge, he runs through Jordanville into
New London, and may there put up at the Crocker House in the middle of
the town.

There are several alternatives over the last part of the course. For
example, after crossing the Lyme Ferry and passing through Lyme, instead
of keeping to the right it is possible for the rider to turn to the
left, and follow the secondary bicycle route marked on the map, which,
on the whole, is neither as short nor as good riding as the other. The
road passes through Graniteville and joins the turnpike-road near
Jordanville. In the case of a strong head wind, especially if it is a
little to the southward of east, it will save a great deal of time and
labor for the rider to take this more inland route. On the southern
route, after passing Niantic and East Lyme and crossing the long bridge,
the rider may turn sharp to the right, follow the route marked on the
map, crossing another inlet of the Sound, leaving Jordanville on the
north, and thence run on to the mouth of the Thames River, where he can
put up at the Pequot House, a summer hotel, which will be a welcome
place after such a ride.

     NOTE.--Map of New York city asphalted streets in No. 809. Map of
     route from New York to Tarrytown in No. 810. New York to Stamford,
     Connecticut, in No. 811. New York to Staten Island in No. 812. New
     Jersey from Hoboken to Pine Brook in No. 813. Brooklyn in No. 814.
     Brooklyn to Babylon in No. 815. Brooklyn to Northport in No. 816.
     Tarrytown to Poughkeepsie in No. 817. Poughkeepsie to Hudson in
     No. 818. Hudson to Albany in No. 819. Tottenville to Trenton in
     820. Trenton to Philadelphia in 821. Philadelphia in No. 822.
     Philadelphia-Wissahickon Route in No. 823. Philadelphia to West
     Chester in No. 824. Philadelphia to Atlantic City--First stage in
     No. 825; Second Stage in No. 826. Philadelphia to Vineland--First
     Stage in No. 827. Second Stage in No. 828. New York to
     Boston--Second Stage in No. 829.




[Illustration: STAMPS]

     This Department is conducted in the interest of stamp and coin
     collectors, and the Editor will be pleased to answer any question
     on these subjects so far as possible. Correspondents should
     address Editor Stamp Department.


The New York _Herald_ states that the Duke of York is prepared to sell
his very valuable collection of stamps to the highest bidder. Lord
Rothschild has made the most liberal offer thus far, but he would prefer
to buy the rarest specimens only.

     C. E. ABBEY.--U. S. stamps are printed on plates of 200 or 400
     stamps divided into _panes_ of 100 stamps each. A sheet of 100
     stamps as sold by the Post-Office is one of these panes. Every
     plate bears a number, and this number is printed on the margin of
     each pane. For instance, the current 2c. red is printed from
     plates of 400 stamps which, after printing, is cut into four
     sheets. I illustrate plate No. 112.

     [Illustration]

     I know of no stamp chapter in Newark.

     H. B. THAW.--The 12 sen 1875, Japan, is worth 70c., the 15 sen,
     same issue, 60c.

     L. M. C.--Dealers quote two varieties of the half-dime of 1838,
     one at 10c., the other at 30c.

     A. WHITTEMORE.--No stamp was found in your envelope when opened.

     D. C. S.--The stamps are Costa Rica revenues. There are several
     varieties of U. S. 1c. Proprietary worth from 1c. to 10c. each.

     J. K. MORLAN.--The current 1s. Great Britain postage-stamp is
     catalogued at 2c. if used. As there are many thousand varieties of
     North, Central, and South American stamps, I cannot quote values,
     but advise you to buy a catalogue.

     E. H. MAURER.--The $1 values of U. S. postage-stamps are largely
     used to pay postage on packages of bonds sent from the U. S. to
     Europe. The "pink" 1861 is extremely rare. It is a peculiar shade
     which cannot be described in words.

     H. L. WATSON, Paris.--It is probably a fraud. The only Jones
     Express known in America bears Washington's portrait, and is
     printed on pink paper.

     A. E. BARROW.--No coins enclosed. I cannot say what dealers will
     pay for stamps. That depends on scarcity, condition, and quantity.
     An unsevered pair of any scarce stamp is always worth more than
     two single stamps of the same kind. The Columbus and 1853 dollars
     can both be bought from dealers at a slight advance.

     D. E. PORTEr.--The coin is a Connecticut cent dated 1787. Dealers
     catalogue it at 15c.

     J. T. DELANO.--What dealers pay for coins we do not know. You can
     buy the 1832 half-dollar in good condition for 75c., the 1853
     quarter for 35c., the 1864 two-cent copper for 10c.

     F. S. BIDWELL, JUN.--No premium on the shilling.

     E. B. TRIPP.--Dealers quote the 1857 and 1858 cents at 5c. each,
     1822 half-dollar at 75c., silver three-cent pieces at 10c.

     C. MARTIN.--Levant stamps are used for local purposes, and for
     prepayment of postage on letters to the home countries.

  PHILATUS.

       *       *       *       *       *

DON'T WORRY YOURSELF

and don't worry the baby; avoid both unpleasant conditions by giving the
child pure, digestible food. Don't use solid preparations. _Infant
Health_ is a valuable pamphlet for mothers. Send your address to the New
York Condensed Milk Company, N.Y.--[_Adv._]




ADVERTISEMENTS.




[Illustration: Columbia Bicycles]

You see them everywhere




Walter Baker & Co. Limited,

[Illustration]

The Largest Manufacturers of

PURE, HIGH GRADE

COCOAS and CHOCOLATES

On this Continent, have received

HIGHEST AWARDS

from the great

Industrial and Food

EXPOSITIONS

IN EUROPE AND AMERICA.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Caution:= In view of the many imitations of the labels and wrappers on
our goods, consumers should make sure that our place of manufacture,
namely, =Dorchester, Mass.= is printed on each package.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOLD BY GROCERS EVERYWHERE.

       *       *       *       *       *

WALTER BAKER & CO. LTD. DORCHESTER, MASS.




Any man seeing a

"Rugby" Watch

will wish himself a boy again.

=Never before= have such elegant watches been made for the boys.

=Boys, you are in it= this year, sure.

Send for ="Rugby" Catalogue=, and it will make you open your eyes.

The Waterbury Watch Co.,

Waterbury, Conn.




Postage Stamps, &c.




[Illustration]

100 all dif. Venezuela, Bolivia, etc., only 10c.; 200 all dif. Hayti,
Hawaii, etc., only 50c. Ag'ts w't'd at 50% com. List FREE! =C. A.
Stegmann=, 5941 Cote Briliante, St. Louis, Mo.




=FREE 25 STAMPS.= Japan, Mexico, Roumania, etc., for 2c. stamp; 100 all
dif., 10c.; 8 Samoa, 10c.

J. A. WILSON, 1108 Fairmount, Phila., Pa.




=CUBA= 29 varieties of genuine, unused stamps for 50 cents. Catalogue
value, =$3.41=. =E. T. PARKER=, Bethlehem, Pa.




=25= var. foreign stamps and price-list free for 2c. stamp.

EXCELSIOR STAMP CO., Keyport, N. J.




=STAMPS.= 100 for 12c.; 40 U.S., 25c.; _no rubbish_, 50% com. KEYSTONE
STAMP CO., Lebanon, Pa.




[Illustration: If afflicted with SORE EYES USE Dr. ISAAC THOMPSON'S EYE
WATER]




[Illustration]

Harper's Catalogue,

Thoroughly revised, classified, and indexed, will be sent by mail to any
address on receipt of ten cents.

[Illustration]




Our Photographic Prize Competition.


The Camera Club Department of HARPER'S ROUND TABLE is the only one of
the kind published regularly in the interests and for the help of the
young amateur. It contains matter also for those more advanced in the
art of photography. Its aim is to raise the standard of amateur
photography among young people, and to direct them how to make the best
use of their cameras.

To stimulate all to do their best, the ROUND TABLE offers prizes for the
best specimens of photographic work submitted by the members. Any
amateur may become a member of the Camera Club by simply sending name
and address to HARPER'S ROUND TABLE, and stating that you wish to become
a member. There are no fees or dues. Those wishing to become members are
asked to state in their application whether they have or have not passed
their eighteenth birthday. Those under eighteen are made members, and
those over eighteen are made Patrons of the Round Table.

The following are our annual prize offers with conditions. Part of these
are open to all amateurs without regard to age.


PHOTOGRAPHIC PRIZE COMPETITION.


CLASS I.--MARINES.

  First Prize      $15
  Second Prize      10

Entries in this class will close October 15, 1895.


CLASS II.--LANDSCAPES.

  First Prize      $15
  Second Prize      10

Entries in this class will close November 15, 1895.


CLASS III.--FIGURE STUDIES.

  First Prize      $25
  Second Prize      10

Entries in this class will close December 15, 1895.


RULES OF COMPETITION.

1. This competition is open to all Knights and Ladies who have not
passed their eighteenth birthday.

2. All photographs offered must be the work of the competitor from the
exposure of the plate to the mounting of the finished print.

3. No photographs must be sent which have taken prizes or have been
submitted for prizes in other competitions.

4. No picture less than 4 x 5 or larger than 8 x 10 must be sent.

5. Any printing process may be used with the exception of blue prints.

6. All pictures must be mounted, but not framed, and the carriage
prepaid.

7. Each picture must be marked with the name and address of the sender,
the class to which it belongs, and the statement whether or not the
artist has passed his or her eighteenth birthday. No other writing is
necessary. Any picture not thus marked will be ruled out.

8. As the competition closes at different dates, all entries for each
class must be forwarded not later than the date named under each class.
The packet must be marked on the outside "Harper's Round Table
Photographic Competition," in addition to the name and address of this
journal.


OPEN TO ALL AMATEURS.

The following prizes are open to all amateurs, without regard to age:


CLASS A.--LANDSCAPES.

  First Prize      $15
  Second Prize      10

Entries in this class will close November 1, 1895.


CLASS B.--FIGURE STUDY.

  First Prize      $25
  Second Prize      10

Entries in this class will close December 15, 1895.


RULES OF COMPETITION.

1. This competition is open to all amateur photographers, without regard
to age limit.

The other rules governing this competition are the same as those in the
Competition open for those who have not passed their eighteenth
birthday. Special attention is called to Rules 3 and 7.


JUDGING.

Each picture submitted in either competition will be judged: 1.
Originality; 2. Artistic merits of composition; 3 Illustrative value; 4.
Technical excellence of finish. The one having the highest percentage
receiving the highest award in each class, etc. Pictures which fail to
take a prize, the percentage of which is over seventy, will receive
honorable mention.

Please pay special attention to the different dates at which the classes
close. This plan has been adopted to simplify the work of handling the
pictures. Photographs which do not take prizes or are not retained for
publication will be returned to the senders at the close of the
competition if postage is enclosed.

Watch this column for hints in regard to finishing pictures. Class No.
I, "Marines," closes first. Amateurs living in waterports take notice.




Help for those Lovers of Figures.


Answers to the Turk and Christian and Valet problems published last
week: 1. Turk and Christian Puzzle.--In the Latin sentence and French
verse given, attention must be given to the vowels _a_, _e_, _i_, _o_,
_u_ contained in the syllables, letting _a_ equal one, _e_ two, _i_
three, _o_ four, and _u_ five. Begin by arranging four Christians
together, because the vowel in the first syllable is _o_; then five
Turks, because the vowel in the second syllable is _u_, and so on to the
end. By proceeding in this manner, it will be found, taking every ninth
person circularly, beginning at the first of the row, that the lot will
fall entirely on the Turks.

2. Valet Puzzle.--Two valets cross first, and one of them, rowing back,
carries over the third valet. One of the three valets then returns with
the boat, and, remaining, allows the two masters whose valets have
crossed to go over in the boat. One of the masters then carries back his
valet, and leaving him on the bank, rows over the third master. In the
last place, the valet who crossed enters the boat, and, returning twice,
carries over the other two valets.




A Famous Chess Problem.


     This is a famous problem, and several notable chess-players of the
     old school have amused themselves with it:

     _To make the knight move into all the squares of the chess-board
     in succession, without passing twice over the same._

     Of the four solutions to the problem, Demoivre's is the easiest to
     follow. I will furnish Montmort's, Mairan's, or M. W----'s
     solution to any member so desiring, provided a stamp is sent for
     reply. Following is Demoivre's solution:

   ---------------------------------------
  | 34 | 49 | 32 | 11 | 36 | 39 | 24 |  1 |
  |----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
  | 21 | 10 | 35 | 50 | 23 | 12 | 37 | 40 |
  |----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
  | 48 | 33 | 62 | 57 | 38 | 25 |  2 | 13 |
  |----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
  |  9 | 20 | 51 |  5 | 63 | 60 | 41 | 26 |
  |----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
  | 32 | 47 | 58 | 61 | 56 | 53 | 14 |  3 |
  |----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
  | 19 |  8 | 55 | 52 | 59 | 64 | 27 | 42 |
  |----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
  | 46 | 31 |  6 | 17 | 44 | 29 |  4 | 15 |
  |----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
  |  7 | 18 | 45 | 30 |  5 | 16 | 43 | 28 |
   ---------------------------------------

  VINCENT V. M. BEEDE, R. T. F.
  17 WEBSTER PLACE, EAST ORANGE, N. J.




Wants a Round Table Reunion.


     Those of us who were in Boston during the week of the Templars'
     Conclave will never forget the parade. Twenty-five thousand men,
     with the motto, "Fraternity," "Fidelity," "Charity," marched from
     eleven o'clock in the morning to six in the evening. The flying
     banners, emblematic signs, playing bands, and general feeling of
     good-fellowship all combined to make one wish that the Round Table
     could have some similar convention. We have the same friendly
     feeling towards each other; we have emblems; we have Chapters; and
     we have a hundred thousand members.

     What could we not do in a three days' convention? We could hold
     our all-round athletic championship tournament for the gold medal;
     we could have an exhibition of the Table's handicraft work; we
     could organize and have a "Grand Master," as the Templars have;
     and think how it would "boom" the membership and promote
     good-fellowship. I, for one, am in favor of holding a convention
     this year in New York, and several of my correspondents hold the
     same ideas. If some one with a "planning head" will "take hold"
     and develop my ideas I will be glad to hear from them.

  M.D.O.
  19 ORANGE STREET, WORCESTER, MASS.

We print this morsel because it is full of praiseworthy enthusiasm. We
fear that our Order could not accomplish what an old fraternity is able
to. But what say all of you?




Answers to Kinks.


No. 102.

   1. O
   2. O N
   3. O W N
   4. O M E N
   5. O N I O N
   6. O B T A I N
   7. O P I N I O N
   8. O B T U S I O N
   9. O B J E C T I O N
  10. O C C U P A T I O N
  11. O S T E N T A T I O N
  12. O B L I T E R A T I O N

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 103.

Pulcheria--1. Peach. 2. Munch. 3. Calid. 4. Teach. 5. Porch. 6. Sleep.
7. Force. 8. Mitre. 9. Aster.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 104.

  B A L =A= N C E
    T I =M= I D
      S =E= T
        =R=
      T =I= N
    P A =C= E R
  C R E =A= T E D

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 105.--THE SUPPER TABLE.

1. Coffee. 2. Buckwheat cakes. 3. Molasses. 4. Oysters. 5. Tongue. 6.
Partridge. 7. Crackers. 8. Butter. 9. Terrapin. 10 Radish. 11. Port. 12.
Champagne, 13. Madeira. 14. Spirits. 15. Potato. 16. Turkey. 17. Ham.
18. Jam. 19. Toast. 20. Fowl. 21. Sole. 22. Herring. 23. Steak. 24.
Croquette. 25. Quail. 26. Fig.




Questions and Answers.


It is not known, dear Sir Knight Latham, who was the wearer of the Iron
Mask. There are many theories, but no positive knowledge. F.W.L.
Bunting, Abbott Street, Cairns, Queensland, Australia, is a Knight who
is fond of letter-writing, and a stamp collector in for trading. He
wants to hear from you. Charles E. Abbey, Chester, N. J., asks if James
Dixon, a former prize-winner in one or two of our contests, will write
him. He wants to trade minerals and stones with anybody.

Edith Cline, Lewisberry, Pa., waits to receive a ribbon with your name,
address and date. She will send hers. Edith F. Morris is now secretary
of the Durham Stamp Exchange. Her address is 213 Third Avenue, New York.
J. Crispia Bebb is informed that there has been no change in the Table's
colors. We regret you can find no other Knights in Seattle. Ask for some
blank Patents and give them to friends. Maybe when they read on the last
page of the Patent the advantages of the Table they will consent to let
you fill out a Patent for them.

Fred G. Patterson, Markleton, Pa., had a live rattlesnake which he was
willing to sell to the highest bidder, the proceeds to go to the School
Fund. His best bid at writing was $5. Wonder what he got, and how the
snake is doing in captivity by this time? Sir John H. Campbell sends us
the yells and colors of Vanderbilt University at Nashville, Tenn.:

"Vanderbilt! 'Rah, 'Rah, 'Rah! Whiz, Boom! Zip, Boom! 'Rah, 'Rah, 'Rah!"
The colors are old-gold and black.




The Helping Hand.


     I want to make a suggestion how the members in this city can raise
     some money for the Fund. It is to give a "trolley party." I
     suppose you know what a trolley party is. A party of young people
     charter a car for the evening, and ride all over the city and into
     the suburbs. The trolley party is a craze in this city at present.
     It is very common to see strings of illuminated cars coming down
     the streets in twos, generally accompanied by a band of music. It
     was not long ago I saw a large trolley party of sixty-five cars
     one after each other; This party was for the benefit of the German
     Hospital, and was a great success.

     Don't you think a trolley party could be gotten up in this city if
     all the members were in real sympathy with the Order's work? I
     think we could easily give a trolley party, say, some week in
     October. Mr. Patton has consented to help me, and we want at least
     three more members in this city aged about sixteen years. The cost
     of a party varies according to the distance and the electrical
     decorations.

     There are several fine routes. Germantown, Chestnut Hill, Angora,
     Darby, and Willow Grove. The two last ones are preferable on
     account of the length of the lines. The cost is about $16 per car,
     decorated. We need at least three things for a success
     financially--united action on the part of the members, publicity,
     and a good night.

  CHARLES C. CANFIELD.
  FAIRMOUNT STATION, PHILADELPHIA, PA.

This is an admirable suggestion. Let us hear from all Quaker City
members who will go.




Origin of Three Common Things.


Some of our most common symbols have interesting derivations. Take, for
instance, the dollar sign ($), which every one knows and loves--to a
more or less extent. Several explanations have been given of its origin.
The most probable is that it is a modification of the figure 8, denoting
the famous "piece of eight" of pirate lore, a Spanish silver piece of
the value of our dollar. Another theory is that it represents the scroll
and pillars depicted on certain Spanish coins. Still another makes us
question whether it is not a monogram of the letters "U.S." It has even
been stated that this mark at one time appeared on the flag of
Saragossa, a city famous for its two months' siege by the French in
1808.

The symbol Rx, standing for _recipe_--take--was originally the symbol
for Jupiter, a sign placed at the head of a medical formula to
propitiate Jove, that the compound might act favorably. The character &
is a corruption of the Latin word _et_, the letters being written as
one.




Hunting Deer in California.


     I wish you could see the picturesque spot where we are spending
     the summer. We are in a deep cañon, surrounded by the Santa Cruz
     Mountains, all of them over 2000 feet high. Llagas Creek, which
     abounds in cataracts, runs through the ravine. But the attractive
     feature of the place is that deer abounds on the hill-sides. The
     season opened on the 15th of July. At three o'clock on that
     morning thirteen hunters, dressed in leggings and corduroys,
     mounted their horses and started out, followed by a large pack of
     hounds, for the deer haunts.

     The leader of the party in an hour's time had reached a convenient
     spot and divided his men into sets of two or three, stationing
     them in certain spots where the deer, scented by the dogs, would
     be likely to pass. Within three hours' time we heard the crack of
     rifles, and then the blowing of the horns brought us the joyful
     news that the hunters had been successful. By eight o'clock the
     party returned to the house, one of them leading on the back of a
     horse a fine buck weighing 100 pounds, exclusive of head and
     antlers. To-day we have been feasting from some choice bits, and
     feel that though we did not do the shooting ourselves, we were
     decidedly "in it."

  GERALDINE SCUPHAM.
  LLAGAS, CAL.




[Illustration: Ivory Soap]

Have you noticed when discussing household affairs with other ladies
that each one has found some special use for Ivory Soap, usually the
cleansing of some article that it was supposed could not be safely
cleaned at home.

THE PROCTER & GAMBLE CO., CIN'TI.




[Illustration]

Oh, Boys and Girls,

AND ALL WHO ARE YOUNG AT HEART

IF NOT IN YEARS,

_HERE IS FUN FOR YOU!_

=WATERLOO= is novel and =exciting=! It costs $1.25 ($1.50, express
prepaid from publishers). It is one of the famous

Parker Games

Our Illustrated Catalogue, including "=Innocents Abroad=," "=Chivalry=,"
"=Authors=," "=Napoleon=," "=Yankee Doodle=," and 100 others, for
two-cent stamp. "=Brownies=" and "=Wonderland=," by mail, 35 cents each.
Look for the imprint.

PARKER BROTHERS, Salem, Mass., U.S.A.




OFFICIAL ANNOUNCEMENT of the award on

=GILLOTT'S PENS= at the CHICAGO EXPOSITION.

=AWARD:= "For excellence of steel used in their manufacture, it being
fine grained and elastic; superior workmanship, especially shown by the
careful grinding which leaves the pens free from defects. The tempering
is excellent and the action of the finished pens perfect."

(Signed) FRANZ VOGT, _Individual Judge_.

  Approved: { H. I. KIMBALL, _Pres't Departmental Committee_.
            { JOHN BOYD THACHER, _Chairman Exec. Com. on Awards_.




HARPER S PERIODICALS.

Per Year:

  HARPER'S MAGAZINE          _Postage Free_, $4.00
  HARPER'S WEEKLY                  "          4.00
  HARPER'S BAZAR                   "          4.00
  HARPER'S ROUND TABLE             "          2.00

       *       *       *       *       *

_Booksellers and Postmasters usually receive subscriptions.
Subscriptions sent direct to the publishers should be accompanied by
Post-office Money Order or Draft._

       *       *       *       *       *

HARPER & BROTHERS, New York, N.Y.




[Illustration]

WONDER CABINET =FREE=. Missing Link Puzzle, Devil's Bottle, Pocket
Camera, Latest Wire Puzzle, Spook Photos, Book of Sleight of Hand, Total
Value 60c. Sent free with immense catalogue of 1000 Bargains for 10c.
for postage.

INGERSOLL & BRO., 65 Cortlandt Street N. Y.




[Illustration: If afflicted with SORE EYES USE Dr. ISAAC THOMPSON'S EYE
WATER]




_PUBLISHED TO-DAY:_

Snow-shoes and Sledges

     A Sequel to "The Fur-Seal's Tooth." By KIRK MUNROE. Illustrated.
     Post 8vo, Cloth, Ornamental.

Mr. Munroe long ago established himself as one of our ablest juvenile
writers, and this latest work from his pen is perhaps the best that he
has published. The story continues the adventures of two boys--Phil
Ryder, a New-Englander, and Serge Belcofsky, an Alaskan--from St.
Michaels, in the northern part of Alaska, through a 2000-mile trip with
dog sleds and snow-shoes up the Yukon River and across the mountains to
Sitka.

_BY THE SAME AUTHOR:_

THE FUR-SEAL'S TOOTH.--RAFTMATES.--CANOEMATES.--CAMPMATES.--DORYMATES.
Each one volume. Illustrated. Post 8vo, Cloth, $1.25.

WAKULLA.--THE FLAMINGO FEATHER.--DERRICK STERLING.--CHRYSTAL, JACK &
CO., and DELTA BIXBY: Two Stories.--Each one volume. Illustrated. Square
16mo, Cloth, $1.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

HARPER & BROTHERS, Publishers, New York




GREEDY THOMAS.

BY KATHARINE PYLE.


[Illustration]

  "No, Thomas, no," his good nurse said.
    "Indeed, you should not take
  At tea-time such a very large
    And plummy piece of cake."

  In vain it was for nurse to speak,
    Young Thomas paid no heed;
  The slice of cake, both plum and crumb,
    He ate with eager greed.

[Illustration]

  But, ah! that night, when all the house
    Was wrapped in slumber deep,
  Then Thomas had a dreadful dream,
    For he was fast asleep.

  He dreamed he was a plummy cake
    Of most enormous size.
  The icing was his nose and mouth,
    And currants were his eyes.

[Illustration]

  He dreamed the door swung softly back,
    The dream-man entered in;
  And spectacles were on his nose,
    And bristles on his chin.

  He held a great knife in his hand,
    And tiptoed to the bed.
  "Oh, pray don't cut! I'm not a cake,
    I'm Tommy," Thomas said.

[Illustration]

  In vain to speak, for Thomas knew
    He looked too brown and nice;
  He saw the dream-man lift his knife
    As if to cut a slice,

  And then--young Thomas shrieked and woke,
    And sat up straight in bed.
  "Oh, dear! I'll never eat rich cake
    Again at night," he said.




STORIES BY GRANDMA.

SOME TERRIBLE ADVENTURES WITH WOLVES.


"Grandma," said Ralph, "what do you suppose Uncle Henry said?"

"Well," answered grandma, "it wouldn't surprise me if he said it was a
cold day, or--"

"No; I mean what do you suppose he told me; what kind of a story?"

"Oh, dear! your uncle Henry is _such_ a hand to tell stories that I
could hardly guess. About animals, I suppose, though, and nothing
smaller than elephants, I'll warrant."

"No; wolves. They chased him once. Got away by climbing a tree and
pulling the tree up after him."

"Dear me! what an extraordinary occurrence!" exclaimed grandma.

"But do you _believe_ it, grandma?" asked Ralph.

"Oh no; certainly not. I never believe any of your uncle Henry's animal
stories."

"Well," said Ralph, slowly. "I've been a little afraid of some of them
myself. He _couldn't_ pull up a tree he was in, _could_ he, grandma?"

"I don't believe he could, unless he pulled pretty hard. I remember _my_
uncle Henry used to tell a wolf story when I was a little girl. He said
that one day, when he lived in Vermont, two wolves came after him, and
he ran as fast as he could. By-and-by he began to get tired. Just then
he came to a big rock, half as big as a house, and leaped upon it. The
wolves were close behind, and so furious that they were almost or quite
blind. One rushed around the rock one way, and the other the other way.
They met on the farther side, and each thought he had caught Uncle
Henry, and they began to fight like cats and dogs. Pretty soon they
stopped to rest, and saw their mistake, and Uncle Henry said he never
saw two wolves look so disgusted."

"Do you believe _that_ story?" asked Ralph.

"Well," answered grandma, "it does seem to have its hard points. I think
he may have stretched it a little."

"Tell me a true wolf story, grandma," pleaded Ralph.

"I'm afraid I don't know any more wolf stories--except the one about
Little Red Riding-hood. Once on a time--"

"Oh, I've heard that, grandma. Tell me another about your uncle Henry."

"Well, another time, when Uncle Henry was living in Vermont a long time
ago, two wolves came and sat down on his door-step. His house was a
little log cabin with only one door. It was a very cold winter, with
deep snow, so there wasn't much for wolves to eat. These two wolves were
pretty hungry, and they thought that they would wait on the door-step
till Uncle Henry came out, and just eat him for dinner, and perhaps stir
around and get the stage-driver for supper, and depend on luck for
breakfast the next morning.

"Uncle Henry happened to look out of the window and saw the two wolves
sitting on the door-step; so he just staid in and said nothing. He staid
in and kept on saying nothing for two whole days, and still those wolves
sat there and waited for dinner to serve itself. They were friendly for
a long time, and sat facing each other, discussing the weather and other
things, I suppose; but after a while, when they began to get pretty
hungry, they had a little tiff, and turned their backs on each other.
Then Uncle Henry took a clothes-pin, reached through the crack under the
door, and slipped it on their tails where they crossed just as cool as
if he had been pinning a wet stocking on a clothes-line. It held their
tails together like a vise. 'Stop pinching my tail,' said one wolf.
'You--'"

"Now, grandma!" broke in Ralph, reprovingly.

"I'm telling this story just as Uncle Henry told it to me when I was a
little girl. I don't suppose he meant that the wolf really _said_ that
out loud, but _thought_ it, and _looked_ it. 'Let go my tail,' said one
wolf; and he scowled over his shoulder at the other. 'Quit pinching _my_
tail,' said the other; and _he_ looked over _his_ shoulder and scowled.
Then they sprang at each other, and began to fight as hard as they knew
how. Uncle Henry said he never heard such a noise in his life. But after
a while it became all still, and he went out; but he couldn't find
anything except a little wolf fur floating about in the air, and the
clothes-pin; so he concluded that they had either fought each other
completely out of existence, or got tired out and gone off."

  H. C.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARPER'S ROUND TABLE, SEPTEMBER 24, 1895 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

