the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
https://www.pgdp.net





THE PLANTS OF MICHIGAN


SIMPLE KEYS FOR THE
IDENTIFICATION OF THE NATIVE SEED PLANTS
OF THE STATE


By HENRY ALLAN GLEASON, Ph. D.
Associate Professor of Botany and Director of the Botanical Gardens
and Arboretum in the University of Michigan


1918




COPYRIGHT, 1918
GEORGE WAHR




PUBLISHED BY
GEORGE WAHR
ANN ARBOR


PRINTED BY
THE ANN ARBOR PRESS




PREFACE


This book is not intended for the expert botanist. He should consult one
of the regular Manuals which give full descriptions of each species of
plant.

Neither is it intended for the merely curious. Only those who have
sufficient interest in a plant to observe it can find its name by this
book.

Furthermore, it is not a textbook. It does not attempt to convey
botanical information, but offers merely an opportunity to learn the
names of plants.

Its mission is fully accomplished if, through its use, students,
vacationists, and plant-lovers in general are able to recognize by name
the plants about them.




HOW TO USE THE BOOK


One recognizes a plant by the presence of structural features peculiar
to itself, and not found on any other kind of plant. In such a book as
this, these characters are given one or a few at a time, and contrasted
with the characters which other sorts of plants possess. Such a
presentation is called a Key, and by its proper use the name may be
learned of any plant considered in it. This process is called
Identification.

Keys are constructed in several different ways, although the principle
of all is the same. In this book, the user will begin with lines 1a and
1b on the page headed Key to the Groups. Each of these lines includes
some descriptive matter, but only one of them can apply to the plant
being identified. For example, if the plant to be identified is an Oak,
line 1a will apply perfectly, and the same line will also apply to any
other kind of tree or to any shrub. But if the plant is a Violet, a
Buttercup, or any other herb, line 1b agrees and line 1a will not apply.
At the end of each line is a reference to be consulted next. If the
plant is a tree or shrub, one turns accordingly to Group 1, on page ix,
and begins again at the first number given. If the plant is an herb, he
follows the reference to line 2, just below, and again compares the
plants with lines 2a and 2b.

Under every number at least two lines of description are given,
designated a and b, and under a few numbers additional lines appear,
designated c, d, etc. In every case, the user of the key will select
from the different lines under the same number that particular line
which agrees with the structure of the plant, and follow up the
reference given at the end of that line. Eventually one finds at the end
of a line, instead of a number, the name of a family of plants, to which
this particular plant belongs, and then turns over to the page where
this family is treated. Under each family is a similar key, to be
followed in exactly the same way, until finally one finds instead of a
number the common name and the scientific name of the plant in hand. The
process of identification is now completed, and the student has found
the name of the plant.

In some cases, a reference is made in the key to a particular portion of
the family key. One then turns directly to this particular number in the
family key, and continues his identification in the usual way.

As a definite example of the use of the key, suppose that one has in
hand a branch of the White Oak, and that he does not know its name. To
determine its name, he will trace it through the following steps in the
key. Under the Key to the Groups, it agrees with line 1a, which refers
to Group 1, Woody Plants. Under this group it agrees in structure with
line 1a, which refers to 2; with line 2b, referring to 21; with line
21b, referring to 22; with 22b, referring to 29; with 29b, referring to
32; with 32c, referring to 47; with 47b, referring to 48; with 48b,
referring to 51; with 51b, referring to number 1b in the Beech Family.
Turning to the proper number in this family, the plant is referred to
line 3; it agrees with line 3c, referring to 10; with 10a, referring to
11; and with 11b, which gives the name of the plant. White Oak, _Quercus
alba_.

As a second example, suppose one has a common yellow-flowered plant
blooming on lawns and roadsides in spring. Under the Key to the Groups,
it agrees with 1b, referring to 2; with 2b, referring to 3; and its
net-veined leaves place it in 3b, referring to Group 4, Dicotyledones.
Under this group, its basal leaves place it in 1b, referring to 2; its
simple leaves in 2b, referring to 18; the absence of stem-leaves places
it in 18b, referring to 23; its solitary flowers on each flower-stalk
place it in 23b, referring to 24; its yellow flowers agree with 24a,
referring to 25; and its milky juice refers the plant to number 16, in
the Composite Family. In the key to this family, its lobed leaves agree
with 16b, referring on to 17; its large flowers with 17b, giving one the
common name Dandelion, and referring on to 18 to determine which kind of
Dandelion the plant may be.

At some point in the key there will be found for each plant a statement
in parentheses. This is general information concerning the height of the
plant, the color of the flowers, or the season of bloom. It must be
remembered that the height of plants is subject to great variation; that
most plants have white-flowered varieties; and that the month of bloom
depends largely on the latitude and the climate. Therefore this general
information should not be used as means of distinguishing species.

=The names of plants.= Each plant bears a scientific name. This is
composed of two parts and is usually of Latin or Greek derivation. In
some cases these names are taken directly from the Latin language, as
_Quercus_, the Oak, or _Acer_, the Maple. In other cases the name may
indicate some characteristic feature of the plant, as _Polygonum_, many
joints, for the Knotweed, or _Ammophila_, sand-loving, for the Beach
Grass.

An English name is also given for almost every kind of plant. In a few
cases there is no accepted English name, and none has been given. In
many cases the same English name applies to several kinds of plants and
has been repeated for each. When this is so, the common name is given in
the key in parentheses before the scientific name is reached. Thus, if
one is satisfied to know merely that his plant is a dandelion, he learns
it in line 17b of the key to the Composite Family, but to discover which
kind of a dandelion he has, he must follow through the key and use the
scientific name.

There is in this book, therefore, no necessity of learning or using
scientific names. The less critical may be satisfied with an English
name, and others may use the scientific names as they see fit.

=Possible Errors.= In using this book, care must be taken to compare all
the lines under each number with the plant, and to use judgment in
selecting the right one. While faulty observation or poor judgment may
lead to error, a mistake is usually due to carelessness in not following
correctly the reference at the end of the line chosen. If one reaches a
number in which none of the lines of description agrees with the plant,
it is very probable that he has made a mistake at an earlier stage of
the identification, and he should then begin anew.

It has been the intention of the author to make the key as nearly as
possible proof against errors of judgment. For example, the Indian
Turnip may be sought under either Group 3 or Group 4; the Matrimony Vine
may be identified either as a shrub or as an herb, and numerous other
similar examples may be discovered.

=Botanical Information Needed.= It is presumed that those using the book
will be familiar with the parts of the flower and with the commoner
descriptive terms applied to leaves. Unusual terms have been avoided as
far as possible, but those which do occur, as well as the simpler ones,
are explained in the glossary.

In general, only those characters have been used in the keys which can
be observed without a magnifying glass and without dissection of the
flower.

In several groups of plants, reference is made to the fuller
descriptions to be found in the Manuals. The standard manuals for
Michigan are Gray's New Manual of Botany, 7th edition (American Book
Company, $2.50), and Britton and Brown, Illustrated Flora of the
Northern States and Canada (Chas. Scribner's Sons, $13.50). These books
may be consulted in most school or public libraries.

All dimensions are expressed in the metric system. For convenience, it
may be stated that 25 millimeters (mm.) are about equal to one inch; 1
centimeter (cm.) to two-fifths of an inch; 1 decimeter (dm.) to 4
inches; and 1 meter (m.) is a little more than 3 feet.




KEY TO GROUPS


1a. Trees, shrubs, or woody climbers, with stems which last from year to
    year                                 Group 1, =WOODY PLANTS=, p. ix.

1b. Herbaceous plants, with stems which live above ground only a single
    season --2.

     2a. Plants with unusual habits or structures, including leafless,
         colorless, submerged, floating, parasitic, or hollow-leaved
         plants                     Group 2, =UNUSUAL PLANTS=, p. xxiii.

     2b. Ordinary terrestrial or swamp plants, without unusual
         structural peculiarities --3.

3a. Leaves parallel-veined (or net-veined in a few species); parts of
    the flower usually in threes or sixes, never in fives; wood-fibers
    scattered through the stem; seed with one cotyledon. All plants with
    definitely parallel-veined leaves may be identified through this
    division, unless the parts of the flower are distinctly in fives.
                                   Group 3, =MONOCOTYLEDONES=, p. xxvii.

3b. Leaves net-veined (or parallel-veined in a few species); parts of
    the flower usually in fours or fives; wood-fibers arranged in a
    circle in the stem; seeds with two cotyledons. All plants with
    definitely net-veined leaves may be identified through this
    division.                          Group 4, =DICOTYLEDONES=, p. xxx.


Note:--In order to avoid possible chances of error, many plants have
been treated under both of the above groups. The following hints may
also be useful in distinguishing Groups 3 and 4:

All herbaceous plants with deeply lobed, dissected or compound leaves
may be sought under the Dicotyledones.

All herbaceous plants with five stamens in each flower, or with seven or
more stamens and one ovary in each flower, may be sought under
Dicotyledones.




GROUP 1, WOODY PLANTS


1a. Trees, with erect stem and central trunk, attaining a height of 6 m.
    (20 ft.) or more --2.

1b. Shrubs or woody vines, without true tree habit, or attaining heights
    of less than 6 m. (20 ft.) --52.

     2a. Key for use in earliest spring, for trees which have flowers
         but no leaves --3.

     2b. Key for use with trees bearing leaves --21.

3a. Flowers in catkins, without brightly colored or petal-like parts
    --4.

3b. Flowers not in catkins, either with or without petals --14.

     4a. Leaf-scars and lateral buds 2-ranked, i. e., in two
         longitudinal rows with the third leaf above the first --5.

     4b. Leaf-scars and buds in three or more longitudinal rows --9.

5a. From 1 to 3 bud-scales visible on each leaf-bud
                                               2b, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 22.

5b. From 4 to 7 bud-scales visible on each leaf-bud --6.

5c. From 8 to 20 bud-scales visible on each leaf-bud; buds long and
    slender; bark of the trunk smooth --8.

     6a. Bundle-scars 5 or more              2b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

     6b. Bundle-scars 3 --7.

7a. Twigs bearing numerous dwarf branches thickly covered with crowded
leaf-scars (Birch)                                  =BETULACEAE=, p. 21.

7b. Twigs without dwarf branches (Ironwood)  9a, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

     8a. Trunk cylindrical or nearly so        2a, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 22.

     8b. Trunk prominently fluted with longitudinal ridges
                                             1b, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 21.

9a. Bundle-scars 3 in each leaf-scar --10.

9b. Bundle scars more than 3 in each leaf-scar --12.

     10a. Pith divided into separate cavities by transverse partitions
                                           1a, in =JUGLANDACEAE=, p. 21.

     10b. Pith not partitioned --11.

11a. Buds small, with only one external bud-scale
                                             1b, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 19.

11b. Buds with more than one outer bud-scale
                                             1a, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 19.

     12a. Buds clustered near the tips of the twigs
                                               1b, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 22.

     12b. Buds not clustered at the tips of the twigs --13.

13a. Buds with about 3 visible bud-scales      2b, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 22.

13b. Terminal bud large, with 4 or more visible bud-scales
                                           1b, in =JUGLANDACEAE=, p. 21.

     14a. Flowers conspicuous, brightly colored, at least 8 mm. wide.
          with both calyx and corolla --15.

     14b. Flowers inconspicuous, seldom brightly colored, and then less
          than 8 mm. wide --17.

15a. Flowers irregular, pink or red         3a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

15b. Flowers regular, white --16.

     16a. Ovary one, superior, in the center of the flower
                                              32b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

     16b. Ovary inferior, appearing as a swelling below the calyx at the
          summit of the pedicel               42b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

17a. Leaf-scars and buds opposite --18.

17b. Leaf-scars and buds alternate --19.

     18a. Bundle-scar one in each leaf-scar     1b, in =OLEACAE=, p. 88.

     18b. Bundle-scars 3 or more in each leaf-scar   =ACERACEAE=, p. 70.

19a. Bundle-scar 1 in each leaf-scar          1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

19b. Bundle-scars 3 in each leaf-scar --20.

19c. Bundle-scars 5 in each leaf-scar       7a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     20a. Branches thorny                   5a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     20b. Branches not thorny                3a, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 24.

                                 --21--

21a. Leaves narrow, needle-like or scale-like; trees mostly evergreen
                                                       =PINACEAE=, p. 1.

21b. Leaves broader, flat, never needle-like or scale-like, falling in
     winter --22.

     22a. Leaves compound --23.

     22b. Leaves simple --29.

23a. Leaves opposite --24.

23b. Leaves alternate --26.

     24a. Leaves palmately compound with 5-7 leaflets
                                                   =SAPINDACEAE=, p. 70.

     24b. Leaves pinnately compound --25.

25a. Leaflets 3-5                             1a, in =ACERACEAE=, p. 70.

25b. Leaflets 7-11                             1b, in =OLEACEAE=, p. 88.

     26a. Stem or branches thorny           4a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     26b. Stem or branches not thorny --27.

27a. Leaflets entire                        7a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

27b. Leaflets entire except for a few large glandular teeth near their
     base                                         =SIMARUBACEAE=, p. 65.

27c. Leaflets serrate their entire length --28.

     28a. Upper leaflets less than 25 mm. wide
                                               4b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 51.

     28b. Upper leaflets more than 25 mm. wide
                                                  =JUGLANDACEAE=, p. 21.

29a. Leaves opposite --30.

29b. Leaves alternate --32.

     30a. Leaves entire                              =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

     30b. Leaves toothed or lobed, not entire --31.

31a. Leaves lobed                             1b, in =ACERACEAE=, p. 70.

31b. Leaves merely toothed             27b, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 111.

     32a. Leaves entire --33.

     32b. Leaves toothed --36.

     32c. Leaves lobed --47.

33a. Leaves heart-shape                     3a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

33b. Leaves not heart-shape --34.

     34a. Twigs and foliage spicy-aromatic    1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

     34b. Twigs and foliage not aromatic --35.

35a. Pith 5-angled; fruit an acorn             3a, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 22.

35b. Pith not 5-angled; fruit a berry         1a, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

     36a. Leaves oblique at base, i. e., one side of the leaf larger
          than the other --37.

     36b. Leaves symmetrical, not oblique at base --38.

37a. Leaves heart-shape, about as broad as long      =TILIACEAE=, p. 72.

37b. Leaves oval or ovate, much longer than wide
                                             1a, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

     38a. Stems thorny                        41b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

     38b. Stems not thorny --39.

39a. Leaves finely toothed, with 3-many teeth per centimeter of margin
     --40.

39b. Leaves coarsely toothed, with 1-2 teeth per centimeter of margin
     --46.

     40a. Petioles laterally compressed      2a, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 19.

     40b. Petioles not compressed --41.

41a. Leaves, or many of them, crowded on short spur-like branches --42.

41b. Leaves scattered, not on short spur-like branches --43.

     42a. Bark of the trunks separating in thin papery or leathery
          sheets                                    =BETULACEAE=, p. 21.

     42b. Bark of the trunk not papery or leathery
                                              24b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 53.

43a. Lateral leaf-veins straight and parallel, and terminating in the
     teeth                                          =BETULACEAE=, p. 21.

43b. Lateral veins more or less curved, and not ending in the teeth
     --44.

     44a. Leaves palmately veined, about as broad as long; juice
          somewhat milky                     2b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

     44b. Leaves pinnately veined; juice not milky --45.

45a. Willows, with slender leaves and brittle twigs
                                             8a, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 19.

45b. Trees with lanceolate, ovate, or oblong leaves and tough twigs
                                               30, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

45c. Cottonwoods, with broad, heart-shape or rounded leaves
                                             1a, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 19.

     46a. Petioles laterally compressed      2a, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 19.

     46b. Petioles not compressed; lateral veins straight and parallel,
          running directly to the teeth               =FAGACEAE=, p. 22.

47a. Stem thorny                              41b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

47b. Stem not thorny --48.

     48a. Leaves palmately veined --49.

     48b. Leaves pinnately veined --51.

49a. Lobes of the leaf entire                 1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

49b. Lobes of the leaf serrate --50.

     50a. Juice somewhat milky; lateral buds visible
                                             2b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

     50b. Juice not milky; lateral buds covered by the base of the
          petiole                                  =PLATANACEAE=, p. 51.

51a. Leaves with 4 large entire lobes; stem marked with a ring at each
     node                                         =MAGNOLIACEAE=, p. 40.

51b. Leaves with many lobes; stem not ringed   1b, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 22.

                                 --52--

     52a. For specimens bearing leaves only --53.

     52b. For specimens bearing flowers only --140.

     52c. For specimens with both leaves and flowers --155.

53a. Leaves narrow, needle-like or scale-like, mostly evergreen --54.

53b. Leaves broader, flat or rolled, but not needle-like or scale-like
     --56.

     54a. Foliage densely gray-pubescent; low bushy shrubs with yellow
          flowers                             2a, in =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

     54b. Foliage green --55.

55a. Leaves opposite or whorled                        =PINACEAE=, p. 1.

55b. Leaves scattered on the stem                      =TAXACEAE=, p. 2.

     56a. Twining or climbing vines --57.

     56b. Not climbing or twining --66.

57a. Thorny vines --58.

57b. Not thorny --60.

     58a. Climbing by tendrils at the base of the leaves
                                              4b, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 11.

     58b. Tendrils none --59.

59a. Leaves simple                          5a, in =SOLANACEAE=, p. 100.

59b. Leaves compound                           8a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 52.

     60a. Leaves compound --61.

     60b. Leaves simple --63.

61a. Leaves with 5 leaflets                    1a, in =VITACEAE=, p. 71.

61b. Leaves with 3 leaflets --62.

     62a. Plant climbing by tendril-like leaf-stalks
                                          1a, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

     62b. Plant climbing by hold-fast roots
                                          5b, in =ANACARDIACEAE=, p. 69.

63a. Leaves opposite                    5a, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 110.

63b. Leaves alternate --64.

     64a. Plants climbing by tendrils          1b, in =VITACEAE=, p. 71.

     64b. Twining plants --65.

65a. Leaves ovate-oblong, attached by the base
                                           1a, in =CELASTRACEAE=, p. 69.

65b. Leaves almost round, peltate near the edge  =MENISPERMACEAE= p. 40.

     66a. Leaves opposite --67.

     66b. Leaves alternate --84.

67a. Leaves compound --68.

67b. Leaves simple --69.

     68a. Leaflets 3                             =STAPHYLEACEAE=, p. 69.

     68b. Leaflets 7 or more            1a, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 109.

69a. Leaves palmately veined, or at least with a pair of prominent
     lateral veins from the base --70.

69b. Leaves pinnately veined --72.

     70a. Leaves not lobed                   1b, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

     70b. Leaves more or less lobed --71.

71a. Leaves with stipules              22a, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 111.

71b. Leaves without stipules                  2a, in =ACERACEAE=, p. 70.

     72a. Leaves serrate --73.

     72b. Leaves entire --77.

73a. Stem thorny                             1b, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

73b. Stem not thorny --74.

     74a. Bark of the ripe twigs green     1b, in =CELASTRACEAE=, p. 69.

     74b. Bark of the ripe twigs brown, reddish, or gray --75.

75a. Twigs with a prominent hairy ridge extending downward from the
     middle of the line connecting the petiole bases
                                       13a, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 110.

75b. Twigs without any pubescent ridge --76.

     76a. Erect shrubs; leaves obviously toothed
                                       11b, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 110.

     76b. Spreading shrubs; most of the leaves entire, and only here and
          there some with serrate margins
                                       18b, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 110.

77a. Leaves silvery beneath with a dense coating of scales
                                                  =ELAEAGNACEAE=, p. 77.

77b. Leaves green beneath, or somewhat hairy and light-colored --78.

     78a. Aquatic plant with lanceolate leaves, and stems bending over
          and into the water                 1a, in =LYTHRACEAE=, p. 77.

     78b. Not truly aquatic, although frequently in wet places --79.

79a. Leaves evergreen, as shown by their presence on the older stems
                                             18a, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 85.

79b. Leaves deciduous each year --80.

     80a. Leaves dotted with translucent dots, easily seen when the leaf
          is held to the light             1a, in =HYPERICACEAE=, p. 73.

     80b. Leaves not dotted with translucent dots --81.

81a. Lateral veins curved forward and running almost parallel to the
     leaf-margin                                     =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

81b. Lateral veins spreading, and not paralleling the leaf-margin --82.

     82a. Leaves with stipules 1a,           1a, in =RUBIACEAE=, p. 108.

     82b. Leaves with a prominent ridge connecting them at the base
         --83.

     82c. Leaves with neither stipules nor connecting ridges
                                               1a, in =OLEACEAE=, p. 88.

83a. Bundle-scar one in each leaf-scar 18b, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 110.

83b. Bundle-scars three in each leaf-scar (Honeysuckle)
                                        12, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 110.

     84a. Leaves compound --85.

     84b. Leaves simple --95.

85a. Stems prickly or thorny --86.

85b. Stems without prickles or thorns --88.

     86a. Leaves twice-pinnate 4a,           1a, in =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     86b. Leaves evenly pinnate             5b, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     86c. Leaves odd-pinnate or trifoliate --87.

87a. Leaflets entire 1a,                       1a, in =RUTACEAE=, p. 65.

87b. Leaflets serrate 3b,                      3b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 51.

     88a. Leaflets 3 --89.

     88b. Leaflets 5 to many --91.

89a. Tall shrubs; leaflets entire or minutely toothed
                                               1b, in =RUTACEAE=, p. 65.

89b. Shrubs 2 m. high or less; leaves conspicuously toothed --90.

     90a. Stipules present                    17b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 53.

     90b. Stipules none                   1b, in =ANACARDIACEAE=, p. 68.

91a. Leaflets 6-25 mm. long --92.

91b. Leaflets 30 mm. long, or more --93.

     92a. Leaflets mostly 5, rarely 3 or 7     7a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 52.

     92b. Leaflets mostly 9-19, 15 mm. long or more
                                           26a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 60.

     92c. Leaflets mostly 25-45, less than 15 mm. long
                                            8a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

93a. Leaflets entire 3a, in =ANACARDIACEAE=, p. 68.

93b. Leaflets entire, except for 1-4 large glandular teeth near their
     base                                         =SIMARUBACEAE=, p. 65.

93c. Leaflets toothed throughout --94.

     94a. Juice milky                     1a, in =ANACARDIACEAE=, p. 68.

     94b. Juice not milky                      3a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 51.

95a. Leaves minute, scale-like, appressed     2a, in =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

95b. Leaves 3-10 mm. long, spreading, completely rolled into a tube
                                                   =EMPETRACEAE=, p. 68.

95c. Leaves normal in shape, green in color --96.

     96a. Leaves evergreen, as shown by their presence on the older
          parts of the stem                   4b, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 84.

     96b. Leaves deciduous --97.

97a. Stems or branches thorny --98.

97b. Stems or branches without thorns or thorny leaves --103.

     98a. Leaves conspicuously palmately veined --99.

     98b. Leaves pinnately veined, or sometimes with smaller lateral
          veins arising from the end of the petiole --100.

99a. Leaves 5 cm. wide or less            1a, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

99b. Leaves 15 cm. wide or more              1a, in =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     100a. Leaves entire 5a, in =SOLANACEAE=, p. 100.

     100b. Leaves toothed or somewhat lobed --101.

101a. Leaves with bristly margins; some of the thorns three-pointed
                                          2a, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.

101b. Leaves not bristly on the margin; thorns not branched --102.

     102a. Only lateral thorns present        41b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

     102b. Only terminal thorns present      2a, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

103a. Leaves palmately veined, or with one or more pairs of lateral
      veins from the base of the leaf --104.

103b. Leaves pinnately veined --111.

     104a. Leaves entire --105.

     104b. Leaves toothed --106.

     104c. Leaves palmately lobed --108.

105a. Foliage fragrant when crushed; leaves ovate
                                              1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

105b. Foliage not aromatic; leaves heart-shape
                                            3b, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     106a. Lateral veins straight and parallel, running to the teeth of
           the leaf                          3a, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

     106b. Lateral veins curved or branched, and not running straight to
           the teeth --107.

107a. Tall shrubs with somewhat milky juice and broadly ovate leaves
                                             2b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

107b. Low shrubs less than 1 m. high with watery juice
                                             1b, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

     108a. Leaves with 2 or 3 entire lobes, spicy-fragrant when crushed
                                              1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

     108b. Leaves with milky juice           2b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

     108c. Leaves neither spicy-fragrant nor with milky juice --109.

109a. Stem covered with brown bristles         29, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

109b. Stem not bristly --110.

     110a. Sides of the petiole strongly decurrent on the stem;
           bundle-scars crowded or nearly in contact in the leaf-scars
                                              28b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 53.

     110b. Sides of petiole little decurrent or not at all; bundle-scars
           distinctly separate            2b, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

111a. Leaves aromatically fragrant when crushed --112.

111b. Leaves not aromatically fragrant when crushed --113.

     112a. Leaves broadly obovate, entire; a common woodland shrub
                                              1a, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

     112b. Leaves linear-lanceolate or oblanceolate, conspicuously
           toothed or entire                        =MYRICACEAE=, p. 20.

113a. Leaves entire --114.

113b. Leaves toothed or lobed --121.

     114a. Base of the petiole covering the axillary buds; twigs marked
           with rings                            =THYMELAEACEAE=, p. 77.

     114b. Base of petiole not covering the bud, and twigs not marked
           with rings --115.

115a. Pith with prominent partitions; tall shrubs with fetid bark;
      leaves obovate, 10 cm. long or larger          =ANONACEAE=, p. 40.

115b. Pith not partitioned; leaves smaller --116.

     116a. Leaves waxy or resinous underneath
                                             24b, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 86.

     116b. Leaves not waxy or resinous --117.

117a. Lateral veins curved forward and almost parallel to the margin of
      the leaf                                2a, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

117b. Lateral veins spreading --118.

     118a. Leaves lanceolate or linear, much longer than wide --119.

     118b. Leaves ovate or elliptical --120.

119a. Stem weak, spreading or trailing      5a, in =SOLANACEAE=, p. 100.

119b. Stems, or some of them, erect         3b, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     120a. Leaves with purple petioles, which are at least one-fourth as
           long as the leaf-blade         1a, in =AQUIFOLIACEAE=, p. 69.

     120b. Leaves with short petioles or sessile
                                             24c, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 86.

121a. Lateral veins straight and parallel, mostly ending in the teeth of
      the leaf --122.

121b. Lateral veins not straight and parallel --129.

     122a. Leaves 2-ranked, i. e., in two longitudinal rows, with the
           third leaf directly above the first --123.

     122b. Leaves not 2-ranked --127.

123a. Leaves unsymmetrical, oblique at the base, i. e., with one side of
      the leaf larger than the other            =HAMAMELIDACEAE=, p. 51.

123b. Leaves symmetrical or nearly so at the base --124.

     124a. Lateral leaf-veins ending in the leaf-teeth --125.

     124b. Lateral veins not ending in the teeth
                                              42b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

125a. Bark smooth and fluted on the large stems
                                             1b, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 21.

125b. Bark rough or warty or glandular --126.

     126a. Leaves 4 cm. long or less         3a, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

     126b. Leaves 5 cm. long or more         9b, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

127a. Pith 3-angled                          6a, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

127b. Pith 5-angled                           13b, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 23.

127c. Pith cylindrical --128.

     128a. Leaves finely serrate              42b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

     128b. Leaves coarsely or doubly serrate  41a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

129a. Leaves coarsely or doubly serrate --130.

129b. Leaves simply serrate --131.

     130a. Leaves 2-ranked, i. e., in two longitudinal rows, with the
           third leaf directly over the first
                                             9b, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

     130b. Leaves not 2-ranked                41a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

131a. Leaves with glands on the petiole or at the base of the leaf-blade
      --132.

131b. Leaves with small dark glands on the upper side of the mid-vein
                                              42a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

131c. Leaves without glands --133.

     132a. Willows; with usually slender leaves, frequently conspicuous
           broad stipules, and lateral buds protected by a single
           external bud-scale                13, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 20.

     132b. Plums and cherries; with leaves lanceolate or broader, and
           stipules minute and falling early in the season; lateral buds
           with more than one bud-scale        30, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

133a. With stipules or with stipular scars indicating where stipules
      have been detached --134.

133b. Without stipules or stipular scars --138.

     134a. With three bundle-scars in each leaf-scar --135.

     134b. With one bundle-scar in each leaf-scar --136.

135a. Willows; usually with slender leaves and twigs and frequently with
      large conspicuous stipules; lateral buds covered by a single
      external bud-scale                     13, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 20.

135b. Juneberries; with oblong or ovate leaves and small stipules which
      fall early; lateral buds with more than one external scale
                                              42b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

     136a. Leaves mostly entire, only a few here and there with low
           teeth                          1a, in =AQUIFOLIACEAE=, p. 69.

     136b. Leaves sharply toothed --137.

137a. Axillary buds superposed, i. e., with a second one just above the
      first                               1b, in =AQUIFOLIACEAE=, p. 69.

137b. Axillary buds not superposed           2b, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

     138a. Leaves with purple petioles, which are at least one-fourth as
           long as the blade              1a, in =AQUIFOLIACEAE=, p. 69.

     138b. Leaves short-petioled or sessile --139.

139a. Stems erect and straight, unbranched or with very few branches
                                               27, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 53.

139b. Stems more or less crooked and freely branched, making a spreading
      shrub                                   25, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 86.

                                 --140--

     140a. Flowers appearing in autumn, after the leaves have fallen
                                                =HAMAMELIDACEAE=, p. 51.

     140b. Flowers appearing in spring, before the leaves have opened
           --141.

141a. Flowers in catkins, without brightly colored or petal-like parts
      --142.

141b. Flowers not in catkins, either with or without brightly colored or
      petal-like parts --149.

     142a. Leaves 2-ranked, as shown by the arrangement of buds and
           leaf-scars in two longitudinal rows, so that the third bud is
           directly over the first --143.

     142b. Leaves and leaf-scars not 2-ranked --146.

143a. Bundle-scars three in each leaf-scar --144.

143b. Bundle-scars several in each leaf-scar 2b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

     144a. Leaf-buds with only 1-3 visible bud-scales
                                             10, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

     144b. Leaf-buds with more than 3 visible scales --145.

145a. Bark of the branches smooth and dark gray, the larger stems fluted
      with projecting longitudinal ridges    1b, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 21.

145b. Branches without projecting ridges      4, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

     146a. Pith 3-angled                      8, in =BETULACEAE=, p. 22.

     146b. Pith 5-angled                      13b, in =FAGACEAE=, p. 23.

     146c. Pith cylindrical --147.

147a. Visible outer bud-scales 2 or more --148.

147b. Buds with a single visible outer scale
                                             13, in =SALICACEAE=, p. 20.

     148a. Bundle-scars 3 in each leaf-scar =MYRICACEAE=, p. 20.

     148b. Bundle-scars more than 3 in each leaf-scar
                                             2b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

149a. Flowers dark red-purple, about 3 cm. wide      =ANONACEAE=, p. 40.

149b. Flowers bright pink, irregular, about 1 cm. wide
                                            3a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

149c. Flowers white, with 5 conspicuous petals --150.

149d. Flowers greenish or yellowish, small, inconspicuous --152.

     150a. Ovary 1, superior, i. e., in the center of the flower and not
           attached to surrounding parts       36, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 54.

     150b. Ovary inferior, appearing as a swelling below the calyx at
           the apex of the pedicel --151.

151a. Flowers in racemes or solitary          42b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

151b. Flowers in flattened or rounded branching clusters
                                              42a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

     152a. Stems thorny                        1a, in =RUTACEAE=, p. 65.

     152b. Stems not thorny --153.

153a. Bark pleasantly aromatic when crushed; perianth with 6 parts
      --154.

153b. Bark not pleasantly aromatic; perianth with 4 short lobes
                                                 =THYMELAEACEAE=, p. 77.

     154a. Flowers in sessile lateral clusters
                                              1a, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

     154b. Flowers in peduncled terminal clusters
                                              1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

                                 --155--

155a. Leaves narrow, needle-like or scale-like, mostly evergreen --54.

155b. Leaves broader, flat or rolled, but not needle-like or scale-like
      --156.

     156a. Twining or climbing vines --56.

     156b. Not twining or climbing --157.

157a. Leaves opposite --158.

157b. Leaves alternate --165.

     158a. Leaves compound --68.

     158b. Leaves simple --159.

159a. Leaves broad, palmately lobed --160.

159b. Leaves not palmately lobed --161.

     160a. Flowers greenish-yellow, in racemes or panicles
                                              2a, in =ACERACEAE=, p. 70.

     160b. Flowers white, in rounded or flattened clusters
                                       22a, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 111.

161a. Flowers in close clusters, subtended by four large white
      petal-like bracts                       4b, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

161b. Flowers small, white, in dense spherical heads
                                             1a, in =RUBIACEAE=, p. 108.

161c. Flowers not in dense heads, and not subtended by petal-like bracts
      --162.

     162a. Petals separate from each other --163.

     162b. Petals united with each other --164.

163a. Flowers dark purple-red              1b, in =CELASTRACEAE=. p. 69.

163b. Flowers bright yellow                1a, in =HYPERICACEAE=, p. 73.

163c. Flowers pink-purple; aquatic shrubs    1a, in =LYTHRACEAE=, p. 77.

163d. Flowers white                            5, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

163e. Flowers minute, greenish; twigs usually thorny
                                             1b, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

163f. Flowers small, yellowish; leaves silvery beneath
                                                  =ELAEAGNACEAE=, p. 77.

     164a. Stamens 2                           1a, in =OLEACEAE=, p. 88.

     164b. Stamens 4 or 5               11, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 110.

     164c. Stamens 10                        18a, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 85.

165a. Leaves once-compound --166.

165b. Leaves simple --172.

165c. Leaves twice- or thrice-compound       4a, in =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     166a. Flowers small, greenish or greenish-yellow --167.

     166b. Flowers conspicuous, white, or brightly colored --170.

167a. Stems thorny                             1a, in =RUTACEAE=, p. 65.

167b. Stems not thorny --168.

     168a. Leaflets 3, entire or minutely toothed
                                               1b, in =RUTACEAE=, p. 65.

     168b. Leaflets 3, conspicuously toothed
                                          1b, in =ANACARDIACEAE=, p. 68.

     168c. Leaflets more than 3 --169.

169a. Leaflets entire except for 1-4 large glandular teeth near their
      base                                        =SIMARUBACEAE=, p. 65.

169b. Leaflets entire, or toothed for their entire length
                                                 =ANACARDIACEAE=, p. 68.

     170a. Flowers with a single bright-blue petal
                                            8a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     170b. Flowers with several petals --171.

171a. Flowers regular                           3, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 51.

171b. Flowers irregular, the upper petal the largest
                                             4, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     172a. Leaves minute, scale-like, appressed
                                              2a, in =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

     172b. Leaves 3-10 mm. long, spreading, completely rolled into a
           tube                                    =EMPETRACEAE=, p. 68.

     172c. Leaves normal in shape, green in color --173.

173a. Leaves evergreen, as shown by their presence on the older parts of
      the stem                                4b, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 84.

173b. Leaves deciduous --174.

     174a. Flowers in catkins, without petal-like parts --142.

     174b. Flowers not in catkins, either with or without petal-like
           parts --175.

175a. Flowers small, inconspicuous, yellowish or greenish in color
      --176.

175b. Flowers white or colored, with conspicuous petals --180.

     176a. Leaves broad and palmately lobed; stem thorny
                                             1a, in =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     176b. Leaves entire, toothed, or with 2-3 entire lobes; stem not
           thorny --177.

177a. Flowers in small axillary clusters; foliage not spicy-aromatic
      --178.

177b. Flowers in clusters terminating last year's twigs; foliage
      spicy-aromatic                          1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

     178a. Petals none; sepals present       2b, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

     178b. Petals present but small --179.

179a. A stamen in front of each petal        2a, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

179b. A stamen between each two petals           =AQUIFOLIACEAE=, p. 69.

     180a. Petals united with each other; stamens 8-10
                                              24, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 86.

     180b. Petals separate from each other --181.

181a. Petals 4 --182.

181b. Petals 5 --183.

181c. Petal-like sepals 6; real petals none; foliage spicy-aromatic
                                              1b, in =LAURACEAE=, p. 41.

181d. Petals 6; sepals also present --187.

     182a. Flowers in late spring or early summer
                                              2a, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

     182b. Flowers in autumn                    =HAMAMELIDACEAE=, p. 51.

183a. Corolla irregular, the upper petal largest
                                            3b, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

183b. Corolla regular, all petals alike in size and shape --184.

     184a. Stamens 5 --185.

     184b. Stamens 10 or more                  24, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 53.

185a. Flowers in loose racemes or axillary clusters
                                           2, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

185b. Flowers in branching clusters --186.

     186a. Leaves palmately lobed; stem thorny
                                             1a, in =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     186b. Leaves not lobed; stem not thorny
                                             1b, in =RHAMNACEAE=, p. 71.

187a. Flowers dark red-purple                        =ANONACEAE=, p. 40.

187b. Flowers yellow                      2a, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.


GROUP 2, UNUSUAL PLANTS

1a. Small brown leafless plants, growing as parasites on the tamarack or
    black spruce                                  =LORANTHACEAE=, p. 25.

1b. Aquatic plants, with all or most of the leaves submerged, or
    leafless --2.

1c. Aquatic plants, with the leaves or the whole plant floating on or
    near the surface --20.

1d. Terrestrial or marsh plants, without floating or submerged leaves
    --29.

     2a. Submerged aquatics, without leaves --3.

     2b. Submerged aquatics, with the leaves linear or dissected --4.

3a. Flowers showy, yellow or purple          =LENTIBULARIACEAE=, p. 105.

3b Flowers small and inconspicuous, sessile, purplish or greenish
                                         3a, in =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

     4a. Leaves linear or lanceolate, not lobed or dissected --5.

     4b. Leaves more or less lobed or dissected --13.

5a. Leaves all basal --6.

5b. Stem-leaves present --7.

     6a. Flowers blue, 1 cm. long or more; leaves cylindrical, blunt,
         hollow, partitioned lengthwise    1a, in =LOBELIACEAE=, p. 113.

     6b. Flowers yellow; leaves minute       =LENTIBULARIACEAE=, p. 105.

     6c. Flowers white, in clusters; leaves linear-lanceolate, acute,
         not hollow                           1b, in =ALISMACEAE=, p. 3.

     6d. Flowers greenish, solitary at the end of elongated peduncles;
         leaves very long and ribbon-like, flat or trough-shape
                                        1a, in =HYDROCHARITACEAE=, p. 3.

     6e. Flowers minute, whitish or lead-color, in heads
                                                  =ERIOCAULACEAE=, p. 9.

7a. Leaves alternate --8.

7b. Leaves opposite --10.

7c. Leaves whorled --12.

     8a. Leaves with thin sheathing stipules  1b, in =NAJADACEAE=, p. 2.

     8b. Leaves without stipules --9.

9a. Flowers greenish, in a head                   =SPARGANIACEAE=, p. 2.

9b. Flowers pale yellow                  1b, in =PONTEDERIACEAE=, p. 10.

     10a. Leaves serrate                      2b, in =NAJADACEAE=, p. 2.

     10b. Leaves entire --11.

11a. Leaves 2 cm. long or less                 =CALLITRICHACEAE=, p. 68.

11b. Leaves thread-like, 2-8 cm. long         2a, in =NAJADACEAE=, p. 2.

11c. Leaves linear to elliptical, more than 2 cm. long
                                              1b, in =NAJADACEAE=, p. 2.

     12a. Leaves in whorls of 3, abruptly widened at the base
                                              2b, in =NAJADACEAE=, p. 2.

     12b. Leaves in whorls of 3, widest near the middle
                                        1b, in =HYDROCHARITACEAE=, p. 3.

     12c. Stems straight and erect, at leaves the flowers emerged;
          leaves in whorls of 4 or more  2a, in =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

13a. Leaves with numerous small bladders attached, each bladder 1-3 mm.
     long                                    =LENTIBULARIACEAE=, p. 105.

13b. Leaves without bladders --14.

     14a. Leaves alternate --15.

     14b. Leaves opposite or whorled --18.

15a. Delicate and rare plants growing attached to stones in running
     water                                       =PODOSTEMACEAE=, p. 48.

15b. Plants 2 dm. high or more, with roots in mud or sand --16.

     16a. Leaves once-pinnate --17.

     16b. Leaves 2-3 times pinnate        15b, in =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 81.

     16c. Leaves palmately dissected      1b, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

17a. Taste peppery or mustardy               34, in =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 45.

17b. Taste not peppery or mustardy       1a, in =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

     18a. Leaves pinnately compound      3b, in =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

     18b. Leaves palmately compound --19.

19a. Leaves opposite or in whorls of four 119a, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 123.

19b. Leaves in whorls of 5-12                 =CERATOPHYLLACEAE=, p. 34.

     20a. Plants small, flattened, rounded or ovate, without distinction
          of stem and leaf; the whole plant floating on or near the
          surface                                     =LEMNACEAE=, p. 9.

     20b. Plant attached to the soil, with differentiated stem and
          leaves --21.

21a. Leaves on long slender stalks, which bear also a cluster of slender
     tubers near the leaf-base; leaves heart-shape
                                           1b, in =GENTIANACEAE=, p. 88.

21b. Leaf-stalks without a cluster of tubers --22.

     22a. Leaves all basal --23.

     22b. Stem-leaves present --24.

23a. Leaves parallel-veined                   1b, in =ALISMACEAE=, p. 3.

23b. Leaves net-veined                     1b, in =NYMPHAEACEAE=, p. 35.

     24a. Leaves opposite or whorled --25.

     24b. Leaves alternate --26.

25a. Leaves less than 2 cm. long               =CALLITRICHACEAE=, p. 68.

25b. Leaves more than 2 cm. long              1b, in =NAJADACEAE=, p. 2.

     26a. Leaves attached by the center to the stalk
                                           2b, in =NYMPHAEACEAE=, p. 35.

     26b. Leaves attached by the margin --27.

27a. Leaves parallel-veined --28.

27b. Leaves net-veined, with a single mid-vein; lanceolate or elliptical
     in outline                           29b, in =POLYGONACEAE=, p. 28.

     28a. Leaves not over 2 dm. long          1b, in =NAJADACEAE=, p. 2.

     28b. Leaves very long and grass-like     14a, in =GRAMINEAE=, p. 5.

29a. Brown, yellow, or white plants, without green color --30.

29b. Plants with normal green color, at least in some parts --33.

     30a. Stemless and leafless plants, consisting of flowers only and
          partly underground                     4a, in =ARACEAE=, p. 8.

     30b. Stems climbing on other plants 1b, in =CONVOLVULACEAE=, p. 91.

     30c. Stem and flower-stalks erect, not climbing --31.

31a. Corolla regular; stamens 6-12            1a, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 84.

31b. Corolla irregular --32.

     32a. Sepals and petals each 3; flowers in simple racemes
                                            5a, in =ORCHIDACEAE=, p. 16.

     32b. Sepals 5; corolla of united petals    =OROBANCHACEAE=, p. 106.

33a. Stem thick and fleshy, leafless, thorny         =CACTACEAE=, p. 77.

33b. Stem not thorny --34.

     34a. Leaves none --35.

     34b. Leaves reduced to small scales --40.

     34c. Leaves thick and fleshy --44.

     34d. Leaves hollow --45.

     34e. Leaves small, all basal, bearing large glandular hairs on the
          upper surface                            =DROSERACEAE=, p. 48.

35a. Stem none, the flowers appearing at or partially beneath the
     surface of the soil                         4a, in =ARACEAE=, p. 8.

35b. Stem present --36.

     36a. Stem freely branched                2a, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 10.

     36b. Stem unbranched, except possibly in the flower-clusters
          --37.

37a. Flowers greenish or brownish, without obvious colored petals --38.

37b. Flowers with conspicuous white or colored petals --39.

     38a. Each flower with 6 small chaffy petals
                                               4, in =JUNCACEAE=, p. 10.

     38b. Petals none; each flower in the axil of a single chaffy bract
                                              2a, in =CYPERACEAE=, p. 7.

39a. Flowers regular                         34a, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 11.

39b. Flowers irregular                     10a, in =ORCHIDACEAE=, p. 16.

     40a. Stem erect, unbranched or with one or two branches only --41.

     40b. Stem freely branched --42.

41a. Plants of moist soil, with opposite scales; corolla regular, with 4
     petal-like lobes                      1a, in =GENTIANACEAE=, p. 88.

41b. Swamp plants, with a few alternate scales; corolla irregular
                                             =LENTIBULARIACEAE=, p. 105.

     42a. Leaves numerous and close, concealing the stem
                                              2a, in =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

     42b. Leaves spreading, not concealing the stem --43.

43a. Leaf-scales in small clusters; flowers greenish, with 6 petals
                                              2a, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 10.

43b. Leaf-scales distinctly opposite; petals 5, yellow
                                           7a, in =HYPERICACEAE=, p. 74.

     44a. Sepals 2                         3, in =PORTULACACEAE=, p. 34.

     44b. Sepals 4 or 5                           =CRASSULACEAE=, p. 48.

45a. Leaves pitcher-shape, open at the top      =SARRACENIACEAE=, p. 48.

45b. Leaves tubular, closed at the end       37b, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 13.


GROUP 3, MONOCOTYLEDONES

1a. Twining plants, with flowers in panicles or racemes

=DIOSCOREACEAE=, p. 14.

1b. Plants with milky juice

13a, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 115.

1c. Plants not twining (some climb by tendrils) and not with milky
    juice. --2.

     2a. Flowers in close spikes or heads, surrounded or subtended by a
         green or colored bract, the whole resembling a single flower;
         petals minute or wanting; leaves broad, not grass-like, linear,
         or sword-shape                                 =ARACEAE=, p. 8.

     2b. Plants with narrow, linear, grass-like, or sword-shape leaves
         (a few species of Carex have broader, lanceolate to ovate
         leaves); flowers greenish, yellowish, or brownish, never
         brightly colored, and frequently dry or chaffy in texture;
         perianth small or wanting; individual flowers inconspicuous in
         size, but sometimes grouped into conspicuous clusters --3.

     2c. Plants with leaves of various widths, but the flowers petaloid,
         i. e., with a white or colored, more or less conspicuous
         perianth, and never chaffy in texture. In a few cases the
         flowers are greenish, but the size and conspicuousness of the
         perianth identifies them in this class --9.

3a. Flowers in the axils of dry, membranous or chaffy scales, which are
    regularly arranged into spikes or spikelets of uniform size and
    structure, which are variously grouped or clustered; fruit an
    achene; grasses and sedges, with joined stems and sheathing leaves,
    or leafless and the stems not jointed --4.

3b. Flowers not subtended individually by dry, membranous, or chaffy
    scales, and otherwise not agreeing with 3a --5.

     4a. Leaf-sheaths split on the side opposite the leaf; leaves
         usually 2-ranked, i. e., in 2 longitudinal rows with the third
         leaf above the first; stems rounded or flat, never triangular,
         usually hollow                               =GRAMINEAE=, p. 4.

     4b. Leaf-sheaths closed into a continuous tube; leaves usually
         3-ranked; stems frequently triangular, usually solid
                                                     =CYPERACEAE=, p. 7.

5a. Flowers in dense spikes --6.

5b. Flowers in heads, racemes, or panicles --7.

     6a. Spike terminal, with pistillate flowers at the base and
         staminate ones at the apex                   =TYPHACEAE=, p. 2.

     6b. Spike short, apparently lateral, near the apex of the stem
                                                 3a, in =ARACEAE=, p. 8.

7a. Flowers in globose heads which are arranged in spikes, the lowest
    heads pistillate, the upper staminate; ovary 1-celled
                                                  =SPARGANIACEAE=, p. 2.

7b. Flowers in globose woolly heads terminating leafless unbranched
    stalks                                        =ERIOCAULACEAE=, p. 9.

7c. Flowers in a spike-like raceme; ovaries 3-6, separate or nearly so
                                                  =JUNCAGINACEAE=, p. 3.

7d. Flowers in heads or panicles, all perfect, not woolly, with one
    ovary --8.

     8a. Leaves less than 1 cm. wide, or none; divisions of the perianth
         6                                           =JUNCACEAE=, p. 10.

     8b. Leaves 2 cm. wide or more; petals 5
                                           2a, in =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

9a. Flowers regular, with all the petals of approximately the same size
    and shape --10.

9b. Flowers irregular, with the petals of each flower not of the same
    size or shape --22.

     10a. Ovaries 3 or more, separate or barely united with each other
          at the base --11.

     10b. Ovary one in each flower --12.

11a. Ovaries 3-6 in number; flowers in spikes or racemes; leaves linear
                                                  =JUNCAGINACEAE=, p. 3.

11b. Ovaries more than 6                             =ALISMACEAE=, p. 3.

     12a. Flowers or flower-clusters lateral, axillary or apparently so
         --13.

     12b. Flowers or flower-clusters terminal or on leafless stalks
         --14.

13a. Leaves minute and scale-like; flowers greenish-yellow
                                              2a, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 10.

13b. Leaves linear, grass-like                3b, in =IRIDACEAE=, p. 13.

13c. Leaves lanceolate or broader, not grass-like or scale-like
                                              2b, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 10.

     14a. Divisions of the perianth 5-12 cm. long --15.

     14b. Divisions of the perianth less than 5 cm. long --16.

15a. Flowers blue, or blue marked with yellow 1a, in =IRIDACEAE=, p. 15.

15b. Flowers not blue                        12a, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 11.

     16a. Flowers solitary --17.

     16b. Flowers 2 or more, in some kind of a cluster --18.

17a. Leaves 2, broadly heart-shape, basal, on long stalks
                                       1b, in =ARISTOLOCHIACEAE=, p. 25.

17b. Leaves not heart-shape 20,               20, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 12.

     18a. Divisions of the perianth (4 to 6) all essentially alike --19.

     18b. Perianth differentiated into sepals and 2 or 3 colored petals
          --21.

19a. Flowers in umbels --20.

19b. Flowers in dense round heads; petals 5
                                           2a, in =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

19c. Flowers in spikes, racemes, or panicles  38, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 13.

     20a. Ovary inferior, appearing below the perianth as a swelling at
          the apex of the stalk; flowers bright yellow; leaves linear
                                                =AMARYLLIDACEAE=, p. 14.

     20b. Ovary inferior; flowers blue or white, terminating a flattened
          winged leafless flower-stalk        3a, in =IRIDACEAE=, p. 15.

     20c. Ovary superior, i. e., in the center of the flower and
          separate from the perianth          31, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 13.

21a. Flowers in dense heads, yellow, 1 cm. wide or smaller
                                                     =XYRIDACEAE=, p. 9.

21b. Flowers in umbels, blue or white, 2 cm. wide or larger
                                                  =COMMELINACEAE=, p. 9.

     22a. Flowers blue; ovary superior (defined under _20c_); stamens
          distinct from the other parts of the flower --23.

     22b. Ovary inferior (defined under _20a_); floral structure
          complex; stamens attached to other parts of the flower and not
          resembling ordinary stamens in form or structure
                                                   =ORCHIDACEAE=, p. 15.

23a. Leaves triangular-heart-shape at base; marsh plants
                                         1a, in =PONTEDERIACEAE=, p. 10.

23b. Leaves not heart-shape at base               =COMMELINACEAE=, p. 9.


GROUP 4, DICOTYLEDONES

1a. Foliage leaves all or principally basal; flower-stalk either
    completely leafless, or bearing a single pair of opposite leaves
    only. Bracts and scale-leaves are not considered foliage leaves --2.

1b. Stem-leaves present on the stem, either one or more in number, and
    not limited to a single opposite pair --3.

     2a. Leaves compound --7.

     2b. Leaves simple --18.

3a. Stem-leaves all or chiefly opposite or whorled (the bracts of the
    flower clusters may be alternate) --4.

3b. Stem-leaves all or chiefly alternate --5.

     4a. Flowers small and inconspicuous, the perianth none or greenish
         or chaffy, and never petal-like in appearance --50.

     4b. Flowers with a white or colored petal-like perianth --66.

5a. Flowers small and inconspicuous, without any white or colored
    petal-like perianth --118.

5b. Flowers large or small, but with a white or colored petal-like
    perianth --6.

     6a. Flowers small, not exceeding 3 mm. in length or breadth --144.

     6b. Flowers larger, more than 3 mm. in length or breadth --166.

                                 --7--

7a. Leaves twice to three times compound or dissected --8.

7b. Leaves once-compound --11.

     8a. Flowers in racemes                 2b, in =FUMARIACEAE=, p. 41.

     8b. Flowers in umbels --9.

9a. Flowers about 3 mm. wide, white or greenish-white --10.

9b. Flowers 10-20 mm. wide, conspicuous  45b, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 39.

     10a. Leaflets 5-15 cm. long             5b, in =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     10b. Leaflets not over 2 cm. long    16a, in =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 81.

11a. Leaflets 2                           3a, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.

11b. Leaflets three or more --12.

     12a. Leaflets entire or very finely toothed --13.

     12b. Leaflets coarsely toothed or lobed --15.

13a. Flowers irregular, in dense head-like umbels
                                           37a, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 61.

13b. Flowers consisting of a greenish or purplish bract wholly or partly
     enclosing a fleshy spike                     2, in =ARACEAE=, p. 8.

13c. Flowers regular, solitary or in loose clusters --14.

     14a. Leaflets reverse heart-shape, not over 2 cm. long
                                                   =OXALIDACEAE=, p. 64.

     14b. Leaflets 4-10 cm. long           1c, in =GENTIANACEAE=, p. 88.

15a. Flowers with colored or white petals and green or colored sepals
     --16.

15b. Flowers with one kind of perianth only (calyx), with broad and
     petal-like parts                     32, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 38.

15c. Flowers with white petal-like sepals and small inconspicuous petals
                                         38b, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 39.

     16a. Petals and sepals each 4           31, in =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 44.

     16b. Petals and sepals each 5 or more --17.

17a. Leaves with stipules                             =ROSACEAE=, p. 51.

17b. Leaves without stipules             23b, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 37.

                                 --18--

     18a. Stem-leaves a single opposite pair (basal leaves may also be
          present) --19.

     18b. Stem-leaves none --23.

19a. Leaves entire --20.

19b. Leaves toothed or lobed --21.

     20a. Flowers solitary; leaves broadly kidney-shape
                                              =ARISTOLOCHIACEAE=, p. 25.

     20b. Flowers in racemes; leaves linear or lanceolate
                                                 =PORTULACACEAE=, p. 34.

21a. Flowers in racemes; petals deeply toothed
                                         23b, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 51.

21b. Flowers solitary or few in a cluster; petals entire or nearly so
     --22.

     22a. Petals                                 5 =GERANIACEAE=, p. 64.

     22b. Petals 6 or more                2b, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.

23a. Flowers or flower-clusters sessile, at or partly beneath the
     surface of the ground                       4a, in =ARACEAE=, p. 8.

23b. Flowers or flower-heads solitary at the ends of the flower-stalks
     --24.

23b. Flowers or flower-heads numerous or several on each flower-stalk
     --38.

     24a. Flowers yellow --25.

     24b. Flowers not yellow --29.

25a. Juice milky                            16, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 115.

25b. Juice not milky --26.

     26a. Aquatic or mud plants, with large entire leaves 1-4 dm. wide
                                                  =NYMPHAEACEAE=, p. 35.

     26b. Land plants, with smaller or lobed leaves --27.

27a. Flower-stalk scaly                    110, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 122.

27b. Flower-stalk bare or with 1 to 2 minute bracts --28.

     28a. Flowers regular                 10, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 36.

     28b. Flowers irregular, with a spur      3a, in =VIOLACEAE=, p. 75.

29a. Flowers obviously irregular, with a spur --30.

29b. Flowers regular or nearly so, without a spur --31.

     30a. Leaves sessile or nearly so; stamens 2
                                             =LENTIBULARIACEAE=, p. 105.

     30b. Leaves petioled; stamens 5                 =VIOLACEAE=, p. 75.

31a. Flowers 3 mm. wide or smaller; leaves thread-like
                                     16a, in =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 103.

31b. Flowers 6 mm. wide or larger --32.

     32a. Ovary 1 --33.

     32b. Ovaries numerous --37.

33a. Leaves lobed or cleft --34.

33b. Leaves entire or toothed --35.

     34a. Leaves deeply 2-cleft; stamens 8
                                          3a, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.

     34b. Leaf 1, palmately lobed; stamens numerous
                                           1a, in =PAPAVERACEAE=, p. 41.

35a. Flowers dull red =ARISTOLOCHIACEAE=, p. 25.

35b. Flowers white or pinkish --36.

     36a. Leaves entire; stamens with good anthers 5
                                          13, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 50.

     36b. Leaves minutely toothed; stamens 8-10
                                             14a, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 85.

37a. Leaves lobed or divided                     =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

37b. Leaves crenate or toothed 64a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 56.

                                --38--

     38a. Flowers of the composite type, with several or many small
          flowerets closely aggregated into a dense head surrounded by a
          calyx-like involucre of small bracts
                                             10, in =COMPOSITAE=. p. 114.

     38b. Flowers separate; variously clustered, but never crowded into
          involucred heads --39.

39a. Flowers in dense close spikes --40.

39b. Flowers in open loose clusters --42.

     40a. Flower-stalk leafless below the spike
                                               =PLANTAGINACEAE=, p. 107.

     40b. Flower-stalk with several bracts --41.

41a. Leaves entire                          9c, in =ORCHIDACEAE=, p. 16.

41b. Leaves toothed                   6a, in =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 102.

     42a. Flowers in umbels --43.

     42b. Flowers in racemes, panicles, flat-topped clusters, or merely
          1 or 2 --45.

43a. Leaves almost round, peltate, palmately veined
                                           3a, in =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

43b. Leaves at least twice as long as broad, with a single mid-vein
     --44.

     44a. Stamens 5                                =PRIMULACEAE=, p. 87.

     44b. Stamens 10                          15, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 85.

45a. Leaves cylindrical, hollow, obtuse.   1a, in =LOBELIACEAE=, p. 113.

45b. Leaves beset on the upper side with long glandular hairs; bog plant
     with flowers in racemes                       =DROSERACEAE=, p. 48.

45c. Leaves flat, pubescent or smooth, but not with long glandular hairs
     --46.

     46a. Sepals and petals each 4           53, in =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 46.

     46b. Sepals and petals each 5 --47.

     46c. Sepals 6; petals none; flowers minute, green; leaves
          frequently lobed at the base      4, in =POLYGONACEAE=, p. 25.

47a. Petals united with each other in an irregular corolla
                                             =LENTIBULARIACEAE=, p. 105.

47b. Petals separate from each other --48.

     48a. Stamens 10; style 1                        =ERICACEAE=, p. 84.

     48b. Stamens 5 or 10; styles 2              =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

     48c. Stamens and pistils each very numerous --49.

49a. Flowers white                            64a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 56.

49b. Flowers yellow                      13a, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 36.

                                 --50--

     50a. Leaves compound or deeply lobed --51.

     50b. Leaves entire or toothed --54.

51a. Flowers in axillary racemes, spikes, or panicles
                                                    =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

51b. Flowers terminal, or in terminal clusters --52.

     52a. Flowers in umbels; leaves palmately compound
                                                    =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     52b. Flowers in racemes or spikes, or solitary --53.

53a. Leaves deeply pinnatifid; swamp plants with flowers in spikes or
     solitary                                   =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

53b. Leaves lobed, or irregularly pinnately cut or dissected; weedy
     plants with flowers in racemes          2, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 114.

     54a. Juice milky                      3, in =EUPHORBIACEAE=, p. 67.

     54b. Juice not milky or colored --55.

55a. Leaves whorled --56.

55b. Leaves all opposite --58.

     56a. Aquatic or mud plants with erect stems
                                         2a, in =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

     56b. Prostrate weedy terrestrial plants         =AIZOACEAE=, p. 31.

     56c. Erect or ascending terrestrial plants --57.

57a. Leaves more than 2.5 cm. long            4a, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

57b. Leaves 2 cm. long or less              3a, in =PRIMULACEAE=, p. 87.

     58a. Flowers in terminal or axillary spikes, racemes, or other
          clusters --59.

     58b. Flowers solitary or few in the axils of the leaves --61.

59a. Leaves less than 5 mm. long           1a, in =GENTIANACEAE=, p. 88.

59b. Leaves more than 2 cm. long --60.

     60a. Inflorescence chiefly terminal, panicled
                                             2, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 114.

     60b. Inflorescence chiefly axillary            =URTICACEAE=, p. 23.

61a. Flowers on long pedicels            2, in =CARYOPHYLLACEAE=, p. 31.

61b. Flowers on short pedicels or sessile --62.

     62a. Stem erect, repeatedly branched; leaves linear to oblong
                                                 =ILLECEBRACEAE=, p. 31.

     62b. Stem decumbent or prostrate --63.

63a. Leaves round, ovate, or kidney-shape, rounded at the base, crenate
     or lobed                            12a, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 50.

63b. Leaves of a narrower shape, entire, tapering toward the base --64.

     64a. Principal leaves 2-3 cm. long      1a, in =ONAGRACEAE=, p. 78.

     64b. Principal leaves 1 cm. long or less --65.

65a. Petals present                                =ELATINACEAE=, p. 74.

65b. Petals none                               =CALLITRICHACEAE=, p. 68.

                                 --66--

     66a. Plants of the composite type, with several or many small
          flowerets closely aggregated into a dense head surrounded or
          subtended by a calyx-like involucre of small bracts --67.

     66b. Flowers solitary or variously clustered, but not in involucred
          heads --70.

67a. Involucre of 4 conspicuous white bracts, much larger than the small
     flower-cluster                           4a, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

67b. Involucral bracts green or somewhat colored --68.

     68a. Stem more or less prickly               =DIPSACACEAE=, p. 112.

68b. Stem and leaves not prickly --69.

69a. Stem square; foliage aromatic when crushed       =LABIATAE=, p. 95.

69b. Stem not square; foliage not with the odor of mint
                                                   =COMPOSITAE=, p. 113.

     70a. The conspicuous portion of the perianth[1] composed of
          separate parts --71.

     70b. The conspicuous portion of the perianth[1] composed of united
          parts --97.

71a. Stem-leaves compound, or cleft to the very base --72.

71b. Stem-leaves simple --78.

     72a. Stamens more than 10 in each flower --73.

     72b. Stamens 5-10 in each flower --75.

73a. Ovary 1 in each flower                2a, in =PAPAVERACEAE=, p. 41.

73b. Ovaries several in each flower --74.

     74a. Leaves pinnately compound           68a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 57.

     74b. Leaves palmately compound              =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

75a. Stamens 6                               31, in =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 44.

75b. Stamens 5 or 10 --76.

     76a. Leaflets reverse heart-shape; flowers yellow
                                                   =OXALIDACEAE=, p. 64.

     76b. Leaflets not reverse heart-shape; flowers white, greenish, or
          pink --77.

77a. Flowers greenish or white, about 2 mm. broad   =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

77b. Flowers 5 mm. broad or larger                 =GERANIACEAE=, p. 64.

     78a. Juice milky --79.

     78b. Juice not milky --80.

79a. A 3-lobed ovary with 3 short styles visible in some of the flowers
                                                 =EUPHORBIACEAE=, p. 66.

79b. Ovaries 2 in the center of each flower (sometimes concealed by
     other organs); sepals and petals each 5 --104.

     80a. Perianth with one circle of parts only --81.

     80b. Each flower with both calyx and corolla --82.

81a. Stem prostrate; flowers only 2 mm. broad        =AIZOACEAE=, p. 31.

81b. Stem erect; flowers at least 20 mm. wide 4a, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

     82a. Petals 2 or 4 --83.

     82b. Petals 3                             22, in=LILIACEAE=, p. 12.

     82c. Petals 5 or 6 --84.

83a. Leaves with 3-5 principal veins             =MELASTOMACEAE=, p. 77.

83b. Leaves with 1 principal mid-vein               =ONAGRACEAE=, p. 78.

     84a. Leaves palmately lobed --85.

     84b. Leaves entire or toothed, or with 1-2 small lobes near the
          base only --86.

85a. Petals entire or notched at the end           =GERANIACEAE=, p. 64.

85b. Petals conspicuously fringed        23b, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 51.

     86a. Ovary 1 --87.

     86b. Ovaries 2, surrounded and concealed by other organs
                                                =ASCLEPIADACEAE=, p. 90.

     86c. Ovaries 4-5                      2b, in =CRASSULACEAE=, p. 48.

87a. Leaves dotted with translucent dots (easily seen when the leaf is
     held to the light)                           =HYPERICACEAE=, p. 73.

87b. Leaves not dotted with translucent dots --88.

     88a. Leaves only 1-3 mm. long, closely appressed and concealing the
          stem                                2a, in =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

     88b. Leaves larger, not concealing the stem --89.

89a. Style 1 or none --90.

89b. Styles 2 to 7 --94.

     90a. Stamens 5 --91.

     90b. Stamens 10 --92.

     90c. Stamens neither 5 nor 10 --93.

91a. Flowers blue, sessile in terminal spikes with leaf-like bracts
                                                    =LYTHRACEAE=, p. 77.

91b. Flowers not in terminal bracted spikes        =PRIMULACEAE=, p. 87.

     92a. Leaves entire                             =LYTHRACEAE=, p. 77.

     92b. Leaves toothed or crenate                  =ERICACEAE=, p. 84.

93a. Flowers irregular; petals 3                  =POLYGALACEAE=, p. 65.

93b. Flowers regular; petals 5 or more              =LYTHRACEAE=, p. 77.

     94a. Sepals 2, partly attached to the ovary =PORTULACACEAE=, p. 34.

     94b. Sepals 5, free from the ovary --95.

95a. Stamens 5 --96.

95b. Stamens not 5                             =CARYOPHYLLACEAE=, p. 31.

     96a. Flowers blue or yellow                      =LINACEAE=, p. 63.

     96b. Flowers white or pinkish             =CARYOPHYLLACEAE=, p. 31.

                                 --97--

97a. Perianth with but one circle of floral leaves --98.

97b. Perianth consisting of both calyx and corolla --101.

     98a. Flowers small, in dense heads subtended by conspicuous bracts
          --99.

     98b. Flowers 2-5, in a colored spreading 5-lobed involucre
                                                 =NYCTAGINACEAE=, p. 31.

     98c. Flowers in various sorts of clusters or solitary, but never in
          heads with a conspicuous involucre --100.

99a. Bracts 4, white and conspicuous; stem not thorny
                                              4a, in =CORNACEAE=, p. 83.

99b. Bracts green; stem thorny                    =DIPSACACEAE=, p. 112.

     100a. Stamens 3                            =VALERIANACEAE=, p. 111.

     100b. Stamens 4 or 5                           =RUBIACEAE=, p. 108.

101a. Anthers more numerous than the lobes of the corolla --102.

101b. Anthers just as many as the lobes of the corolla --103.

101c. Anthers fewer than the lobes of the corolla --110.

     102a. Leaves simple                          =POLYGALACEAE=, p. 65.

     102b. Leaves compound with 3 leaflets         =OXALIDACEAE=, p. 64.

     102c. Leaves finely dissected; stems climbing
                                            2a, in =FUMARIACEAE=, p. 41.

103a. Ovaries 2 --104.

103b. Ovary 1, but very deeply 4-lobed, with a single style
                                                      =LABIATAE=, p. 95.

103c. Ovary 1, not deeply lobed --105.

     104a. Stamens united, surrounding and more or less concealing the
           ovaries, and not resembling ordinary stamens
                                                =ASCLEPIADACEAE=, p. 90.

     104b. Stamens separate, of ordinary structure =APOCYNACEAE=, p. 90.

105a. Ovary inferior, appearing as a swelling below the calyx at the
      apex of the pedicel --106.

105b. Ovary superior, located in the center of the flower --107.

     106a. Corolla 3-4-lobed                        =RUBIACEAE=, p. 108.

     106b. Corolla 5-lobed              3b, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 109.

107a. Leaves toothed or deeply cut                 =VERBENACEAE=, p. 99.

107b. Leaves entire --108.

     108a. A stamen in front of the middle of each petal
                                                   =PRIMULACEAE=, p. 87.

     108b. Stamens located between the petals or lobes of the corolla,
           or else so far down in the tubular corolla that their
           position is not easily ascertained --109.

109a. Corolla salver-form, with a very slender tube, and abruptly
      spreading lobes                            =POLEMONIACEAE=, p. 92.

109b. Corolla salver-form, with a wide tube and fringed blue petals
                                                  =GENTIANACEAE=, p. 88.

109c. Corolla rotate, funnel-form, or bell-shape  =GENTIANACEAE=, p. 88.

     110a. Ovary deeply 4-lobed, appearing like 4 separate ovaries;
           style 1                                    =LABIATAE=, p. 95.

     110b. Ovary not 4-lobed --111.

111a. Stamens 2 --112.

111b. Stamens 3                                 =VALERIANACEAE=, p. 111.

111c. Stamens 4 --113.

     112a. Flowers in dense heads          1a, in =ACANTHACEAE=, p. 107.

     112b. Flowers solitary or in loose clusters
                                             =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

113a. Corolla distinctly 2-lipped and irregular --114.

113b. Corolla not distinctly 2-lipped, its 5 lobes all alike or nearly
      so --115.

     114a. Calyx 2-lipped; the upper lip with 3 awl-shape teeth, the
           lower with 2 short teeth; flowers in slender terminal spikes
                                                   =PHRYMACEAE=, p. 107.

     114b. Calyx not obviously 2-lipped, its teeth equal or nearly so
                                             =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

115a. Flowers sessile or nearly so, in spikes --116.

115b. Flowers in nodding pairs at the top of a slender stalk
                                        3a, in =CAPRIFOLIACEAE=, p. 109.

115c. Flowers solitary or in clusters; not in spikes or nodding pairs
      --117.

     116a. Corolla not over 1 cm. long             =VERBENACEAE=, p. 99.

     116b. Corolla 1.5 cm. long or more      =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

117a. Calyx-lobes 15-25 mm. long; flowers blue, 3-5 cm. long; calyx
      without an obvious tube               2, in =ACANTHACEAE=, p. 107.

117b. Calyx-lobes united below into an obvious calyx-tube
                                             =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

                                 --118--

     118a. Leaves deeply lobed, compound, or dissected --119.

     118b. Leaves simple and not deeply lobed --129.

119a. Leaves once-pinnately compound or lobed --120.

119b. Leaves once-palmately compound or lobed --124.

119c. Leaves dissected or 2-3 times compound --125.

     120a. Leaves merely lobed --121.

     120b. Leaves actually compound --123.

121a. Flowers axillary; marsh or swamp plants   =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

121b. Flowers in terminal clusters --122.

     122a. Stamens 2-6; taste mustard-like  52b, in =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 46.

     122b. Stamens 10 or more                       =RESEDACEAE=, p. 48.

123a. Leaflets entire                            =LIMNANTHACEAE=, p. 68.

123b. Leaflets serrate                        70a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 57.

     124a. Flowers solitary              31a, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 38.

     124b. Flowers in dense terminal umbels or heads
                                                  =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

     124c. Flowers in terminal racemes      2a, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 114.

     124d. Flowers in axillary spikes or panicles
                                             9b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 24.

125a. Leaves merely dissected, not truly compound with distinct leaflets
      --126.

125b. Leaves truly compound, with distinct petiolate leaflets --127.

     126a. Flowers in axillary clusters         =CHENOPODIACEAE=, p. 28.

     126b. Flowers in terminal clusters            =COMPOSITAE=, p. 113.

127a. Stamens 5; flowers in umbels --128.

127b. Stamens 6; flowers in small clusters
                                          3b, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.

127c. Stamens many; flowers in racemes or panicles
                                                 =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

     128a. Styles 5                                 =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

     128b. Styles 2                               =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

129a. Flowers in dense cottony heads; plants more or less white-woolly
                                            79, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 120.

129b. Pistillate flowers in an ovoid spiny involucre, ripening into a
      bur                                   3a, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 114.

129c. Flowers minute, subtended by palmately cleft axillary bracts
                                          1a, in =EUPHORBIACEAE=, p. 66.

129d. Plants without any of the preceding characters --130.

     130a. Plants with milky or colored juice
                                          10, in =EUPHORBIACEAE=, p. 67.

     130b. Plants with tendrils, at least on the upper leaves
                                              4a, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 11.

     130c. Plants of nettle-like character, with stinging hairs
                                             8b, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 24.

     130d. Plants with sheathing stipules, surrounding the stem above
           the base of each leaf                  =POLYGONACEAE=, p. 25.

     130e. Plants with smooth, pale, juicy, almost translucent stems
                                            12a, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 24.

     130f. Plants without any of the preceding structures or habits
           --131.

131a. Flowers axillary, solitary or in few-flowered clusters --132.

131b. Flowers in terminal, or terminal and axillary clusters --138.

     132a. Leaves linear                        =CHENOPODIACEAE=, p. 28.

     132b. Leaves of a broader shape than linear --133.

133a. Flower-clusters with bracts as long as or longer than the flowers
      --134.

133b. Flowers without conspicuous bracts --135.

     134a. Leaves broadest below the middle  8a, in =URTICACEAE=, p. 24.

     134b. Leaves broadest above the middle
                                           2, in =AMARANTHACEAE=, p. 30.

135a. Principal leaves 3 cm. long or more --136.

135b. Principal leaves 2.5 cm. long or less --137.

     136a. Flowers nodding in the axils of the leaves
                                              1a, in =VIOLACEAE=, p. 75.

     136b. Flowers erect in the axils        2a, in =ONAGRACEAE=, p. 78.

137a. Leaves narrowly oblong             1a, in =HALORAGIDACEAE=, p. 79.

137b. Leaves roundish and somewhat heart-shape
                                         12a, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 50.

     138a. Flowers in racemes or simple spikes --139.

     138b. Flowers in panicles or other branched clusters --141.

139a. Leaves toothed or lobed               52b, in =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 46.

139b. Leaves entire --140.

     140a. Flowers sessile; leaves heart-shape      =PIPERACEAE=, p. 19.

     140b. Flowers pedicelled; leaves obovate
                                            8b, in =PRIMULACEAE=, p. 87.

141a. Individual flowers distinct from each other, on pedicels --142.

141b. Individual flowers crowded in close clusters, or separate and
      sessile --143.

     142a. Leaves finely serrate           3b, in =CRASSULACEAE=, p. 49.

     142b. Leaves entire                      1b, in =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

143a. Flower-clusters mingled with sharp-pointed bracts
                                                 =AMARANTHACEAE=, p. 30.

143b. Flower-clusters without bracts, or (rarely) with bracts which are
      not sharp-pointed                         =CHENOPODIACEAE=, p. 28.

                                 --144--

     144a. Juice not milky --145.

     144b. Juice milky; apparent flowers consisting of a few white or
           colored petal-like bracts, inclosing a few inconspicuous
           flowers without petals. In some of them a 3-lobed ovary with
           3 styles may be plainly seen          =EUPHORBIACEAE=, p. 66.

145a. Plants of the composite type, with several or many small flowerets
      closely aggregated into a dense head subtended by a calyx-like
      involucre of small bracts --146.

145b. Flowers solitary or in clusters, but not in involucred heads
      --147.

     146a. Leaves compound with 3 leaflets; stipules present
                                                   =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     146b. Stipules none                           =COMPOSITAE=, p. 113.

147a. Leaves compound or deeply lobed --148.

147b. Leaves simple and not deeply lobed --154.

     148a. Flowers irregular                       =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     148b. Flowers regular --149.

149a. Petals 3                                   =LIMNANTHACEAE=, p. 68.

149b. Petals 4 --150.

149c. Petals 5 or more --151.

     150a. Stamens 4                          70a, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 57.

     150b. Stamens 6                                =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 42.

     150c. Stamens numerous               43, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 39.

151a. Flowers in heads or umbels --152.

151b. Flowers in slender spikes or racemes --153.

     152a. Styles 2                               =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

     152b. Styles 5                                 =ARALIACEAE=, p. 80.

153a. Leaves ternately compound           43, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 39.

153b. Leaves once-pinnately compound          50b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

     154a. Flowers irregular --155.

     154b. Flowers regular --156.

155a. Stamens 2                      40b, in =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 104.

155b. Stamens 5 or 10                            =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

155c. Stamens 6 or 8                              =POLYGALACEAE=, p. 65.

     156a. With sheathing stipules surrounding the stem at the base of
           each leaf                              =POLYGONACEAE=, p. 24.

     156b. Stipules not encircling the stem, or none --157.

157a. Petals 3                                       =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

157b. Petals 4 --158.

157c. Petals 5 --161.

     158a. Stamens 2 --159.

     158b. Stamens 6                                =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 42.

     158c. Stamens 8 --160.

159a. Corolla perfectly regular; flowers in terminal clusters without
      bracts, becoming racemes; taste peppery
                                            52a, in =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 46.

159b. Corolla slightly irregular; flowers in bracted clusters, or
      axillary; taste not peppery    40b, in =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 104.

     160a. Delicate trailing evergreen, with flowers solitary in the
           axils and nearly or quite hidden beneath the leaves
                                             22b, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 85.

     160b. Erect or nearly so; flowers in terminal clusters
                                            12b, in =ONAGRACEAE=, p. 78.

161a. Leaves sword-shape, finely parallel-veined, with bristly margins
                                           2a, in =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

161b. Leaves not sword-shape --162.

     162a. Leaves toothed or lobed --163.

     162b. Leaves entire --164.

163a. Stems creeping                       2b, in =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

163b. Stems erect or nearly so                   =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

     164a. Flowers in open panicles; leaves principally basal
                                                 =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

     164b. Flowers in rounded or flattened clusters; leaves principally
     on the stem                                   =SANTALACEAE=, p. 24.


164c. Flowers in racemes, which become elongated at maturity --165.

165a. Foliage glabrous                      8b, in =PRIMULACEAE=, p. 87.

165b. Foliage pubescent                           =BORAGINACEAE=, p. 93.

                                 --166--

     166a. Juice milky or colored --167.

     166b. Juice watery, not colored --172.

167a. Apparent flowers consisting of a few petal-like bracts, inclosing
      a few inconspicuous flowers without petals. In some of them a
      3-lobed ovary with 3 styles may be seen
                                                 =EUPHORBIACEAE=, p. 66.

167b. Plants of the composite type, with several or many small flowerets
      closely aggregated in dense heads subtended by a calyx-like
      involucre of small bracts             11, in =COMPOSITAE=, p. 115.

167c. Flowers never aggregated in involucred clusters resembling a
      single flower --168.

     168a. Corolla very irregular; stamens protruding
                                                  =LOBELIACEAE=, p. 113.

     168b. Corolla regular --169.

169a. Stamens with ordinary visible anthers; ovary 1 --170.

169b. Stamens so grown together and to the stigma as to be almost
      unrecognizable; ovaries 2                 =ASCLEPIADACEAE=, p. 90.

     170a. Petals separate                        =PAPAVERACEAE=, p. 41.

     170b. Petals united --171.

171a. Stamens attached to the tube of the corolla
                                                =CONVOLVULACEAE=, p. 91.

171b. Stamens attached at the very base of the corolla
                                                =CAMPANULACEAE=, p. 112.

     172a. Plants of the composite type, with several or many small
           flowerets closely aggregated into dense heads subtended by a
           calyx-like involucre of small bracts --173.

     172b. Flowers solitary or clustered, but not in involucred heads
           --174.

173a. True composites, without a normal calyx      =COMPOSITAE=, p. 113.

173b. A normal calyx with each floweret; leaves compound with 3 leaflets
                                                   =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

     174a. Flowers irregular, i. e., the conspicuous lobes of the
           perianth unlike in size or shape --175.

     174b. Flowers regular --185.

175a. Stamens 2 or 4                         =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

175b. Stamens 5 --176.

175c. Stamens 6 --181.

175d. Stamens 8; leaves simple                    =POLYGALACEAE=, p. 65.

175e. Stamens 10; leaves usually compound          =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 58.

175f. Stamens more than 10 --183.

     176a. Petals separate --177.

     176b. Petals united --179.

177a. Flowers greenish or purplish, in a panicle =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

177b. Flowers white or purplish, in compound umbels
                                                  =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

177c. Flowers solitary, or in few-flowered clusters --178.

     178a. Flowers blue, yellow, or white, in spring =VIOLACEAE=, p. 75.

     178b. Flowers red-orange or yellow, in summer
                                                 =BALSAMINACEAE=, p. 71.

     178c. Flowers small and greenish, in spring
                                              1a, in =VIOLACEAE=, p. 75.

179a. Anthers united; stamens protruding from the very irregular corolla
                                                  =LOBELIACEAE=, p. 113.

179b. Anthers separate; corolla almost regular --180.

     180a. Corolla rotate; some or all filaments hairy
                                       2, in =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

     180b. Corolla funnel-form, dull yellow and purple; filaments not
           hairy                           12a, in =SOLANACEAE=, p. 101.

     180c. Corolla funnel-form, blue or violet; filaments not hairy
                                           7b, in =BORAGINACEAE=, p. 94.

181a. Leaves compound or dissected                 =FUMARIACEAE=, p. 41.

181b. Leaves simple --182.

     182a. Flowers solitary                   =ARISTOLOCHIACEAE=, p. 25.

     182b. Flowers in spikes, heads, or racemes   =POLYGALACEAE=, p. 65.

183a. Leaves truly compound --184.

183b. Leaves palmately cleft; flowers 15 mm. wide or larger
                                          6a, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 36.

183c. Leaves irregularly cleft; flowers about 5 mm. wide
                                                    =RESEDACEAE=, p. 48.

     184a. Petals prolonged backward into hollow spurs
                                          6b, in =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 36.

     184b. Petals not prolonged into spurs       =CAPPARIDACEAE=, p. 47.

                                 --185--

185a. Perianth consisting of one circle of parts only (usually
      considered to be the calyx) --186.

185b. Perianth consisting of both calyx and corolla --192.

     186a. Leaves with sheathing stipules encircling the stem above the
           base of every leaf                     =POLYGONACEAE=, p. 25.

     186b. Leaves without sheathing stipules --187.

187a. Leaves entire --188.

187b. Leaves toothed, lobed, or compound --190.

     188a. Stamens 5                               =SANTALACEAE=, p. 24.

     188b. Stamens 6 --189.

     188c. Stamens 10                           =PHYTOLACCACEAE=, p. 30.

189a. Perianth-lobes 3; perianth-tube curved  =ARISTOLOCHIACEAE=, p. 25.

189b. Perianth-lobes 6, spreading             4a, in =LILIACEAE=, p. 11.

     190a. Stamens 5                              =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

     190b. Stamens 6 --191.

     190c. Stamens more than 6                   =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

191a. Climbing plant with heart-shape perianth
                                            2a, in =FUMARIACEAE=, p. 41.

191b. Erect plant, with spreading perianth
                                          3b, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.

     192a. Corolla composed of united petals --193.

     192b. Corolla composed of separate petals --208.

193a. Stamens 2 or 4                         =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

193b. Stamens 3; climbing vines                 =CUCURBITACEAE=, p. 112.

193c. Stamens 5 --194.

193d. Stamens 6                             2a, in =FUMARIACEAE=, p. 41.

193e. Stamens 8                              22b, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 85.

193f. Stamens 10 --207.

193g. Stamens very numerous                          =MALVACEAE=, p. 72.

     194a. Ovaries 2; flowers orange-red, in umbels
                                         7a, in =ASCLEPIADACEAE=, p. 91.

     194b. Ovary 1, deeply 4-lobed; flowers in racemes
                                                  =BORAGINACEAE=, p. 93.

     194c. Ovary 1, not deeply lobed --195.

195a. Climbing or scrambling vines --196.

195b. Not climbing or scrambling --198.

     196a. Flowers about 1 cm. wide --197.

     196b. Flowers 2-8 cm. wide                 =CONVOLVULACEAE=, p. 91.

197a. Leaves 1 cm. wide or less          2b, in =CAMPANULACEAE=, p. 112.

197b. Leaves 2 cm. wide or more             4a, in =SOLANACEAE=, p. 100.

     198a. Flowers solitary, either terminal or axillary --199.

     198b. Flowers in terminal clusters --201.

199a. Calyx concealed by 2 bracts               =CONVOLVULACEAE=, p. 91.

199b. Calyx not completely concealed by bracts --200.

     200a. Ovary inferior, appearing as a swelling below the calyx at
           the base of the flower, 3-celled; stigma 3-lobed
                                                =CAMPANULACEAE=, p. 112.

     200b. Ovary superior, located in the center of the flower
                                                   =SOLANACEAE=, p. 100.

201a. Some or all filaments hairy --202.

201b. Filaments not hairy --203.

     202a. Leaves lobed or divided             =HYDROPHYLLACEAE=, p. 93.

     202b. Leaves not lobed            2, in =SCROPHULARIACEAE=, p. 101.

203a. Anthers close together, longer than the filaments
                                             2, in =SOLANACEAE=, p. 100.

203b. Anthers separate from each other --204.

     204a. Leaves compound or very deeply lobed --205.

     204b. Leaves simple or with shallow lobes only --206.

205a. Leaf-segments linear or oblong, irregular
                                               =HYDROPHYLLACEAE=, p. 93.

205b. Leaves truly compound with separate leaflets
                                          1a, in =POLEMONIACEAE=, p. 92.

     206a. Flowers greenish-yellow                 =SOLANACEAE=, p. 100.

     206b. Flowers blue, violet, white, or intermediate tints
                                                =CAMPANULACEAE=, p. 112.

207a. Leaves simple                                  =ERICACEAE=, p. 84.

207b. Leaves compound                              =OXALIDACEAE=, p. 64.

                                  --208--

     208a. Petals 4 --209.

     208b. Petals 5 --212.

     208c. Petals 6 or more --227.

209a. Stamens 4 or 8 --210.

209b. Stamens 6, 4 long and 2 short                 =CRUCIFERAE=, p. 42.

209c. Stamens 9 or more                          =CAPPARIDACEAE=, p. 47.

     210a. Leaves compound                            =ROSACEAE=, p. 51.

     210b. Leaves simple --211.

211a. Ovary 1, inferior, appearing as a swelling below the calyx
                                                    =ONAGRACEAE=, p. 78.

211b. Ovaries 4 or 5, in the center of the flower
                                                  =CRASSULACEAE=, p. 48.

     212a. Stamens with good anthers 5 --213.

     212b. Stamens 6 to 10 --217.

     212c. Stamens more than 10 --222.

213a. Flowers solitary, terminating the stem
                                         12b, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 50.

213b. Flowers axillary, solitary or in small clusters --214.

213c. Flowers several, in loose irregular terminal clusters; leaves
      simple                                          =LINACEAE=, p. 63.

213d. Flowers in slender spike-like racemes; leaves compound
                                              50b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

213e. Flowers in panicles                20a, in =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 50.

213f. Flowers in umbels --216.

     214a. Leaves compound                 25b, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 60.

     214b. Leaves simple --215.

215a. Flowers blue or yellow, erect or spreading      =LINACEAE=, p. 63.

215b. Flowers greenish, nodding               1a, in =VIOLACEAE=, p. 75.

     216a. Flowers pink or purple                  =GERANIACEAE=, p. 64.

     216b. Flowers yellow or white                =UMBELLIFERAE=, p. 80.

217a. Leaves compound with 3 leaflets --218.

217b. Leaves pinnately compound --219.

217c. Leaves deeply palmately lobed                =GERANIACEAE=, p. 64.

217d. Leaves simple and not deeply lobed --220.

     218a. Leaflets reverse heart-shape; flowers yellow
                                                   =OXALIDACEAE=, p. 64.

     218b. Leaflets taper-pointed; flowers white or pink
                                               73, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 57.

219a. Leaflets entire                       24, in =LEGUMINOSAE=, p. 60.

219b. Leaflets toothed                        50b, in =ROSACEAE=, p. 55.

     220a. Prostrate plants, with thick, fleshy, entire leaves
                                           3, in =PORTULACACEAE=, p. 34.

     220b. Bushy branched plants, with small gray leaves concealing the
           stem                               2a, in =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

     220c. Erect or spreading plants --221.

221a. Ovary 1, style 1                        4a, in =ERICACEAE=, p. 84.

221b. Ovary with 2 distinct styles               =SAXIFRAGACEAE=, p. 49.

221c. Ovaries 5; styles 5                         =CRASSULACEAE=, p. 48.

     222a. Stamens united by their filaments into a tube
                                                     =MALVACEAE=, p. 72.

     222b. Stamens separate from each other --223.

223a. Leaves with stipules; ovaries more than 1       =ROSACEAE=, p. 51.

223b. Leaves without stipules --224.

     224a. Leaves toothed, deeply lobed, or compound
                                                 =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

     224b. Leaves entire --225.

225a. Ovaries numerous                           =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.

225b. Ovary 1 --226.

     226a. Sepals 2                              =PORTULACACEAE=, p. 34.

     226b. Sepals 3 or 5                             =CISTACEAE=, p. 74.

                                 --227--

227a. Leaves entire                                 =LYTHRACEAE=, p. 77.

227b. Leaves lobed, divided, dissected, or compound --228.

     228a. Flowers in slender racemes               =RESEDACEAE=, p. 48.

     228b. Flowers solitary or clustered, but not in slender racemes
           --229.

229a. Stamens 6                           3b, in =BERBERIDACEAE=, p. 40.

229b. Stamens numerous                           =RANUNCULACEAE=, p. 35.


[1] In most flowers the corolla is the conspicuous portion of
the perianth, and is composed of united or separate petals, as the case
may be. In some flowers the corolla is absent, and the calyx is the
conspicuous portion.




THE PLANTS OF MICHIGAN




PINACEAE, the Pine Family

Trees or shrubs, usually evergreen, with needle-like or scale-like
leaves; fruit a cone or berry.


1a. Leaves in clusters of 2-5 --2.

1b. Leaves mostly in clusters of 10 or more, on short lateral wart-like
branches, deciduous each autumn              =Tamarack, Larix laricina.=

1c. Leaves not in clusters --4.

     2a. Leaves in clusters of 5            =White Pine, Pinus strobus.=

     2b. Leaves in clusters of 2 or 3 --3.

3a. Leaves 8-15 cm. long                  =Norway Pine, Pinus resinosa.=

3b. Leaves 2-4 cm. long                    =Jack Pine, Pinus banksiana.=

     4a. Leaves alternate or scattered --5.

     4b. Leaves opposite or whorled --8.

5a. Leaves four-sided --6.

5b. Leaves flattened --7.

     6a. Leaves 6-12 mm. long             =Black Spruce, Picea mariana.=

     6b. Leaves 15-25 mm. long         =White Spruce, Picea canadensis.=

7a. Leaves short-stalked, 15 mm. long or less
                                            =Hemlock, Tsuga canadensis.=

7b. Leaves sessile, 15-30 mm. long             =Balsam, Abies balsamea.=

     8a. Leafy twigs soft and flattened
                                      =White Cedar, Thuja occidentalis.=

     8b. Leafy twigs not distinctly flattened --9.

9a. Leaves opposite --10.

9b. Leaves in whorls of three --11.

     10a. Erect shrub or tree         =Red Cedar, Juniperus virginiana.=

     10b. Prostrate or spreading shrub
                               =Creeping Cedar, Juniperus horizontalis.=

11a. Erect shrub or small tree            =Juniper, Juniperus communis.=

11b. Spreading or ascending shrub, growing in dense mats
                        =Low Juniper, Juniperus communis var. depressa.=




TAXACEAE, the Yew Family

Shrubs, with needle-like evergreen leaves; fruit red and berry-like.


One species in Michigan; straggling shrub 1-3 m. high
                                     =Ground Hemlock, Taxus canadensis.=




TYPHACEAE, the Cat-tail Family

Erect plants 1-2 m. high, with linear leaves and terminal spikes of
brown flowers, appearing in summer.


1a. Staminate and pistillate portions of the flower-spike contiguous,
    the latter 2.5 cm. in diameter   =Common Cat-tail, Typha latifolia.=

1b. Staminate and pistillate portions of the spike separated, the latter
    2 cm. or less in diameter
                           =Narrow-leaved Cat-tail, Typha angustifolia.=




SPARGANIACEAE, the Bur-reed Family

Marsh plants with linear leaves and spherical heads of inconspicuous
greenish flowers, appearing in summer.


About 5 species occur in Michigan, of which the commonest is
                                      =Bur-reed, Sparganium eurycarpum.=




NAJADACEAE, the Pondweed Family

Aquatic plants with submerged or floating leaves and inconspicuous
flowers in summer.


1a. Leaves opposite or whorled --2.

1b. Leaves alternate --2c.

     2a. Leaves thread-like, 3-8 cm. long
                              =Horned Pondweed, Zannichellia palustris.=

     2b. Leaves linear, toothed, abruptly dilated at the base, 3 cm.
         long or less (Naiad) --3.

     2c. Leaves entire, not abruptly dilated at base
                                         [2]=Pondweed, Potamogeton spp.=

3a. Leaves about 2 mm. wide, sharply and coarsely toothed
                                                  =Naiad, Naias marina.=

3b. Leaves very narrowly linear, with numerous minute teeth
                                                =Naiad, Naias flexilis.=


[2] About 30 species of Potamogeton occur in Michigan, among
which the most conspicuous is Potamogeton natans, with elliptical
floating leaves. For the identification of the species the Manual must
be used.




JUNCAGINACEAE, the Arrow Grass Family

Marsh plants, with linear cylindrical leaves and inconspicuous flowers
in spikes or racemes, appearing in early summer.


1a. Leaves all basal; flowers numerous in a spike-like raceme (Arrow
    Grass) --2.

1b. Stem-leaves present; flowers in a loose bracted raceme (1-3 dm.
    high).                       =Scheuchzeria, Scheuchzeria palustris.=

     2a. Fruit (usually to be seen at the base of the raceme) ovoid or
         oblong, rounded at the base =Arrow Grass, Triglochin maritima.=

     2b. Fruit linear, narrowed at the base (1-5 dm. high)
                                    =Arrow Grass, Triglochin palustris.=




ALISMACEAE, the Water Plantain Family

Marsh plants, with scape-like stems; flowers with 3 green sepals, 3
white petals, 6 or more stamens, and several separate pistils.


1a. Ovaries in a ring; flowers in panicles (2-8 dm. high, summer)
                             =Water Plantain, Alisma Plantago-aquatica.=

1b. Ovaries in a head; flowers in racemes or umbels --2.

     2a. Flowers all perfect, in a single umbel of 2-8 flowers; stamens
         9 (leaves lanceolate; 15 cm. high or less; summer)
                           =Dwarf Water Plantain, Echinodorus tenellus.=

     2b. Flowers in a raceme of 3-flowered whorls, the lower pistillate,
         the upper staminate; stamens usually more than nine (1-10 dm.
         high, summer) (Arrow-head) --3.

3a. Leaves ovate to linear, not sagittate at base --4.

3b. Leaves broad or narrow, sagittate at base --5.

     4a. Pistillate (basal) flowers sessile or nearly so (2-8 dm. high,
         summer)                  =Arrow-head, Sagittaria heterophylla.=

     4b. Pistillate flowers with obvious pedicels
                                      =Arrow-head, Sagittaria graminea.=

5a. Basal lobes of the leaf conspicuous, triangular, almost or quite as
    long as the terminal portion --6.

5b. Basal lobes small, short, linear --4b.

     6a. Beak of the achene very short and erect; rare species
                                      =Arrow-head, Sagittaria arifolia.=

     6b. Beak of the achene sharp, incurved at right angles to the body;
         common species              =Arrow-head, Sagittaria latifolia.=




HYDROCHARITACEAE, the Frog's Bit Family

Submerged aquatics, with inconspicuous flowers in summer.


1a. Leaves all from the base, 2 dm. long or more
                                      =Eel Grass, Vallisneria spiralis.=

1b. Leaves on the stem, 2 cm. long or less
                                        =Water-weed, Elodea canadensis.=




GRAMINEAE, the Grass Family

Grasses, with linear or narrow sheathing leaves, and very small flowers
without perianth in the axils of chaffy bracts, appearing in late spring
and summer.

Of the large number (over 150) of grasses in Michigan, only the
commonest are included here, and the student is referred to the Manuals
for a full treatment of them.

Their classification depends chiefly upon the structure and arrangement
of the spikelets. These consist typically of a short axis, the rachilla,
almost or quite concealed by several chaffy bracts. The two lower bracts
are termed glumes, and have no flowers in their axils. Above the glumes
are two or more other bracts, the lemmas. In the axil of each lemma, and
usually concealed by it, is a smaller bract, the palea, and between the
lemma and the palea is a single flower. The number of flowers in a
spikelet is therefore normally equal to the number of lemmas. The
spikelets are grouped in racemes, spikes, or panicles of various size.


1a. Spikelets one-flowered --2.

1b. Spikelets with 2 or more flowers --24.

     2a. Spikelets grouped into dense solitary cylindrical spikes --3.

     2b. Spikelets arranged in panicles or in panicled spikes --8.

3a. Spikelets without awns or bristles, or with short awns not more than
    3 mm. long --4.

3b. Spikelets with awns 2-5 cm. long, terminating the bracts
                                       =Squirrel-tail, Hordeum jubatum.=

3c. Bracts of the spikelet without terminal awns, but the spikelets with
    one or more long bristles arising from their base --6.

     4a. Spike-like panicle thickened in the middle, more than 1 cm.
         thick                        =Beach Grass, Ammophila arenaria.=

     4b. Spike little or not at all thickened in the middle, less than 1
         cm. thick --5.

5a. Lower bracts awned; stem erect, unbranched
                                             =Timothy, Phleum pratense.=

5b. Lower scales unawned; stem branched at the base
                             =Floating Foxtail, Alopecurus geniculatus.=

     6a. Bristles 5 or more at the base of each spikelet
                                       =Yellow Foxtail, Setaria glauca.=

     6b. Bristles 1-3 at the base of each spikelet --7.

7a. Spikelets about 2 mm. long; bristles not much longer, green
                                       =Green Foxtail, Setaria viridis.=

7b. Spikelets about 3 mm. long; bristles much longer, usually purple
                                              =Millet, Setaria italica.=

     8a. Spikelets numerous, in long slender symmetrical spikes --9.

     8b. Spikelets in panicles, racemes, or loose spikes --13.

9a. Spikelets without awns; plants 8 dm. high or less (Crab Grass) --10.

9b. Spikelets with awns; plants 12 dm. high or more --12.

     10a. Leaf-sheaths all glabrous.   =Crab Grass, Digitaria humifusa.=

     10b. Lower leaf-sheaths hairy --11.

11a. Axis of the spike flat, with wing-like margins
                                    =Crab Grass, Digitaria sanguinalis.=

11b. Axis of the spike slender, without winged margins
                                     =Crab Grass, Digitaria filiformis.=

     12a. Spikes numerous, appressed to the axis of the panicle; tall
          marsh grass              =Slough Grass, Spartina michauxiana.=

     12b. Spikes 2-6, widely divergent; plant of dry ground
                                      =Blue-joint, Andropogon furcatus.=

13a. Spikelets subtended by an ovoid thorny involucre 3-8 mm. wide
                                      =Sand Bur, Cenchrus carolinianus.=

13b. Spikelets without a thorny involucre --14.

     14a. Lower branches of the panicle spreading, bearing staminate
          flowers, the upper branches erect, with pistillate flowers;
          aquatic or marsh grass 2-4 m. high
                                          =Wild Rice, Zizania aquatica.=

     14b. Panicle uniform throughout --15.

15a. Spikelets with awns 2 mm. or more long --16.

15b. Spikelets not awned, or with short inconspicuous awns --18.

     16a. Spikelets in solitary raceme-like spikes; awn about 1 cm. long
          or more                   =Beard Grass, Andropogon scoparius.=

     16b. Spikelets in branching clusters; awn less than 1 cm. long
          --17.

17a. Leaf-blade 4 mm. wide or narrower; panicle slender
                                    =Drop-seed, Muhlenbergia schreberi.=

17b. Leaf-blade 6 mm. wide or more; panicle stout and coarse
                               =Barnyard Grass, Echinochloa crus-galli.=

     18a. Spikelet plump and compact, its bracts closely folded about
          each other --19.

     18b. Spikelet very flat, its two bracts closely folded together
                                         =Cut-grass, Leersia oryzoides.=

     18c. Spikelet loose and open, somewhat flattened, its 3 bracts
          ascending or spreading and not closely folded about each other
          --20.

19a. Panicle about half as long as the entire plant; leaves copiously
     hairy                             =Witch Grass, Panicum capillare.=

19b. Panicle of smaller size
                            =Panic-grasses, various species of Panicum.=

     20a. Panicle strongly contracted or spike-like; plants of
          sand-dunes --4a.

     20b. Panicle spreading or slightly contracted; axis of the spikelet
          beset with bristles; leaves 2 dm. long or more; marsh grass
                                 =Reed Grass, Calamagrostis canadensis.=

     20c. Panicle spreading or somewhat contracted, but not spike-like;
          axis of the spikelet without bristles --21.

21a. Panicle-branches erect or ascending --22.

21b. Panicle-branches strongly spreading --23.

     22a. The two outer scales of the spikelet one-fourth as long as the
          third scale, or sometimes one of them absent --17a.

     22b. The glumes at least half as long as the lemma
                                    =Wood-grass, Muhlenbergia mexicana.=

23a. The chief lateral branches of the panicle dividing and bearing
     flowers below their middle                =Red-top, Agrostis alba.=

23b. The chief branches of the panicle dividing only beyond the middle
                                        =Hair Grass, Agrostis hyemalis.=

     24a. Spikelets arranged in two rows to form a definite spike --25.

     24b. Spikelets in panicles, never in definite rows --29.

25a. Spikelets in a single row on one side of the axis, forming a
     one-sided spike                      =Yard Grass, Eleusine indica.=

25b. Spikelets alternating on opposite sides of the axis, forming a
     two-rowed spike --26.

     26a. Spikelets in pairs at each joint, forming a dense spike (Wild
          Rye) --27.

     26b. Spikelets single at each joint, forming a loose, open or
          interrupted spike --28.

27a. Glumes lanceolate                    =Wild Rye, Elymus canadensis.=

27b. Glumes narrowly subulate             =Wild Rye, Elymus virginicus.=

     28a. Spikelets with their edges toward the axis of the spike
                                            =Rye Grass, Lolium perenne.=

     28b. Spikelets with their sides toward the axis of the spike
                                        =Quack Grass, Agropyron repens.=

29a. Glumes longer than the lemmas
                                                   =Oats, Avena sativa.=

29b. Glumes shorter than the lemmas --30.

     30a. Axis of the spikelet beset with conspicuous long hairs about
          equaling the lemmas; tall marsh grass 1-4 m. high
                                            =Reed, Phragmites communis.=

     30b. Spikelets without conspicuous long hairs --31.

31a. Spikelets sessile or nearly so, forming crowded or spike-like
     panicles --32.

31b. Spikelets distinctly panicled --33.

     32a. Spikelets in dense one-sided clusters at the ends of the
          panicle branches          =Orchard Grass, Dactylis glomerata.=

     32b. Spikelets in an erect spike-like cluster
                                =Prairie June-grass, Koeleria cristata.=

33a. Lemmas, exclusive of the awn when present, 8 mm. long or more --34.

33b. Lemmas, exclusive of the awn when present, 6 mm. long or less
     --35.

     34a. Awns on the lemmas 12 mm. long or more
                                         =Brome-grass, Bromus tectorum.=

     34b. Awns on the lemmas 8 mm. long or less, or none
                                              =Cheat, Bromus secalinus.=

35a. Lemmas with 7 sharp conspicuous veins from base to apex
                                        =Manna Grass, Glyceria nervata.=

35b. Lemmas with 3-5 inconspicuous veins --36.

     36a. Spikelets with 5 flowers or more --37.

     36b. Spikelets with 2-4 (rarely 5) flowers --40.

37a. Stems tufted and decumbent at base (Love Grass) --38.

37b. Stems erect (Fescue Grass) --39.

     38a. Spikelets 1.5 mm. wide        =Love Grass, Eragrostis pilosa.=

     38b. Spikelets 3 mm. wide     =Love Grass, Eragrostis megastachya.=

39a. Lemmas with conspicuous awns     =Fescue Grass, Festuca octoflora.=

39b. Lemmas without awns                =Fescue Grass, Festuca elatior.=

     40a. Tufted annual grass                  =Spear Grass, Poa annua.=

     40b. Perennials, with erect flowering stems --41.

41a. Stems round                            =Blue Grass, Poa pratensis.=

41b. Stems strongly flattened      =Canadian Blue Grass, Poa compressa.=




CYPERACEAE, the Sedge Family

Grass-like or rush-like plants, with linear leaves or leafless, and
inconspicuous flowers in small chaffy spikes.

Over 200 species occur in Michigan, of which only the commonest are
included here. For the remaining species the Manuals should be
consulted.


1a. Spikes all alike --2.

1b. The uppermost spike or spikes wholly staminate, the lower one or
    more pistillate; ovary and achene surrounded by a sac, the
    perigynium. Mature fruit is necessary for satisfactory
    identification (Sedge) --12.

     2a. Stems leafless, bearing one or more spikes at or near the top
         --3.

     2b. Stems leafy --6.

3a. Spike one, terminal and erect (Spike Rush) --4.

3b. Spikes usually more than one, lateral and spreading --5.

     4a. Annual, with fibrous roots     =Spike Rush, Eleocharis obtusa.=

     4b. Perennial, with a running rootstock
                                     =Spike Rush, Eleocharis palustris.=

5a. Stem round                               =Bulrush, Scirpus validus.=

5b. Stem 3-cornered                  =Three-square, Scirpus americanus.=

     6a. Spikes axillary along the side of the stem
                                   =Dulichium, Dulichium, arundinaceum.=

     6b. Spikes terminal --7.

7a. Spikes subtended by long conspicuous leaves which greatly exceed the
    flower clusters --8.

7b. Spikes not conspicuously exceeded by the bract-like leaves --10.

     8a. Spikes in a dense head-like cluster, white-woolly at maturity
                                  =Cotton Grass, Eriophorum virginicum.=

     8b. Spikes not in dense heads, nor white-woolly at maturity --9.

9a. Perennial by a creeping rootstock   =Nut Grass, Cyperus esculentus.=

9b. Perennial by hard basal corms          =Cyperus, Cyperus strigosus.=

     10a. Bracts of the spike chestnut-brown
                                       =Twig Rush, Cladium mariscoides.=

     10b. Bracts of the spike green or straw-color (Sedge) --11.

11a. Spikes 3-8, separate                      =Sedge, Carex straminea.=

11b. Spikes very numerous and densely crowded
                                             =Sedge, Carex vulpinoidea.=

     12a. Achenes flattened                      =Sedge, Carex crinita.=

     12b. Achenes 3-angled --13.

13a. Perigynium tipped with a sharp straight 2-toothed beak --14.

13b. Perigynium with a short soft beak --17.

     14a. Perigynium thin and papery, loosely enclosing the achene --15.

     14b. Perigynium firm, closely enclosing the achene --16.

15a. Perigynium less than 1 cm. long         =Sedge, Carex hystericina.=

15b. Perigynium more than 1 cm. long            =Sedge, Carex lupulina.=

     16a. Perigynium smooth                      =Sedge, Carex riparia.=

     16b. Perigynium hairy                    =Sedge, Carex filiformis.=

17a. Beak of the perigynium bent abruptly to one side
                                               =Sedge, Carex laxiflora.=

17b. Beak of the perigynium straight
                                           =Sedge, Carex pennsylvanica.=




ARACEAE, the Arum Family

Individual flowers small, but crowded on a fleshy spadix to form a
conspicuous spike, usually surrounded by a green or colored spathe.


1a. Leaves compound --2.

1b. Leaves simple --3.

     2a. Leaflets 3, spathe pale green or purple (3-6 dm. high; spring)
                                   =Indian Turnip, Arisaema triphyllum.=

     2b. Leaflets 7-11; spathe green; spadix long and slender (3-8 dm.
         high; late spring)          =Dragon Root, Arisaema dracontium.=

3a. Leaves linear, sword-shape; spathe none (5-15 dm. high; early
    summer)                                =Sweet Flag, Acorus calamus.=

3b. Leaves broader than linear; spathe present --4.

     4a. Flower clusters partly underground, appearing in earliest
         spring                  =Skunk Cabbage, Symplocarpus foetidus.=

     4b. Flower clusters peduncled, in early summer --5.

5a. Leaves broadly ovate-cordate; spathe white
                                          =Water Arum, Calla palustris.=

5b. Leaves more or less sagittate; spathe green
                                      =Arrow Arum, Peltandra virginica.=




LEMNACEAE, the Duckweed Family

Minute leafless plants floating on quiet water; flowers exceedingly
small and seldom seen.


1a. Plant thick, ovoid, less than 2 mm. long; roots none. Two species
    are reported from Michigan                            =Wolffia spp.=

1b. Plant flattened, with short roots --2.

     2a. Roots several from each rounded plant
                                        =Duckweed, Spirodela polyrhiza.=

     2b. Root single from each rounded plant      =Duckweed, Lemna spp.=

Three species are reported from Michigan, of which the commonest is
Lemna minor.




ERIOCAULACEAE, the Pipewort Family

Bog or marsh herbs, with small flowers in heads terminating long slender
scapes.


One species in Michigan; leaves linear and basal; flower-stalk 5-15 cm.
high; flower-heads whitish or lead-color
                                     =Pipewort, Eriocaulon articulatum.=




XYRIDACEAE, the Yellow-eyed Grass Family

Small herbs with basal leaves and erect flower-stalks bearing a head of
perfect yellow flowers, in summer.


1a. Base of plant bulbous-thickened (3-6 dm. high)
                                    =Yellow-eyed Grass, Xyris flexuosa.=

1b. Base of plant not bulbous-thickened (1-3 dm. high)
                                     =Yellow-eyed Grass, Xyris montana.=




COMMELINACEAE, the Spiderwort Family

Leafy-stemmed herbs; flowers with 3 sepals, 3 petals, and 6 stamens,
lasting but a single day; petals blue.


1a. Stamens 6; petals all equal (Spiderwort) --2.

1b. Perfect stamens 3, sterile stamens 3; two of the petals larger than
    the third (3-6 dm. high; summer)  =Day-flower, Commelina virginica.=

     2a. Sepals villous (3-10 dm. high; late spring)
                                  =Spiderwort, Tradescantia virginiana.=

     2b. Sepals glabrous, or with a tuft of hairs at the apex (4-10 dm.
         high; late spring)          =Spiderwort, Tradescantia reflexa.=




PONTEDERIACEAE, the Pickerel-weed Family

Aquatic herbs, with 6 rather conspicuous petals; flowers in summer.


1a. Flowers blue; leaves cordate-sagittate (3-10 dm. high)
                                    =Pickerel-weed, Pontederia cordata.=

1b. Flowers yellow; leaves linear (submerged)
                                     =Mud Plantain, Heteranthera dubia.=




JUNCACEAE, the Rush Family

Grass-like or rush-like plants, with inconspicuous greenish or brownish
flowers, of 3 chaffy or scale-like sepals and as many similar petals.


1a. Leaf-sheaths closed; capsule 1-celled and 3-seeded; stem or leaves
    usually hairy at or near the base (1-4 dm. high). (Wood Rush) --2.

1b. Leaf-sheaths open; capsule many-seeded; plants never hairy --4.

     2a. Flowers solitary at the ends of the branches of the umbel-like
         cluster (spring)                =Wood Rush, Luzula saltuensis.=

     2b. Flowers in spikes or dense clusters --3.

3a. Flower-cluster spike-like, nodding at the tip (summer)
                                            =Wood Rush, Luzula spicata.=

3b. Flower-cluster umbel-like (spring)
                         =Wood Rush, Luzula campestris var. multiflora.=

     4. The genus Juncus, or Rush, contains about 25 species in
        Michigan, blooming in summer or autumn. For their identification
        the Manuals should be consulted. One of the commonest species is
        Juncus effusus, growing in marshes, with erect leafless
        cylindrical stems, bearing a lateral cluster of flowers near the
        summit. Another common species is Juncus tenuis, with slender
        stems and linear leaves, growing in hard ground, especially in
        woodland paths.




LILIACEAE, the Lily Family

Herbs or twining shrubs, with generally conspicuous flowers; sepals and
petals each 3, and usually colored alike, stamens 6, ovary 3-celled,
superior. In one species the perianth is 4-parted and the stamens are 4.


1a. Flowers or flower-clusters lateral, axillary or apparently so --2.

1b. Flowers or flower-clusters scapose or terminal --12.

     2a. Leaves minute and scale-like (7-15 dm. high; flowers
         greenish-yellow, June)      =Asparagus, Asparagus officinalis.=

     2b. Leaves broad and flat, not scale-like --3.

3a. Flowers numerous in rounded umbels; perianth-segments nearly
    separate; leaves long-petioled --4.

3b. Flowers in clusters of 1-8; leaves short-petioled, sessile, or
    clasping --8.

     4a. Stems herbaceous (flowers greenish-yellow, ill-scented)
         (Carrion-flower) --5.

     4b. Stems woody, thorny, climbing (flowers greenish-yellow, early
         summer) (Green Brier) --7.

5a. Stems climbing by tendrils --6.

5b. Stem not climbing; only the upper leaves, or none, with tendrils
                                     =Carrion-flower, Smilax ecirrhata.=

     6a. Leaves smooth beneath.       =Carrion-flower, Smilax herbacea.=

     6b. Leaves minutely pubescent beneath when mature
                    =Carrion-flower, Smilax herbacea var. pulverulenta.=

7a. Leaves with 5 principal veins.   =Green Brier, Smilax rotundifolia.=

7b. Leaves with 7 principal veins.        =Green Brier, Smilax hispida.=

     8a. Perianth-segments united into a tube (flowers axillary, late
         spring) (Solomon's Seal) --9.

     8b. Perianth-segments separate (2-8 dm. high; spring)
         (Twisted-stalk) --10.

9a. Leaves minutely pubescent beneath; filaments rough, inserted at
    three-fourths the length of the perianth (3-8 dm. high)
                           =Small Solomon's Seal, Polygonatum biflorum.=

9b. Leaves smooth beneath; filaments smooth, inserted at the middle of
    the perianth tube (5-15 dm. high)
                         =Great Solomon's Seal, Polygonatum commutatum.=

     10a. Leaves distinctly clasping the stem; flowers greenish-white
                              =Twisted-stalk, Streptopus amplexifolius.=

     10b. Leaves closely sessile; flowers reddish to purple --11.

11a. Rootstock short and thick; berries spherical
                                     =Twisted-stalk, Streptopus roseus.=

11b. Rootstock long and slender; berries 3-angled
                                   =Twisted-stalk, Streptopus longipes.=

     12a. Perianth-segments 5-12 cm. long --13.

     12b. Perianth-segments shorter than 5 cm. --19.

13a. Leaves all or chiefly basal, stem-leaves bract-like or none --14.

13b. Leaves chiefly or entirely on the stem --15.

     14a. Leaves numerous, linear or sword-shape (flowers orange,
          summer)                        =Day Lily, Hemerocallis fulva.=

     14b. Leaves a single pair, oblong or lanceolate --21.

15a. Leaves a single whorl of 3 (Wake Robin, Trillium) --22.

15b. Leaves numerous (6-12 dm. high; flowers yellow, orange, or red, in
     summer) (Lily) --16.

     16a. Flowers erect --17.

     16b. Flowers nodding --18.

17a. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, 6-15 mm. wide, mostly whorled
                                     =Wood Lily, Lilium philadelphicum.=

17b. Leaves linear, 5 mm. wide or less, almost all alternate
                        =Wood Lily, Lilium philadelphicum var. andinum.=

     18a. Perianth-segments strongly revolute
                                     =Turk's-cap Lily, Lilium superbum.=

     18b. Perianth-segments half-recurved
                                        =Yellow Lily, Lilium canadense.=

19a. Flower solitary --20.

19b. Flowers in clusters, not solitary --31.

     20a. Stem with a single pair of basal leaves (Dog's-tooth Violet)
          --21.

     20b. Stem with a single whorl of 3 leaves (1-3 dm. high; spring)
          (Wake Robin, Trillium) --22.

     20c. Stem leafy (Bellwort) --29.

21a. Perianth yellow       =Dog's-tooth Violet, Erythronium americanum.=

21b. Perianth white, bluish, or pinkish
                              =Dog's-tooth Violet, Erythronium albidum.=

     22a. Flower sessile, red or brown --23.

     22b. Flower peduncled, white or pink, rarely red --24.

23a. Leaves sessile, sepals spreading    =Wake Robin, Trillium sessile.=

23b. Leaves short-petioled, sepals reflexed
                                      =Wake Robin, Trillium recurvatum.=

     24a. Ovary with 6 distinct wing-like angles --25.

     24b. Ovary obtusely 3-angled or lobed --28.

25a. Stamens distinctly longer than the pistil --26.

25b. Stamens equaling or shorter than the pistil --27.

     26a. Stigmas erect or nearly so, slender
                                    =Wake Robin, Trillium grandiflorum.=

     26b. Stigmas strongly recurved or spreading
                                         =Wake Robin, Trillium erectum.=

27a. Filaments about as long as the anthers
                                         =Wake Robin, Trillium cernuum.=

27b. Filaments half as long as the anthers or shorter
                                      =Wake Robin, Trillium declinatum.=

     28a. Leaves obtuse; petals obtuse, white
                                =Dwarf White Trillium, Trillium nivale.=

     28b. Leaves acuminate; petals acute, purple-striped at base
                                 =Painted Trillium, Trillium undulatum.=

29a. Leaves sessile (3-6 dm. high; flowers yellow, spring)
                                       =Bellwort, Oakesia sessilifolia.=

29b. Leaves perfoliate (4-6 dm. high; flowers yellow, in spring) --30.

     30a. Leaves minutely pubescent beneath
                                       =Bellwort, Uvularia grandiflora.=

     30b. Leaves glabrous and all glaucous
                                        =Bellwort, Uvularia perfoliata.=

31a. Stem bearing 2 whorls of 3-9 leaves (3-6 dm. high; flowers pale
     yellow, early summer)   =Indian Cucumber-root, Medeola virginiana.=

31b. Stem-leaves not whorled, or all leaves basal --32.

     32a. Flowers in umbels --33.

     32b. Flowers in racemes or panicles --38.

33a. Plant with the odor of onions or garlic (leaves all or chiefly
     basal; flower-stalks 2-8 dm. high, late spring or summer) --34.

33b. Plant not with the odor of onions (leaves basal; flower-stalks 2-3
     dm. high, with an umbel of 3-6 greenish-yellow flowers in late
     spring)                            =Clintonia, Clintonia borealis.=

     34a. Leaves oblong, 2-5 cm. wide, not present when the plants are
          in bloom (greenish-white flowers)
                                          =Wild Leek, Allium tricoccum.=

     34b. Leaves linear, present with the flowers --35.

35a. Umbel nodding or horizontal (petals rose-color)
                                           =Wild Onion, Allium cernuum.=

35b. Umbel erect --36.

     36a. Pedicels longer than the flowers --37.

     36b. Pedicels equaling or shorter than the flowers (petals
          rose-purple)
                     =Wild Chives, Allium schoenoprasum var. sibiricum.=

37a. Leaves flattened; flowers pink to white
                                         =Wild Onion, Allium canadense.=

37b. Leaves cylindrical; flowers greenish to purple
                                         =Field Garlic, Allium vineale.=

     38a. Leaves lanceolate to ovate, not more than 8 times as long as
          broad --39.

     38b. Leaves linear or grass-like, at least 12 times as long as
          broad --45.

39a. Principal leaves all basal, stem-leaves none or bract-like --40.

39b. Principal leaves on the stem --41.

     40a. Flowers in a spike-like raceme (4-10 dm. high; small white
          flowers in summer)             =Colic-root, Aletris farinosa.=

     40b. Flowers in an umbel-like cluster --34b.

41a. Perianth-segments 4 (1-2 dm. high; flowers white, early summer)
                       =Wild Lily of the Valley, Maianthemum canadense.=

41b. Perianth-segments 6 --42.

     42a. Styles 3; flowers dioecious (3-10 dm. high; flowers white,
          early summer)             =Blazing Star, Chamaelirium luteum.=

     42b. Style 1; flowers perfect, white, in spring (False Solomon's
          Seal) --43.

43a. Flowers panicled (3-6 dm. high)
                             =False Solomon's Seal, Smilacina racemosa.=

43b. Flowers racemed --44.

     44a. Leaves 2-4, usually 3 (1-2 dm. high)
                             =False Solomon's Seal, Smilacina trifolia.=

     44b. Leaves 5-12 (2-5 dm. high)
                             =False Solomon's Seal, Smilacina stellata.=

45a. Flowers bright blue; perianth-segments united (2-3 dm. high,
     spring)                       =Grape Hyacinth, Muscari botryoides.=

45b. Flowers blue, greenish, yellowish, or white; perianth-segments
     separate --46.

     46a. Flowers 1 cm. wide, or smaller (white or greenish, in racemes,
          late spring or summer) (False Asphodel) --47.

     46b. Flowers 1.5 cm. wide, or larger --48.

47a. Stem glabrous (2 dm. high or less)
                                  =False Asphodel, Tofieldia palustris.=
                                  =False Asphodel, Tofieldia glutinosa.=

47b. Stem viscid-pubescent (1-5 dm. high)

     48a. Perianth-segments with 2 glands near the base (3-8 dm. high;
          greenish-white panicled flowers in summer)
                                     =Zygadenus, Zygadenus chloranthus.=

     48b. Perianth-segments without glands --49.

49a. Plant 3-5 dm. tall; flowers blue or nearly white, in long racemes
     (early summer)                 =Wild Hyacinth, Camassia esculenta.=

49b. Plant 1-3 dm. tall; flowers greenish-white, in short corymb-like
     racemes (spring)      =Star of Bethlehem, Ornithogalum umbellatum.=




DIOSCOREACEAE, the Yam Family

Twining herbs with net-veined leaves and greenish or white flowers in
panicles or racemes.


One species in Michigan; leaves ovate-cordate; flowers in summer
                                          =Wild Yam, Dioscorea villosa.=




AMARYLLIDACEAE, the Amaryllis Family

Plants with linear basal leaves, and perfect flowers, with 6-parted
perianth, inferior ovary, and 6 stamens.


One species in Michigan; 1-2 dm. high; flowers yellow, 1 cm. wide, in
spring                                    =Star Grass, Hypoxis hirsuta.=




IRIDACEAE, the Iris Family

Herbs, with 6-parted perianth, inferior ovary, and 3 stamens.


1a. Flowers blue, 5 cm. wide or larger --2.

1b. Flowers about 1 cm. wide (blue or white, from a spathe terminating a
    2-edged stem 2-5 dm. high, spring and early summer) (Blue-eyed
    Grass) --3.

     2a. Flowering stems 4-8 dm. high (early summer)
                                           =Blue Flag, Iris versicolor.=

     2b. Flowering stems 2 dm. or less high (spring)
                                           =Dwarf Iris, Iris lacustris.=

3a. Spathes terminal, sessile --4.

3b. Spathes long-peduncled, axillary --8.

     4a. Spathe single --5.

     4b. Spathes 2 on each flowering stem --7.

5a. Pedicels much longer than the inner (shorter) bract
                             =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium mucronatum.=

5b. Pedicels equaling or barely exceeding the inner bract --6.

     6a. Capsule brown; common species
                          =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium angustifolium.=

     6b. Capsule green or yellowish; rare species
                               =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium montanum.=

7a. Leaves folded lengthwise; stems narrowly winged
                                =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium hastile.=

7b. Leaves flat; stem broadly winged, 2-3 mm. wide
                                =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium albidum.=

     8a. Capsules pale straw-color or whitish --9.

     8b. Capsules brown, or tinged with purple --10.

9a. Plant with straight fibrous bristles at base; pedicels long-exserted
                              =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium farwellii.=

9b. Plants not bristly at base; pedicels barely exserted
                               =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium strictum.=

     10a. Pedicels scarcely exceeding the inner bract --6a.

     10b. Pedicels much exceeding the inner bract --11.

11a. Stem 2-6 mm. wide; bracts 1.5-2 cm. long
                              =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium gramineum.=

11b. Stem 1-2 mm. wide; bracts 1-1.5 cm. long
                             =Blue-eyed Grass, Sisyrinchium apiculatum.=




ORCHIDACEAE, the Orchis Family

Herbs, with irregular flowers, one petal, the lip, differing from the
others in size and shape, inferior ovary, and one or two stamens
adherent to the style.


1a. Flowers in a spike-like obviously twisted raceme; small, yellowish
    or greenish-white, in late summer and autumn (except 4a) (Ladies'
    Tresses) --2.

1b. Flowers solitary or in clusters, but never in a twisted raceme --5.

     2a. Flowers in 1 row        =Ladies' Tresses, Spiranthes gracilis.=

     2b. Flowers in several rows --3.

3a. Lip constricted near the apex
                            =Ladies' Tresses, Spiranthes romanzoftiana.=

3b. Lip not constricted --4.

     4a. Lip yellow; flowers in spring and early summer
                                   =Ladies' Tresses, Spiranthes lucida.=

     4b. Lip white                 =Ladies' Tresses, Spiranthes cernua.=

5a. Brown, purple, or yellow plants, without green color, with
    scale-like leaves (1-4 dm. high; summer) (Coral Root) --6.

5b. Plants with normal green color --9.

     6a. Lip white, not spotted     =Coral Root, Corallorrhiza trifida.=

     6b. Lip white, spotted with red --7.

7a. Lip distinctly 3-lobed         =Coral Root, Corallorrhiza maculata.=

7b. Lip entire, or barely toothed --8.

     8a. Flower, exclusive of ovary, 4 mm. long
                                =Coral Root, Corallorrhiza odontorhiza.=

     8b. Flower about 10 mm. long.  =Coral Root, Corallorrhiza striata.=

9a. Leaf 1 or none at flowering time --10.

9b. Leaves a single pair, basal, or opposite on the stem; never
    alternate on the stem --19.

9c. Leaves several, all basal, prominently net-veined, and frequently
    blotched with white (scape 1-4 dm. high; flowers whitish, pubescent,
    in summer) (Rattlesnake Plantain) --26.

9d. Leaves 2 or more, on the stem --28.

     10a. Foliage leaf absent or undeveloped at flowering time, or
          merely persisting through the winter from the previous year
          --11.

     10b. Foliage leaf present at flowering time --12.

11a. Flower rose-purple, 3-5 cm. long, solitary or two (1-3 dm. high,
     early summer)                         =Arethusa, Arethusa bulbosa.=

11b. Flowers purplish-green, in racemes, with a spur 2 cm. long
                                 =Crane-fly Orchis, Tipularia discolor.=

11c. Flowers yellowish, purple tinged, in racemes; spur none (3-4 dm.
     high, early summer).               =Putty Root, Aplectrum hyemale.=

     12a. Leaf linear or linear-lanceolate --13.

     12b. Leaf of a broader shape --14.

13a. Flower solitary or two; leaf just below the flower --11a.

13b. Flowers in a loose raceme, sometimes only 2; leaf basal
                                      =Calopogon, Calopogon pulchellus.=

     14a. Flowers greenish, yellowish, or white --15.

     14b. Flowers pink to purple, often variegated --17.

15a. Flowers 6-10 mm. wide, with a spur about the same length (1-4 dm.
     high, summer) (Rein Orchis) --35.

15b. Flowers 5 mm. wide or less; spur none (1-2 dm. high; summer)
     (Adder's Mouth) --16.

     16a. Pedicels less than 5 mm. long; lip broadest below the middle
                               =Adder's Mouth, Microstylis monophyllos.=

     16b. Pedicels more than 5 mm. long; lip broadest near the apex
                                  =Adder's Mouth, Microstylis unifolia.=

17a. Flowers spicate; lip distinctly 3-lobed (1-2 dm. high; early
     summer) --24.

17b. Flowers solitary or two --18.

     18a. Leaf on the stem, lanceolate to ovate --34a.

     18b. Leaf basal, round-ovate (2 dm. high or less; early summer)
                                             =Calypso, Calypso bulbosa.=

19a. Leaves opposite and sessile near the middle of the stem (1-3 dm.
     high; flowers in summer) (Tway-blade) --20.

19b. Leaves basal --21.

     20a. Lip deeply 2-cleft (flowers purplish)
                                          =Tway-blade, Listera cordata.=

     20b. Lip wedge-shape, with 2 round shallow lobes (flowers
          greenish-yellow)        =Tway-blade, Listera convallarioides.=

21a. Lip an inflated sac about 4 cm. long --29d.

21b. Lip not sac-like --22.

     22a. Flower with a spur 15-50 mm. long --23.

     22b. Flower not spurred (1-2 dm. high; early summer) (Tway-blade)
          --25.

23a. Flowers purple or magenta, or with white markings --24.

23b. Flowers greenish, yellowish, or white (1-4 dm. high; summer) (Rein
     Orchis) --36.

     24a. Leaf 1 (1-2 dm. high; early summer)
                             =Round-leaved Orchis, Orchis rotundifolia.=

     24b. Leaves 2 (-20 cm. high; late spring)
                                     =Showy Orchis, Orchis spectabilis.=

25a. Lip about 10 mm. long, purple     =Tway-blade, Liparis liliifolia.=

25b. Lip about 5 mm. long, yellowish-green
                                         =Tway-blade, Liparis loeselii.=

     26a. Perianth 8-10 mm. long; lip with elongated point
                            =Rattlesnake Plantain, Epipactis decipiens.=

     26b. Perianth 4-6 mm. long; lip sack-like --27.

27a. Raceme loosely flowered, one-sided
                =Rattlesnake Plantain, Epipactis repens var. ophioides.=

27b. Raceme closely flowered, not one-sided
                            =Rattlesnake Plantain, Epipactis pubescens.=

     28a. Lip conspicuously sack-like, inflated (late spring and early
          summer) (Lady's Slipper) --29.

     28b. Lip not sack-like nor inflated --32.

29a. Lip white (1-3 dm. high)
                           =White Lady's Slipper, Cypripedium candidum.=

29b. Lip yellow (2-7 dm. high) --30.

29c. Lip white, with crimson or purple markings --31.

29d. Lip pink (1-4 dm. high, late spring)
                          =Stemless Lady's Slipper, Cypripedium acaule.=

     30a. Lip 2-3 cm. long.
                 =Small Yellow Lady's Slipper, Cypripedium parviflorum.=

     30b. Lip 3.5-5 cm. long
  =Large Yellow Lady's Slipper, Cypripedium parviflorum var. pubescens.=

31a. Lip 2 cm. long or less; sepals separate (1.5-3 dm. high)
                     =Ram's Head Lady's Slipper, Cypripedium arietinum.=

31b. Lip 3 cm. long or more; the 2 lower sepals united
                           =Showy Lady's Slipper, Cypripedium hirsutum.=

     32a. Flowers solitary in the axils, or solitary and terminal; not
          spurred --33.

     32b. Flowers in terminal racemes, spurred --38.

33a. Leaves a whorl of 5 (2-3 dm. high; petals greenish; late summer)
                                =Whorled Pogonia, Pogonia verticillata.=

33b. Leaves alternate --34.

     34a. Leaves lanceolate or narrowly ovate, 2-8 cm. long, narrowed at
          base; flower terminal (1-4 dm. high; flowers pink purple,
          early summer)          =Snake Mouth, Pogonia ophioglossoides.=

     34b. Leaves ovate, 1-2 cm. long, clasping; flowers axillary (5-20
          cm. high; flowers purple, summer)
                               =Nodding Pogonia, Pogonia trianthophora.=

35a. Leaf basal; spur nearly straight
                                      =Rein Orchis, Habenaria obtusata.=

35b. Leaf on the stem; spur strongly curved
                                    =Rein Orchis, Habenaria clavellata.=

     36a. Flower-stalk without bracts below the raceme; flowers
          yellowish-green              =Rein Orchis, Habenaria hookeri.=

     36b. Flower-stalk bearing bracts below the raceme; flowers
          greenish-white --37.

37a. Spur 15-25 mm. long            =Rein Orchis, Habenaria orbiculata.=

37b. Spur 30-50 mm. long           =Rein Orchis, Habenaria macrophylla.=

     38a. Lip fringed (Fringed Orchis) --43.

     38b. Lip not fringed (Rein Orchis) --39.

39a. Lip with 2-3 evident teeth at apex --40.

39b. Lip without apical teeth --41.

     40a. Stem-leaves 3 or more      =Rein Orchis, Habenaria bracteata.=

     40b. Stem-leaves 2 --35b.

41a. Flowers white                    =Rein Orchis, Habenaria dilatata.=

41b. Flowers greenish-yellow --42.

     42a. Lip lanceolate, tapering toward the apex
                                    =Rein Orchis, Habenaria hyperborea.=

     42b. Lip oblong, truncate at the apex
                                         =Rein Orchis, Habenaria flava.=

43a. Lip deeply 3-lobed, toothed or fringed --44.

43b. Lip not 3-lobed, but deeply fringed --46.

     44a. Flowers purple    =Purple Fringed Orchis, Habenaria psycodes.=

     44b. Flowers white or nearly so --45.

45a. Spur 3 cm. long or more
                         =Prairie Fringed Orchis, Habenaria leucophaea.=

45b. Spur 1-1.5 cm. long      =Ragged Fringed Orchis, Habenaria lacera.=

     46a. Flowers yellow    =Yellow Fringed Orchis, Habenaria ciliaris.=

     46b. Flowers white
                      =White Fringed Orchis, Habenaria blephariglottis.=




PIPERACEAE, the Pepper Family

Herbaceous plants with alternate leaves, and flowers without either
calyx or corolla.


One species in Michigan, a marsh plant with heart-shape leaves and
slender racemes of white flowers
                                      =Lizard's Tail, Saururus cernuus.=




SALICACEAE, the Willow Family

Trees or shrubs, with dioecious flowers in catkins.


1a. Leaves less than twice as long as broad, on petioles 3 cm. long or
    more --2.

1b. Leaves more than twice as long as broad, on petioles 2.5 cm. long or
    less. (The genus Salix, or Willow, contains about 30 species in
    Michigan, of which only the commoner are mentioned here. For the
    others the Manuals should be consulted.) --8.

     2a. Petioles strongly flattened laterally --3.

     2b. Petioles not flattened laterally --6.

3a. Leaves broadly ovate or nearly circular --4.

3b. Leaves broadly triangular or deltoid in shape --5.

     4a. Leaves coarsely toothed
                           =Large-toothed Aspen, Populus grandidentata.=

     4b. Leaves finely crenulate or serrate
                                   =Quaking Aspen, Populus tremuloides.=

5a. Tree with narrow spire-shape crown
                          =Lombardy Poplar, Populus nigra var. italica.=

5b. Tree with spreading crown
                                        =Cottonwood, Populus deltoides.=

     6a. Lower side of leaf densely tomentose
                                           =White Poplar, Populus alba.=

     6b. Lower side of leaf glabrous or nearly so --7.

7a. Petioles glabrous              =Balsam Poplar, Populus balsamifera.=

7b. Petioles ciliate                =Balm of Gilead, Populus candicans.=

     8a. Trees --9.

     8b. Shrubs --13.

9a. Petioles without glands --10.

9b. Petioles with glands --11.

     10a. Petiole short (about 5 mm.), broad and flat
                                            =Black Willow, Salix nigra.=

     10b. Petiole slender, about 10-20 mm. long
                              =Peach-leaved Willow, Salix amygdaloides.=

11a. Leaves green beneath
                                         =Crack Willow, Salix fragilis.=

11b. Leaves pale beneath --12.

     12a. Branches and twigs conspicuously drooping
                                     =Weeping Willow, Salix babylonica.=

     12b. Branches and twigs not conspicuously drooping, yellow
                             =Yellow Willow, Salix alba var. vitellina.=

13a. Shrubs of bogs --14.

13b. Plants of sand-dunes along the Great Lakes --15.

13c. Plants of dry upland hills --16.

13d. Plants of wet ground, river-banks, and swamps --17.

     14a. Leaves densely white-tomentose beneath
                                                =Willow, Salix candida.=

     14b. Leaves pale beneath but not tomentose
                                              =Willow, Salix serissima.=

     14c. Leaves glabrous and green beneath
                                           =Willow, Salix pedicellaris.=

15a. Leaves linear                           =Willow, Salix longifolia.=

15b. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, tomentose beneath
                                              =Willow, Salix syrticola.=

15c. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, glabrous
                                           =Willow, Salix glaucophylla.=

     16a. Leaves about 3 times as long as broad
                                               =Willow, Salix rostrata.=

     16b. Leaves narrower, nearly sessile
                                                =Willow, Salix tristis.=

     16c. Leaves narrower, distinctly petioled
                                                =Willow, Salix humilis.=

17a. Leaves linear or nearly so              =Willow, Salix longifolia.=

17b. Leaves shining                              =Willow, Salix lucida.=

17c. Leaves silky                               =Willow, Salix sericea.=

17d. Leaves not as in the preceding 3 species --18.

     18a. Leaves rounded at base                =Willow, Salix cordata.=

     18b. Leaves acute at base --19.

19a. Leaves finely serrulate                 =Willow, Salix petiolaris.=

19b. Leaves remotely serrate or nearly entire
                                               =Willow, Salix discolor.=




MYRICACEAE, the Sweet Gale Family

Shrubs, with monoecious or dioecious flowers in catkins, and aromatic
foliage.


1a. Leaves pinnately lobed            =Sweet Fern, Myrica asplenifolia.=

1b. Leaves merely serrate --2.

     2a. Shrub of sandy soil, shore of Lake Erie
                                        =Bayberry, Myrica carolinensis.=

     2b. Shrub of bogs and shores, northern half of state
                                              =Sweet Gale, Myrica gale.=




JUGLANDACEAE, the Walnut Family

Trees with alternate pinnately compound leaves and flowers in catkins.


1a. Leaflets 11-23; pith divided by partitions into chambers --2.

1b. Leaflets 5-11; pith not partitioned (Hickory) --3.

     2a. Pith brown; bark with flat longitudinal ridges
                                           =Butternut, Juglans cinerea.=

     2b. Pith cream-color; bark of trunk without flat ridges
                                          =Black Walnut, Juglans nigra.=

3a. Bark of the trunk essentially smooth, not deeply furrowed or shaggy
    --4.

3b. Bark of the trunk deeply furrowed or shaggy --6.

     4a. Leaflets glabrous beneath; buds greenish --5.

     4b. Leaflets somewhat pubescent beneath; buds bright yellow
                                        =Bitter Nut, Carya cordiformis.=

5a. Twigs hairy               =Small-fruited Hickory, Carya microcarpa.=

5b. Twigs smooth                         =Pignut Hickory, Carya glabra.=

     6a. Twigs and leaves both pubescent --7.

     6b. Twigs nearly smooth; leaves smooth beneath
                                       =Shag-bark Hickory, Carya ovata.=

7a. Twigs brownish; buds densely hairy
                                       =Mocker-nut Hickory, Carya alba.=

7b. Twigs orange; buds very slightly hairy
                                    =King-nut Hickory, Carya laciniosa.=




BETULACEAE, the Birch Family

Trees or shrubs with alternate simple leaves and inconspicuous
monoecious flowers, the staminate flowers in catkins, and the pistillate
in catkins or small clusters.


1a. Trees, with white or yellowish bark exfoliating in thin papery
plates or scales --2.

1b. Tree or shrub, with smooth, dark gray bark; trunk fluted with
prominent longitudinal ridges          =Hornbeam, Carpinus caroliniana.=

1c. Trees or shrubs; the bark more or less roughened, but not
    exfoliating; trunk not fluted --3.

     2a. Bark white or chalky
                             =Paper Birch, Betula alba var. papyrifera.=

     2b. Bark yellowish                    =Yellow Birch, Betula lutea.=

3a. Shrubs, with leaves 4 cm. long or less --4.

3b. Shrubs or trees, with leaves 5 cm. long or more --5.

     4a. Twigs glandular-warty         =Dwarf Birch, Betula glandulosa.=

     4b. Twigs not glandular               =Swamp Birch, Betula pumila.=

5a. Twigs and bark with the odor of wintergreen
                                            =Sweet Birch, Betula lenta.=

5b. Twigs and bark without odor of wintergreen --6.

     6a. Fruit clusters woody, persistent on the plant for a long time
         --7.

     6b. Fruit clusters herbaceous, dropping in late autumn --9.

7a. Leaves rusty or whitish beneath, and pubescent at least on the veins
                                         =Speckled Alder, Alnus incana.=

7b. Leaves green beneath, and either pubescent or smooth --8.

     8a. Leaves broadest at or below the middle
                                         =Mountain Alder, Alnus crispa.=

     8b. Leaves broadest above the middle
                                           =Smooth Alder, Alnus rugosa.=

9a. Tree; fruit a cluster of bladder-like sacs each containing a small
    achene                                =Ironwood, Ostrya virginiana.=

9b. Shrubs; fruit a nut within a close-fitting involucre --10.

     10a. Involucre of 2 broad bracts, almost separate and not much
          longer than the fruit              =Hazel, Corylus americana.=

     10b. Involucre of united bracts, prolonged into a bristly beak
          beyond the fruit             =Beaked Hazel, Corylus rostrata.=




FAGACEAE, the Beech Family

Trees (or 1 species shrubby), with alternate simple leaves and
monoecious flowers, the staminate flowers in catkins, and the pistillate
solitary or in small clusters. Fruit a nut (or acorn) enclosed in a cup
or bur.


1a. Leaves serrate with numerous sharp-pointed teeth --2.

1b. Leaves serrate, lobed, or entire, but never serrate with
    sharp-pointed teeth; fruit an acorn; pith 5-angled in the young
    twigs (Oak) --3.

     2a. Bark gray, smooth; buds 3-4 times longer than wide; nut
         triangular                          =Beech, Fagus grandifolia.=

     2b. Bark rough; buds relatively thicker; nut rounded
                                           =Chestnut, Castanea dentata.=

3a. Leaves entire, except for a bristle at the tip
                                      =Shingle Oak, Quercus imbricaria.=

3b. Leaves toothed or lobed, the points bristle-tipped --4.

3c. Leaves toothed or lobed, the points without bristles --10.

     4a. Leaves entire below the middle, with a few shallow lobes beyond
                                  =Black Jack Oak, Quercus marilandica.=

     4b. Leaves deeply lobed throughout --5.

5a. Cup of the acorn saucer-shape, covering less than one-third of the
    acorn --6.

5b. Cup of the acorn hemispherical or top-shape, covering one-third or
    more of the acorn --8.

     6a. Length of the lateral leaf-lobes less than one-third the width
     of the leaf; acorn cup 2-2.5 cm. wide
                                               =Red Oak, Quercus rubra.=

     6b. Length of the lateral leaf-lobes more than one-third the width
         of the leaf --7.

7a. Acorn depressed-globose, about 1 cm. in diameter
                                           =Pin Oak, Quercus palustris.=

7b. Acorn ovoid, 1.5-2 cm. thick     =Schneck's Oak, Quercus schneckii.=

     8a. Leaves pubescent beneath         =Black Oak, Quercus velutina.=

     8b. Leaves glabrous beneath --9.

9a. Buds glabrous; inner bark of the trunk yellow
                                    =Hill's Oak, Quercus ellipsoidalis.=

9b. Buds pubescent beyond the middle; inner bark of trunk red
                                        =Scarlet Oak, Quercus coccinea.=

     10a. Leaves deeply pinnately lobed --11.

     10b. Leaves crenate, dentate, or sinuate, not lobed --12.

11a. Leaf divided nearly to the middle by a pair of deep lateral lobes
     near the middle of the leaf; acorn more than half covered by the
     cup                                  =Bur Oak, Quercus macrocarpa.=

11b. Leaf without a median pair of deeper lobes; acorn about one-fourth
     covered by the cup                       =White Oak, Quercus alba.=

     12a. Leaves broadest at or near the middle, with numerous (8-13)
          sharp coarse teeth on each side
                                     =Yellow Oak, Quercus muhlenbergii.=

     12b. Leaves broadest above the middle, with a few shallow, rounded
          or subacute teeth (7 or less on each side) --13.

13a. Large tree; leaves densely white-tomentose beneath; acorn on a
     stalk 3-10 cm. long             =Swamp White Oak, Quercus bicolor.=

13b. Shrub; leaves thinly white-tomentose beneath; acorn sessile or
     nearly so                           =Scrub Oak, Quercus prinoides.=




URTICACEAE, the Nettle Family

Herbs or trees, with small inconspicuous apetalous flowers.


1a. Trees or tall shrubs --2.

1b. Herbs --7.

     2a. Leaves oblong-ovate to lanceolate, serrate --3.

     2b. Leaves broadly ovate to rotund, some of them lobed (Mulberry)
         --6.

3a. Leaves thick, coarsely and doubly serrate, broadest near the middle
    (Elm) --4.

3b. Leaves thin, simply serrate, broadest distinctly below the middle
                                       =Hackberry, Celtis occidentalis.=

     4a. Some of the branches with flat corky wings; leaves smooth above
                                             =Cork Elm, Ulmus racemosa.=

     4b. Branches without corky wings; leaves more or less rough above
         --5.

5a. Petioles and axillary buds glabrous    =White Elm, Ulmus americana.=

5b. Petioles and axillary buds pubescent with rusty hairs
                                            =Slippery Elm, Ulmus fulva.=

     6a. Leaves rough above                 =Red Mulberry, Morus rubra.=

     6b. Leaves smooth above               =White Mulberry, Morus alba.=

7a. Leaves alternate --8.

7b. Leaves opposite --9.

     8a. Leaves 2-5 cm. long, stems pubescent
                                  =Pellitory, Parietaria pennsylvanica.=

     8b. Leaves 8-20 cm. long; stem armed with stinging hairs
                                     =Wood Nettle, Laportea canadensis.=

9a. Twining plant; leaves serrate or cleft       =Hop, Humulus lupulus.=

9b. Erect plant; leaves palmately compound      =Hemp, Cannabis sativa.=

9c. Erect plants; leaves not lobed or compound --10.

     10a. Stems armed with stinging hairs --11.

     10b. Stems glabrous or rough, but not with stinging hairs --12.

11a. Leaves ovate, with a heart-shape base
                                       =Stinging Nettle, Urtica dioica.=

11b. Leaves lanceolate or ovate-lanceolate, not heart-shape at base
                                      =Slender Nettle, Urtica gracilis.=

     12a. Stems glabrous, pellucid
                                              =Clearweed, Pilea pumila.=

     12b. Stems rough, opaque      =False Nettle, Boehmeria cylindrica.=




SANTALACEAE, the Sandalwood Family

Low herbs with alternate entire leaves and terminal clusters of small
greenish-white bell-shape flowers without petals in spring and early
summer.


1a. Inflorescence of several-flowered clusters terminating the stem and
    in the upper axils                  =Toad-flax, Comandra umbellata.=

1b. Inflorescence of axillary clusters of 1-5 flowers
                                           =Toad-flax, Comandra livida.=




LORANTHACEAE, the Mistletoe Family

Parasitic plants, attached to the branches of trees.


One species in Michigan, a dwarf brown plant 5-20 mm. long, with minute
scale-like leaves, growing on the branches of Black Spruce
                               =Dwarf Mistletoe, Arceuthobium pusillum.=




ARISTOLOCHIACEAE, the Birthwort Family

Flowers greenish-brown or reddish-brown, at or near the ground, with
inferior 6-celled ovary.


1a. Leaves alternate, on the stem; flowers on a basal scaly branch (1-4
    dm. high; summer)    =Virginia Snakeroot, Aristolochia serpentaria.=

1b. Leaves a single basal pair, bearing 1 short-stalked flower between
    them (spring) (Wild Ginger) --2.

     2a. Lobes of the perianth ending in a tubular portion 5-8 mm. long
                                        =Wild Ginger, Asarum canadense.=

     2b. Lobes of the perianth ending in a tubular portion over 1 cm.
         long           =Wild Ginger, Asarum canadense var. acuminatum.=

     2c. Lobes of the perianth triangular, not tubular at the end
                          =Wild Ginger, Asarum canadense var. reflexum.=




POLYGONACEAE, the Buckwheat Family

Herbs with alternate entire leaves, stipules surrounding the stem above
the base of each leaf, and small green, white or pink flowers without
petals.


1a. Erect or ascending or prostrate or floating plants --2.

1b. Scrambling or climbing plants, clinging by sharp recurved prickles
    on the 4-angled stems (flowers greenish or pink, summer)
    (Tear-thumb) --32.

1c. Twining vines (flowers white or greenish, summer) --33.

     2a. Sepals 6, the 3 inner ones enlarging in fruit and surrounding
         the achenes; flowers in panicles --3.

     2b. Sepals 4 or 5 (occasional flowers may be found with 6 sepals,
         but the flowers are not in panicles) (summer) --13.

3a. Leaves arrow-shape or halberd-shape, with 2 basal lobes (Sorrel)
    --4.

3b. Leaves without basal lobes (Dock) --5.

     4a. Leaves halberd-shape, the basal lobes directed sidewise
                                         =Red Sorrel, Rumex acetosella.=

     4b. Leaves arrow-shape, the basal lobes directed backward
                                          =Green Sorrel, Rumex acetosa.=

5a. The projecting wings of the fruiting calyx (known as valves) with
    sharp slender teeth               =Bitter Dock, Rumex obtusifolius.=

5b. Valves entire or finely dentate, but without sharp slender teeth
    --6.

     6a. Pedicels straight, thickened toward the end, all regularly
         deflexed, 3-4 times longer than the fruiting calyx
                                      =Swamp Dock, Rumex verticillatus.=

     6b. Pedicels slender, flexuous, spreading --7.

7a. Leaves flat or nearly so --8.

7b. Leaves with strongly crisped or wavy-curled margins; plants usually
    of cultivated grounds or waste places (5-10 dm., summer) --12.

     8a. With grain-like tubercles on all 3 valves of the fruit --9.

     8b. With grain-like tubercles on only one valve, or entirely
         lacking --10.

9a. Valves broadly cordate, finely toothed
                                         =Water Dock, Rumex brittanica.=

9b. Valves triangular-ovate, entire or nearly so
                                                =Dock, Rumex mexicanus.=

     10a. Valves oblong                 =Bloody Dock, Rumex sanguineus.=

     10b. Valves broadly heart-shape --11.

11a. Grain-like tubercle less than half as long as the valve
                                       =Patience Dock, Rumex patientia.=

11b. Grain-like tubercle more than half as long as the valve
                                          =Tall Dock, Rumex altissimus.=

     12a. The grain-like tubercle on the valves of the fruit broadly
          ellipsoid, with rounded apex       =Sour Dock, Rumex crispus.=

     12b. Tubercle ovoid with tapering apex
                                           =Sour Dock, Rumex elongatus.=

13a. Flowers inconspicuous, in small axillary clusters; leaves jointed
     at the base (Knotweed) --14.

13b. Flowers more or less conspicuous, in obvious spikes or racemes
     which terminate the stems or branches, or arise from the axils of
     the upper leaves --18.

     14a. Leaves sharply folded lengthwise (1-4 dm. tall)
                                            =Knotweed, Polygonum tenue.=

     14b. Leaves flat or nearly so --15.

15a. The small sepals pink or white at the margin (stems prostrate or
     ascending) --16.

15b. Sepals greenish or yellowish throughout (stems erect or ascending)
     --17.

     16a. Leaves thin; common weed of dooryards and gardens
                                        =Knotweed, Polygonum aviculare.=

     16b. Leaves thick and fleshy; a plant of sandy shores
                         =Knotweed, Polygonum aviculare var. littorale.=

17a. Leaves narrowly lanceolate or linear-oblong; rare species
                                     =Knotweed, Polygonum ramosissimum.=

17b. Leaves broadly oblong, oval, or elliptical; common weed of yards
     and gardens                          =Knotweed, Polygonum erectum.=

     18a. Leaves broadly triangular (3-7 dm. high; flowers white)
                                      =Buckwheat, Fagopyrum esculentum.=

     18b. Leaves from linear to ovate or oblong --19.

19a. Sepals 4; flowers in very long and slender spike-like racemes (4-10
     dm. high)                        =Knotweed, Polygonum virginianum.=

19b. Sepals 5; flowers in spikes or racemes --20.

     20a. Flowers on slender pedicels, forming a loose raceme; leaves
          linear, jointed at the base (1-3 dm. high; flowers pink or
          white; chiefly near the Great Lakes)
                                    =Jointweed, Polygonella articulata.=

     20b. Flowers sessile or nearly so, forming a spike or spike-like
          raceme --21.

21a. Stipular sheaths at the base of the leaves ciliate at their upper
     margin --22.

21b. Stipular sheaths not ciliate at the upper margin --28.

     22a. Sheaths with spreading borders --23.

     22b. Sheaths without a spreading border, appressed to the stem
          (Smartweed) --24.

23a. Leaves ovate, acuminate; stem erect (1-2 m. high; flowers pink)
                                =Prince's Feather, Polygonum orientate.=

23b. Leaves oblong, obtuse or subacute; spreading or ascending plant of
     wet soil  =Water Smartweed, Polygonum amphibium var. hartwrightii.=

     24a. Peduncles with glandular hairs (5-15 dm. high)
                                          =Smartweed, Polygonum careyi.=

     24b. Peduncles not glandular (1-8 dm. high) (Smartweed) --25.

25a. Sepals beset with minute black dots --26.

25b. Sepals white, pink, or red, not black-dotted --27.

     26a. Racemes drooping or nodding at the tip; achene dull-colored
                                      =Smartweed, Polygonum hydropiper.=

     26b. Racemes erect; achene smooth and shining
                                            =Smartweed, Polygonum acre.=

27a. Sheaths smooth; leaves usually with a dark spot near the base
                                      =Smartweed, Polygonum persicaria.=

27b. Sheaths hairy; leaves not dark-spotted
                                 =Smartweed, Polygonum hydropiperoides.=

     28a. Leaves obtuse or somewhat acute at the apex --29.

     28b. Leaves acuminate at the apex (5-15 dm. high; flowers white to
          pink) (Smartweed) --30.

29a. Stem unbranched, erect, bearing a single terminal raceme (5-30 cm.
     high; flowers pink)                 =Bistort, Polygonum viviparum.=

29b. Stem branched, submerged in water or creeping on muddy shores
     (flowers pink)              =Water Smartweed, Polygonum amphibium.=

     30a. Raceme single or two; leaves broadly ovate-lanceolate, about 3
          times as long as wide     =Smartweed, Polygonum muhlenbergii.=

     30b. Racemes numerous; leaves lanceolate, 4-6 times as long as wide
          --31.

31a. Racemes drooping or nodding at the tip
                                   =Smartweed, Polygonum lapathifolium.=

31b. Racemes erect                =Smartweed, Polygonum pennsylvanicum.=

     32a. Leaves arrow-shape, the basal lobes pointing backward
                                     =Tear-thumb, Polygonum sagittatum.=

     32b. Leaves halberd-shape, the basal lobes pointing sidewise
                                      =Tear-thumb, Polygonum arifolium.=

33a. The three outer sepals becoming conspicuously winged in fruit
     (False Buckwheat) --34.

33b. The sepals all unchanged in fruit, except in size (Black Bindweed)
     --35.

     34a. Wings of the fruit with wavy-curled margins
                                  =False Buckwheat, Polygonum scandens.=

     34b. Wings of the fruit flat
                                 =False Buckwheat, Polygonum dumetorum.=

35a. Leaf-sheaths with a ring of bristles at the base
                                   =Black Bindweed, Polygonum cilinode.=

35b. Leaf-sheaths without a ring of bristles
                                =Black Bindweed, Polygonum convolvulus.=




CHENOPODIACEAE, the Goosefoot Family

Herbs, with inconspicuous greenish or reddish flowers without petals, in
summer.


1a. Leaves linear or nearly so, entire --2.

1b. Leaves of a broader shape, usually toothed or lobed --5.

     2a. Leaves rather stiff, narrowly linear or thread-like, with
         spine-like tips
                        =Russian Thistle, Salsola kali var. tenuifolia.=

     2b. Leaves soft, not spine-like --3.

3a. Widely branched, rather diffuse, 1-5 dm. tall; plant of the shore of
    the Great Lakes               =Bug-seed, Corispermum hyssopifolium.=

3b. Erect plants with ascending branches --4.

     4a. Leaves glabrous (3-6 dm. tall)
                                  =Goosefoot, Chenopodium leptophyllum.=

     4b. Leaves minutely ciliate on the margin (bushy branched, 5-10 dm.
         tall)                                =Kochia, Kochia scoparia.=

5a. Principal leaves with a broad truncate, rounded, or hastate base
    --6.

5b. Principal leaves narrowed to the base --12.

     6a. Leaves broadly ovate, with 1-4 large sharp projecting teeth on
         each side                    =Goosefoot, Chenopodium hybridum.=

     6b. Leaves hastate or triangular-ovate, entire or with many teeth
         --7.

7a. Leaves entire or merely undulate --8.

7b. Leaves sharply or sinuately toothed --9.

     8a. Stem erect, simple or sparingly branched
                          =Good King Henry, Chenopodium bonus-henricus.=

     8b. Stem diffuse or ascending, freely branched
                                              =Orache, Atriplex patula.=

9a. Flowers in small heads, in the axils or in terminal spikes; leaves
    sinuately toothed or nearly entire
                              =Strawberry Blite, Chenopodium capitatum.=

9b. Flowers in terminal panicles; leaves sharply toothed (Goosefoot)
    --10.

     10a. Panicles short, not as long as the subtending leaves
                                        =Goosefoot, Chenopodium murale.=

     10b. Panicles long, exceeding the subtending leaves --11.

11a. Calyx green                       =Goosefoot, Chenopodium urbicum.=

11b. Calyx red                          =Goosefoot, Chenopodium rubrum.=

     12a. Foliage glandular and strongly aromatic --13.

     12b. Foliage not glandular nor aromatic; sometimes ill-scented
          --15.

13a. Flowers in large loose open spreading panicles; leaves deeply
     pinnatifid                     =Jerusalem Oak, Chenopodium botrys.=

13b. Flowers clustered in slender axillary or terminal spikes --14.

     14a. Spikes dense, leafy   =Mexican Tea, Chenopodium ambrosioides.=

     14b. Spikes open, nearly leafless
               =Wormseed, Chenopodium ambrosioides var. anthelminticum.=

15a. Stem erect, 5-20 dm. tall; leaves frequently white-mealy
                                   =Lamb's Quarters, Chenopodium album.=

15b. Stem prostrate or ascending, succulent; leaves glaucous-white
     beneath                           =Goosefoot, Chenopodium glaucum.=

15c. Stem widely and diffusely branched; leaves green, soon deciduous
                                 =Cycloloma, Cycloloma atriplicifolium.=




AMARANTHACEAE, the Amaranth Family

Herbs, with alternate leaves, and inconspicuous greenish or reddish
flowers without petals, which are axillary or in dense clusters,
blooming in summer.


1a. Flower-clusters axillary --2.

1b. Flower-clusters in terminal spikes or panicles, sometimes also
    axillary --3.

     2a. Plant prostrate or decumbent; seed about 1.5 mm. broad
                                        =Pigweed, Amaranthus blitoides.=

     2b. Plant erect or ascending, widely branched; seeds about 1 mm.
         broad (3-10 dm. high)     =Tumble Weed, Amaranthus graecizans.=

3a. Principal leaves with a pair of spines at their base
                                 =Thorny Amaranth, Amaranthus spinosus.=

3b. Spines none at the base of the leaves --4.

     4a. Weedy plants of cultivated or waste ground; flowers monoecious
         or polygamous; pistillate flowers with a calyx (Pigweed) --5.

     4b. Plants of swamps or stream-banks; flowers dioecious; pistillate
         flowers without calyx (Water Hemp) --7.

5a. Spikes short, 1-8 cm. long, crowded in dense ovoid panicles; the
    terminal spike not conspicuously elongated beyond the appressed or
    ascending lower ones              =Pigweed, Amaranthus retroflexus.=

5b. Spikes slender, 1-12 cm. long; the terminal spike greatly exceeding
    the short inconspicuous divergent lower ones --6.

     6a. Bracts subulate, sharply awned  =Pigweed, Amaranthus hybridus.=

     6b. Bracts merely acuminate      =Pigweed, Amaranthus paniculatus.=

7a. Flowers in leafy spikes, or the lower in separate clusters
                                       =Water Hemp, Acnida tuberculata.=

7b. Flowers in separate distinct clusters
                          =Water Hemp, Acnida tuberculata var. subnuda.=




PHYTOLACCACEAE, the Pokeweed Family

Herbs with alternate entire leaves, small flowers without petals, and a
many-celled ovary.


One species in Michigan, 1-2 m. high, with numerous racemes of whitish
flowers, in late summer, followed by dark-purple berries
                                        =Pokeweed, Phytolacca decandra.=




NYCTAGINACEAE, the Four-o'Clock Family

Herbs, with opposite entire leaves and flowers in small clusters
surrounded by a broad open calyx-like involucre; the true calyx colored
like a corolla; petals none (4-8 dm. high; flowers purple, in summer).


1a. Leaves lanceolate or narrower, sessile
                                    =Umbrella-wort, Oxybaphus hirsutus.=

1b. Leaves ovate, petioled
                                 =Umbrella-wort, Oxybaphus nyctagineus.=




ILLECEBRACEAE, the Knotwort Family

Herbs, with opposite entire leaves, and minute flowers without petals.
(Prostrate spreading or freely branched plants, 3 dm. high or less;
flowers in summer.)


1a. Stipules none; leaves slightly connate at base, subulate
                                           =Knawel, Scleranthus annuus.=

1b. Stipules present, but small; leaves elliptical or oval (Forked
    Chickweed) --2.

     2a. Stems pubescent; internodes seldom more than 1 cm. long
                               =Forked Chickweed, Anychia polygonoides.=

     2b. Stems smooth; internodes about 2 cm. long
                                 =Forked Chickweed, Anychia canadensis.=




AIZOACEAE, the Carpet-weed Family

Prostrate herbs, with whorled leaves and small whitish axillary flowers
without petals, in summer.


One species in Michigan             =Carpet-weed, Mollugo verticillata.=




CARYOPHYLLACEAE, the Pink Family

Herbs, with opposite or whorled entire leaves, and stems frequently
swollen at the nodes. Sepals 4 or 5; petals separate, as many as the
sepals, or rarely none; stamens twice as many as the petals in plants
with conspicuous flowers, sometimes fewer in those with small flowers;
ovary 1-celled, with the ovules on a central axis, and with 2-5 styles.


1a. Calyx spreading, of separate sepals; flowers 15 mm. wide or less;
    petals sometimes none --2.

1b. Calyx tubular, of united sepals; flowers in many species more than
    15 mm. wide; petals always present --22.

     2a. Stipules present --3.

     2b. Stipules none --4.

3a. Leaves opposite; flowers pink (about 1 dm. high; summer)
                                      =Sand Spurrey, Spergularia rubra.=

3b. Leaves whorled; flowers white (1-5 dm. high; leaves linear; summer)
                                           =Spurrey, Spergula arvensis.=

     4a. Leaves subulate or thread-like --5.

     4b. Leaves linear to ovate --7.

5a. Leaves opposite (1 dm. high or less; flowers white, summer)
                                         =Pearlwort, Sagina procumbens.=

5b. Leaves fascicled in the axils --6.

     6a. Styles 4 or 5 (1 dm. high; terminal white flowers 5 mm. wide,
         in summer)                          =Pearlwort, Sagina nodosa.=

     6b. Styles 3 (1-4 dm. high; flowers white, nearly 1 cm. wide,
         summer)                         =Stitchwort, Arenaria stricta.=

7a. Petals entire (3 dm. high or less; flowers white, in summer)
    (Stitchwort) --8.

7b. Petals notched or 2-cleft at the end, or none --11.

     8a. Principal leaves 1 cm. long or less --9.

     8b. Principal leaves 1.5 cm. long or more --10.

9a. Petals half as long as the sepals
                                     =Stitchwort, Arenaria leptoclados.=

9b. Petals almost as long as the sepals
                                   =Stitchwort, Arenaria serpyllifolia.=

10a. Leaves oblong-oval, obtuse.     =Stitchwort, Arenaria lateriflora.=

10b. Leaves lanceolate, acute.       =Stitchwort, Arenaria macrophylla.=

11a. Capsule splitting by valves at maturity; styles usually 3
     (Chickweed) --12.

11b. Capsule opening by terminal teeth at maturity; styles usually 5
     (tufted or matted plants, 1-5 dm. high; flowers white, in spring
     and summer) (Mouse-ear Chickweed) --18.

     12a. Petals distinctly shorter than the sepals, or none --13.

     12b. Petals as long as the sepals, or longer --15.

13a. Leaves ovate (1-3 dm. high; flowers white, all summer)
                                           =Chickweed, Stellaria media.=

13b. Leaves lanceolate to oblong (in water or wet places, 1-4 dm. high;
     flowers white, in summer) --14.

     14a. Flowers in a leafy terminal branching cluster
                                        =Chickweed, Stellaria borealis.=

     14b. Flowers in a lateral cluster with minute bracts
                                       =Chickweed, Stellaria uliginosa.=

15a. Flowers in clusters with leaf-like bracts, or axillary and solitary
     (in water or wet places; 1-3 dm. high; flowers white, summer)
                                     =Chickweed, Stellaria crassifolia.=

15b. Flowers in clusters with scale-like bracts --16.

     16a. Leaves distinctly linear; cymes lateral; a common species in
          marshes (2-5 dm. high; flowers white, early summer)
                                      =Chickweed, Stellaria longifolia.=

     16b. Leaves distinctly broadest near the base; flower-cluster
          terminal --17.

17a. Pedicels erect; clusters usually few-flowered; in extreme northern
     part of the state only (1-3 dm. high; flowers white, summer)
                                        =Chickweed, Stellaria longipes.=

17b. Pedicels spreading; clusters open, many-flowered (2-6 dm. high;
     flowers white, in summer)          =Chickweed, Stellaria graminea.=

     18a. Petals distinctly longer than the sepals --19.

     18b. Petals as long as the sepals, or shorter than them --21.

19a. Flowers much less than 1 cm. wide
                                =Mouse-ear Chickweed, Cerastium nutans.=

19b. Flowers more than 1 cm. wide --20.

     20a. Stem-leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate
                               =Mouse-ear Chickweed, Cerastium arvense.=

     20b. Stem-leaves oblong
            =Mouse-ear Chickweed, Cerastium arvense var. oblongifolium.=

21a. Bracts green; pedicels short and inflorescence crowded
                              =Mouse-ear Chickweed, Cerastium viscosum.=

21b. Bracts with transparent white margins; pedicels longer than the
     calyx and inflorescence open
                              =Mouse-ear Chickweed, Cerastium vulgatum.=

     22a. Styles 5 --23.

     22b. Styles 3 (3-10 dm. high; flowers in summer) --25.

     22c. Styles 2 --29.

23a. Calyx-teeth much longer than the calyx-tube (erect, 4-10 dm. high;
     flowers large, red, late summer)
                                      =Corn Cockle, Agrostemma githago.=

23b. Calyx-teeth shorter than the calyx-tube (4-10 dm. high; flowers in
     summer) --24.

     24a. Flowers crimson             =Mullein Pink, Lychnis coronaria.=

     24b. Flowers white or pink           =White Campion, Lychnis alba.=

25a. Flowers night-blooming, always wilted during the day
                                          =Catchfly, Silene noctiflora.=

25b. Flowers open during the day --26.

     26a. Flowers 6 mm. wide or less, white or pink
                                          =Catchfly, Silene antirrhina.=

     26b. Flowers 1-2 cm. wide, white to pink or purple --27.

     26c. Flowers 2 cm. wide or more, crimson
                                          =Fire Pink, Silene virginica.=

27a. Principal leaves in whorls of 4
                                      =Starry Campion, Silene stellata.=

27b. Leaves opposite --28.

     28a. Calyx globular, much inflated or bladder-like
                                    =Bladder Campion, Silene latifolia.=

     28b. Calyx club-shape, not inflated
                               =Sweet William Catchfly, Silene armeria.=

29a. Leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate, 5 mm. wide or less (flowers
     pink or white, in summer) --30.

29b. Leaves lanceolate or ovate (flowers pink, white, or red, in summer)
     --32.

30a. Flowers in terminal clusters; leaves hairy (2-4 dm. high)
                                      =Deptford Pink, Dianthus armeria.=

30b. Flowers solitary at the ends of long pedicels --31.

31a. Flowers 3-4 mm. wide (1-2 dm. high)
                                       =Gypsophyll, Gypsophila muralis.=

31b. Flowers 1 cm. wide or more (1-5 dm. high)
                                      =Meadow Pink, Dianthus deltoides.=

     32a. Flowers less than 1 cm. broad --33.

     32b. Flowers more than 1 cm. broad --34.

33a. Flowers white, in large panicles (4-7 dm. high)
                                 =Baby's Breath, Gypsophila paniculata.=

33b. Flowers pale red, in loose clusters (4-10 dm. high)
                                          =Cowherb, Saponaria vaccaria.=

     34a. Leaves with 3-5 prominent veins (4-7 dm. high)
                                      =Soapwort, Saponaria officinalis.=

     34b. Leaves with one mid-vein (3-6 dm. high)
                                     =Sweet William, Dianthus barbatus.=




PORTULACACEAE, the Purslane Family

Herbs with opposite or alternate leaves and regular flowers with 2
sepals, 5 petals, and a 1-celled ovary with 2 or 3 styles.


1a. Leaves a single pair on each stem (1-2 dm. high; flowers pink, in
    racemes in early spring) (Spring Beauty) --2.

1b. Leaves numerous (prostrate or spreading; flowers in summer) --3.

     2a. Leaves lance-ovate to oblong, not more than six times as long
         as wide                 =Spring Beauty, Claytonia caroliniana.=

     2b. Leaves linear or linear-lanceolate, more than six times as long
         as wide                   =Spring Beauty, Claytonia virginica.=

3a. Flowers yellow, about 5 mm. wide     =Purslane, Portulaca oleracea.=

3b. Flowers 2-5 cm. wide             =Portulaca, Portulaca grandiflora.=




CERATOPHYLLACEAE, the Hornwort Family

Submerged aquatics, with whorled, finely dissected leaves and
inconspicuous flowers with neither calyx nor corolla.


One species in Michigan              =Hornwort, Ceratophyllum demersum.=




NYMPHAEACEAE, the Water Lily Family

Aquatic plants, with usually large and floating leaves which are round
or elliptical and palmately veined.


1a. Floating and emersed leaves centrally peltate --2.

1b. Leaves rounded but not peltate, with a deep sinus --3.

     2a. Leaves round, 3 dm. in diameter or more; flowers very large,
         pale yellow                             =Lotus, Nelumbo lutea.=

     2b. Leaves oval, 5-15 cm. long; flowers small, purple
                                     =Water Shield, Brasenia schreberi.=

3a. Flowers yellow (Pond Lily) --4.

3b. Flowers white or tinged with pink (Water Lily) --5.

     4a. Leaves more than 1 dm. long       =Pond Lily, Nymphaea advena.=

     4b. Leaves less than 1 dm. long  =Pond Lily, Nymphaea microphylla.=

5a. Flowers very fragrant; leaves purplish beneath
                                         =Water Lily, Castalia odorata.=

5b. Flowers not fragrant; leaves green beneath
                                        =Water Lily, Castalia tuberosa.=




RANUNCULACEAE, the Crowfoot Family

Herbs with alternate (rarely opposite) leaves, acrid watery juice,
separate sepals and petals, numerous stamens, and several or many
(rarely only 1) simple pistils. Petals present or absent, in the latter
case the sepals are usually petal-like in appearance.


1a. Climbing plants with opposite leaves (flowers in late summer)
    (Virgin's Bower) --2.

1b. Aquatic plants with dissected submerged leaves (flowers in late
    spring and summer) (Water Crowfoot) --3.

1c. Terrestrial or mud plants, not agreeing with 1a or 1b --6.

     2a. Flowers white, 2-3 cm. wide
                                  =Virgin's Bower, Clematis virginiana.=

     2b. Flowers pink-purple, 5-8 cm. wide
                               =Virgin's Bower, Clematis verticillaris.=

3a. Flowers white --4.

3b. Flowers yellow --5.

     4a. Leaves rigid, not collapsing when removed from the water
                                =Water Crowfoot, Ranunculus circinatus.=

     4b. Leaves soft, collapsing when removed from the water
                =Water Crowfoot, Ranunculus aquatilis var. capillaceus.=

5a. Submerged leaves divided into hair-like segments
                            =Water Crowfoot, Ranunculus delphinifolius.=

5b. Submerged leaves palmately divided into linear lobes
                                   =Water Crowfoot, Ranunculus purshii.=

     6a. Flowers blue, irregular, with one spur (4-8 dm. high, summer)
                                          =Larkspur, Delphinium ajacis.=

     6b. The five petals each prolonged into a spur; flowers showy (4-8
         dm. tall) (Columbine) --7.

     6c. Flowers regular, without spurs --8.

7a. Spurs nearly straight; flowers scarlet and yellow (spring)
                                 =Wild Columbine, Aquilegia canadensis.=

7b. Spurs strongly incurved; flowers blue or white (spring, early
    summer)                             =Columbine, Aquilegia vulgaris.=

     8a. Flowers yellow --9.

     8b. Flowers of various colors, but never yellow --28.

9a. Petals none; sepals petal-like; leaves crenate or dentate (2-4 dm.
    high, flowers in early spring)          =Cowslip, Caltha palustris.=

9b. Petals small; sepals petal-like; leaves deeply palmately lobed (4-6
    dm. tall; flowers in late spring)    =Globe-flower, Trollius laxus.=

9c. Petals yellow; sepals green or yellowish --10.

     10a. Leaves linear to narrowly oblong, entire or with minute teeth
          (flowers 10-15 mm. wide, in summer) --11.

     10b. Leaves broader, some or all of them lobed or divided, or
          cordate-ovate and not lobed --12.

11a. Stems ascending (4-8 dm. high), rooting at the lower joints; fruits
     pointed with a long slender beak
                                     =Spearwort, Ranunculus laxicaulis.=

11b. Stems prostrate and trailing, rooting at the joints; fruits tipped
     with a minute short beak
                          =Spearwort, Ranunculus flammula var. reptans.=

     12a. Basal leaves, or most of them, merely serrate or crenate, and
          not obviously lobed --13.

     12b. All the leaves lobed or divided --16.

13a. Stem-leaves resembling the basal ones, and not lobed (1-2 dm. high;
     summer)                 =Sea-side Crowfoot, Ranunculus cymbalaria.=

13b. Stem-leaves deeply divided into oblong or linear segments --14.

     14a. Flowers 1.5 cm. wide or more (1-3 dm. high; spring)
                                    =Buttercup, Ranunculus rhomboideus.=

     14b. Flowers 1 cm. wide or less (2-5 dm. high; spring) --15.

15a. Foliage glabrous or minutely pubescent; basal leaves cordate
                        =Small-flowered Crowfoot, Ranunculus abortivus.=

15b. Foliage villous; basal leaves barely cordate or not at all
                       =Small-flowered Crowfoot, Ranunculus micranthus.=

     16a. Stem erect or essentially so --17.

     16b. Stem prostrate, creeping, or ascending. Early in spring
          stems may be found which appear almost erect. Common
          spring-flowering buttercups are all classified here --22.

17a. Flowers 2 cm. broad or larger (Buttercup) --18.

17b. Flowers 1 cm. broad or smaller --19.

     18a. Terminal lobe of leaf stalked (2-5 dm. high, early summer)
                                       =Buttercup, Ranunculus bulbosus.=

     18b. Terminal lobe of leaf sessile (5-10 dm. high; all summer)
                                          =Buttercup, Ranunculus acris.=

19a. Plant glabrous, succulent; stem hollow (1-5 dm. high; spring and
     summer)                   =Cursed Crowfoot, Ranunculus sceleratus.=

19b. Plant pubescent (Buttercup) --20.

     20a. Fruits tipped with a prominent recurved beak; plant of shady
          woods (2-6 dm. high; flowers in late spring)
                                     =Buttercup, Ranunculus recurvatus.=

     20b. Fruits tipped with a straight or slightly curved beak; plants
          of marshes or wet soil (3-6 dm. high; flowers in summer) --21.

21a. Fruits in a short-cylindric head on a conical receptacle
                                 =Buttercup, Ranunculus pennsylvanicus.=

21b. Fruits in a globose or short-ovoid head, on an obovoid receptacle
                                       =Buttercup, Ranunculus macounii.=

     22a. Leaves dissected into numerous linear or narrowly wedge-shape
          divisions; plants growing in water or very wet places (late
          spring and summer)
                            =Water Crowfoot, Ranunculus delphinifolius.=

     22b. Leaves palmately lobed, the terminal division not definitely
          stalked --23.

     22c. Leaves compound, some or all of the divisions on definite
          stalks (Buttercup) --24.

23a. Stem-leaves numerous (1-2 dm. tall; late spring and summer)
                                         =Crowfoot, Ranunculus purshii.=

23b. Stem-leaves one or none, the principal leaves all basal (about 1
     dm. high; flowers in summer)    =Buttercup, Ranunculus lapponicus.=

     24a. Style short, obviously curved --25.

     24b. Style long and slender, straight or nearly so (common
          spring-flowering buttercups, 2-5 dm. high) --26.

25a. Stems creeping; flowers 2 cm. wide or more (spring)
                                         =Buttercup, Ranunculus repens.=

25b. Stems ascending; flowers 1.5 cm. wide or less (3-6 dm. high;
     summer)                           =Buttercup, Ranunculus macounii.=

     26a. The two lateral divisions of the leaf sessile or nearly so
                                   =Buttercup, Ranunculus fascicularis.=

     26b. The two lateral divisions of the leaf on long stalks --27.

27a. Roots fibrous; plants of wet soil
                                =Buttercup, Ranunculus septentrionalis.=

27b. Roots thickened; plants of dry woods or thickets
                                       =Buttercup, Ranunculus hispidus.=

     28a. Leaves dissected into numerous narrowly linear acute divisions
          (4-7 dm. high; flowers large, bluish, in summer)
                                    =Love-in-a-mist, Nigella damascena.=

     28b. Leaves lobed or divided, but the divisions not separated by
          definite stalks --29.

     28c. Leaves truly compound, all their divisions separated by
          distinct stalks --39.

29a. Leaves all basal, their lobes (usually 3) entire (1-2 dm. high;
     flowers pink-purple, in earliest spring) (Hepatica) --30.

29b. Lobes of the leaf serrate or incised --31.

     30a. Lobes of the leaf obtuse or rounded
                                           =Hepatica, Hepatica triloba.=

     30b. Lobes of the leaf acute        =Hepatica, Hepatica acutiloba.=

31a. Petals none; sepals 3, usually falling away as soon as the flower
     opens (2-4 dm. high; flowers greenish-white, in spring)
                                    =Golden Seal, Hydrastis canadensis.=

31b. Petals none; sepals petal-like, 4 or more (Anemone) --32.

31c. Petals present, but much smaller than the 5 petal-like sepals --38.

     32a. Stem-leaves sessile or nearly so --33.

     32b. Stem-leaves on definite petioles --35.

33a. Ovary tipped with a long slender hairy style; flowers bluish-purple
     (1-4 dm. high; early spring)
                      =Pasque Flower, Anemone patens var. wolfgangiana.=

33b. Ovary with a short style, densely woolly; flowers red, greenish, or
     white (1-4 dm. high; late spring and summer) --34.

33c. Ovary tipped with a short style, glabrous or nearly so; flowers
     white (4-7 dm. high; late spring and early summer)
                                          =Anemone, Anemone canadensis.=

     34a. Stem 1-flowered, sepals white
                                          =Anemone, Anemone parviflora.=

     34b. Stem 3-flowered; sepals usually red
                                           =Anemone, Anemone multifida.=

35a. Achenes densely woolly; flowers appearing in summer --36.

35b. Achenes merely pubescent; stems 1-flowered; woodland species
     blooming in early spring (1-2 dm. high; flowers white)
                                   =Wood Anemone, Anemone quinquefolia.=

     36a. Segments of the leaf broadly wedge-shape or ovate; flowers
          white (4-8 dm. high) --37.

     36b. Segments of the leaf linear-oblong; flower red, greenish, or
          white; plants growing on the shores of the Great Lakes
                                           =Anemone, Anemone multifida.=

37a. Segments of the basal leaves wedge-lanceolate; head of fruit
     cylindric                            =Anemone, Anemone cylindrica.=

37b. Segments of the basal leaves ovate-lanceolate; head of fruit ovoid
     or oblong                            =Anemone, Anemone virginiana.=

     38a. Stem-leaves present --9b.

     38b. Leaves all basal (1-2 dm. high; leaves 3-divided; flowers
          white, in early summer)        =Gold-thread, Coptis trifolia.=

39a. Flowers numerous, in branching panicles (Meadow Rue) --40.

39b. Flowers numerous, in racemes --43.

39c. Flowers solitary or few, in loose clusters; woodland plants
     blooming in early spring (1-3 dm. high; flowers white to purple)
     --45.

     40a. Blooming in spring; stem-leaves with obvious petioles (3-7 dm.
          high; flowers white or greenish)
                                       =Meadow Rue, Thalictrum dioicum.=

     40b. Blooming in late spring or summer, stem-leaves sessile or
          nearly so (8-15 dm. high; flowers white) --41.

41a. Filaments club-shape, approximately as wide as the anther
                                     =Meadow Rue, Thalictrum polygamum.=

41b. Filaments slender or thread-like --42.

     42a. Leaves minutely pubescent beneath, but not glandular
                                    =Meadow Rue, Thalictrum dasycarpum.=

     42b. Leaves minutely glandular beneath
                                     =Meadow Rue, Thalictrum revolutum.=

43a. Racemes slender, 10-90 cm. long (8-15 dm. high; flowers white, in
     summer)                             =Bugbane, Cimicifuga racemosa.=

43b. Racemes short and stout, 3-8 cm. long (4-8 dm. high; flowers white,
     in late spring) (Baneberry) --44.

     44a. Berries white; pedicels strongly thickened at maturity
                                               =Baneberry, Actaea alba.=

     44b. Berries red; pedicels slender       =Baneberry, Actaea rubra.=

45a. Flowers white; stem-leaves alternate
                                        =Isopyrum, Isopyrum biternatum.=

45b. Flowers white to pink or purplish; stem-leaves whorled
                                =Rue Anemone, Anemonella thalictroides.=




MAGNOLIACEAE, the Magnolia Family

Trees or shrubs, with alternate leaves, and large, frequently showy
flowers.


One species in Michigan, with broad 4-lobed leaves and greenish-yellow
flowers in late spring            =Tulip Tree, Liriodendron tulipifera.=




ANONACEAE, the Custard Apple Family

Trees or shrubs, with alternate simple entire leaves, 3 sepals, and 6
petals.


One species in Michigan; tall shrub or small tree, with obovate leaves
and large dull-purple flowers in spring        =Papaw, Asimina triloba.=




MENISPERMACEAE, the Moonseed Family

Woody climbers, with alternate leaves, 6-8 petals, and numerous stamens.


One species in Michigan, with 5-7-angled leaves which are peltate near
the edge, and small white flowers in early summer
                                      =Moonseed, Menispermum canadense.=




BERBERIDACEAE, the Barberry Family

Shrubs or herbs; petals 6 or more; stamens 6-18, frequently opening by
two terminal lids; pistil 1.


1a. Leaves simple --2.

1b. Leaves compound --3.

     2a. Stem shrubby (flowers yellow, in racemes, in spring)
                                          =Barberry, Berberis vulgaris.=

     2b. Stem herbaceous, with a single pair of palmately lobed leaves
         (4-6 dm. tall; flower white, solitary, terminal, in spring)
                                      =May Apple, Podophyllum peltatum.=

3a. Leaves all basal; leaflets 2 (2-4 dm. high; the flower-stalks
    bearing solitary white flowers in spring)
                                      =Twin-leaf, Jeffersonia diphylla.=

3b. The stem-leaf ternately compound, with numerous leaflets (4-8 dm.
    high; with yellowish-green clustered flowers in spring)
                              =Blue Cohosh, Caulophyllum thalictroides.=




LAURACEAE, the Laurel Family

Trees or shrubs, with aromatic taste or odor, and alternate simple
leaves; flowers small, imperfect, the anthers opening by lids.


1a. Freely branched shrub; leaves obovate-oblong, entire (flowers
    yellow, in early spring, before the leaves)
                                        =Spice Bush, Benzoin aestivale.=

1b. Tree or tall shrub; some or all of the leaves 2-3-lobed (flowers
    greenish-yellow, appearing with the leaves)
                                     =Sassafras, Sassafras variifolium.=




PAPAVERACEAE, the Poppy Family

Herbs with milky or colored juice, regular flowers, 2 sepals, 4, 6, or 8
petals, numerous stamens, and a 1-celled ovary.


1a. Leaves palmately lobed; flower 2.5-5 cm. wide, with 8 petals or more
    (leaf basal; flower white, in early spring)
                                    =Bloodroot, Sanguinaria canadensis.=

1b. Leaves pinnately toothed or lobed; flower 7-10 cm. wide, with 4-6
    petals (4-8 cm. high; leaves clasping; summer)
                                            =Poppy, Papaver somniferum.=

1c. Leaves divided pinnately to the mid-rib into several toothed or
    lobed segments; flower 2.5 cm. broad or less (3-5 cm. high; flowers
    yellow) --2.

     2a. Flowers in clusters of 2-4, about 3 cm. wide (spring)
                               =Celandine Poppy, Stylophorum diphyllum.=

     2b. Flowers in umbels of 3-8, about 1.5 cm. wide
                                         =Celandine, Chelidonium majus.=




FUMARIACEAE, the Fumitory Family

Herbs with watery juice, compound or dissected leaves, and irregular
flowers; sepals 2, small; petals 4, in two pairs, and one or both of the
outer pair spurred at the base; stamens 6.


1a. Both outer petals spurred or sack-like at the base --2.

1b. One outer petal spurred or sack-like at the base --4.

     2a. A climbing vine with flowers in panicles (white or pinkish
         flowers in summer)        =Climbing Fumitory, Adlumia fungosa.=

     2b. Low herbs (2-4 cm.) with basal leaves and white or pinkish
         flowers in racemes (early spring) --3.

3a. Spurs of the corolla triangular, divergent
                             =Dutchman's Breeches, Dicentra cucullaria.=

3b. Spurs of the corolla short and rounded
                                   =Squirrel Corn, Dicentra canadensis.=

     4a. Flowers about 5 mm. long, pink-purple tipped with red (3-8 dm.
         high; summer)                  =Fumitory, Fumaria officinalis.=

     4b. Flowers 10 mm. long or more, yellow, at least at the tip (2-6
         dm. high) (Corydalis) --5.

5a. Flowers yellow throughout (spring)    =Corydalis, Corydalis aurea.=

5b. Flowers pink, tipped with yellow (summer).
                                    =Corydalis, Corydalis sempervirens.=




CRUCIFERAE, the Mustard Family

Herbs, with alternate, frequently lobed or dissected leaves, and regular
flowers, usually in racemes; sepals and petals each 4, stamens 6, 4 long
and 2 short (or rarely 2 only), ovary 1.


1a. Petals yellow or yellowish --2.

1b. Petals white, pink, or purple, never yellow --29.

     2a. Leaves simple, entire or dentate, never lobed --3.

     2b. Leaves deeply lobed or compound (the bracteal leaves, at or
         near the flower-clusters, may be simple and unlobed) --10.

3a. Leaves clasping the stem --4.

3b. Leaves not clasping at base --6.

     4a. Clasping base and apex of leaf obtuse or rounded; pod very long
         and slender (3-8 dm. high; summer)
                                     =Hare's Ear, Conringia orientalis.=

     4b. Clasping base and apex of leaf acute; pod obovoid (3-7 dm.
         high; early summer) (False Flax) --5.

5a. Stem and leaves glabrous              =False Flax, Camelina sativa.=

5b. Leaves and usually the stem pubescent
                                      =False Flax, Camelina microcarpa.=

     6a. Flowers about 2 mm. wide (1-3 dm. high; flowers in summer) --7.

     6b. Flowers 5 mm. wide or more (2-6 dm. high; flowers in summer)
         --8.

7a. Leaves about twice as long as broad, widest near or below the middle
                                        =Whitlow Grass, Draba nemorosa.=

7b. Leaves 3-5 times as long as broad, widest above the middle
                                   =Yellow Alyssum, Alyssum alyssoides.=

     8a. Leaves lanceolate, gradually tapering to the base; flowers
         about 15 mm. wide            =Sand Rocket, Diplotaxis muralis.=

     8b. Leaves ovate, acute at base; flowers about 15 mm. wide --22a.

     8c. Leaves entire or minutely toothed; flowers 5-10 mm. wide --9.

9a. Pods 25 mm. long or less, on slender pedicels about 8 mm. long
                           =Worm-seed Mustard, Erysimum cheiranthoides.=

9b. Pods 20 mm. long or more, on stout pedicels about 4 mm. long
                              =Worm-seed Mustard, Erysimum parviflorum.=

     10a. Leaves bipinnate or dissected into very numerous divisions
          (3-8 dm. high; flowers in summer) --11.

     10b. Leaves simply pinnate --13.

11a. Flowers about 5 mm. broad; pods about 20 mm. long by 1 mm. broad
                                       =Herb Sophia, Sisymbrium sophia.=

11b. Flowers about 3 mm. broad; pods about 8 mm. long by 2 mm. wide
     (Tansy Mustard) --12.

     12a. Stems gray with a close fine pubescence
                                  =Tansy Mustard, Sisymbrium canescens.=

     12b. Stems green
                =Tansy Mustard, Sisymbrium canescens var. brachycarpon.=

13a. Pod short, not more than 3 times as long as wide (coarse plants,
     preferring wet or sandy ground; flowers in summer) (Yellow Cress)
     --14.

13b. Pod elongated, more than 4 times as long as wide --17.

     14a. Stems creeping, with erect or ascending branches; flowers
          about 8 mm. wide          =Yellow Cress, Radicula sylvestris.=

     14b. Stems erect or ascending (3-10 dm. high); flowers about 4 mm.
          wide --15.

15a. Pods about twice as long as the pedicels
                                        =Yellow Cress, Radicula obtusa.=

15b. Pods about as long as the pedicels, or shorter than them --16.

     16a. Plant glabrous or minutely pubescent
                                     =Yellow Cress, Radicula palustris.=

     16b. Plant hirsute =Yellow Cress, Radicula palustris var. hispida.=

17a. Petals 7 mm. long or more; pod terminating in a conspicuous beak
     (coarse, weedy plants, 3-12 dm. high, blooming in summer) --18.

17b. Petals of smaller size; pod not terminating in a conspicuous beak
     --24.

     18a. Upper stem-leaves clasping at the base
                                        =Rutabaga, Brassica campestris.=

     18b. Upper stem-leaves not clasping --19.

19a. Pod tipped with a slender cylindrical beak whose base is much
     narrower than the pod --20.

19b. Pod gradually narrowed at its tip into a stout, flattened or angled
     beak --22.

     20a. Leaves oblanceolate, rather regularly pinnatifid, the terminal
         segment about the same size as the lateral ones
                                      =Sand Rocket, Diplotaxis muralis.=

     20b. Leaves broad, irregularly pinnatifid especially below the
          middle, with a large terminal segment --21.

21a. Beak of pod 3-4 mm. long           =Black Mustard, Brassica nigra.=

21b. Beak of pod 5 mm. long or more   =Indian Mustard, Brassica juncea.=

     22a. Leaves dentate or lobed         =Charlock, Brassica arvensis.=

     22b. Leaves deeply pinnatifid --23.

23a. Pod dehiscent when ripe by two valves, tipped with a flat or angled
     beak                                =White Mustard, Brassica alba.=

23b. Pod indehiscent, with spongy cross-partitions between the seeds,
     tipped with a conical beak    =Wild Radish, Raphanus raphanistrum.=

     24a. Terminal segment of the principal leaves much larger than the
          lateral segments; flowers in spring and summer --25.

     24b. Terminal segment of the principal leaves equaling or smaller
          than the lateral ones (5-10 dm. high; pods very long and
          slender; flowers in summer)
                                    =Sisymbrium, Sisymbrium altissimum.=

25a. Flowers about 3 mm. wide; pods erect and closely appressed to the
     stem (3-9 dm. high; weed blooming in summer) (Hedge Mustard) --26.

25b. Flowers about 7 mm. wide; pods spreading or ascending (3-6 dm.
     high; flowers in spring) (Winter Cress) --27.

     26a. Pods pubescent         =Hedge Mustard, Sisymbrium officinale.=

     26b. Pods glabrous
                 =Hedge Mustard, Sisymbrium officinale var. leiocarpum.=

27a. Lateral leaf-segments 5-8 pairs on the principal leaves
                                         =Winter Cress, Barbarea verna.=

27b. Lateral leaf-segments 1-4 pairs on the principal leaves --28.

     28a. Flowers bright yellow, in racemes; pods spreading or ascending
                                      =Winter Cress, Barbarea vulgaris.=

     28b. Flowers pale yellow, in corymb-like clusters; pods erect and
          somewhat appressed           =Winter Cress, Barbarea stricta.=

29a. Principal stem-leaves compound or deeply lobed (the uppermost or
     bracteal leaves may be simple) --30.

29b. Principal stem-leaves entire, dentate, serrate, or sometimes
     shallowly lobed or none (the basal leaves, at the surface of the
     ground, may be deeply lobed or compound) --42.

     30a. Leaves ternately divided or compound (2-5 dm. high; flowers in
          spring) (Toothwort) --31.

     30b. Leaves pinnately divided or compound --33.

     31a. Leaf-segments lanceolate or narrowly oblong
                                        =Toothwort, Dentaria laciniata.=

31b. Leaf-segments ovate or ovate-oblong --32.

     32a. Stem-leaves 2, opposite or nearly opposite
                                         =Toothwort, Dentaria diphylla.=

     32b. Stem-leaves 2-5, alternate
                                           =Toothwort, Dentaria maxima.=

33a. Plants growing in water, or in mud near water (spring and summer)
     --34.

33b. Plants of dry or moist soil --35.

     34a. Aerial leaves distinctly compound, with 3-11 leaflets
                           =Water Cress, Radicula nasturtium-aquaticum.=

     34b. Aerial leaves merely serrate to pinnatifid; the submerged
          leaves, if present, dissected
                                        =Lake Cress, Radicula aquatica.=

35a. Flowers 5 mm. broad, or less --36.

35b. Flowers 6 mm. broad, or more --39.

     36a. Stem-leaves irregularly pinnatifid or lobed; pod about as
          broad as long (2-4 dm. high; flowers in summer)
                                       =Garden Cress, Lepidium sativum.=

     36b. Stem-leaves distinctly pinnatifid, with 3-6 pairs of lateral
          segments (spring) (Bitter Cress) --37.

37a. Leaves chiefly basal, pubescent on the upper side (1-3 dm. tall)
                                      =Bitter Cress, Cardamine hirsuta.=

37b. Stem-leaves conspicuous, glabrous on the upper side --38.

     38a. Plant of dry soil; flowers about 3 mm. wide (1-4 dm. high)
                                   =Bitter Cress, Cardamine parviflora.=

     38b. Plant of moist or wet soil; flowers about 5 mm. wide (2-8 dm.
          high)                 =Bitter Cress, Cardamine pennsylvanica.=

39a. Leaves irregularly pinnatifid or lobed, not segmented into
     definitely paired divisions (coarse plants 4-8 dm. high; flowers
     in summer) --40.

39b. Leaves deeply segmented into 3-10 pairs of divisions --41.

     40a. Flowers pink or white from the first
                                             =Radish, Raphanus sativus.=

     40b. Flowers yellow at first, turning white with age
                                   =Wild Radish, Raphanus raphanistrum.=

41a. Flowers pink or white, appearing in spring (2-5 dm. high)
                                   =Cuckoo Flower, Cardamine pratensis.=

41b. Flowers yellowish or cream-color; a weed blooming in summer (5-10
     dm. high)                      =Sisymbrium, Sisymbrium altissimum.=

     42a. A fleshy, much-branched plant of the shores of the Great
          Lakes, with a pod transversely divided into two joints
          (2-3 dm. high; summer)          =Sea Rocket, Cakile edentula.=

     42b. Pod not transversely divided into two joints --43.

43a. Pod short, its length not more than 3 times its diameter --44.

43b. Pod long and slender, its length more than 3 times its diameter
     --55.

     44a. Pods not conspicuously flattened, thick and plump, about
          circular in cross-section (flowers in summer) --45.

     44b. Pods distinctly flat --46.

45a. A plant escaped from cultivation in dry or moist soil, with very
     large basal leaves (5-10 dm. high)
                                     =Horse Radish, Radicula armoracia.=

45b. A plant of water or very wet soil, the largest leaves seldom more
     than 15 cm. long (1-5 dm. tall)    =Lake Cress, Radicula aquatica.=

     46a. Stem-leaves clasping the stem by an auricled base --47.

     46b. Stem-leaves sessile or petioled, not clasping, or none --49.

47a. Stem and leaves glabrous or pubescent; pod very flat and circular,
     about 10 mm. wide (1-5 dm. tall; early summer)
                                         =Penny Cress, Thlaspi arvense.=

47b. Stem and leaves glabrous or pubescent; pod not more than 5 mm. wide
     (1-6 dm. high; spring and early summer) --48.

     48a. Pods broadly ovate          =Field Cress, Lepidium campestre.=

     48b. Pods triangular, or slightly indented at the apex
                            =Shepherd's Purse, Capsella bursa-pastoris.=

49a. Pods about circular, or a very little longer than broad --50.

49b. Pods ovoid or oblong, broadest near the middle, and distinctly
     longer than wide (Whitlow Grass) --53.

     50a. Leaves entire (1-3 dm. high; flowers in summer)
                                   =Yellow Alyssum, Alyssum alyssoides.=

     50b. Leaves serrate (2-6 dm. high; flowers in summer) --51.

51a. Stamens 6                         =Garden Cress, Lepidium sativum.=

51b. Stamens 2 (Pepper Grass) --52.

     52a. Petals present            =Pepper Grass, Lepidium virginicum.=

     52b. Petals none                 =Pepper Grass, Lepidium apetalum.=

53a. Petals deeply 2-cleft (about 1 dm. high; early spring)
                                           =Whitlow Grass, Draba verna.=

53b. Petals entire or barely notched at the tip --54.

     54a. Leaves all or chiefly at or near the base (about 1 dm. high;
          spring)                    =Whitlow Grass, Draba caroliniana.=

     54b. Stems leafy up to the flowers (1-5 dm. high; summer)
                                       =Whitlow Grass, Draba arabisans.=

55a. Stem-leaves cordate or sagittate at the base and sessile, forming a
     more or less clasping leaf (3-10 dm. high) (Rock Cress) --56.

55b. Stem-leaves sessile or somewhat petioled, but not clasping --63.

     56a. Seeds in 2 rows in each cavity of the pod (early summer) --57.

     56b. Seeds in 1 row in each cavity of the pod --59.

57a. Calyx pubescent; the pods reflexed =Rock Cress, Arabis holboellii.=

57b. Calyx glabrous; the pods spreading or ascending --58.

     58a. Basal leaves densely pubescent
                                       =Rock Cress, Arabis brachycarpa.=

     58b. Basal leaves smooth or nearly so
                                        =Rock Cress, Arabis drummondii.=

59a. Petals conspicuous, about twice as long as the calyx, or longer;
     straight, erect, mostly unbranched plants --60.

59b. Petals inconspicuous, equaling or but little longer than the calyx
     --61.

     60a. Pods 3-4 cm. long, ascending (summer)
                                            =Rock Cress, Arabis patens.=

     60b. Pods 8-10 cm. long, recurved (late spring)
                                         =Rock Cress, Arabis laevigata.=

61a. Pods widely spreading; stem usually sparingly branched near the
     base (spring)                         =Rock Cress, Arabis dentata.=

61b. Pods erect or appressed; stem usually unbranched (summer) --62.

     62a. Stem-leaves and stem smooth and glaucous
                                            =Rock Cress, Arabis glabra.=

     62b. Stem-leaves and stem almost always pubescent, and never
          glaucous                         =Rock Cress, Arabis hirsuta.=

63a. Principal stem-leaves 7-10 cm. long, or more --64.

63b. Principal stem-leaves 2-5 cm. long --65.

     64a. Leaves lanceolate or oblong; flowers 10 mm. wide or less (3-7
          dm. high; summer)             =Rock Cress, Arabis canadensis.=

     64b. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate; flowers 15-20 mm. wide (5-8
          dm. high; late spring and summer)
                                   =Dame's Rocket, Hesperis matronalis.=

65a. Basal leaves ovate to orbicular or cordate, not more than twice as
     long as broad (1-3 dm. high; spring) (Bitter Cress) --66.

65b. Basal leaves oblong, lanceolate, or oblanceolate, at least 3 times
     as long as broad (1-3 dm. high) --67.

     66a. Flowers purple or rose color
                                   =Bitter Cress, Cardamine douglassii.=

     66b. Flowers white               =Bitter Cress, Cardamine bulbosa.=

67a. Basal leaves pinnatifid (spring and summer)
                                            =Rock Cress, Arabis lyrata.=

67b. Basal leaves entire or toothed --68.

     68a. Leaves narrowly oblanceolate; rare plant occurring from
          Mackinac northward (summer)       =Rock Cress, Braya humilis.=

     68b. Leaves obovate or oblong; an introduced weed (spring)
                                =Mouse-ear Cress, Sisymbrium thalianum.=




CAPPARIDACEAE, the Caper Family

Herbs, with alternate compound leaves, 4 petals, and 6 or more stamens,
which are about equal in length; fruit a 1-celled pod.


One species in Michigan, stamens about 11; leaflets 3 (2-4 dm. high;
flowers yellowish, in summer)       =Clammy-weed, Polanisia graveolens.=




RESEDACEAE, the Mignonette Family

Herbs, with alternate leaves and terminal racemes of small yellowish
flowers; sepals 6, petals 6, stamens numerous.


One species in Michigan, with divided leaves and irregularly cleft
petals, blooming in summer            =Yellow Mignonette, Reseda lutea.=




SARRACENIACEAE, the Pitcher Plant Family

Insectivorous plants, with hollow, pitcher-shaped leaves, and large
purple flowers at the ends of naked stems.


One species in Michigan, growing in bogs and blooming in late spring
                                   =Pitcher Plant, Sarracenia purpurea.=




DROSERACEAE, the Sundew Family

Insectivorous herbs, with a rosette of basal leaves bearing gland-tipped
bristles on their upper surface, and with slender racemes of small white
flowers in summer; inhabitants of bogs and swamps (2 dm. high, or less).


1a. Leaf-blade about as long as wide     =Sundew, Drosera rotundifolia.=

1b. Leaf-blade about 2-3 times as long as wide
                                           =Sundew, Drosera longifolia.=

1c. Leaf-blade about 5-8 times as long as wide
                                              =Sundew, Drosera anglica.=

1d. Leaf-blade narrowly linear, about 10 times as long as wide
                                             =Sundew, Drosera linearis.=




PODOSTEMACEAE, the River Weed Family

Small submerged aquatics, growing attached to stones in running water,
with dissected leaves and minute flowers.


One species in Michigan          =River Weed, Podostemum ceratophyllum.=




CRASSULACEAE, the Orpine Family

Herbs, with usually alternate leaves; the sepals, petals, and pistils
each 4 or 5, or in one species the petals none, and the stamens as many
or twice as many as the sepals.


1a. Leaves entire (Stonecrop) --2.

1b. Leaves toothed --3.

     2a. Leaves 3-5 mm. long, very thick and fleshy (tufted plants about
         1 dm. high, with yellow flowers in summer)
                                                =Stonecrop, Sedum acre.=

     2b. Leaves 10-30 mm. long, flat (tufted plants 1-2 dm. high;
         flowers white, in spring)          =Stonecrop, Sedum ternatum.=

3a. Petals present, purple (2-5 dm. high; summer)
                                       =Live-for-ever, Sedum purpureum.=

3b. Petals none (3-6 dm. high; summer)
                                  =Ditch Stonecrop, Penthorum sedoides.=




SAXIFRAGACEAE, the Saxifrage Family

Herbs or shrubs, with alternate or opposite leaves; petals and sepals
each 5, or the petals none; stamens 5 or 10; styles or stigmas 2-4.


1a. Shrubs with lobed leaves (3-15 dm. high; flowers in late spring)
    --2.

1b. Herbs --12.

     2a. Stems thorny --3.

     2b. Stems not thorny (Currant) --8.

3a. Flowers and fruits in racemes       =Swamp Currant, Ribes lacustre.=

3b. Flowers and fruit in short clusters (Gooseberry) --4.

     4a. Ovary and fruit prickly and bristly
                                          =Gooseberry, Ribes cynosbati.=

     4b. Ovary and fruit smooth, or sometimes a little glandular --5.

5a. Stamens equaling the ovate calyx-lobes in length, or a very little
    longer --6.

5b. Stamens distinctly longer than the linear calyx-lobes --7.

     6a. Leaves glabrous beneath, or nearly so
                                     =Gooseberry, Ribes oxyacanthoides.=

     6b. Leaves softly pubescent beneath
                      =Gooseberry, Ribes oxyacanthoides var. calcicola.=

7a. Flowers, including the stamens, about 15 mm. long
                                            =Gooseberry, Ribes gracile.=

7b. Flowers, including the stamens, about 8 mm. long
                                      =Gooseberry, Ribes rotundifolium.=

     8a. Calyx prolonged above the ovary into a tube which is longer
         than the sepals --9.

     8b. Calyx-tube shorter than the ovary or none --10.

9a. Flowers greenish-yellow, inconspicuous; calyx-tube narrowly
    bell-shape                          =Black Currant, Ribes floridum.=

9b. Flowers bright yellow, conspicuous; calyx-tube narrow, with
    spreading lobes                      =Golden Currant, Ribes aureum.=

     10a. Ovary and berry bristly with glandular hairs
                                      =Skunk Currant, Ribes prostratum.=

     10b. Ovary and fruit smooth, or with sessile glands --11.

11a. Leaves dotted beneath with resinous glands
                                     =Black Currant, Ribes hudsonianum.=

11b. Leaves glabrous or pubescent beneath, without resinous glands
                                            =Red Currant, Ribes triste.=

     12a. Flowers minute, yellowish, without petals, in the axils of the
          leaves (1-2 dm. high; flowers in spring)
                          =Golden Saxifrage, Chrysosplenium americanum.=

     12b. Flowers large, solitary, terminating erect stalks (leaves
          mostly basal; flowers white, in late summer; flower-stalks
          1-5 dm. high) (Grass-of-Parnassus) --13.

     12c. Flowers in terminal racemes, panicles, or clusters --15.

13a. Flowers less than 2 cm. wide; leaves narrowed to the base
                             =Grass-of-Parnassus, Parnassia parviflora.=

13b. Flowers 2-3.5 cm. wide; leaves rounded or cordate at the base --14.

     14a. A 3-cleft scale at the base of each petal
                            =Grass-of-Parnassus, Parnassia caroliniana.=

     14b. A many-cleft (9-15) scale at the base of each petal
                              =Grass-of-Parnassus, Parnassia palustris.=

15a. Leaves linear to oblanceolate, 3 times as long as broad, or more,
     and pinnately veined (Saxifrage) --16.

15b. Leaves broadly ovate to nearly circular, frequently cordate at the
     base, and always palmately veined or lobed --20.

     16a. Leaves basal; the flower-stalk bearing no leaves except small
          ones at the base of its branches --17.

     16b. Flower-stalk leafy below (1-3 dm. high; flowers yellow,
          summer) --18.

17a. Petals white; sepals erect; leaves conspicuously toothed, 3-10 cm.
     long (1-3 dm. high; spring)    =Saxifrage, Saxifraga virginiensis.=

17b. Petals greenish; sepals reflexed; leaves minutely toothed or
     entire, 10-30 cm. long (5-10 dm. high; spring)
                                   =Saxifrage, Saxifraga pennsylvanica.=

     18a. Leaves with 3 sharp teeth at the apex
                                    =Saxifrage, Saxifraga tricuspidata.=

     18b. Leaves with numerous teeth or entire --19.

19a. Leaves linear, chiefly on the stem
                                        =Saxifrage, Saxifraga aizoides.=

19b. Leaves spatulate, chiefly in a basal rosette
                                          =Saxifrage, Saxifraga aizoon.=

     20a. Stamens 5 (leaves mostly basal; flowers greenish or purplish
          in late spring, on stalks 5-10 dm. high) (Alum Root) --21.

     20b. Stamens 10 (flowers white, in spring) --23.

21a. Flowers regular                    =Alum Root, Heuchera americana.=

21b. Flowers irregular, the calyx oblique, longer on the upper side than
     on the lower --22.

     22a. Stamens projecting beyond the calyx
                                    =Alum Root, Heuchera hirsuticaulis.=

     22b. Stamens not projecting beyond the calyx
                                          =Alum Root, Heuchera hispida.=

23a. Stem-leaves alternate or none --24.

23b. Stem with a pair of opposite leaves (2-4 dm. high)
                                       =Bishop's Cap, Mitella diphylla.=

     24a. Petals deeply fringed (1-2 dm. high)
                                           =Bishop's Cap, Mitella nuda.=

     24b. Petals entire (1-3 dm. high)
                                 =False Mitrewort, Tiarella cordifolia.=




HAMAMELIDACEAE, the Witch Hazel Family

Shrubs, with alternate simple leaves; sepals, petals, and stamens each
4; ovary 2-lobed.


One species in Michigan; tall shrub with obovate leaves and yellow
flowers appearing late in autumn    =Witch Hazel, Hamamelis virginiana.=




PLATANACEAE, the Plane Tree Family

Trees, with broad, palmately veined and lobed leaves, and minute flowers
in dense spherical heads.


One species in Michigan               =Sycamore, Platanus occidentalis.=




ROSACEAE, the Rose Family

Trees, herbs, or shrubs, with alternate, frequently compound leaves;
petals and sepals usually 5, stamens numerous, pistils 1 to many;
receptacle expanded into a saucer-shape or cup-shape organ, bearing the
sepals, petals, and stamens at its margin, the pistils at its center,
and resembling a calyx-tube or flattened calyx.


1a. Shrubs or trees --2.

1b. Herbaceous plants --48.

     2a. Leaves compound --3.

     2b. Leaves simple --24.

3a. Flowers in large panicles or corymbs, each flower 5-10 mm. across;
    leaflets 7 or more --4.

3b. Flowers solitary or in small clusters, each flower usually 20-80 mm.
    wide; leaflets frequently only 3 or 5 --7.

     4a. Flowers in a pyramidal or oblong panicle, the ovaries superior
         (1-2 m. high; flowers white, in summer) --70b.

     4b. Flowers in rounded or hemispheric clusters, the ovary inferior
         --5.

5a. Leaves pubescent on the lower surface
                                          =Rowan Tree, Pyrus aucuparia.=

5b. Leaves glabrous beneath when mature (small trees; flowers white, in
    early summer or late spring) (Mountain Ash) --6.

     6a. Leaves acuminate at the apex   =Mountain Ash, Pyrus americana.=

     6b. Leaves obtuse or acute at the apex
                                       =Mountain Ash, Pyrus sitchensis.=

7a. Flowers yellow (5-10 dm. high; summer)
                                     =Cinquefoil, Potentilla fruticosa.=

7b. Flowers pink or red, rarely white, 4-10 cm. across (shrubs, 5-15 dm.
    high, or climbing; stems usually thorny; flowers in early summer)
    (Rose) --8.

7c. Flowers white, 1-3 cm. across (4-20 dm. high; flowers in late
    spring) --16.

     8a. Leaflets on most of the leaves 3; styles cohering in a column
         which protrudes from among the stamens
                                         =Climbing Rose, Rosa setigera.=

     8b. Leaflets 5-11; styles not cohering in a protruding column --9.

9a. Sepals persistent on the fruit after flowering --10.

9b. Sepals soon deciduous from the young fruit after flowering --14.

     10a. A pair of spines below each leaf larger than the other spines
          --11.

     10b. Spines all alike in size or nearly so, or absent completely
          --12.

11a. Sepals entire                            =Wild Rose, Rosa woodsii.=

11b. Sepals pinnatifid                          =Dog Rose, Rosa canina.=

     12a. Stems with few thorns or none at all =Wild Rose, Rosa blanda.=

     12b. Stems prickly --13.

13a. Fruit somewhat pear-shape, narrowed toward the base.
                                           =Wild Rose, Rosa acicularis.=

13b. Fruit globose, rounded at the base
                         =Wild Rose, Rosa acicularis var. bourgeauiana.=

     14a. The pair of spines at the base of each leaf straight or nearly
          so                                  =Wild Rose, Rosa humilis.=

     14b. The pair of spines at the base of each leaf distinctly
          recurved or hooked --15.

15a. Leaves densely glandular-pubescent beneath
                                          =Sweetbrier, Rosa rubiginosa.=

15b. Leaves glabrous or minutely pubescent  =Swamp Rose, Rosa carolina.=

     16a. Stems trailing or creeping --17.

     16b. Stems erect, ascending, or arched --19.

17a. Stems distinctly shrubby and thorny (Dewberry) --18.

17b. Stems almost herbaceous, without thorns
                                     =Dwarf Raspberry, Rubus triflorus.=

     18a. Leaves thin, dull above; fruit black, large and juicy
                                             =Dewberry, Rubus villosus.=

     18b. Leaves firm or thick, shining above; fruit reddish, small,
          consisting of a few sour drupelets
                                       =Swamp Dewberry, Rubus hispidus.=

19a. Ripe fruit dropping away from the white receptacle or core;
     terminal leaflet of each leaf with a long stalk, while the lateral
     leaflets are sessile or nearly so (Raspberry) --20.

19b. Ripe fruit and receptacle or core dropping together; all the
     leaflets on stalks which are approximately equal in length
     (Blackberry) --22.

     20a. Stem very glaucous with a whitish or bluish waxy deposit;
          fruit black             =Black Raspberry, Rubus occidentalis.=

     20b. Stem not glaucous; fruit red --21.

21a. Calyx velvety-pubescent              =Red Raspberry, Rubus idaeus.=

21b. Calyx bristly-hispid
                      =Red Raspberry, Rubus idaeus var. aculeatissimus.=

     22a. Pedicels with gland-tipped hairs, but no prickles
                                     =Blackberry, Rubus allegheniensis.=

     22b. Pedicels with prickles          =Blackberry, Rubus nigricans.=

     22c. Pedicels with neither prickles nor gland-tipped hairs --23.

23a. Leaves downy beneath                 =Blackberry, Rubus frondosus.=

23b. Leaves smooth beneath               =Blackberry, Rubus canadensis.=

     24a. Ovaries 1 or more, superior (attached to the surface of the
          receptacle, but not concealed within it or united to it) --25.

     24b. Ovary 1, inferior (permanently enclosed within the receptacle,
          with only the styles protruding) --38.

25a. Ovaries more than 1 --26.

25b. Ovary 1 --30.

     26a. Leaves serrate --27.

     26b. Leaves lobed --28.

27a. Leaves glabrous or very nearly so (8-20 dm. high; flowers white or
     pinkish, summer)               =Meadow-sweet, Spiraea salicifolia.=

27b. Leaves closely pubescent beneath (5-15 dm. high; flowers pink,
     summer)                              =Hardhack, Spiraea tomentosa.=

     28a. Flowers showy, purple or white, 3-4 cm. broad --29.

     28b. Flowers white, about 1 cm. wide (1-3 m. high; flowers in early
          summer)                   =Ninebark, Physocarpus opulifolius.=

29a. Flowers purple               =Flowering Raspberry, Rubus odoratus.=

29b. Flowers white                     =Salmonberry, Rubus parviflorus.=

     30a. Flowers in racemes (trees or tall shrubs; flowers white, in
          late spring) --31.

     30b. Flowers in small umbels or corymbs (flowers white, in spring)
          --32.

31a. Leaves oblong, the points of their teeth incurved
                                        =Black Cherry, Prunus serotina.=

31b. Leaves obovate, the points of their teeth spreading
                                      =Choke Cherry, Prunus virginiana.=

     32a. Flowers about 1 cm. wide --33.

     32b. Flowers about 1.5-2.5 cm. wide --36.

33a. Low shrubs, with the spatulate or oblong leaves widest above the
     middle --34.

33b. Erect tall shrubs or small trees, with the leaves widest below the
     middle --35.

     34a. An erect shrub (5-10 dm. high)
                                   =Appalachian Cherry, Prunus cuneata.=

     34b. A prostrate or ascending shrub (3-15 dm. high)
                                           =Sand Cherry, Prunus pumila.=

35a. Leaves very broadly ovate, almost as wide as long (small tree)
                                      =Perfumed Cherry, Prunus mahaleb.=

35b. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, about 3 times as long as broad (shrub or
     small tree, 2-10 m. high)       =Pin Cherry, Prunus pennsylvanica.=

     36a. Sepals glandular-serrate (tall shrub or small tree)
                                              =Wild Plum, Prunus nigra.=

     36b. Sepals entire --37.

37a. Leaves with sharp teeth, frequently bristle-tipped; a native
     species (tall shrub or small tree, frequently growing in thickets)
                                          =Wild Plum, Prunus americana.=

37b. Leaves with obtuse teeth; a species escaped from cultivation
     (widely branched tree)                    =Cherry, Prunus cerasus.=

     38a. Trees, in cultivation or escaped from cultivation near roads
          or dwellings, with showy flowers 2.5-5 cm. across, edible
          fruits, and no thorns (spring) --39.

     38b. Native species, trees or shrubs, growing in woods, fields, or
          thickets; frequently with thorns (spring) --40.

39a. Leaves finely serrulate or entire           =Pear, Pyrus communis.=

39b. Leaves coarsely serrate or somewhat lobed     =Apple, Pyrus malus.=

     40a. Shrubs or small trees, without thorns --42.

     40b. Bushy trees or shrubs, with thorns or stiff thorn-like
          branches, and with flowers generally 1.5-2.5 cm. across --41.

41a. Flowers pink, very fragrant           =Wild Crab, Pyrus coronaria.=

41b. Flowers white (Hawthorn, the genus Crataegus). Several species of
     this genus occur in the state, for the identification of which the
     Manual must be used.

     42a. Mid-vein glandular above (shrubs 1-3 m. tall; flowers white or
          pink) (Chokeberry) --43.

     42b. Mid-vein not glandular (shrubs or trees, 1-10 m. tall; flowers
          white) (Juneberry) --44.

43a. Leaves glabrous beneath            =Chokeberry, Pyrus melanocarpa.=

43b. Leaves tomentose beneath
                      =Chokeberry, Pyrus arbutifolia var. atropurpurea.=

     44a. Petals 15-25 mm. long --45.

     44b. Petals 5-12 mm. long --46.

45a. Mature leaves glabrous         =Juneberry, Amelanchier canadensis.=

45b. Mature leaves pubescent beneath
                    =Juneberry, Amelanchier canadensis var. botryapium.=

     46a. Flowers in racemes --47.

     46b. Flowers solitary, or in small clusters of 2-4
                                    =Juneberry, Amelanchier oligocarpa.=

47a. Leaves coarsely dentate, with about 1 tooth for each lateral vein
                                       =Juneberry, Amelanchier spicata.=

47b. Leaves finely serrate, with about 2-3 teeth for each lateral vein
                                  =Juneberry, Amelanchier oblongifolia.=

     48a. Flowers yellow --49.

     48b. Flowers white, pink, purple, or rose, never yellow --63.

49a. Plant with basal trifoliate leaves, resembling strawberry (1-3 dm.
     high; late spring)   =Barren Strawberry, Waldsteinia fragarioides.=

49b. Plants with leafy stems --50.

     50a. Flowers solitary in the axils of foliage leaves, on long
          peduncles (trailing or creeping plants; flowers in late spring
          and summer) --51.

     50b. Flowers in narrow terminal spike-like racemes (3-8 dm. high;
          summer) (Agrimony) --52.

     50c. Flowers in irregular or spreading clusters --55.

51a. Leaflets 5                    =Five-finger, Potentilla canadensis.=

51b. Leaflets 7-25                   =Silver Weed, Potentilla anserina.=

     52a. Principal leaflets more than 3 times (about 3-1/2) as long as
          wide                         =Agrimony, Agrimonia parviflora.=

     52b. Principal leaflets less than 3 times (about 2-1/2) as long as
          wide --53.

53a. Leaves nearly glabrous beneath, or with scattered spreading hairs
                                      =Agrimony, Agrimonia gryposepala.=

53b. Leaves softly pubescent beneath --54.

     54a. Leaves distinctly glandular beneath
                                          =Agrimony, Agrimonia striata.=

     54b. Leaves not glandular beneath     =Agrimony, Agrimonia mollis.=

55a. Principal leaves palmately compound with 5-7 leaflets (Cinquefoil)
     --56.

55b. Principal stem-leaves with 3 leaflets, or pinnately compound with
     several leaflets --58.

     56a. Leaves silvery-white beneath, laciniately toothed (1-4 dm.
          high; late spring and summer)
                              =Silvery Cinquefoil, Potentilla argentea.=

     56b. Leaves not silvery-white beneath (3-10 dm. high; summer)
          --57.

57a. Terminal leaflet more than 3 times as long as wide
                                         =Cinquefoil, Potentilla recta.=

57b. Terminal leaflet less than 3 times as long as wide
                                     =Cinquefoil, Potentilla intermedia=

     58a. Flowers about 4 mm. wide (2-6 dm. high; spring)
                                            =Spring Avens, Geum vernum.=

     58b. Flowers 6 mm. wide, or wider --59.

59a. Principal leaves with lobed leaflets, of which the terminal is the
     largest; leaf-axis bearing also some small leaflets between those
     of usual size (4-12 dm. high; late spring and summer) (Avens) --60.

59b. Principal leaves with toothed or pinnately cleft leaflets, the
     lateral ones about equaling the terminal one in size, and without
     any small scattered leaflets (3-8 dm. tall; summer) (Cinquefoil)
     --61.

     60a. Terminal leaflet cordate at base   =Avens, Geum macrophyllum.=

     60b. Terminal leaflet wedge-shape or acute at base
                                                 =Avens, Geum strictum.=

61a. Leaflets 3                  =Cinquefoil, Potentilla monspeliensis.=

61b. Leaflets 5-15 --62.

     62a. Leaflets crenate            =Cinquefoil, Potentilla paradoxa.=

     62b. Leaflets deeply incised
                                 =Cinquefoil, Potentilla pennsylvanica.=

63a. Leaves all basal, the flowers on leafless stalks --64.

63b. Stem-leaves present --66.

     64a. Leaves simple (1-2 dm. high; summer)
                                          =Dalibarda, Dalibarda repens.=

     64b. Leaves trifoliate (1-2 dm. high; spring) (Strawberry) --65.

65a. Leaflets thick and firm, the petioles and pedicels pubescent with
     spreading or ascending hairs; fruit subglobose, the achenes
     embedded in pits on its surface
                                      =Strawberry, Fragaria virginiana.=

65b. Leaflets thin, the petioles and pedicels nearly glabrous or with
     appressed hairs; fruit conic, the achenes on its surface
                                  =Wood Strawberry, Fragaria americana.=

     66a. Leaves pinnate with numerous leaflets --67.

     66b. Stem-leaves with 3-5 leaflets --72.

67a. Leaflets laciniate or deeply lobed (flowers pink or purple, early
     summer) --68.

67b. Leaflets merely toothed --69.

     68a. Stem-leaves few, small and opposite (2-4 dm. tall)
                                         =Purple Avens, Geum triflorum.=

     68b. Stem-leaves large and alternate (5-20 dm. tall)
                              =Queen of the Prairie, Filipendula rubra.=

69a. Individual flowers small, not exceeding 6 mm. across, in large
     clusters or spikes --70.

69b. Individual flowers more than 10 mm. wide, in few-flowered clusters
     (Cinquefoil) --71.

     70a. Flowers in dense spikes (5-15 dm. high; late summer)
                                       =Burnet, Sanguisorba canadensis.=

     70b. Flowers in panicles           =Sorbaria, Sorbaria sorbifolia.=

71a. Flowers red or purple (3-6 dm. high; summer)
                               =Marsh Cinquefoil, Potentilla palustris.=

71b. Flowers white (5-10 dm. high; early summer)
                                        =Cinquefoil, Potentilla arguta.=

     72a. Pistils 5 (5-10 dm. high; flowers white or pink, early summer)
          --73.

     72b. Pistils 10, in a ring (flowers pink or purple) --68b.

     72c. Pistils numerous, in a head or close group --74.

73a. Stipules linear or subulate, 5-8 mm. long
                                   =Bowman's Root, Gillenia trifoliata.=

73b. Stipules leaf-like, 10-25 mm. long, serrate
                                  =American Ipecac, Gillenia stipulata.=

     74a. Flowers red or purple --75.

     74b. Flowers white --76.

75a. Leaflets sharply and irregularly toothed or lobed; petals erect,
     narrowed at the base (3-9 dm. high; early summer)
                                            =Purple Avens, Geum rivale.=

75b. Leaflets finely and regularly toothed, oblong; petals spreading
     --71a.

     76a. Leaflets entire below, 3-toothed at the apex (1-3 dm. high;
          summer)                   =Cinquefoil, Potentilla tridentata.=

     76b. Leaflets toothed all around the margin --77.

77a. Leaves all trifoliate (2-5 dm. high; late spring) --17b.

77b. Some of the upper leaves merely lobed or dentate (5-8 dm. high)
     (Avens) --78.

     78a. Stem bristly-hairy (early summer)   =Avens, Geum virginianum.=

     78b. Stem softly and finely pubescent (summer)
                                                =Avens, Geum canadense.=




LEGUMINOSAE, the Pulse Family

Trees, shrubs, or herbs, with alternate compound (except 3 species with
simple) leaves and stipules; flowers usually irregular (except in a few
species), with a large upper petal and 4 smaller ones, the 2 lower
enclosing the stamens and pistil; stamens almost always 10, and
generally united by their filaments; pistil 1, simple, ripening into a
pod.


1a. Shrubs or trees --2.

1b. Herbs, twining, but without tendrils --9.

1c. Herbs; the leaves, or some of them, tipped with tendrils --12.

1d. Herbs, not climbing or twining; tendrils none --21.

     2a. Leaves simple --3.

     2b. Leaves compound --4.

3a. Leaves broadly cordate (tall shrub or small tree; flowers pink,
    early spring)                           =Redbud, Cercis canadensis.=

3b. Leaves lanceolate or elliptical (3-6 dm. high; flowers yellow,
    summer)                       =Dyer's Greenweed, Genista tinctoria.=

     4a. Twigs or branches thorny --5.

     4b. Thorns none --7.

5a. Thorns branched, scattered on the stem (tall tree; flowers greenish,
    early summer)                 =Honey Locust, Gleditsia triacanthos.=

5b. Thorns unbranched, a pair of them at the base of each leaf (late
    spring) --6.

     6a. Branches glabrous or nearly so (tree; flowers white)
                                  =Black Locust, Robinia pseudo-acacia.=

     6b. Branches glandular-pubescent (tall shrub; flowers pinkish)
                                       =Clammy Locust, Robinia viscosa.=

     6c. Branches bristly (shrub. 1-3 m. high; flowers pink)
                                      =Bristly Locust, Robinia hispida.=

7a. Trees; leaves 2-3-pinnate (flowers greenish-white, spring)
                             =Kentucky Coffee-tree, Gymnocladus dioica.=

7b. Low shrubs; leaves once-pinnate (3-6 dm. high; summer) --8.

     8a. Flowers bright-blue, each with a single petal
                                        =Lead Plant, Amorpha canescens.=

     8b. Flowers yellowish and pink-purple, petals 5 --26a.

9a. Leaflets 5-7; flowers in racemes (purplish, late summer)
                                            =Wild Bean, Apios tuberosa.=

9b. Leaflets 3 (flowers greenish, purple, or white, late summer) --10.

     10a. Flowers in small capitate clusters; lower 2 petals strongly
          incurved                   =Wild Bean, Strophostyles helvola.=

     10b. Flowers in racemes (Hog Peanut) --11.

11a. Stem pubescent or glabrate; leaflets seldom more than 5 cm. long
                                       =Hog Peanut, Amphicarpa monoica.=

11b. Stem villous with retrorse hairs; leaflets usually longer than 5 cm.
                                      =Hog Peanut, Amphicarpa pitcheri.=

     12a. Style with a tuft of hairs at the apex; lateral petals of the
          corolla adherent to the lower ones as far as the middle;
          stipules less than 10 mm. long, and usually less than
          one-fourth the length of the lower leaflets (spring and
          summer) (Vetch) --13.

     12b. Style hairy along the inner side; lateral petals of the
          corolla free from the lower ones or adherent only at the
          very base; stipules more than 8 mm. long and usually
          one-third or more the length of the lower leaflets (late
          spring and summer) --17.

13a. Flowers axillary, sessile or nearly so (flowers purple) --14.

13b. Flowers in peduncled racemes --15.

     14a. Upper leaves oblong-obovate, truncate or notched, and
          mucronate at the apex            =Spring Vetch, Vicia sativa.=

     14b. Upper leaves lance-linear, sharply acute
                                     =Common Vetch, Vicia angustifolia.=

15a. Flowers 15-20 mm. long, 4-8 in a cluster (flowers purple)
                                               =Vetch, Vicia americana.=

15b. Flowers 8-12 mm. long --16.

     16a. Racemes one-sided; flowers blue         =Vetch, Vicia cracca.=

     16b. Racemes loosely flowered, not one-sided; flowers whitish, the
          lower petals tipped with blue      =Vetch, Vicia caroliniana.=

17a. Flowers yellowish-white          =Vetchling, Lathyrus ochroleucus.=

17b. Flowers purple --18.

     18a. Stipules nearly regularly halberd-shape, almost as large as
          the leaflets                  =Beach Pea, Lathyrus maritimus.=

     18b. Stipules half-sagittate, apparently attached laterally near
          the middle --19.

19a. Leaflets 4-8 pairs, ovate; racemes with 10 or more flowers
                                           =Wild Pea, Lathyrus venosus.=

19b. Leaflets 2-4 pairs, linear to oblong or elliptical; racemes with
     2-9 flowers (Marsh Pea) --20.

     20a. Stems with a membranous wing on the margins
                                        =Marsh Pea, Lathyrus palustris.=

     20b. Stems angled, but not winged
                       =Marsh Pea, Lathyrus palustris var. myrtifolius.=

21a. Leaves simple (2-3 dm. high; flowers yellow, summer)
                                     =Rattlebox, Crotalaria sagittalis.=

21b. Leaves palmately compound; leaflets 7-11 (3-6 dm. high; flowers
     blue, late spring)                      =Lupine, Lupinus perennis.=

21c. Leaves pinnately compound; leaflets 5 to many --22.

21d. Leaves compound; leaflets 3 --28.

     22a. Leaflets 5; flowers rose-purple in a spike-like head (5-8 dm.
          high, late summer)   =Prairie Clover, Petalostemum purpureum.=

     22b. Leaflets more than 5 --23.

23a. Flowers bright-blue, in a dense spike (3-6 dm. high; summer) --8a.

23b. Flowers bright-yellow; stamens not united (summer) --24.

23c. Flowers white, cream-color, or yellowish, or marked with purple
     --26.

     24a. Leaflets linear-oblong, 2 cm. long or less; stamens 5 or 10
          (3-6 dm. high) (Partridge Pea) --25.

     24b. Leaflets lanceolate-oblong, 2-5 cm. long; 7 stamens with
          normal anthers and 3 with imperfect anthers (8-15 dm. high)
                                       =Wild Senna, Cassia marilandica.=

25a. Anthers 10; flowers 2-4 cm. wide
                                   =Partridge Pea, Cassia chamaecrista.=

25b. Anthers 5; flowers 5-10 mm. wide
                                      =Partridge Pea, Cassia nictitans.=

     26a. Silky-hairy with whitish hairs; flowers marked with purple
          (3-5 dm. high; summer)     =Goat's Rue, Tephrosia virginiana.=

     26b. Glabrous or nearly so (summer) (Milk Vetch) --27.

27a. Flowers greenish cream-color (4-10 dm. high)
                                    =Milk Vetch, Astragalus canadensis.=

27b. Flowers white (3-5 dm. high)    =Milk Vetch, Astragalus neglectus.=

     28a. Flowers in heads, umbels, or short dense spikes --29.

     28b. Flowers in loose racemes or panicles --42.

29a. Flowers bright-yellow; decumbent or ascending plants (spring and
     summer) --30.

29b. Flowers white, cream, purple, or red; never yellow --34.

     30a. Whole flower only about 2 mm. long; pod coiled --31.

     30b. Flowers larger, each one 3-6 mm. long; pod straight (1-4 dm.
          high) (Hop Clover) --32.

31a. Flowers numerous in each head    =Black Medick, Medicago lupulina.=

31b. Flowers in clusters of 2 --20       =Bur Clover, Medicago hispida.=

     32a. Stipules linear              =Hop Clover, Trifolium agrarium.=

     32b. Stipules ovate --33.

33a. Heads densely flowered; flowers 20 or more; upper petal striate
     when dry                        =Hop Clover, Trifolium procumbens.=

33b. Heads loosely flowered; flowers usually 10 or fewer; upper petal
     scarcely striate or not at all      =Hop Clover, Trifolium dubium.=

     34a. Leaves palmately compound, the 3 leaflets all from the same
          point (late spring and summer) (Clover) --35.

     34b. Leaves pinnately compound, the terminal leaflet on a distinct
          stalk --39.

35a. Individual flowers sessile, or on very short pedicels --36.

35b. Individual flowers distinctly pedicelled --37.

     36a. Heads oblong, on distinct peduncles; calyx longer than the
          corolla (flowers nearly white; 1-4 dm. tall)
                                      =Stone Clover, Trifolium arvense.=

     36b. Heads nearly globose, almost sessile, closely subtended by the
          leaves; corolla longer than the calyx (2-8 dm. high; flowers
          red-purple)                  =Red Clover, Trifolium pratense.=

37a. Stems prostrate or creeping; heads long-peduncled, arising from the
     creeping branches (flower-stalks 1-2 dm. high; flowers white)
                                       =White Clover, Trifolium repens.=

37b. Some or all of the stems erect; heads arising from the leafy stems
     (flowers white or pink) --38.

     38a. Plants with long basal runners; flowers 10-13 mm. long (2-3
          dm. high)            =Buffalo Clover, Trifolium stoloniferum.=

     38b. Basal runners none; flowers 6-8 mm. long (3-8 dm. high)
                                    =Alsike Clover, Trifolium hybridum.=

39a. Prostrate; leaflets broadly ovate; flowers 3-10 in a cluster --10a.

39b. Erect; leaflets broadest near the middle; flowers numerous (5-12
     dm. high; flowers yellowish-white, late summer) (Bush Clover) --40.

     40a. Leaflets less than twice as long as broad
                                         =Bush Clover, Lespedeza hirta.=

     40b. Leaflets more than twice as long as broad --41.

41a. Leaflets linear, 5 mm. wide or less; heads with obvious peduncles
                                  =Bush Clover, Lespedeza angustifolia.=

41b. Leaflets narrowly elliptical, the principal ones more than 5 mm.
     wide; heads sessile or nearly so
                                      =Bush Clover, Lespedeza capitata.=

     42a. Leaflets finely toothed --43.

     42b. Leaflets entire --44.

43a. Flowers violet or blue (3-6 dm. high; summer)
                                             =Alfalfa, Medicago sativa.=

43b. Flowers yellow (1-2 m. high; summer)
                           =Yellow Sweet Clover, Melilotus officinalis.=

43c. Flowers white (1-3 m. high; summer)
                                   =White Sweet Clover, Melilotus alba.=

     44a. Flowers yellow (5-10 dm. high; summer)
                                      =Wild Indigo, Baptisia tinctoria.=

     44b. Flowers white, the leaflets all from the same point (5-10 dm.
          high; summer)               =Wild Indigo, Baptisia leucantha.=

     44c. Flowers blue, purple, or pink (rarely white, and then the
          terminal leaflet stalked) --45.

45a. Racemes arising from the base of the plant, leafless (4-8 dm. high;
     summer)                       =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium nudiflorum.=

45b. Racemes terminal or a few of them axillary; leaflets generally
     more than 3 cm. long; pod (usually to be seen at the base of the
     raceme) transversely segmented into 2 or more joints (summer)
     (Tick Trefoil; the genus Desmodium. Pods are usually necessary for
     satisfactory identification) --46.

45c. Racemes short, loose, chiefly axillary; leaflets generally less
     than 3 cm. long; the short ovate or ovoid pod not transversely
     jointed (5-10 dm. high; flowers in summer) (Bush Clover; the genus
     Lespedeza. Reference to the Manual is recommended) --58.

     46a. Leaves clustered near the summit of the stem (4-12 dm. high)
                                 =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium grandiflorum.=

     46b. Leaves scattered on the stem --47.

47a. Plants prostrate; racemes panicled; leaflets nearly circular
                                =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium rotundifolium.=

47b. Plants decumbent or ascending; racemes short, simple, few-flowered;
     stipules ovate (stems 4-8 dm. long)
                                  =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium pauciflorum.=

47c. Plants erect or ascending; racemes panicled --48.

     48a. Leaflets of an oblong type, broadest at or near the middle,
          and about 4 times as long as broad (5-10 dm. tall) --49.

     48b. Leaflets of an ovate or lanceolate type, broadest below the
          middle, and not more than 3 times as long as wide --50.

49a. Stem pubescent; leaves sessile or nearly so
                                =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium sessilifolium.=

49b. Stem glabrous or nearly so; leaves obviously petioled
                                  =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium paniculatum.=

     50a. Stipules lanceolate to ovate, 1 cm. long or more (6-15 dm.
          high) --51.

     50b. Stipules narrowly lanceolate or subulate, less than 1 cm. long
          --54.

51a. Stems glabrous or minutely pubescent; leaves acuminate --52.

51b. Stems hispid or densely pubescent; leaves ovate or
     ovate-lanceolate, obtuse or barely acute --53.

     52a. Leaves glabrous on both sides
                                   =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium bracteosum.=

     52b. Leaves rough above, hairy beneath
                  =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium bracteosum var. longifolium.=

53a. Leaflets broadly ovate         =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium canescens.=

53b. Leaflets ovate-lanceolate     =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium illinoense.=

     54a. Flowers 10-12 mm. long (1-2 m. high)
                                    =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium canadense.=

     54b. Flowers 5-8 mm. long (5-8 dm. tall) --55.

     54c. Flowers 3-4 mm. long (4-8 dm. tall) --56.

55a. Leaflets broadly ovate      =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium viridiflorum.=

55b. Leaflets oblong-ovate           =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium dillenii.=

     56a. Leaflets 3-5 cm. long, oblong-ovate, scabrous above
                                      =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium rigidum.=

     56b. Leaflets 1-2.5 cm. long, broadly ovate or oval, not scabrous
          above --57.

57a. Stem and leaves glabrous or very nearly so
                                 =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium marilandicum.=

57b. Stem and leaves conspicuously pubescent
                                      =Tick Trefoil, Desmodium obtusum.=

     58a. Flower-clusters sessile, or on peduncles shorter than the
          subtending leaves --59.

     58b. Flower-clusters, or many of them, on peduncles longer than the
          leaves --61.

59a. Leaves linear-oblong            =Bush Clover, Lespedeza virginica.=

59b. Leaves ovate or oval --60.

     60a. Leaves and stem velvety or downy
                                        =Bush Clover, Lespedeza stuvei.=

     60b. Leaves and stem glabrous, or with close appressed pubescence
                                    =Bush Clover, Lespedeza frutescens.=

61a. Leaves ovate or broadly elliptical; corolla conspicuously exceeding
     the calyx --62.

61b. Leaves linear-oblong; calyx about as long as the corolla
                                      =Bush Clover, Lespedeza manniana.=

     62a. Stem erect or ascending --63.

     62b. Stem trailing; peduncles much exceeding the leaves
                                    =Bush Clover, Lespedeza procumbens.=

63a. Villous-pubescent; inflorescence dense; some peduncles shorter than
     the leaves                      =Bush Clover, Lespedeza nuttallii.=

63b. Slightly pubescent or glabrous; inflorescence loose, on peduncles
     much longer than the leaves      =Bush Clover, Lespedeza violacea.=




LINACEAE, the Flax Family

Herbs with simple leaves, and regular flowers, having 5 sepals, 5 yellow
or blue petals, 5 stamens, and 5 styles.


1a. Flowers blue (3-6 dm. high; summer)    =Flax, Linum usitatissimum.=

1b. Flowers yellow (3-8 dm. high; summer) (Wild Flax) --2.

     2a. Middle stem-leaves below the branches opposite
                                            =Wild Flax, Linum striatum.=

     2b. Middle stem-leaves below the branches alternate --3.

3a. Leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear, 1-4 mm. wide --4.

3b. Leaves oblanceolate to oblong, 4-6 mm. wide
                                         =Wild Flax, Linum virginianum.=

     4a. Leaves entire                        =Wild Flax, Linum medium.=

     4b. Upper leaves glandular-ciliate     =Wild Flax, Linum sulcatum.=




OXALIDACEAE, the Wood Sorrel Family

Herbs, with alternate or basal compound leaves with 3 reverse
heart-shaped leaflets; sepals, petals, and styles each 5; stamens 10.
(Wood Sorrel)


1a. Leaves all basal; flowers white to pink-purple (1-2 dm. high; late
    spring) --2.

1b. Stem-leaves present; flowers yellow (1-5 dm. high; spring and
    summer) --3.

     2a. Flower-stalks bearing a single flower
                                       =Wood Sorrel, Oxalis acetosella.=

     2b. Flower-stalks bearing an umbel of several flowers
                                         =Wood Sorrel, Oxalis violacea.=

3a. Stem prostrate and creeping Wood Sorrel, Oxalis repens.

3b. Stem erect or ascending --4.

     4a. Pedicels with spreading pubescence
                                      =Wood Sorrel, Oxalis corniculata.=

     4b. Pedicels with appressed pubescence
                                          =Wood Sorrel, Oxalis stricta.=




GERANIACEAE, the Geranium Family

Herbs, with deeply lobed or divided leaves; flowers regular, with 5
sepals, 5 petals, 5 or 10 stamens, and a 5-celled ovary.


1a. Anthers 5 (spreading or ascending plants, 2-4 dm. high; flowers pink
    or purple, spring and summer) --2.

1b. Anthers 10 --3.

     2a. Leaves pinnately dissected  =Stork's-bill, Erodium cicutarium.=

     2b. Leaves palmately divided into cuneate lobes
                                     =Crane's-bill, Geranium pusillum.=

3a. Leaves ternately divided, the lobes pinnatifid (2-4 dm. high;
    flowers purple, late spring and summer)
                                    =Herb Robert, Geranium robertianum.=

3b. Leaves palmately 3-11-lobed --4.

     4a. Petals 12 mm. long or more (3-6 dm. high; flowers pale purple,
         spring)                    =Wild Geranium, Geranium maculatum.=

     4b. Petals less than 10 mm. long (Crane's-bill) --5.

5a. Seed-bearing portion of the pistil smooth, glabrous or nearly so
    (low spreading plant; flowers purple, late spring and summer)
                                    =Crane's-bill, Geranium columbinum.=

5b. Seed-bearing portion of the pistil transversely wrinkled (widely
    branching. 1-3 dm. tall; flowers purple, summer)
                                         =Crane's-bill, Geranium molle.=

5c. Seed-bearing portion of the pistil pubescent (widely branching. 1-5
    dm. tall) --6.

     6a. Leaves divided almost to the base (flowers pinkish or white,
         spring and summer) --7.

     6b. Leaves divided one-half to two-thirds the way to the base
         (flowers purple, summer)
                                 =Crane's-bill, Geranium rotundifolium.=

7a. Petals white or pale pink; flowers in compact clusters
                                  =Crane's-bill, Geranium carolinianum.=

7b. Petals pink-purple; flowers in loose clusters
                                    =Crane's-bill, Geranium bicknellii.=




RUTACEAE, the Rue Family

Shrubs or low trees, with compound leaves frequently dotted with
translucent glands; flowers small, greenish-white, with 3-5 sepals,
petals, and stamens.


1a. Leaflets 5-9; stems thorny    =Prickly Ash, Zanthoxylum americanum.=

1b. Leaflets 3; stems not thorny          =Hop Tree, Ptelea trifoliata.=




SIMARUBACEAE, the Quassia Family

Trees, with pinnately compound leaves and small greenish-yellow flowers
in large panicles in early summer, ripening into winged fruits.


One species in Michigan, escaped from cultivation chiefly in towns
                                 =Tree of Heaven, Ailanthus glandulosa.=




POLYGALACEAE, the Milkwort Family

Small herbs, with alternate or whorled simple leaves, and small
irregular flowers; sepals 5, petals 3, stamens 6 or 8, more or less
united with each other and with the petals.


1a. All of the leaves alternate --2.

1b. Some or all of the leaves in whorls (1-4 dm. high; flowers greenish,
    purple, or white; summer) (Milkwort) --6.

     2a. Flowers few, loosely clustered, 15-20 mm. long (1-3 dm. high;
         flowers purple; early summer)
                           =Flowering Wintergreen, Polygala paucifolia.=

     2b. Flowers numerous, in a spike or raceme --3.

3a. Stem-leaves minute, linear-subulate; stem slender, erect, 3-7 dm.
    high (flowers pink; summer)          =Milkwort, Polygala incarnata.=

3b. Stem-leaves narrowly oblong or broader; stem generally 1-4 dm. high
    --4.

     4a. Flowers in a short thick obtuse very dense spike (flowers
         greenish or purple; summer)     =Milkwort, Polygala sanguinea.=

     4b. Flowers in a slender tapering spike --5.

     4c. Flowers in a raceme; plants with subterranean flowers also
         (flowers purple; early summer)   =Milkwort, Polygala polygama.=

5a. Leaves linear or nearly so (flowers purple; summer) --7b.

5b. Leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, 2-6 cm. long (flowers white;
    late spring)                    =Seneca Snakeroot, Polygala senega.=

5c. Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate (flowers white; late spring)
                     =Seneca Snakeroot, Polygala senega var. latifolia.=

     6a. Spike oval, thick, obtuse        =Milkwort, Polygala cruciata.=

     6b. Spike acute --7.

7a. Spike densely flowered, 1-2 cm. long
                                      =Milkwort, Polygala verticillata.=

7b. Spike loosely flowered, 2-5 cm. long
                         =Milkwort, Polygala verticillata var. ambigua.=




EUPHORBIACEAE, the Spurge Family

Herbs, with alternate, opposite, or whorled leaves and usually milky
juice. Flowers small or minute and inconspicuous, without petals and
frequently without calyx. In our commoner species, several staminate
flowers, each consisting of a single stamen only, and one pistillate
flower, consisting of a single pedicelled 3-lobed ovary only, are
included within a 4-5-lobed involucre, which is sometimes colored and
resembles a calyx or corolla.


1a. Stem-leaves alternate; inflorescence axillary; flowers with calyx
    and several stamens (3-8 dm. tall; flowers greenish or purplish;
    summer) (Three-seeded Mercury) --2.

1b. Stem-leaves opposite, usually inequilateral at base; flowers as
    described for the family; apparent flowers in axillary clusters
    (summer and autumn) (Spurge) --3.

1c. Stem-leaves alternate; inflorescence a terminal umbel-like cluster,
    with its branches subtended by opposite or whorled leaves; flowers
    as described for the family (Spurge) --9.

     2a. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate; flower-clusters shorter than
         the subtending bract
                             =Three-seeded Mercury, Acalypha virginica.=

     2b. Leaves lanceolate to oblong; flower-clusters equaling or
         exceeding the subtending bract
                             =Three-seeded Mercury, Acalypha gracilens.=

3a. Stem and foliage glabrous --4.

3b. Stem and foliage more or less pubescent (stems prostrate or
    ascending, 1-4 dm. long) --7.

     4a. Erect or ascending, usually without basal branches (2-4 dm.
         tall)                              =Spurge, Euphorbia preslii.=

     4b. Prostrate or spreading, branched from the base (stems 1-4 dm.
         long) --5.

5a. Leaves entire; plants of the shores of the Great Lakes
                                      =Spurge, Euphorbia polygonifolia.=

5b. Leaves serrulate --6.

     6a. Leaves broadly oblong or obovate; seeds obscurely wrinkled
                                      =Spurge, Euphorbia serpyllifolia.=

     6b. Leaves narrowly oblong; seeds with prominent transverse ridges
                                       =Spurge, Euphorbia glyptosperma.=

7a. Seeds black                             =Spurge, Euphorbia hirsuta.=

7b. Seeds red --8.

     8a. Leaves oblong                     =Spurge, Euphorbia maculata.=

     8b. Leaves elliptical to obovate; involucre split down one side
                                         =Spurge, Euphorbia humistrata.=

9a. Flowers subtended by conspicuous petal-like white appendages (part
    of the involucre) (4-10 dm. tall; summer)
                                          =Spurge, Euphorbia corollata.=

9b. Flowers not subtended by petal-like appendages --10.

     10a. Stem-leaves below the inflorescence serrulate (2-5 dm. high;
          summer) --11.

     10b. Stem-leaves below the inflorescence entire --13.

11a. Upper leaves acute                 =Spurge, Euphorbia platyphylla.=

11b. Upper leaves obtuse, rounded, or notched at the apex --12.

     12a. Leaves of the involucre broadly triangular-ovate, widest near
          the base                         =Spurge, Euphorbia obtusata.=

     12b. Leaves of the involucre broadly obovate to nearly circular,
          widest near or above the middle
                                        =Spurge, Euphorbia helioscopia.=

13a. Stem-leaves narrowly linear, less than 3 mm. wide (2-4 dm. high;
     late spring and summer)    =Cypress Spurge, Euphorbia cyparissias.=

13b. Stem-leaves narrowly oblong-spatulate, more than 5 mm. wide, and
     more than 3 times as long as wide (2-6 dm. high; summer) --14.

13c. Stem-leaves obovate to nearly circular, not more than twice as long
     as wide (1-4 dm. high) --15.

     14a. Leaves at base of umbel narrow, resembling those on the stem
                                              =Spurge, Euphorbia esula.=

     14b. Leaves at base of umbel broad, resembling those of the
          inflorescence                      =Spurge, Euphorbia lucida.=

15a. Upper stem-leaves distinctly narrowed at the base; introduced
     species of waste places (summer)        =Spurge, Euphorbia peplus.=

15b. Upper stem-leaves rounded at the sessile base; native species of
     woodlands (spring and early summer)  =Spurge, Euphorbia commutata.=




CALLITRICHACEAE, the Water Starwort Family

Small herbs growing in water or in mud, with opposite entire leaves and
small inconspicuous axillary flowers, with neither calyx nor corolla.
(Flowers in summer).


1a. Completely submerged; leaves all linear
                               =Water Starwort, Callitriche autumnalis.=

1b. Submerged leaves linear, emersed and floating leaves obovate
                                =Water Starwort, Callitriche palustris.=




EMPETRACEAE, the Crowberry Family

Low evergreen shrubs, with the linear leaves completely rolled into a
tube, and inconspicuous flowers without petals, in the axils of the
leaves.


One species in Michigan, 1-3 dm. high; leaves less than 1 cm. long;
flowers in summer                          =Crowberry, Empetrum nigrum.=




LIMNANTHACEAE, the False Mermaid Family

Low herbs with alternate compound leaves and minute axillary flowers;
sepals 3, petals 3, stamens 6.


One species in Michigan, with stems 1-3 dm. long, and flowers in late
spring                       =False Mermaid, Floerkea proserpinacoides.=




ANACARDIACEAE, the Cashew Family

Shrubs or small trees, with milky or resinous juice, alternate compound
leaves sometimes poisonous to the touch, and small clustered greenish or
yellowish flowers.


1a. Leaflets 7 to many (1-5 m. high) (Sumach) --2.

1b. Leaflets 3-5.

     2a. Axis of the leaves wing-margined between the leaflets
                                               =Sumach, Rhus copallina.=

     2b. Axis of the leaves not margined --3.

3a. Leaflets entire                        =Poison Sumach, Rhus vernix.=

3b. Leaflets serrate --4.

     4a. Bark of the older stems glabrous         =Sumach, Rhus glabra.=

     4b. Bark of the older stems densely velvety-hairy
                                                 =Sumach, Rhus typhina.=

5a. Terminal leaflet narrowed to a sessile base (5-20 dm. high)
                                              =Sumach, Rhus canadensis.=

5b. Terminal leaflet on a definite stalk, round or acute at base (3-8
    dm. high, or climbing by hold-fast roots)
                                       =Poison Ivy, Rhus toxicodendron.=




AQUIFOLIACEAE, the Holly Family

Shrubs, with alternate simple leaves and small white or greenish
axillary flowers in late spring and early summer; sepals, petals, and
stamens each 4-6; fruit a berry.


1a. Leaves entire or nearly so, 1-3 cm. long (1-2 m. tall)
                                =Mountain Holly, Nemopanthus mucronata.=

1b. Leaves sharply serrate, 5-8 cm. long (2-5 m. high) (Black Alder)
    --2.

     2a. Leaves downy on the veins beneath; fruit red
                                       =Black Alder, Ilex verticillata.=

     2b. Leaves nearly or quite glabrous; fruit orange
                       =Black Alder, Ilex verticillata var. tenuifolia.=




CELASTRACEAE, the Staff Tree Family

Shrubs with simple leaves and inconspicuous flowers; sepals and petals
each 4 or 5, the stamens of the same number and attached to a disk which
fills the center of the flower; fruit showy, orange and red.


1a. Leaves alternate (climbing vine; flowers in racemes; late spring)
                                     =Bitter-sweet, Celastrus scandens.=

1b. Leaves opposite (flowers in axillary clusters) --2.

     2a. Prostrate, with short erect branches; leaves broadest above the
         middle (spring)            =Creeping Wahoo, Evonymus obovatus.=

     2b. Tall shrub, with leaves broadest below or near the middle
         (early summer)                 =Wahoo, Evonymus atropurpureus.=




STAPHYLEACEAE, the Bladder Nut Family

Shrubs with opposite trifoliate leaves and small axillary clusters of
white flowers in spring; sepals, petals, and stamens each 5; ovary
3-celled, ripening into a large inflated 3-celled pod.


One species in Michigan (2-5 m. high) =Bladder Nut, Staphylea trifolia.=




ACERACEAE, the Maple Family

Trees or shrubs, with opposite, lobed or compound leaves and
inconspicuous flowers; sepals about 5; petals the same number, or none;
stamens 4-12; ovary 2-lobed, ripening into a pair of winged fruits.


1a. Leaves compound (tree; flowers appearing before the leaves)
                                              =Box Elder, Acer negundo.=

1b. Leaves simple (Maple) --2.

     2a. Shrubs or small trees; leaves 3-5-lobed; the lobes with
         regularly serrate margins (flowers greenish-yellow, appearing
         later than the leaves) --3.

     2b. Trees; leaves 3-7-lobed; margins of the lobes entire or
         incised, but never regularly serrate --4.

3a. Leaves finely and sharply serrate; twigs smooth; bark conspicuously
    striped with white lines       =Striped Maple, Acer pennsylvanicum.=

3b. Leaves coarsely and bluntly serrate; young twigs pubescent; bark not
    striped                             =Mountain Maple, Acer spicatum.=

     4a. Angles between the leaf-lobes rounded (flowers greenish-yellow,
         appearing with the leaves) --5.

     4b. Angles between the leaf-lobes acute or obtuse, but not rounded
         (flowers purple, red, or yellowish, appearing before the
         leaves) --6.

5a. Leaves glabrous beneath, or minutely pubescent on the veins
                                          =Sugar Maple, Acer saccharum.=

5b. Leaves downy beneath      =Black Maple, Acer saccharum var. nigrum.=

     6a. Middle leaf-lobe usually more than half the length of the leaf,
         narrowed at its base; broken twigs with a strong odor
                                       =Silver Maple, Acer saccharinum.=

     6b. Middle leaf-lobe usually less than half the length of the leaf,
         its sides parallel or broadened at the base; broken twigs
         without strong odor                   =Red Maple, Acer rubrum.=




SAPINDACEAE, the Soapberry Family

Trees, with opposite palmately compound leaves, and showy white or
yellowish flowers in panicles in spring; sepals 5; petals 4 or 5;
stamens about 7; fruit a smooth brown nut.


1a. Leaflets 7; buds viscid; corolla of 5 petals
                               =Horse Chestnut, Aesculus hippocastanum.=

1b. Leaflets 5; buds smooth; corolla of 4 petals
                                             =Buckeye, Aesculus glabra.=




BALSAMINACEAE, the Touch-me-not Family

Smooth herbs, with alternate simple leaves and showy flowers; one
petal-like sepal prolonged into a spur; fruit explosive when ripe (5-10
dm. high; summer).


1a. Flowers pale-yellow, with a few red-brown spots
                                      =Touch-me-not, Impatiens pallida.=

1b. Flowers orange, thickly spotted with red-brown
                                      =Touch-me-not, Impatiens biflora.=




RHAMNACEAE, the Buckthorn Family

Shrubs, with simple leaves and small flowers in axillary or terminal
clusters in early summer; sepals, petals, and stamens each 4 to 5, or
petals none.


1a. Leaves with a single mid-vein; flowers in axillary clusters,
    greenish (Buckthorn) --2.

1b. Leaves with 3-5 principal veins; flowers in dense terminal clusters,
    white (Red-root) --3.

     2a. Lateral veins 3-4 pairs (stout shrub, frequently thorny,
         escaped from cultivation)      =Buckthorn, Rhamnus cathartica.=

     2b. Lateral veins 6-9 pairs (1 m. high or less; in swamps and bogs)
                                         =Buckthorn, Rhamnus alnifolia.=

3a. Leaves ovate, rounded or cordate at the base, 2-5 cm. wide or more
    (4-8 dm. high)                     =Red-root, Ceanothus americanus.=

3b. Leaves elliptical-lanceolate, 2 cm. wide or less (3-8 dm. high)
                                           =Red-root, Ceanothus ovatus.=




VITACEAE, the Grape Family

Shrubs, climbing by tendrils or hold-fast roots, with palmately lobed or
palmately compound leaves and small greenish flowers in panicles or
flattened clusters; petals and sepals each 4 or 5; fruit a berry.


1a. Leaves compound (summer) (Virginia Creeper) --2.

1b. Leaves simple (late spring) (Grape) --4.

     2a. Branches of the tendrils chiefly ending in adhesive disks --3.

     2b. Branches of the tendrils twining, or rarely with a few disks
                                    =Virginia Creeper, Psedera vitacea.=

3a. Stem and foliage glabrous
                               =Virginia Creeper, Psedera quinquefolia.=

3b. Stem and foliage pubescent, at least when young
                  =Virginia Creeper, Psedera quinquefolia var. hirsuta.=

     4a. Leaves conspicuously pubescent beneath --5.

     4b. Leaves glabrous beneath when mature, or pubescent on the veins
         only --6.

     5a. A tendril or flower-cluster opposite each leaf
                                            =Fox Grape, Vitis labrusca.=

     5b. No tendril opposite each third leaf
                                       =Summer Grape, Vitis aestivalis.=

     6a. Pith continuous through the joints of the stem
                                        =Fox Grape, Vitis rotundifolia.=

     6b. Pith interrupted by the solid joints --7.

7a. Leaf-lobes with rounded angles between them
                                          =Summer Grape, Vitis bicolor.=

7b. Leaf-lobes with sharp angles between them --8.

     8a. Leaves coarsely toothed, unlobed or slightly 3-lobed
                                        =Frost Grape, Vitis cordifolia.=

     8b. Leaves sharply toothed, prominently lobed
                                           =Frost Grape, Vitis vulpina.=




TILIACEAE, the Linden Family

Trees, with alternate, simple, palmately veined leaves, and clusters of
fragrant white flowers in late spring arising from the middle of a
leaf-like bract; sepals and petals each 5; stamens numerous, but united
into 5 sets.


One species in Michigan                     =Basswood, Tilia americana.=




MALVACEAE, the Mallow Family

Herbs with alternate leaves; sepals and petals each 5; stamens numerous,
united by their filaments to form a tube surrounding the styles; ovary
many-celled.


1a. Flowers yellow (summer and autumn) --2.

1b. Flowers pale-yellow, with a dark center (2-4 dm. high; late summer)
                                  =Flower-of-an-hour, Hibiscus trionum.=

1c. Flowers white to red or blue, never yellow --3.

     2a. Leaves broadly heart-shape (10-15 dm. tall)
                                    =Velvet Leaf, Abutilon theophrasti.=

     2b. Leaves ovate-lanceolate (2-5 dm. tall)    =Sida, Sida spinosa.=

3a. Calyx subtended by 6 to many bractlets which are sometimes united at
    base (summer) --4.

3b. Calyx subtended by 3 bractlets, or by none --6.

     4a. Flowers 2-4 cm. wide (5-10 dm. high; flowers pink)
                                    =Marsh Mallow, Althaea officinalis.=

     4b. Flowers 7-15 cm. wide (8-15 dm. high; flowers pink to nearly
         white) (Rose Mallow) --5.

5a. Leaves densely pubescent below   =Rose Mallow, Hibiscus moscheutos.=

5b. Leaves glabrous                   =Rose Mallow, Hibiscus militaris.=

     6a. Petals prominently notched at the end or reverse heart-shape
         (Mallow) --7.

     6b. Petals obtuse or truncate (summer) --11.

7a. Flowers 1-1.5 cm. wide --8.

7b. Flowers 2-5 cm. wide (3-8 dm. high; flowers in summer) --9.

     8a. Stems procumbent, prostrate, or spreading (spring, summer, and
         autumn)                           =Mallow, Malva rotundifolia.=

     8b. Stems erect (10-15 dm. high; summer)
                                           =Mallow, Malva verticillata.=

9a. Leaves with prominent but shallow lobes; flowers axillary
                                             =Mallow, Malva sylvestris.=

9b. Leaves deeply lobed or cleft; flowers in the upper axils, producing
    a raceme-like cluster --10.

     10a. Lobes of the leaf dentate or incised    =Mallow, Malva alcea.=

     10b. Lobes of the leaf pinnately cleft into linear or narrowly
          oblong divisions                     =Mallow, Malva moschata.=

11a. Flowers white (1-2 m. high)  =Virginia Mallow, Sida hermaphrodita.=

11b. Flowers purple or pink (3-5 dm. high, spreading)
                                  =Poppy Mallow, Callirhoe triangulata.=




HYPERICACEAE, the St. John's-wort Family

Herbs or shrubs, with opposite entire leaves dotted with translucent
glands; flowers usually yellow (or pink); sepals and petals each 5;
stamens 5 to many; ovary with 3-5 styles. (St. John's-wort.)


1a. Shrubs (4-8 dm. high; flowers yellow, summer) --2.

1b. Herbs (flowers in summer) --3.

     2a. Styles 5                =St. John's-wort, Hypericum kalmianum.=

     2b. Styles 3               =St. John's-wort, Hypericum prolificum.=

3a. Flowers pinkish, 15 mm. broad (3-5 dm. high, in swamps)
                          =Marsh St. John's-wort, Hypericum virginicum.=

3b. Flowers yellow --4.

     4a. Flowers about 4 cm. wide; principal leaves 5-10 cm. long (7-15
         dm. tall)                 =St. John's-wort, Hypericum ascyron.=

     4b. Flowers 8-25 mm. wide; stamens 15 or more --5.

     4c. Flowers 1-10 mm. wide; stamens 12 or fewer (1-6 dm. high) --7.

5a. Petals dotted with black (4-8 dm. high) --6.

5b. Petals without black dots (2-5 dm. high)
                                =St. John's-wort, Hypericum ellipticum.=

     6a. Flowers 20-25 mm. wide; leaves of an oblong type, broadest near
         the middle             =St. John's-wort, Hypericum perforatum.=

     6b. Flowers 10-15 mm. wide; leaves of an ovate type, broadest below
         the middle              =St. John's-wort, Hypericum punctatum.=

7a. Leaves minute, subulate, 1-3 mm. long
                                     =Pineweed, Hypericum gentianoides.=

7b. Leaves linear, with 1-3 principal veins, broadest near or above the
    middle                       =St. John's-wort, Hypericum canadense.=

7c. Leaves lanceolate, 4-6 times as long as broad, with 5-7 principal
    veins                            =St. John's-wort, Hypericum majus.=

7d. Leaves oblong, elliptic, or ovate, 1.5-3 times as long as broad --8.

     8a. Uppermost bracts linear   =St. John's-wort, Hypericum mutilum.=

     8b. Uppermost bracts resembling the leaves in shape, but smaller
                                   =St. John's-wort, Hypericum boreale.=




ELATINACEAE, the Waterwort Family

Small marsh herbs, with opposite leaves without translucent dots, and
inconspicuous axillary flowers. (Stems 2-5 cm. long; flowers in summer.)


One species in Michigan                  =Waterwort, Elatine americana.=




CISTACEAE, the Rock-rose Family

Small herbs or shrubs, with opposite or alternate entire leaves; flowers
regular, with 5 sepals, 3 or 5 petals, and 3 to many stamens.


1a. Flowers yellow (early summer) --2.

1b. Flowers greenish or purplish, minute, in panicles (late summer)
    (Pinweed) --4.

     2a. Leaves crowded, closely appressed to the branches; flowers
         7 mm. wide (2-4 dm. high)
                                    =False Heather, Hudsonia tomentosa.=

     2b. Leaves spreading; flowers 15-30 mm. wide (3-6 dm. high)
         (Frostweed) --3.

3a. Petal-bearing flowers solitary
                                    =Frostweed, Helianthemum canadense.=

3b. Petal-bearing flowers few, racemose
                                        =Frostweed, Helianthemum majus.=

     4a. Stem-leaves linear, 4 or more times as long as wide --5.

     4b. Stem-leaves oblong or elliptical, about 3 times as long as wide
         (2-6 dm. tall) --8.

5a. Plant pale with dense appressed pubescence (2-4 dm. high)
                                              =Pinweed, Lechea stricta.=

5b. Plant green, pubescence sparse or none --6.

     6a. Leaves thread-like, seldom exceeding 1 mm. in width (1-3 dm.
         tall)                             =Pinweed, Lechea tenuifolia.=

     6b. Leaves 1-5 mm. wide (2-6 dm. high) --7.

7a. Leaves on the basal shoots narrowly lanceolate
                                           =Pinweed, Lechea intermedia.=

7b. Leaves on the basal shoots oblong-elliptic, about twice as long as
    wide                                   =Pinweed, Lechea racemulosa.=

     8a. Pubescence of spreading hairs        =Pinweed, Lechea villosa.=

     8b. Pubescence of appressed hairs          =Pinweed, Lechea minor.=




VIOLACEAE, the Violet Family

Herbs with simple, alternate or basal leaves, and conspicuous irregular
flowers with a spur (except in the first species); sepals, petals, and
stamens each 5; ovary 1-celled.


1a. Flowers regular or nearly so, greenish-white, axillary; erect plant
    with leafy stem (3-5 dm. high; spring)
                                     =Green Violet, Hybanthus concolor.=

1b. Flowers irregular, blue, yellow, or white, conspicuous (Violet) --2.

     2a. Plant stemless, the flowers all on leafless stalks and the
         leaves all basal (spring or early summer) --3.

     2b. Stems leafy (spring and summer) --17.

3a. Petals yellow             =Round-leaved Violet, Viola rotundifolia.=

3b. Petals blue, violet, or white --4.

     4a. Principal leaves at time of flowering deeply lobed --5.

     4b. Leaves oblong, ovate, or triangular, not narrowed to the
         petiole, and frequently sharply toothed or incised near the
         base --7.

     4c. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, tapering to the base
                                             =Violet, Viola lanceolata.=

     4d. Leaves heart-shape or kidney-shape, not lobed --8.

5a. Lateral petals bearded --6.

5b. Lateral petals not bearded         =Bird-foot Violet, Viola pedata.=

     6a. Leaves divided to the base into linear segments
                                   =Bird-foot Violet, Viola pedatifida.=

     6b. Leaves irregularly divided into broader segments
                                      =Hand-leaf Violet, Viola palmata.=

7a. Leaves ovate-oblong, pubescent          =Violet, Viola fimbriatula.=

7b. Leaves triangular-lanceolate, usually somewhat dilated at base,
    nearly or quite glabrous                  =Violet, Viola sagittata.=

     8a. Flowers violet or blue (rarely white-flowered plants are found
         with the typical blue-flowered ones) (Blue Violets) --9.

     8b. Flowers white, the 3 lower petals marked with purple (White
         Violets) --14.

9a. Lateral petals bearded --10.

9b. Lateral petals beardless    =Great-spurred Violet, Viola selkirkii.=

     10a. Foliage glabrous --11.

     10b. Petioles and lower surface of leaves pubescent --13.

11a. Beard of the lateral petals with a knob at the tip of each hair
                                         =Blue Violet, Viola cucullata.=

11b. Beard of the lateral petals not knobbed --12.

     12a. Spurred petal hairy              =Wood Violet, Viola affinis.=

     12b. Spurred petal glabrous      =Blue Violet, Viola papilionacea.=

13a. Spurred petal villous         =Blue Violet, Viola septentrionalis.=

13b. Spurred petal glabrous, or with a few scattered hairs
                                    =Common Blue Violet, Viola sororia.=

     14a. Leaf-blade obviously pubescent --15.

     14b. Leaf-blade glabrous or very nearly so --16.

15a. Lateral petals bearded       =Sweet White Violet, Viola incognita.=

15b. Lateral petals not bearded         =White Violet, Viola renifolia.=

     16a. Leaf-blades strictly glabrous
                                    =Sweet White Violet; Viola pallens.=

     16b. Leaf-blades with some minute white hairs on the upper surface
          near the base              =Sweet White Violet, Viola blanda.=

17a. Stipules large and leaf-like, deeply pinnatifid and nearly or quite
     as long as the petioles --18.

17b. Stipules small, inconspicuous, entire or toothed, and much shorter
     than the petiole --19.

     18a. Leaves serrate; flowers 1.5-2.5 cm. wide (1-3 dm. high;
          flowers of various colors)             =Pansy, Viola tricolor.=

     18b. Upper leaves entire or nearly so; flowers about 1 cm. wide
          (1-2 dm. high; flowers bluish-white)
                                        =Wild Pansy, Viola rafinesquii.=

19a. Petals yellow (1-4 dm. high) (Yellow Violet) --20.

19b. Petals violet, blue, or white --21.

     20a. Foliage villous-pubescent    =Yellow Violet, Viola pubescens.=

     20b. Foliage nearly or quite glabrous
                                    =Yellow Violet, Viola scabriuscula.=

21a. Stipules entire (2-4 dm. high)   =Canada Violet, Viola canadensis.=

21b. Stipules toothed --22.

     22a. Lateral petals not bearded (1-2 dm. high)
                                  =Long-spurred Violet, Viola rostrata.=

     22b. Lateral petals bearded --23.

23a. Flowers white or nearly white (1-3 dm. high)
                                           =Pale Violet, Viola striata.=

23b. Flowers blue (about 1 dm. high) --24.

     24a. Leaves smooth                   =Dog Violet, Viola conspersa.=

     24b. Leaves pubescent                =Sand Violet, Viola arenaria.=




CACTACEAE, the Cactus Family

Fleshy, jointed leafless plants, armed with numerous thorns; flowers
large (5-10 cm. wide), yellow, with about 10 petals and numerous
stamens.


One species in Michigan, on the shores of Lake Michigan; flowers in
summer                              =Prickly Pear, Opuntia rafinesquii.=




THYMELAEACEAE, the Mezereum Family

Shrubs, with simple alternate entire leaves, and small yellowish flowers
in clusters, opening before the leaves; petals none, the sepals somewhat
petal-like.


One species in Michigan, 5-15 dm. tall, with very tough bark
                                         =Leatherwood, Dirca palustris.=




ELAEAGNACEAE, the Oleaster Family

Shrubs, with opposite, silvery-pubescent, simple, entire leaves, and
small clusters of inconspicuous yellow flowers in spring.


One species in Michigan, 1-2 m. high
                                 =Buffalo Berry, Shepherdia canadensis.=




LYTHRACEAE, the Loosestrife Family

Herbs or shrubs, with opposite or alternate entire leaves; receptacle
cup-shape or tubular, bearing the 5-7 petals and sepals at its margin,
and the 6-12 stamens on its inner surface; ovary superior.


1a. Stem shrubby (aquatic, stems 1-3 m. long; flowers pink, summer)
                             =Water Loosestrife, Decodon verticillatus.=

1b. Stem herbaceous (4-10 dm. high; flowers purple, summer) --2.

     2a. Flowers solitary in the axils; leaves mostly alternate
                                          =Loosestrife, Lythrum alatum.=

     2b. Flowers in terminal panicles; leaves opposite or whorled
                                       =Loosestrife, Lythrum salicaria.=




MELASTOMACEAE, the Melastoma Family

Herbs, with opposite leaves with 3-5 principal veins; receptacle
urn-shape, bearing 4 sepals and 4 petals at its edge; stamens 8; ovary
4-celled, superior.


One species in Michigan, 3-4 dm. high, with purple flowers in late
summer                                =Meadow Beauty, Rhexia virginica.=




ONAGRACEAE, the Evening Primrose Family

Herbs with opposite or alternate simple leaves and regular flowers;
sepals and petals each 4 (or 2 in one genus), stamens 8 (or 2 in one
genus), attached to the summit or inside of a tubular receptacle; ovary
2-4-celled, inferior.


1a. Aquatic plant of shallow water or muddy ground, with prostrate stem
(flowers minute, axillary; petals small or none, summer)
                                   =Water Purslane, Ludvigia palustris.=

1b. Land plants with erect or ascending stems --2.

     2a. Petals minute, greenish (3-8 dm. high; late summer)
                                =False Loosestrife, Ludvigia polycarpa.=

     2b. Petals yellow --3.

     2c. Petals white, pink, purple, or red --9.

3a. Sepals borne at the summit of the ovary (5-10 dm. high; summer)
                             =False Loosestrife, Ludvigia alternifolia.=

3b. Sepals borne at the summit of the slender tubular receptacle, which
    is prolonged beyond the ovary --4.

     4a. Stamens all equal in length (Evening Primrose) --5.

     4b. The alternate stamens longer (3-8 dm. high; summer) (Sundrops)
         --8.

5a. Leaves deeply dentate or pinnatifid (2-5 dm. high; early summer)
                                =Evening Primrose, Oenothera laciniata.=

5b. Leaves entire or undulate or finely toothed (5-12 dm. high; summer)
    --6.

     6a. Hairs on the stem with broad reddish bases
                                 =Evening Primrose, Oenothera muricata.=

     6b. Hairs on the stem none, or without swollen bases --7.

7a. Stem and foliage glabrous, or with sparse spreading hairs
                                  =Evening Primrose, Oenothera biennis.=

7b. Stem and foliage densely but closely appressed-pubescent
                             =Evening Primrose, Oenothera rhombipetala.=

     8a. Petals 5-10 mm. long              =Sundrops, Oenothera pumila.=

     8b. Petals 14 mm. long or more     =Sundrops, Oenothera fruticosa.=

9a. Petals 2, reverse heart-shape, stamens 2 (flowers small, white,
    summer) (Enchanter's Nightshade) --10.

9b. Petals 4; stamens 4 or 8 --12.

     10a. Leaves rounded at the base, denticulate (3-8 dm. high; fruit
          prickly)          =Enchanter's Nightshade, Circaea lutetiana.=

     10b. Leaves cordate at the base --11.

11a. Fruit 2-celled, bristly (2-4 dm. high)
                           =Enchanter's Nightshade, Circaea intermedia.=

11b. Fruit 1-celled, with soft hairs (delicate plant 2 dm. high, or
     less)                     =Enchanter's Nightshade, Circaea alpina.=

     12a. Petals entire (summer) --13.

     12b. Petals notched at the end (flowers white or pinkish, less than
          1 cm. broad, in summer) (Willow Herb) --15.

13a. Flowers 2-3 cm. wide, purple (7-20 dm. high)
                                    =Fireweed, Epilobium angustifolium.=

13b. Flowers about 1 cm. wide --14.

     14a. Flowers red (2-5 dm. high)            =Gaura, Gaura coccinea.=

     14b. Flowers white, turning pink when old   =Gaura, Gaura biennis.=

15a. Leaves entire, the margins usually somewhat revolute --16.

15b. Leaves toothed, flat (4-9 dm. high) --18.

     16a. Plant densely pubescent with spreading hairs (3-8 dm. high)
                                         =Willow Herb, Epilobium molle.=

     16b. Plant pubescent with appressed or incurved hairs --17.

17a. Leaves linear, the margin revolute (3-5 dm. high)
                                        =Willow Herb, Epilobium densum.=

17b. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, not revolute (2-4 dm. high)
                                      =Willow Herb, Epilobium palustre.=

     18a. Seeds tipped with a tuft of reddish-brown hairs
                                     =Willow Herb, Epilobium coloratum.=

     18b. Seeds tipped with a tuft of white hairs
                                   =Willow Herb, Epilobium adenocaulon.=




HALORAGIDACEAE, the Water Milfoil Family

Aquatic or marsh herbs, with alternate, opposite, or whorled leaves, and
small, inconspicuous terminal or axillary flowers, frequently without
petals (summer).


1a. Leaves none, or else very small and inconspicuous
                                 =Water Milfoil, Myriophyllum tenellum.=

1b. Leaves alternate (1-4 dm. high)
                                 =Mermaid Weed, Proserpinaca palustris.=

1c. Leaves opposite or whorled --2.

     2a. Leaves entire (2-4 dm. high)  =Mare's-tail, Hippuris vulgaris.=

     2b. Leaves toothed or dissected (Water Milfoil) --3.

3a. Flowers in the axils of foliage leaves --4.

3b. Flowers in terminal spikes, subtended by bracts --5.

     4a. Flowers above water, subtended by toothed or entire leaves
                            =Water Milfoil, Myriophyllum heterophyllum.=

     4b. Flowers submerged, subtended by dissected leaves
                                =Water Milfoil, Myriophyllum farwellii.=

5a. Flowers solitary or in pairs at each joint of the spike
                            =Water Milfoil, Myriophyllum alternifolium.=

5b. Flowers several at each joint of the spike --6.

     6a. Bracts deeply pinnatifid
            =Water Milfoil, Myriophyllum verticillatum var. pectinatum.=

     6b. Bracts entire or toothed
                                 =Water Milfoil, Myriophyllum spicatum.=




ARALIACEAE, the Sarsaparilla Family

Herbs or thorny shrubs, with alternate or whorled leaves, and small
flowers in umbels; sepals 5, minute; petals and stamens each 5; ovary
inferior, with 2-5 styles, ripening into a berry.


1a. Leaves simple, palmately lobed (thorny shrub; flowers
    greenish-white, in panicles, in June)
                                         =Devil's Club, Fatsia horrida.=

1b. Leaves once compounded, whorled (umbel one, terminal) --2.

1c. Leaves twice or thrice compounded (umbels several) --3.

     2a. Leaflets sessile; flowers white, in spring (1-2 dm. high)
                                       =Dwarf Ginseng, Panax trifolium.=

     2b. Leaflets stalked; flowers greenish, in summer (2-5 dm. high)
                                         =Ginseng, Panax quinquefolium.=

3a. Stem and petioles spiny or bristly (flowers white, summer) --4.

3b. Stem and petioles smooth or a little pubescent (flowers
    greenish-white) --5.

     4a. Shrubby, with stout thorns (1-3 m. high)
                                       =Hercules' Club, Aralia spinosa.=

     4b. Herbaceous, with slender bristles (4-10 dm. high)
                                 =Bristly Sarsaparilla, Aralia hispida.=

5a. Stem-leaves present; leaflets cordate at the base (8-15 dm. high;
    summer)                                =Spikenard, Aralia racemosa.=

5b. Leaf and flower-stalk arising from the ground; leaflets acute at the
    base (2-4 dm. high; spring)  =Wild Sarsaparilla, Aralia nudicaulis.=




UMBELLIFERAE, the Parsley Family

Herbs, with alternate, usually compound leaves, the petioles dilated at
the base; flowers small, in umbels or heads; sepals 5, minute or even
wanting; petals and stamens each 5; ovary inferior, with 2 styles,
ripening into a dry fruit.


1a. Leaves simple (flowers in summer) --2.

1b. Leaves compound, or at least deeply cleft --4.

     2a. Leaves linear, sword-shape (4-10 dm. tall; flowers
         greenish-white)     =Rattlesnake Master, Eryngium yuccifolium.=

     2b. Leaves kidney-shape or almost circular (stems creeping, about
         1 dm. high; flowers white) (Water Pennywort) --3.

3a. Leaves peltate, attached by the center
                               =Water Pennywort, Hydrocotyle umbellata.=

3b. Leaves not peltate, attached by the margin
                               =Water Pennywort, Hydrocotyle americana.=

     4a. Flowers yellow or purple --5.

     4b. Flowers white or greenish --13.

5a. Leaf-segments entire (4-8 dm. high) --6.

5b. Leaf-segments toothed or incised --7.

     6a. Leaf-segments filiform (summer)   =Fennel, Foeniculum vulgare.=

     6b. Leaf-segments ovate to lanceolate
                               =Golden Alexander, Taenidia integerrima.=

7a. Leaves pinnately compound; some of the leaflets incised or
    pinnatifid --8.

7b. Leaves ternately compound; the segments crenate or serrate --9.

7c. Leaves deeply palmately cleft or divided; flowers in head-like
    umbels --18a.

     8a. Leaf-segments obtuse, rounded, or cordate at the base (6-15 dm.
         high; summer)                 =Wild Parsnip, Pastinaca sativa.=

     8b. Leaf-segments narrowed to the base (4-8 dm. high; spring)
                                =Prairie Parsley, Polytaenia nuttallii.=

9a. Terminal leaflets conspicuously stalked, their total length,
    including stalk, at least 50% greater than the length of the lateral
    leaflets (Meadow Parsnip) --10.

9b. Terminal leaflets not conspicuously stalked, their total length,
    including stalk, about equaling the lateral leaflets (4-8 dm. high;
    late spring) (Golden Alexander) --12.

     10a. Flowers purple (4-8 dm. high; early summer)
                   =Meadow Parsnip, Thaspium aureum var. atropurpureum.=

     10b. Flowers yellow --11.

11a. Stem-leaves once-ternate; leaflets finely serrate (4-8 dm. high;
     early summer)                    =Meadow Parsnip, Thaspium aureum.=

11b. Many stem-leaves 2-3-ternate; leaflets coarsely serrate or incised
    (6-12 dm. high; early summer)  =Meadow Parsnip, Thaspium barbinode.=

     12a. Basal and lower stem-leaves 2-3-ternate
                                        =Golden Alexander, Zizia aurea.=

     12b. Basal leaves simple; stem-leaves once-ternate
                                      =Golden Alexander, Zizia cordata.=

13a. Leaves once-pinnate (or the submerged leaves decompound, if
     present) (summer) --14.

13b. Leaves ternately, palmately, or 2-3-pinnately compound --16.

     14a. Leaflets mostly ovate or ovate-lanceolate, some of them
          coarsely incised (3-9 dm. high)
                                         =Water Parsnip, Berula erecta.=

     14b. Leaflets linear to oblong, serrate to nearly entire, not
          incised (6-15 dm. high) --15.

15a. Leaflets entire, or with a few low remote teeth
                                           =Cowbane, Oxypolis rigidior.=

15b. Leaflets finely but sharply serrate
                                    =Water Parsnip, Sium cicutaefolium.=

     16a. Leaves principally basal, decompound; flowers in early spring
          (1-2 dm. high)        =Harbinger of Spring, Erigenia bulbosa.=

     16b. Leaves principally on the stem --17.

17a. Leaves palmately or ternately once-compound --18.

17b. Leaves 2-3 times compound or decompound --24.

     18a. Flowers short-pedicelled, crowded in head-like umbels,
          greenish; ovary bristly (4-9 dm. high; early summer) (Black
          Snakeroot) --19.

     18b. Flowers in open umbels, white --22.

19a. Styles short, not projecting beyond the bristles of the mature
     fruit --20.

19b. Styles long, projecting beyond the bristles of the fruit, and
     recurved --21.

     20a. Staminate flowers on pedicels 3-4 mm. long, equaling or barely
          exceeding the fruit    =Black Snakeroot, Sanicula trifoliata.=

     20b. Staminate flowers short-pedicelled, concealed among the fruits
                                 =Black Snakeroot, Sanicula canadensis.=

21a. Fruit short-stalked, 4 mm. long or less
                                   =Black Snakeroot, Sanicula gregaria.=

21b. Fruit sessile, 6-7 mm. long
                                =Black Snakeroot, Sanicula marilandica.=

     22a. Umbel unsymmetrical, its branches irregular in length; plant
          slender (3-8 dm. tall; early summer)
                                    =Honewort, Cryptotaenia canadensis.=

     22b. Umbel symmetrical with regular branches; plants tall and stout
         --23.

23a. Stem and leaves very pubescent (10-25 dm. high; summer)
                                       =Cow Parsnip, Heracleum lanatum.=

23b. Stem and leaves glabrous or nearly so (5-15 dm. high; early summer)
                                   =Masterwort, Imperatoria ostruthium.=

     24a. Ovary and fruit bristly (4-10 dm. high) --25.

     24b. Ovary and fruit smooth or winged, never bristly --27.

25a. Umbels loose, open, few-flowered; woodland plants blooming in
     spring (Sweet Cicely) --26.

25b. Umbels densely flowered; weedy plants blooming from summer to fall
                                           =Wild Carrot, Daucus carota.=

     26a. Stem villous-pubescent     =Sweet Cicely, Osmorhiza claytoni.=

     26b. Stem glabrous except at the joints
                                  =Sweet Cicely, Osmorhiza longistylis.=

27a. Leaflets merely serrate (flowers in summer) --28.

27b. Leaflets coarsely incised, so that the leaf appears dissected --30.

     28a. Umbel densely pubescent (8-15 dm. high)
                                           =Angelica, Angelica villosa.=

     28b. Umbel smooth --29.

29a. Leaf-segments broadly ovate (8-15 dm. high)
                                      =Angelica, Angelica atropurpurea.=

29b. Leaf-segments lanceolate (8-15 dm. high)
                                       =Water Hemlock, Cicuta maculata.=

29c. Leaf-segments linear (4-10 dm. high)
                                      =Water Hemlock, Cicuta bulbifera.=

     30a. Principal branches of the umbel 2-5; fruit linear-oblong;
          woodland plants blooming in spring (2-4 dm. high)
                                    =Chervil, Chaerophyllum procumbens.=

     30b. Principal branches of the umbel 7 or more; fruit ovate to
          broadly elliptical (summer) --31.

31a. Native plants, growing in swamps (5-15 dm. high)
                               =Hemlock Parsley, Conioselinum chinense.=

31b. Introduced plants, in waste places and along roads --32.

     32a. Stems conspicuously spotted with purple (5-15 dm. high)
                                     =Poison Hemlock, Conium maculatum.=

     32b. Stems not spotted with purple (2-5 dm. high)
                                                 =Caraway, Carum carvi.=




CORNACEAE, the Dogwood Family

Trees, shrubs, or herbs, with alternate leaves and small flowers in
rather crowded rounded or flattened clusters; sepals 4, minute; petals
and stamens each 4; ovary inferior, ripening into a berry. In one genus
the flowers are minute and greenish, with 5 sepals and petals minute or
none.


1a. Leaves alternate --2.

1b. Leaves opposite --3.

     2a. Flowers white, conspicuous, in flattened clusters (shrubs 2-4
         m. high; flowers in late spring)
                                         =Dogwood, Cornus alternifolia.=

     2b. Flowers greenish, inconspicuous, in small axillary clusters
         (tree; flowers in spring)          =Sour Gum, Nyssa sylvatica.=

3a. Flower clusters small and dense, surrounded by a showy involucre of
    4 bracts, resembling a corolla of 4 petals --4.

3b. Flowers in open flattened clusters, without petal-like involucre
    (shrubs 1-4 m. high; late spring) --5.

     4a. Herbaceous, 3 dm. high or less (flowers in late spring)
                                     =Dwarf Dogwood, Cornus canadensis.=

     4b. Tall shrub or tree (flowers in late spring)
                                    =Flowering Dogwood, Cornus florida.=

5a. Leaves distinctly pubescent beneath with woolly or spreading hairs
    --6.

5b. Leaves smooth beneath, or pubescent with short appressed hairs --9.

     6a. Leaves rough above; fruit white
                                          =Dogwood, Cornus asperifolia.=

     6b. Leaves smooth or finely soft-hairy above --7.

7a. Leaves at least twice as long as wide; branches brownish or purplish
    --8.

7b. Leaves less than twice as long as wide; branches greenish; fruit
    blue                                    =Dogwood, Cornus circinata.=

     8a. Branches purplish; fruit blue         =Dogwood, Cornus amomum.=

     8b. Branches brownish; fruit white       =Dogwood, Cornus baileyi.=

9a. Branches bright red or reddish-purple
                                          =Dogwood, Cornus stolonifera.=

9b. Branches grayish                       =Dogwood, Cornus paniculata.=




ERICACEAE, the Heath Family

Herbs or shrubs, frequently with evergreen leaves; sepals 4-5; corolla
regular, with 4-5 petals; stamens as many or twice as many; ovary
3-10-celled, with 1 style.


1a. Plants without green color; leafless or with scale leaves only --2.

1b. Plants with green leaves --4.

     2a. Flowers solitary (1-2 dm. high; summer)
                                      =Indian Pipe, Monotropa uniflora.=

     2b. Flowers in clusters --3.

3a. Petals united into a bell-shape corolla (3-9 dm. high; summer)
                                    =Pine Drops, Pterospora andromedea.=

3b. Petals all separate (1-3 dm. high; summer)
                                     =Beech Drops, Monotropa hypopitys.=

     4a. Leaves all basal; herbaceous plants with terminal racemes (1-4
         dm. high; summer) (Shin-leaf) --5.

     4b. Stem-leaves present --12.

5a. Style straight --6.

5b. Style bent near the apex --8.

     6a. Racemes one-sided, the flowers all turned in one direction
         (flowers white or greenish-white) --7.

     6b. Raceme regular, the flowers not all pointing in the same
         direction (flowers white or pink)    =Shin-leaf, Pyrola minor.=

7a. Flowers numerous in each raceme         =Shin-leaf, Pyrola secunda.=

7b. Flowers only 3-7 in each raceme
                              =Shin-leaf, Pyrola seconda var. obtusata.=

     8a. Flowers pink or purple --9.

     8b. Flowers white or greenish --10.

9a. Leaves cordate at base               =Shin-leaf, Pyrola asarifolia.=

9b. Leaves rounded at base, not cordate
                          =Shin-leaf, Pyrola asarifolia var. incarnata.=

     10a. Leaves shining on the upper side; sepals one-third as long as
          the petals                      =Shin-leaf, Pyrola americana.=

     10b. Leaves dull on the upper side; sepals one-fourth as long as
          the petals, or a little shorter --11.

11a. Leaf-blades mostly shorter than their petioles, thick and firm
                                         =Shin-leaf, Pyrola chlorantha.=

11b. Leaf-blades thin, usually longer than their petioles
                                          =Shin-leaf, Pyrola elliptica.=

     12a. Petals nearly or quite separate from each other --13.

     12b. Petals united into a gamopetalous corolla, the tube of which
          is as long as or longer than the lobes --18.

13a. Leaves opposite or whorled; stems herbaceous or nearly so (summer)
     --14.

13b. Leaves alternate; stems shrubby (early summer) --16.

     14a. Flowers solitary; leaves broadly ovate to nearly circular
          (1 dm. high; flower white)
                           =One-flowered Wintergreen, Moneses uniflora.=

     14b. Flowers in clusters; leaves narrow (stems trailing, 1-3 dm.
          high; flowers white or pinkish) --15.

15a. Leaves broadest above the middle, green
                                  =Prince's Pine, Chimaphila umbellata.=

15b. Leaves broadest below the middle, spotted with white
                             =Spotted Wintergreen, Chimaphila maculata.=

     16a. Leaves 2-5 cm. long, densely woolly beneath (5-10 dm. high;
          flowers white)            =Labrador Tea, Ledum groenlandicum.=

     16b. Leaves 1-2 cm. long, pale beneath but not wholly (creeping;
          flowers pink) (Cranberry) --17.

17a. Leaves acute                      =Cranberry, Vaccinium oxycoccos.=

17b. Leaves obtuse                   =Cranberry, Vaccinium macrocarpon.=

     18a. Leaves opposite or whorled; corolla saucer-shape (shrubs 3-8
          dm. high; flowers purple, summer) --19.

     18b. Leaves alternate; corolla bell-shape or salver-form --20.

19a. Branches and twigs cylindrical, not angled
                                    =Sheep Laurel, Kalmia angustifolia.=

19b. Branches and twigs with 2 sharp angles
                                       =Swamp Laurel, Kalmia polifolia.=

     20a. Plants prostrate, or with a few ascending branches only
          (flowers white or pink) --21.

     20b. Plants erect or ascending --23.

21a. Flowers 10-20 mm. long, very fragrant (early spring)
                                     =Trailing Arbutus, Epigaea repens.=

21b. Flowers 4-5 mm. long (late spring) --22.

     22a. Leaves spatulate, broadest beyond the middle
                                   =Bearberry, Arctostaphylos uva-ursi.=

     22b. Leaves oval, broadest at the middle
                                       =Snowberry, Chiogenes hispidula.=

23a. Leaves linear, white beneath, their margins strongly revolute
     (shrub 3-8 dm. high; flowers white, late spring)
                                 =Bog Rosemary, Andromeda glaucophylla.=

23b. Leaves oblong, scurfy beneath with rusty scales (bog shrub 4-10 dm.
     high; flowers white, in spring)
                                 =Leatherleaf, Chamaedaphne calyculata.=

23c. Leaves smooth, pubescent, or resinous beneath, but not scurfy nor
     white --24.

     24a. Low shrubs 10-15 cm. high, erect from a creeping rootstock;
          leaves with the taste of wintergreen (flowers white or pink,
          summer)                  =Wintergreen, Gaultheria procumbens.=

     24b. Bushy shrubs 3-8 dm. high; leaves dotted beneath with
          yellowish resinous dots; ovary 10-celled (flowers
          greenish-pink, spring)     =Huckleberry, Gaylussacia baccata.=

     24c. Shrubs 1 dm. to 3 m. high; leaves not resinous-dotted beneath;
          ovary 5-celled (flowers white or greenish-pink, spring or
          early summer) --25.

25a. Corolla bell-shape, the stamens projecting beyond it (5-15 dm.
     high)                             =Deerberry, Vaccinium stamineum.=

25b. Corolla cylindrical or urn-shape, the stamens not projecting --26.

     26a. Filaments hairy (Blueberry) --27.

     26b. Filaments glabrous (Bilberry) --32.

27a. Low bushy shrubs, usually less than 5 dm. and never more than 1 m.
     high --28.

27b. Tall erect shrubs, 1-4 m. high --31.

     28a. Foliage pubescent            =Blueberry, Vaccinium canadense.=

     28b. Foliage glabrous --29.

29a. Leaves pale-green and glaucous, entire or nearly so
                                       =Blueberry, Vaccinium vacillans.=

29b. Leaves bright-green, distinctly serrulate --30.

     30a. Fruit blue              =Blueberry, Vaccinium pennsylvanicum.=

     30b. Fruit black
                      =Blueberry, Vaccinium pennsylvanicum var. nigrum.=

31a. Leaves downy beneath; fruit black
                                      =Blueberry, Vaccinium atrococcum.=

31b. Leaves smooth or minutely pubescent beneath; fruit blue
                                      =Blueberry, Vaccinium corymbosum.=

     32a. Full-grown leaves less than 2.5 cm. long; low much-branched
          shrubs, mostly less than 5 dm. high --33.

     32b. Full-grown leaves more than 2.5 cm. long; shrubs usually a
          meter high or more --34.

33a. Leaves entire; petals usually 4.
                                       =Bilberry, Vaccinium uliginosum.=

33b. Leaves finely serrulate; petals 5
                                      =Bilberry, Vaccinium caespitosum.=

     34a. Leaves serrulate, green beneath, acute; corolla globular
                                     =Bilberry, Vaccinium membranaceum.=

     34b. Leaves entire, pale beneath, obtuse; corolla ovoid
                                      =Bilberry, Vaccinium ovalifolium.=




PRIMULACEAE, the Primrose Family

Herbs, with alternate or opposite simple leaves and regular flowers;
petals more or less united; stamens attached one in front of each petal;
ovary 1-celled with 1 style.


1a. Leaves all basal; flowers on leafless stalks --2.

1b. Stem-leaves present --5.

     2a. Flowers nodding, the petals reflexed (3-6 dm. high; flowers
         showy, white or pink, in spring)
                                    =Shooting Star, Dodecatheon meadia.=

     2b. Flowers erect or spreading; petals not reflexed --3.

3a. Corolla not longer than the calyx; flowers small and inconspicuous
    (1 dm. high; flowers white or pink, spring)
                                    =Androsace, Androsace occidentalis.=

3b. Corolla conspicuous, much longer than the calyx (flowers pink or
purple, summer) (Primrose) --4.

     4a. Leaves white-mealy beneath (1-4 dm. high)
                                           =Primrose, Primula farinosa.=

     4b. Leaves green beneath (2 dm. high or less)
                                       =Primrose, Primula mistassinica.=

5a. All the stem-leaves in one whorl just below the flower-cluster --6.

5b. Stem-leaves several or many, scattered over the stem --7.

     6a. Stem-leaves about 1 cm. long --3a.

     6b. Stem-leaves 5-10 cm. long  =Star Flower, Trientalis americana.=

7a. Flowers red, blue, or white (summer) --8.

7b. Flowers yellow (summer) --9.

     8a. Leaves opposite; flowers axillary (stems spreading, 1-4 dm.
         long; flowers blue or red)     =Pimpernel, Anagallis arvensis.=

     8b. Leaves alternate; flowers racemose (1-4 dm. high; flowers
         minute, white)          =Water Pimpernel, Samolus floribundus.=

9a. Stem creeping                    =Moneywort, Lysimachia nummularia.=

9b. Stem erect (Loosestrife) --10.

     10a. Flowers in dense spike-like racemes (3-8 dm. high)
                                  =Loosestrife, Lysimachia thyrsiflora.=

     10b. Flowers axillary or racemose (3-9 dm. high) --11.

11a. Corolla dotted or streaked with purple or brown; leaves punctate
     with dark spots --12.

11b. Corolla plain yellow; leaves not dark-dotted --14.

     12a. Flowers in racemes --13.

     12b. Flowers all axillary    =Loosestrife, Lysimachia quadrifolia.=

13a. Flowers all in racemes; leaves opposite or some of them alternate
                                   =Loosestrife, Lysimachia terrestris.=

13b. The lowest flowers axillary; leaves opposite or whorled
                                     =Loosestrife, Lysimachia producta.=

     14a. Leaves ovate, on slender ciliate petioles
                                     =Loosestrife, Steironema ciliatum.=

     14b. Leaves lanceolate, sessile or short-petioled, pinnately veined
                                  =Loosestrife, Steironema lanceolatum.=

     14c. Leaves linear, with one mid-vein
                                 =Loosestrife, Steironema quadriflorum.=




OLEACEAE, the Olive Family

Trees or shrubs, with opposite leaves and regular flowers; sepals 4, or
calyx none; petals 4, united, or none; stamens usually 2; ovary
2-celled, superior.


1a. Leaves simple (shrub 2-5 m. high; flowers blue or white, in showy
    clusters in spring)                       =Lilac, Syringa vulgaris.=

1b. Leaves compound (trees; flowers greenish, inconspicuous, in spring)
    (Ash) --2.

     2a. Lateral leaflets sessile           =Black Ash, Fraxinus nigra.=

     2b. Lateral leaflets stalked --3.

3a. Twigs sharply 4-angled           =Blue Ash, Fraxinus quadrangulata.=

3b. Twigs not distinctly angled --4.

     4a. Leaves pubescent beneath     =Red Ash, Fraxinus pennsylvanica.=

     4b. Leaves glabrous beneath --5.

5a. Leaves pale-green beneath, obscurely serrulate
                                        =White Ash, Fraxinus americana.=

5b. Leaves bright-green beneath, sharply serrulate
                    =Green Ash, Fraxinus pennsylvanica var. lanceolata.=




GENTIANACEAE, the Gentian Family

Herbs, with opposite or basal, entire, usually simple leaves and regular
flowers; sepals, petals, and stamens equal in number, 4-12; ovary
superior, 1-celled.


1a. Leaves reduced to small scales (1-4 dm. high; flowers small,
    greenish-yellow, in summer)          =Bartonia, Bartonia virginica.=

1b. Leaves rounded, floating (flowers white, summer)
                                 =Floating Heart, Nymphoides lacunosum.=

1c. Leaves compound (2-4 dm. high; flowers white or bluish, early
    summer)                           =Buckbean, Menyanthes trifoliata.=

1d. Leaves simple, whorled (1-2 m. high; flowers yellowish-white,
    summer)                   =American Columbo, Frasera caroliniensis.=

1e. Leaves simple, opposite --2.

     2a. Corolla rotate, with spreading lobes, 2-4 cm. broad, pink (5-8 dm.
          high; summer)                 =Rose Pink, Sabbatia angularis.=

     2b. Corolla bell-shape, each petal with a spur at the base,
         purplish or white, and not over 1 cm. long (1-4 dm. high;
         summer)                     =Spurred Gentian, Halenia deflexa.=

     2c. Corolla bell-shape, tubular, funnel-form, or salver-form, not
         spurred --3.

3a. Corolla-lobes fringed (flowers bright-blue) (Fringed Gentian) --4.

3b. Corolla-lobes entire --5.

     4a. Leaves lanceolate (2-8 dm. high; autumn)
                                    =Fringed Gentian, Gentiana crinita.=

     4b. Leaves linear (1-4 dm. high; late summer)
                                    =Fringed Gentian, Gentiana procera.=

5a. Corolla 2 cm. long or a little less --6.

5b. Corolla 2.5-5 cm. long (late summer and autumn) (Gentian) --7.

     6a. Upper leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate (2-4 dm. high;
         flowers pink-purple, late summer)
                                      =Centaury, Centaurium umbellatum.=

     6b. Upper leaves ovate, with several principal veins (1-5 dm. high;
         flowers blue, late summer and autumn)
                                       =Gentian, Gentiana quinquefolia.=

7a. Calyx-lobes rough or ciliate at the margin (flowers blue, or rarely
    white) --8.

7b. Calyx-lobes smooth (2-8 dm. high) --10.

     8a. Corolla-lobes spreading; leaves narrowly lanceolate,
         indistinctly veined (2-5 dm. high)
                                           =Gentian, Gentiana puberula.=

     8b. Corolla-lobes erect or incurved; leaves ovate to
         ovate-lanceolate, with 3-7 principal veins (3-6 dm. high) --9.

9a. Calyx-lobes equaling or exceeding the calyx-tube
                                          =Gentian, Gentiana saponaria.=

9b. Calyx-lobes shorter than the calyx-tube
                                          =Gentian, Gentiana andrewsii.=

     10a. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate, somewhat cordate at base
          (flowers greenish-white or yellowish-white)
                                            =Gentian, Gentiana flavida.=

     10b. Leaves narrowly lanceolate or nearly linear, not cordate
          (flowers blue)                   =Gentian, Gentiana linearis.=




APOCYNACEAE, the Dogbane Family

Herbs, with opposite simple entire leaves and regular flowers; sepals,
petals, and stamens each 5; petals united; stamens attached to the
corolla; ovaries 2, with a single style or stigma.


1a. Plant creeping or trailing; flowers blue, axillary, 2-3 cm. broad
    (spring)                                  =Periwinkle, Vinca minor.=

1b. Plant erect or essentially so; flowers 1 cm. broad or less (4-12 dm.
    high) --2.

     2a. Corolla pinkish, about 8 mm. long by 6-8 mm. broad (early
         summer)                   =Dogbane, Apocynum androsaemifolium.=

     2b. Corolla white or greenish, about 6 mm. long by 4 mm. broad
         (summer) --3.

3a. Leaves petioled, acute at the base
                                     =Indian Hemp, Apocynum cannabinum.=

3b. Leaves sessile, rounded or truncate at the base
                 =Indian Hemp, Apocynum cannabinum var. hypericifolium.=




ASCLEPIADACEAE, the Milkweed Family

Herbs, with simple entire leaves and regular flowers; juice usually
milky; except in the first species, which is a twining vine. The flowers
have an unusual structure: calyx of 5 sepals; petals 5, united with each
other, and spreading or reflexed so that they conceal the calyx; stamens
5, united with each other and with the stigma to form a complex organ in
the center of the flower; ovaries 2; on the back of each stamen is a
colored projecting hood, which is frequently the most conspicuous part
of the flower, and may be mistaken for the corolla.


1a. Twining vine, with dark purple flowers (summer)
                                 =Black Swallow-wort, Cynanchum nigrum.=

1b. Stems not twining --2.

     2a. Leaves whorled (3-6 dm. high; summer) (Milkweed) --3.

     2b. Leaves opposite or alternate --4.

3a. Leaves in whorls of 4, lanceolate (flowers pink)
                                      =Milkweed, Asclepias quadrifolia.=

3b. Leaves in whorls of 4-7, linear (flowers greenish-white)
                                     =Milkweed, Asclepias verticillata.=

     4a. Umbel sessile (4-8 dm. high; flowers green, summer)
                                 =Green Milkweed, Acerates viridiflora.=

4b. Umbel peduncled --5.

5a. Leaves linear or narrowly linear-lanceolate (4-8 dm. high; flowers
    greenish-white, summer)        =Green Milkweed, Acerates floridana.=

5b. Leaves lanceolate or broader (flowers in summer) --6.

     6a. Leaves pubescent beneath --7.

     6b. Leaves glabrous or nearly so --10.

7a. Flowers brilliant orange (3-6 dm. high)
                                   =Butterfly Weed, Asclepias tuberosa.=

7b. Flowers red or purple --8.

     8a. Reflexed lobes of corolla merely purple-tinged (1-2 m. high)
                                          =Milkweed, Asclepias syriaca.=

     8b. Reflexed lobes of corolla bright-red or purple --9.

9a. The erect hoods of each flower about 5 mm. long (7-12 dm. high)
                                     =Milkweed, Asclepias purpurascens.=

9b. The erect hoods of each flower about 3 mm. long (6-10 dm. high)
                     =Swamp Milkweed, Asclepias incarnata var. pulchra.=

     10a. Leaves broadly rounded and almost sessile at base (flowers
          purplish) --11.

     10b. Leaves narrowed at the base, distinctly petioled (8-15 dm.
          high) --12.

11a. Umbel solitary, terminal and erect on a long peduncle (4-8 dm.
     high)                          =Milkweed, Asclepias amplexicaulis.=

11b. Umbels terminal or lateral, bent toward one side (7-12 dm. high)
                                      =Milkweed, Asclepias sullivantii.=

     12a. Corolla (not hoods) red (1-2 m. high)
                                  =Swamp Milkweed, Asclepias incarnata.=

     12b. Corolla (not hoods) greenish (8-15 dm. high)
                                         =Milkweed, Asclepias exaltata.=




CONVOLVULACEAE, the Morning Glory Family

Twining or trailing herbs (except one species), with regular flowers;
sepals 5; corolla 5-angled or 5-lobed; stamens 5, attached to the
corolla; ovary superior, 2-3-celled.


1a. Plants with green foliage and conspicuous flowers (summer) --2.

1b. Leafless brown or yellow plants, with very small flowers (Dodder)
    --7.

     2a. Style divided at the top into linear or oblong stigmas (flowers
         white or pink) (Bindweed) --3.

     2b. Style not divided at the top; stigmas sessile, capitate
         (Morning Glory) --6.

3a. Stem erect; leaves rounded or somewhat cordate at base, not hastate
    or sagittate (1-3 dm. high)     =Bindweed, Convolvulus spithamaeus.=

3b. Stem trailing or twining; leaves sagittate or hastate --4.

     4a. Calyx almost concealed by two large heart-shape bracts --5.

     4b. Bracts at base of calyx none  =Bindweed, Convolvulus arvensis.=

5a. Leaves triangular-hastate, with sharp basal lobes
                                         =Bindweed, Convolvulus sepium.=

5b. Leaves oblong-ovate, the basal lobes obtuse
                          =Bindweed, Convolvulus sepium var. pubescens.=

     6a. Stem smooth or nearly so; ovary 2-celled (flowers white)
                                  =Wild Potato Vine, Ipomoea pandurata.=

     6b. Stem with reflexed hairs; ovary 3-celled (flowers of various
         colors)                      =Morning Glory, Ipomoea purpurea.=

7a. Introduced weed, growing as a parasite on clover
                                            =Dodder, Cuscuta epithymum.=

7b. Native species, on various shrubs and herbs --8.

     8a. Flowers sessile --9.

     8b. Flowers distinctly pedicelled --12.

9a. Sepals united below into a gamosepalous calyx --10.

9b. Sepals separate from each other --11.

     10a. Calyx-lobes obtuse                 =Dodder, Cuscuta arvensis.=

     10b. Calyx-lobes acute               =Dodder, Cuscuta obtusiflora.=

11a. Flowers in dense rope-like twists on various species of herbs
                                             =Dodder, Cuscuta paradoxa.=

11b. Flowers in dense clusters on various species of shrubs
                                             =Dodder, Cuscuta compacta.=

     12a. Tips of the petals inflexed          =Dodder, Cuscuta coryli.=

     12b. Tips of the petals erect or spreading --13.

13a. Capsule depressed at the summit      =Dodder, Cuscuta cephalanthi.=

13b. Capsule pointed at the summit           =Dodder, Cuscuta gronovii.=




POLEMONIACEAE, the Polemonium Family

Herbs with alternate or opposite leaves and conspicuous regular flowers;
sepals 5, united; petals 5, united and bearing the 5 stamens in the
corolla-tube; ovary superior, 3-celled.


1a. Leaves pinnately compound and alternate (2-4 dm. high; flowers blue,
    in spring)                     =Greek Valerian, Polemonium reptans.=

1b. Leaves fascicled, narrowly linear (about 1 dm. high; flowers
    pink-purple, in spring)                 =Moss Pink, Phlox subulata.=

1c. Leaves simple, strictly opposite --2.

     2a. Corolla-lobes deeply 2-cleft to the middle (1-2 dm. high;
         flowers pink, in spring)           =Cleft Phlox, Phlox bifida.=

     2b. Corolla-lobes entire and rounded, or somewhat notched at the
         apex --3.

3a. Flowers in summer (8-15 dm. high; flowers purple)
                                       =Garden Phlox, Phlox paniculata.=

3b. Flowers in spring (3-6 dm. high) --4.

     4a. Corolla blue-purple; stems ascending
                                      =Sweet William, Phlox divaricata.=

     4b. Corolla pink or red-purple; stems erect
                                          =Sweet William, Phlox pilosa.=




HYDROPHYLLACEAE, the Water-leaf Family

Herbs with alternate lobed or divided leaves and regular flowers; sepals
5; petals 5, united; stamens 5, attached to the corolla-tube and
projecting beyond it; ovary 1-celled.


1a. Leaves palmately veined and lobed (4-8 dm. high; flowers purple,
    early summer)                  =Water-leaf, Hydrophyllum canadense.=

1b. Leaves pinnately veined and lobed (2-6 dm. high; flowers blue or
    purple, varying to white) --2.

     2a. Corolla-lobes much shorter than the corolla-tube (summer)
                                        =Phacelia, Phacelia franklinii.=

     2b. Corolla-lobes much longer than the corolla-tube (late spring
         and summer) (Water-leaf) --3.

3a. Calyx with a small reflexed appendage between each pair of sepals
                              =Water-leaf, Hydrophyllum appendiculatum.=

3b. Calyx without appendages      =Water-leaf, Hydrophyllum virginicum.=




BORAGINACEAE, the Borage Family

Herbs with alternate entire leaves; sepals 5; petals 5, united, corolla
generally regular; stamens 5, attached to the corolla-tube; ovary deeply
4-lobed with a single style.


1a. Corolla reddish-purple, about 8 mm. wide (4-10 dm. high; spring)
                               =Hound's Tongue, Cynoglossum officinale.=

1b. Corolla blue with a yellow center, 4-8 mm. wide (1-5 dm. high;
    spring and early summer) (Forget-me-not) --13.

1c. Corolla deep orange, salver-form (2-6 dm. high; spring) (Puccoon)
    --15.

1d. Corolla white or blue, or lightly tinged with yellow or red --2.

     2a. Corolla rotate, with a very short tube, bright-blue, about 20
         mm. broad (3-8 dm. high; summer)  =Borage, Borago officinalis.=

     2b. Corolla tubular, funnel-form, or salver-form --3.

3a. Corolla 10 mm. long or more; its tube distinctly longer than the
    calyx --4.

3b. Corolla less than 10 mm. long; its tube equaling or shorter than the
    calyx --8.

     4a. Flowers yellowish-white, or somewhat tinged with pink or
         greenish --5.

     4b. Flowers blue or purple --6.

5a. Corolla-lobes erect; leaves sessile (3-8 dm. high; early summer)
                               =False Gromwell; Onosmodium occidentale.=

5b. Corolla-lobes spreading; leaves decurrent (6-10 dm. high; summer)
                                        =Comfrey, Symphytum officinale.=

     6a. Stem and leaves glabrous (3-6 dm. high; spring)
                                        =Bluebell, Mertensia virginica.=

     6b. Stem and leaves pubescent (4-8 dm. high) --7.

7a. Corolla regular; leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate (summer)
                                       =Bluebell, Mertensia paniculata.=

7b. Corolla irregular; leaves linear-oblong (summer)
                                             =Blueweed, Echium vulgare.=

     8a. Ovary and fruit covered with hooked prickles --9.

     8b. Ovary and fruit not prickly --12.

9a. Principal leaves 2.5 cm. wide or more --10.

9b. Principal leaves 2 cm. wide or less (3-8 dm. high; flowers blue or
    white, summer) (Stickseed) --11.

     10a. Leaves chiefly basal, the racemes on long leafless peduncles
          (4-8 dm. high; flowers pale blue, early summer)
                                    =Wild Comfrey, Cynoglossum boreale.=

     10b. Stems leafy (8-12 dm. high; flowers white, summer)
                                      =Beggar Lice, Lappula virginiana.=

11a. A bract at the base of each flower   =Stickseed, Lappula echinata.=

11b. Racemes without bracts at the base of each flower
                            =Stickseed, Lappula deflexa var. americana.=

     12a. Racemes bractless, or bracted only at the base (1-4 dm. high)
          --14.

     12b. Raceme with a bract at the base of each flower (flowers white
          or yellowish) --17.

13a. Corolla 4 mm. wide                  =Forget-me-not, Myosotis laxa.=

13b. Corolla 6-8 mm. wide         =Forget-me-not, Myosotis scorpioides.=

     14a. Calyx-lobes all of equal length (summer)
                                    =Scorpion Grass, Myosotis arvensis.=

     14b. Calyx-lobes distinctly unequal in length (spring)
                                   =Scorpion Grass, Myosotis virginica.=

15a. Corolla-lobes denticulate    =Puccoon, Lithospermum angustifolium.=

15b. Corolla-lobes entire --16.

     16a. Flowers sessile; stem softly pubescent
                                      =Puccoon, Lithospermum canescens.=

     16b. Flowers on pedicels 2-5 mm. long; stem hispid or bristly
                                        =Puccoon, Lithospermum gmelini.=

17a. Corolla white; fruit brown and wrinkled (weed 2-4 dm. high; spring
     and summer)                  =Corn Gromwell, Lithospermum arvense.=

17b. Corolla yellowish-white; fruit white and smooth (5-10 dm. high)
     --18.

     18a. Corolla distinctly surpassing the calyx in length (spring and
          summer)              =Corn Gromwell, Lithospermum officinale.=

     18b. Corolla equaling or shorter than the calyx (spring)
                               =Wild Gromwell, Lithospermum latifolium.=




LABIATAE, the Mint Family

Herbs with opposite leaves, square stems, and usually aromatic odor;
flowers irregular, with united petals, or almost regular; stamens 2 or
4, attached to the tube of the corolla; ovary deeply 4-lobed, with a
single style.


1a. Stamens 2 --2.

1b. Stamens 4 --15.

     2a. Corolla regular or nearly so; flowers white, in dense axillary
         clusters; plants usually of wet grounds (2-8 dm. high; summer
         and autumn) --3.

     2b. Corolla distinctly irregular and more or less 2-lipped --7.

3a. Calyx-teeth short, triangular, acute or obtuse (Bugle Weed) --4.

3b. Calyx-teeth narrow, acuminate or cuspidate (Water Hoarhound) --5.

     4a. Stems and stolons bearing tubers
                                        =Bugle Weed, Lycopus uniflorus.=

     4b. Stems and stolons not bearing tubers
                                       =Bugle Weed, Lycopus virginicus.=

5a. Leaves serrate; calyx-teeth sharp-pointed --6.

5b. Leaves coarsely incised; calyx-teeth awn-tipped
                                  =Water Hoarhound, Lycopus americanus.=

     6a. Corolla twice as long as the calyx; leaves narrowed at the base
                                    =Water Hoarhound, Lycopus rubellus.=

     6b. Corolla barely longer than the calyx; leaves sessile or nearly
         so          =Water Hoarhound, Lycopus lucidus var. americanus.=

7a. Corolla blue, 3-4 mm. long; flowers in loose axillary clusters (1-4
    dm. high; summer) (Pennyroyal) --8.

7b. Corolla 8-40 mm. long --9.

     8a. Leaves serrate               =Pennyroyal, Hedeoma pulegioides.=

     8b. Leaves linear, entire            =Pennyroyal, Hedeoma hispida.=

9a. Lower lobe of the corolla fringed, very much longer than the upper
    (5-15 dm. high; corolla pale-yellow; late summer)
                                   =Horse Balm, Collinsonia canadensis.=

9b. Lower lobe of the corolla nearly or quite as long as the upper and
    not fringed --10.

     10a. Calyx narrowly tubular; its teeth about equal in size (5-10
          dm. high; flowers in dense terminal heads, in summer) --11.

     10b. Calyx campanulate, 2 of its teeth different in size from the
          other 3 (4-8 dm. high; flowers pink-purple, in terminal
          clusters in summer) --14.

11a. Corolla scarlet                       =Oswego Tea, Monarda didyma.=

11b. Corolla bright crimson or rose-red
                          =Wild Bergamot, Monarda fistulosa var. rubra.=

11c. Corolla white, pink, pale-purple, or yellowish --12.

     12a. Flower-clusters all terminal --13.

     12b. Flower-clusters both terminal and axillary
                                         =Horse Mint, Monarda punctata.=

13a. Leaves and stem with soft spreading pubescence
                                     =Wild Bergamot, Monarda fistulosa.=

13b. Leaves and stem grayish with fine appressed pubescence
                                        =Wild Bergamot, Monarda mollis.=

     14a. Upper calyx-teeth about 3 times as long as the lower
                                         =Blephilia, Blephilia hirsuta.=

     14b. Upper calyx-teeth but little longer than the lower
                                         =Blephilia, Blephilia ciliata.=

15a. Calyx with a distinct protuberance on the back of the upper side
     (Skullcap) --16.

15b. Calyx without a distinct protuberance --20.

     16a. Corolla 5-8 mm. long; flowers in axillary racemes (3-8 dm.
          high; flowers blue, in summer)
                            =Mad-dog Skullcap, Scutellaria lateriflora.=

     16b. Corolla 6-10 mm. long; flowers axillary, solitary (1-3 dm.
          high; flowers violet, early summer)
                                        =Skullcap, Scutellaria parvula.=

     16c. Corolla 12-30 mm. long; flowers axillary or in terminal
          racemes (4-8 dm. high; flowers blue, summer) --17.

17a. Stem-leaves cordate             =Skullcap, Scutellaria versicolor.=

17b. Stem-leaves not distinctly cordate --18.

     18a. Stem-leaves sessile or nearly so; plant of swamps and
          river-banks              =Skullcap, Scutellaria galericulata.=

     18b. Stem-leaves with petioles 1 cm. or more long; plants of dry or
          moist woods --19.

19a. Stem glandular-pubescent toward the summit; corolla 16 mm. long or
     less                                =Skullcap, Scutellaria pilosa.=

19b. Stem not glandular; corolla 20 mm. long
                                         =Skullcap, Scutellaria incana.=

     20a. Calyx-teeth 5, all equal or nearly so at the time of flowering
          --28.

     20b. Calyx-teeth 5, one of them different in size and shape from
          the other four (2-6 dm. high; flowers light blue, summer)
                               =Dragon Head, Dracocephalum parviflorum.=

     20c. Calyx-teeth 5, two of them different in size and shape from
          the other three --21.

     20d. Calyx-teeth 10, subulate (woolly plant 4-10 dm. high, with
          whitish flowers in axillary clusters in summer)
                                         =Hoarhound, Marrubium vulgare.=

21a. Corolla deeply split on the upper side and the stamens protruding;
     upper lip of the calyx much shorter than the lower (5-10 dm. high;
     flowers pink-purple, in terminal spikes, summer) (Wood Sage) --22.

21b. Corolla not deeply split on the upper side --23.

     22a. Calyx canescent               =Wood Sage, Teucrium canadense.=

     22b. Calyx villous               =Wood Sage, Teucrium occidentale.=

23a. Flowers in dense terminal head-like spikes, none axillary (1-5 dm.
     high; flowers pink-purple or blue, in summer)
                                         =Self-heal, Prunella vulgaris.=

23b. Some or all of the flowers in axillary clusters --24.

     24a. Leaves linear, entire (1-4 dm. high; flowers purple, summer)
          --25.

     24b. Leaves oblong to ovate (summer) --26.

25a. Pedicels shorter than the calyx
                                    =Summer Savory, Satureja hortensis.=

25b. Pedicels much longer than the calyx    =Calamint, Satureja glabra.=

     26a. Leaves 1 cm. long or less, entire (stems growing in mats, 1-3
          dm. long; flowers purple, in summer)
                                         =Wild Thyme, Thymus serpyllum.=

     26b. Leaves dentate (flowers purple, summer) --27.

27a. Flowers subtended by bracts as long as the calyx (2-5 dm. high)
                                             =Basil, Satureja vulgaris.=

27b. Flowers with minute bracts or none (1-3 dm. high)
                                         =Basil-thyme, Satureja acinos.=

     28a. Corolla 2-lipped or nearly regular, the upper lip flattened,
          not conspicuously arched over the stamens --29.

     28b. Corolla conspicuously 2-lipped, the stamens ascending under
          the concave upper lip --42.

29a. Flowers in dense terminal spikes; corolla 2-lipped (8-15 dm. high;
     summer) --30.

29b. Flowers peduncled, 1-4 in the axils of linear leaves --25b.

29c. Flowers in many-flowered whorls, which are axillary or terminal, or
     aggregated into terminal spikes or racemes --31.

     30a. Corolla yellowish        =Giant Hyssop, Agastache nepetoides.=

     30b. Corolla purplish
                          =Giant Hyssop, Agastache scrophulariaefolius.=

31a. Corolla distinctly irregular, the lower lip longer than the upper
     --32.

31b. Corolla almost regular, the lobes nearly uniform in size --35.

     32a. Stem-leaves sessile or very nearly so (flowers blue) --33.

     32b. Stem-leaves long-petioled --34.

33a. Leaves linear-oblong, acute at both ends (3-8 dm. high; summer)
                                         =Hyssop, Hyssopus officinalis.=

33b. Leaves oblong to ovate, rounded at the ends (2-4 dm. high; late
     spring)                                     =Bugle, Ajuga reptans.=

     34a. Leaves ovate to oblong, acute; flowers pink, white, or pale
          purple (6-15 dm. high; summer)       =Catnip, Nepeta cataria.=

     34b. Leaves nearly circular or kidney-shape; flowers blue
          (creeping; flowers in spring and summer)
                                         =Ground Ivy, Nepeta hederacea.=

35a. Flowers in terminal spikes, or the lower axillary (3-8 dm. high;
     flowers pink-purple or white, summer) (Mint) --36.

35b. Flowers all in axillary whorls (flowers pink-purple or white,
     summer) (Mint) --38.

35c. Flowers in terminal capitate corymbed clusters (4-8 dm. high;
     flowers white or dotted with purple, summer) (Mountain Mint) --41.

     36a. Leaves sessile or with very short petiole
                                            =Spearmint, Mentha spicata.=

     36b. Leaves with manifest petioles --37.

37a. Principal leaves less than half as broad as long
                                          =Peppermint, Mentha piperita.=

37b. Principal leaves more than half as broad as long
                                        =Bergamot Mint, Mentha citrata.=

     38a. Stem glabrous; leaves ovate to obovate (4-8 dm. high)
                                          =Downy Mint, Mentha gentilis.=

     38b. Stem pubescent, at least on the angles (1-6 dm. high) --39.

39a. Principal leaves distinctly petioled and somewhat rounded at base
                                           =Wild Mint, Mentha arvensis.=

39b. Leaves tapering to the base --40.

     40a. Leaves and stem pubescent
                           =Wild Mint, Mentha arvensis var. canadensis.=

     40b. Leaves glabrous; stem pubescent on the angles only
                             =Wild Mint, Mentha arvensis var. glabrata.=

41a. Leaves linear; calyx-teeth awl-shape
                                =Mountain Mint, Pycnanthemum flexuosum.=

41b. Leaves narrowly lanceolate; calyx-teeth triangular-ovate
                              =Mountain Mint, Pycnanthemum virginianum.=

     42a. Stems decumbent to diffuse; leaves cordate to nearly circular
          (stems 2-5 dm. long or high; flowers in spring and summer)
          (Dead Nettle) --43.

     42b. Stem erect; leaves palmately cleft; calyx-teeth spiny (6-15
          dm. tall; flowers pink, in summer)
                                        =Motherwort, Leonurus cardiaca.=

     42c. Stems erect or ascending; leaves ovate-lanceolate to linear
          (summer) --45.

43a. Upper leaves closely sessile (flowers red-purple)
                                     =Dead Nettle, Lamium amplexicaule.=

43b. Leaves all petioled --44.

     44a. Flowers red or purple         =Dead Nettle, Lamium maculatum.=

     44b. Flowers white                     =Dead Nettle, Lamium album.=

45a. Flowers 2-2.5 cm. long, in loose terminal spikes (5-10 dm. tall;
     flowers rose-color)    =False Dragon Head, Physostegia virginiana.=

45b. Flowers 1-2 cm. long, in axillary and terminal spiked whorls --46.

     46a. Calyx-teeth spiny pointed (flowers pink or pale-purple) (Hemp
          Nettle) --47.

     46b. Calyx-teeth acute to awl-shape, but not spiny (3-10 dm. high;
          flowers pale-purple) (Hedge Nettle) --48.

47a. Leaves ovate (3-8 dm. high)      =Hemp Nettle, Galeopsis tetrahit.=

47b. Leaves linear to lanceolate (1-4 dm. high)
                                       =Hemp Nettle, Galeopsis ladanum.=

     48a. Leaves glabrous --49.

     48b. Leaves distinctly pubescent --50.

49a. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, serrate
                                     =Hedge Nettle, Stachys tenuifolia.=

49b. Leaves linear-oblong, entire or nearly so
                                   =Hedge Nettle, Stachys hyssopifolia.=

     50a. Stem pubescent on the angles alone; leaves petioled
                         =Hedge Nettle, Stachys tenuifolia var. aspera.=

     50b. Stem pubescent on both sides and angles; leaves nearly sessile
          --51.

51a. Leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate, more than 1 cm. wide
                                      =Hedge Nettle, Stachys palustris.=

51b. Leaves linear-lanceolate, 1 cm. wide or less
                                      =Hedge Nettle, Stachys arenicola.=




VERBENACEAE, the Verbena Family

Herbs, with simple opposite leaves and slightly irregular flowers in
spikes or heads; petals 5, united and bearing the 4 stamens in the
corolla-tube; ovary 1, 2-celled or 4-celled, with 1 style.


1a. Plants prostrate or spreading --2.

1b. Plants erect (flowers in summer) (Vervain) --3.

     2a. Leaves serrate; flowers in short dense spikes (flowers
         pale-blue, summer)              =Fog Fruit, Lippia lanceolata.=

     2b. Leaves pinnatifid; flowers in loose bracted spikes (flowers
         light-purple, summer)             =Vervain, Verbena bracteosa.=

3a. Spikes dense, continuous (flowers purple or blue, varying to white)
    --4.

3b. Spikes slender, interrupted, the flowers scattered (corolla white or
    pale-blue) --6.

     4a. Leaves lanceolate, manifestly petioled (1-2 m. high)
                                             =Vervain, Verbena hastata.=

     4b. Leaves sessile, not lanceolate (5-8 dm. high) --5.

5a. Leaves narrowly oblanceolate, tapering at the entire base
                                        =Vervain, Verbena angustifolia.=

5b. Leaves oblong to obovate, not tapering at the base
                                             =Vervain, Verbena stricta.=

     6a. Leaves incised, tapering to a sessile base (5-10 dm. high)
                                        =Vervain, Verbena, officinalis.=

     6b. Leaves serrate, petioled (1-2 m. high)
                                        =Vervain, Verbena urticaefolia.=




SOLANACEAE, the Nightshade Family

Herbs or shrubs, with alternate leaves and regular or slightly irregular
flowers; sepals 5, united; corolla of 5 united petals, bearing the 5
stamens attached; ovary 1, 2-5 (usually 2)-celled, with a slender style.


1a. Corolla rotate; anthers close together (flowers in summer) --2.

1b. Corolla not rotate; anthers separate --5.

     2a. Stem and leaves prickly (3-8 dm. high) --3.

     2b. Stem and leaves not prickly --4.

3a. Flowers white or bluish         =Horse Nettle, Solanum carolinense.=

3b. Flowers yellow                     =Buffalo Bur, Solanum rostratum.=

     4a. Climbing vine; leaves frequently lobed (flowers blue)
                                       =Bittersweet, Solanum dulcamara.=

     4b. Not climbing; leaves toothed (flowers white)
                                           =Nightshade, Solanum nigrum.=

5a. Climbing or trailing shrub, with purplish, white, or greenish
    flowers about 1 cm. wide (frequently thorny; flowers in summer)
                                  =Matrimony Vine, Lycium halimifolium.=

5b. Herbaceous plants, not climbing --6.

     6a. Flowers white, red, or blue, 2.5 cm. or more wide (summer) --7.

     6b. Flowers yellow, yellowish-white, or greenish-yellow (summer)
         --12.

7a. Corolla-tube 10 cm. long or more (5-12 dm. high) --8.

7b. Corolla-tube 5 cm. long or less --10.

     8a. Stem finely pubescent; leaves entire or nearly so
                                            =Thorn-apple, Datura metel.=

     8b. Stem glabrous; leaves coarsely toothed (Jimson Weed) --9.

9a. Stem green; corolla white          =Jimson Weed, Datura stramonium.=

9b. Stem purple; corolla light-blue or purple
                                           =Jimson Weed, Datura tatula.=

     10a. Corolla pale-blue (5-10 dm. high)
                                   =Apple of Peru, Nicandra physalodes.=

     10b. Corolla, red or violet (2-4 dm. high)
                                            =Petunia, Petunia violacea.=

     10c. Corolla white --11.

11a. Corolla all white (2-4 dm. high)      =Petunia, Petunia axillaris.=

11b. Corolla with yellow center
                            =White Ground Cherry, Physalis grandiflora.=

     12a. Corolla 30 mm. wide or more, somewhat irregular; stamens
          declined to one side (3-6 dm. high)
                                            =Henbane, Hyoscyamus niger.=

     12b. Corolla smaller, strictly regular --13.

13a. Flowers in terminal panicles; corolla tubular, with slightly
     spreading lobes (5-10 dm. high)  =Wild Tobacco, Nicotiana rustica.=

13b. Flowers solitary in the axils; corolla short, widely spreading (3-8
     dm. high) (Ground Cherry) --14.

     14a. Annuals with branching slender roots --15.

     14b. Perennials with thickened roots and rootstocks --16.

15a. Plants pubescent               =Ground Cherry, Physalis pubescens.=

15b. Plants smooth, or with a few scattered hairs
                                     =Ground Cherry, Physalis ixocarpa.=

     16a. Stem viscid-pubescent  =Ground Cherry, Physalis heterophylla.=

     16b. Stem glabrous or slightly pubescent, not viscid --17.

17a. Leaves and stem distinctly pubescent
                                   =Ground Cherry, Physalis virginiana.=

17b. Leaves and stem almost glabrous
                                  =Ground Cherry, Physalis subglabrata.=




SCROPHULARIACEAE, the Figwort Family

Herbs with opposite or alternate leaves and usually irregular flowers;
corolla of united petals, bearing the 2 or 4 (or rarely 5) stamens
attached; petals actually 5, but sometimes apparently only 2 or 4; a
sterile fifth stamen sometimes present; ovary superior, 2-celled.


1a. Anther-bearing stamens 5 (6-15 dm. high; flowers in summer)
    (Mullein) --2.

1b. Anther-bearing stamens 4; a sterile fifth stamen may or may not be
    present --3.

1c. Anther-bearing stamens 2 --37.

     2a. Leaves densely white-woolly; flowers yellow, in dense spikes
                                           =Mullein, Verbascum thapsus.=

     2b. Leaves smooth or nearly so; flowers yellow or white, in loose
         racemes                    =Moth Mullein, Verbascum blattaria.=

3a. Flowers (not the bracts) greenish-yellow, yellow, or orange --4.

3b. Flowers blue, purple, brown, red, pink, or white, never yellow --16.

     4a. Flowers in dense terminal leafy-bracted spikes --5.

     4b. Flowers in loose racemes or axillary --9.

5a. Corolla 7 mm. long or less, or none --6.

5b. Corolla 12 mm. long or more --7.

     6a. Leaves alternate (3-6 dm. high; early summer)
                                          =Synthyris, Synthyris bullii.=

     6b. Leaves opposite (1-2 dm. high; summer)
                                         =Eyebright, Euphrasia arctica.=

7a. Stem-leaves entire (2-6 dm. high; summer)
                 =Painted Cup, Castilleja pallida var. septentrionalis.=

7b. Stem-leaves palmately lobed, bracteal leaves scarlet (3-6 dm. high;
    early summer)                    =Painted Cup, Castilleja coccinea.=

7c. Stem-leaves pinnately lobed or incised (Lousewort) --8.

     8a. Flowers in spring (2-4 dm. high)
                                    =Lousewort, Pedicularis canadensis.=

     8b. Flowers in late summer (3-8 dm. high)
                                    =Lousewort, Pedicularis lanceolata.=

9a. Upper lip of the corolla very different in size and shape from the
    lower lip --10.

9b. Upper lip of the corolla resembling the lower lip in shape, and not
    very different in size (5-12 dm. high; summer) (False Foxglove)
    --13.

     10a. Leaves alternate (2-5 dm. high; summer)
                                    =Butter-and-eggs, Linaria vulgaris.=

     10b. Leaves opposite --11.

11a. Stem erect; leaves narrowed at the base --30b.

11b. Stem creeping or spreading (summer) --12.

     12a. Leaves pinnately veined, ovate
                                       =Musk Flower, Mimulus moschatus.=

     12b. Leaves palmately veined, circular or nearly so
                 =Yellow Monkey Flower, Mimulus glabratus var. jamesii.=

13a. Stem glabrous --14.

13b. Stem pubescent --15.

     14a. Principal stem-leaves pinnatifid
                                   =False Foxglove, Gerardia virginica.=

     14b. Principal stem-leaves entire
                                   =False Foxglove, Gerardia laevigata.=

15a. Corolla hairy on the outside
                                 =False Foxglove, Gerardia pedicularia.=

15b. Corolla smooth on the outside     =False Foxglove, Gerardia flava.=

     16a. Leaves all basal; flowers on leafless stalks (1 dm. high or
          less; flowers pink or white, summer)
                          =Mudwort, Limosella aquatica var. tenuifolia.=

     16b. Leaves opposite (those subtending the flowers may be
          alternate) --20.

     16c. Leaves alternate or irregularly scattered --17.

17a. Leaves entire --18.

17b. Leaves pinnately lobed or incised --8a.

17c. Leaves palmately veined and lobed; stem trailing (flowers blue,
     summer)                       =Kenilworth Ivy, Linaria cymbalaria.=

     18a. Corolla-tube less than 1 cm. long, spurred --19.

     18b. Corolla more than 2 cm. long, not spurred (3-8 dm. high;
          flowers red-purple, summer)   =Snapdragon, Antirrhinum majus.=

19a. Stem and foliage pubescent (1-3 dm. high; flowers blue, summer)
                                      =Small Snapdragon, Linaria minor.=

19b. Stem and foliage glabrous (2-6 dm. high; flowers blue, summer)
                                        =Toad-flax, Linaria canadensis.=

     20a. Leaves with 1 or 2 lobes near the base (3-5 dm. high; flowers
          purple, summer)               =Gerardia, Gerardia auriculata.=

     20b. Leaves linear (2-6 dm. high; flowers rose-purple, summer and
          autumn) (Gerardia) --21.

     20c. Leaves lanceolate or broader, not lobed --26.

21a. Pedicels equaling or but little longer than the calyx, and
     conspicuously shorter than the subtending leaf --22.

21b. Pedicels much longer than the calyx, and generally equaling or
     exceeding the subtending leaf --24.

     22a. Plants of moist ground, bogs, and shores --23.

     22b. Plants of dry uplands             =Gerardia, Gerardia aspera.=

23a. Corolla about 25 mm. long            =Gerardia, Gerardia purpurea.=

23b. Corolla less than 20 mm. long      =Gerardia, Gerardia paupercula.=

     24a. Stem rough on the angles --25.

     24b. Stem glabrous                 =Gerardia, Gerardia tenuifolia.=

25a. Leaves 2-5 mm. wide
                       =Gerardia, Gerardia tenuifolia var. macrophylla.=

25b. Leaves thread-like, 1 mm. wide or less
                                       =Gerardia, Gerardia skinneriana.=

     26a. Corolla 16 mm. long, or shorter --27.

     26b. Corolla 20 mm. long, or longer --32.

27a. Corolla dull-purple, brown, or greenish; one sterile stamen present
     (1-2.5 m. high; flowers in summer) (Figwort) --28.

27b. Corolla blue or white (1-4 dm. high) --29.

     28a. Sterile stamen purple     =Figwort, Scrophularia marilandica.=

     28b. Sterile stamen yellow       =Figwort, Scrophularia leporella.=

29a. Flowers nearly or quite sessile (summer) --30.

29b. Flowers on pedicels 10 mm. long or more (spring) --31.

     30a. Foliage-leaves prominently toothed --6b.

     30b. Foliage-leaves entire, or with 1 or 2 small teeth at the base
                                        =Cow Wheat, Melampyrum lineare.=

31a. Corolla more than 10 mm. long, blue and white
                                      =Blue-eyed Mary, Collinsia verna.=

31b. Corolla 5-8 mm. long, blue and white
                                      =Collinsia, Collinsia parviflora.=

     32a. Flowers solitary in the axils of the upper foliage-leaves (4-8
          dm. high; flowers blue, in summer) (Monkey Flower) --33.

     32b. Flowers in dense terminal or subterminal spikes (3-9 dm. high;
          summer) --34.

     32c. Flowers in loose terminal panicles (flowers white or
          pale-violet) (Beard-tongue) --35.

33a. Leaves clasping at the base       =Monkey Flower, Mimulus ringens.=

33b. Leaves petioled, not clasping      =Monkey Flower, Mimulus alatus.=

     34a. Stem and foliage glabrous (flowers white)
                                           =Turtlehead, Chelone glabra.=

     34b. Stem and foliage pubescent (flowers purple)
                                      =Blue Hearts, Buchnera americana.=

35a. Stem finely pubescent (3-6 dm. high; flowers pale-violet, late
     spring)                        =Beard-tongue, Pentstemon hirsutus.=

35b. Stem glabrous below the inflorescence (6-12 dm. high) --36.

     36a. Corolla-tube gradually enlarged from base to tip (flowers
          pale-violet, in early summer)
                                  =Beard-tongue, Pentstemon laevigatus.=

     36b. Corolla-tube abruptly enlarged just beyond the calyx (flowers
          white, early summer)
                   =Beard-tongue, Pentstemon laevigatus var. digitalis.=

37a. Corolla distinctly irregular, 2-lipped (1-4 dm. high; flowers
     yellowish or white, summer) --38.

37b. Corolla regular or nearly so and 2-lobed, or none --6a.

37c. Corolla regular or nearly so, 4-lobed --40.

     38a. Leaves narrowed at the base, with mid-vein
                                    =Hedge Hyssop, Gratiola virginiana.=

     38b. Leaves rounded or somewhat clasping at the base, with 3-5
          principal veins (False Pimpernel) --39.

39a. Peduncles longer than the subtending leaves
                              =False Pimpernel, Ilysanthes anagallidea.=

39b. Peduncles shorter than the subtending leaves
                                    =False Pimpernel, Ilysanthes dubia.=

     40a. Leaves whorled (8-20 dm. high; flowers white or pale-blue, in
          spikes, summer)           =Culver's Root, Veronica virginica.=

     40b. Leaves alternate or opposite (Speedwell) --41.

41a. Flowers in racemes, which arise from the axils of the opposite
     leaves (flowers pale-blue to nearly white, late spring and summer)
     --42.

41b. Flowers solitary in the axils of leaf-like bracts, or in terminal
     bracted racemes (1-4 dm. high; spring and summer) --46.

     42a. Stem and foliage glabrous; swamp plants 2-7 dm. high --43.

     42b. Stem and foliage pubescent; plants of dry ground, 1-3 dm. high
          --45.

43a. Leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate
                                 =Marsh Speedwell, Veronica scutellata.=

43b. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate --44.

     44a. Stem-leaves sessile and somewhat clasping
                         =Water Speedwell, Veronica anagallis-aquatica.=

     44b. Stem-leaves on short petioles
                                        =Brooklime, Veronica americana.=

45a. Leaves narrowed at base into a petiole
                                      =Speedwell, Veronica officinalis.=

45b. Leaves rounded or heart-shape at the base
                                       =Speedwell, Veronica chamaedrys.=

     46a. Bracteal leaves entire; stem glabrous or minutely pubescent
          --47.

     46b. All leaves serrate; foliage pubescent (flowers blue) --48.

47a. Flowers white, about 2 mm. wide    =Speedwell, Veronica peregrina.=

47b. Flowers pale-blue with darker stripes, 3-4 mm. wide
                                    =Speedwell, Veronica serpyllifolia.=

     48a. Flowers nearly sessile, about 2 mm. wide
                                         =Speedwell, Veronica arvensis.=

     48b. Flowers on slender pedicels, 5-8 mm. wide
                                     =Speedwell, Veronica tournefortii.=




LENTIBULARIACEAE, the Bladderwort Family

Small herbs, growing on rocks, in mud, or in water; calyx and corolla
both 2-lipped; stamens 2, attached to the corolla; ovary 1-celled.


1a. Corolla purple --2.

1b. Corolla yellow (flowers in summer) (Bladderwort) --4.

     2a. Leaves oval to elliptical, entire (about 1 dm. high, on rocks;
         flowers in summer)           =Butterwort, Pinguicula vulgaris.=

     2b. Leaves dissected or none, submerged (flowers in summer)
         (Bladderwort) --3.

3a. Flower-stalk with a single bract near the middle
                                  =Bladderwort, Utricularia resupinata.=

3b. Flower-stalk without bracts, except at the base of the pedicels
                                    =Bladderwort, Utricularia purpurea.=

     4a. Stem and numerous dissected leaves floating in water
                     =Bladderwort, Utricularia vulgaris var. americana.=

     4b. Stem and minute leaves creeping on the bottom of ponds or in
         mud, while the flowers are borne on erect stalks, easily
         detached from the delicate stems --5.

5a. Upper lip of corolla conspicuous, as long or nearly as long as the
    lower lip; lower lip with a prominent raised palate --6.

5b. Upper lip of corolla half as long as the lower lip, or less --7.

     6a. Spur of corolla very short and blunt
                                       =Bladderwort, Utricularia gibba.=

     6b. Spur of corolla very long and slender
                                     =Bladderwort, Utricularia cornuta.=

7a. Spur of corolla very short and blunt, or almost none
                                       =Bladderwort, Utricularia minor.=

7b. Spur of corolla long and slender
                                  =Bladderwort, Utricularia intermedia.=




OROBANCHACEAE, the Broom-rape Family

Parasitic plants without green color and with scales in place of leaves;
corolla 2-lipped, of united petals; stamens 4, attached to the corolla.


1a. Flowers in a widely branching panicle, numerous; growing under beech
    trees (1-5 dm. high; flowers white and purple, late summer)
                                     =Beech Drops, Epifagus virginiana.=

1b. Flowers sessile in a dense bracted spike (1-2 dm. high; flowers
    pale-yellow, early summer)       =Squaw-root, Conopholis americana.=

1c. Flowers 1-15, each on a long erect naked peduncle (1-2 dm. high;
    flowers yellowish or pale-violet, spring and summer) (Cancer-root)
    --2.

     2a. Stem erect and scaly, 5-10 cm. high
                                   =Cancer-root, Orobanche fasciculata.=

     2b. Stem very short, almost below the surface of the ground, with
         long erect peduncles         =Cancer-root, Orobanche uniflora.=




ACANTHACEAE, the Acanthus Family

Herbs with opposite simple leaves; corolla of united petals, 2-lipped or
almost regular; stamens 2 or 4, attached to the corolla; ovary 2-celled.


1a. Corolla about 10 mm. long; flowers in dense heads (4-10 dm. high;
    flowers blue or white, summer)  =Water Willow, Dianthera americana.=

1b. Corolla about 30 mm. long; flowers axillary (3-8 dm. high; flowers
    blue, in summer) (Ruellia) --2.

     2a. Foliage glabrous or slightly pubescent
                                            =Ruellia, Ruellia strepens.=

     2b. Foliage densely hirsute             =Ruellia, Ruellia ciliosa.=




PHRYMACEAE, the Lopseed Family

Herb with opposite leaves and irregular flowers in long slender spikes;
petals united, corolla 2-lipped; stamens 4, attached to the corolla;
ovary 1-celled.


One species only, 5-10 dm. high; flowers purple, in summer
                                         =Lopseed, Phryma leptostachya.=




PLANTAGINACEAE, the Plantain Family

Herbs with basal leaves and small white flowers in spikes; sepals 4;
petals 4, united; stamens 4; ovary 2-celled.


1a. Leaves linear (1-4 dm. high; summer) --2.

1b. Leaves broader, lanceolate to broadly ovate or cordate (summer) --3.

     2a. Spikes mixed with bracts several times longer than the flowers
                                          =Buckhorn, Plantago aristata.=

     2b. Bracts about as long as the flowers
                                           =Plantain, Plantago purshii.=

3a. Leaves cordate, pinnately veined; plant of wet ground and marshes
    (4-8 dm. tall)                         =Plantain, Plantago cordata.=

3b. Leaves with 3 to many longitudinal ribs or veins --4.

     4a. Leaves densely pubescent with grayish hairs --5.

     4b. Leaves smooth or slightly pubescent --6.

5a. Flower-stalks 3-6 dm. high               =Plantain, Plantago media.=

5b. Flower-stalks less than 3 dm. high   =Plantain, Plantago virginica.=

     6a. Flower-stalks 3-6 dm. high; spikes not over 10 cm. long
                                =English Plantain, Plantago lanceolata.=

     6b. Scapes 1-4 dm. high; spikes long and slender, usually equaling
         or longer than the peduncle; dooryard plantains --7.

7a. Leaves green at the base                 =Plantain, Plantago major.=

7b. Leaves reddish at the base             =Plantain, Plantago rugelii.=




RUBIACEAE, the Madder family

Herbs or shrubs, with opposite or whorled leaves and regular flowers;
sepals 4, or minute or almost wanting; petals 4, united; stamens 4;
ovary inferior.


1a. Shrub (1-3 m. tall; flowers white, in spherical heads, summer)
                               =Button Bush, Cephalanthus occidentalis.=

1b. Herbaceous --2.

     2a. Leaves opposite --3.

     2b. Leaves whorled; flowers white, green, or purple (Bedstraw) --6.

     2c. Leaves whorled; flowers yellow        =Bedstraw, Galium verum.=

3a. Leaves about as long as wide (trailing; flowers paired, white, in
    spring)                         =Partridge Berry, Mitchella repens.=

3b. Leaves at least twice as long as wide --4.

     4a. Corolla salver-form, about 1 cm. wide; peduncles 1-flowered
         (about 1 dm. high; flowers blue or white, in spring)
                                           =Bluets, Houstonia coerulea.=

     4b. Corolla funnel-form, about 5 mm. wide; flowers in clusters (1-2
         dm. high; flowers white or pale-purple, summer) (Houstonia) --5.

5a. Basal leaves strongly ciliate      =Houstonia, Houstonia ciliolata.=

5b. Basal leaves smooth               =Houstonia, Houstonia longifolia.=

     6a. Leaves in whorls of 4-7.

     6b. Leaves in whorls of 6-8 --16.

7a. Ovary and fruit hispid with hooked bristles (3-7 dm. high; summer)
    --8.

7b. Ovary and fruit not bristly (early summer) --11.

     8a. Leaves with 1 principal vein (flowers dull purple)
                                             =Bedstraw, Galium pilosum.=

     8b. Leaves with 3 principal veins --9.

9a. Flowers bright-white                     =Bedstraw, Galium boreale.=

9b. Flowers greenish, yellowish, or purplish --10.

     10a. Leaves acuminate               =Bedstraw, Galium lanceolatum.=

     10b. Leaves acute or obtuse          =Bedstraw, Galium circaezans.=

11a. Corolla-lobes 3 (2-6 dm. high; flowers white or greenish) --12.

11b. Corolla-lobes 4 --13.

     12a. Flowers in clusters of 2 or 3     =Bedstraw, Galium claytoni.=

     12b. Flowers solitary in the axils, on long hair-like pedicels
                                            =Bedstraw, Galium trifidum.=

13a. Corolla brownish or purple (3-6 dm. high)
                                          =Bedstraw, Galium latifolium.=

13b. Corolla white (1-4 dm. high) --14.

     14a. Flowers rather numerous in small cymes
                                            =Bedstraw, Galium palustre.=

     14b. Flowers in clusters of 2 or 3, or solitary --15.

15a. Principal leaves spreading or ascending
                                          =Bedstraw, Galium tinctorium.=

15b. Principal leaves recurved or reflexed
                                        =Bedstraw, Galium labradoricum.=

     16a. Ovary and fruit bristly or hispid --17.

     16b. Ovary and fruit not bristly (summer) --18.

17a. Leaves narrowly lanceolate to linear, mostly 6-8 in a whorl (stem
     5-15 dm. long; flowers white; spring and summer)
                                             =Bedstraw, Galium aparine.=

17b. Leaves narrowly oval or elliptical, mostly in whorls of 6; flowers
     in clusters of 3 (1-5 dm. high; flowers greenish, summer)
                                           =Bedstraw, Galium triflorum.=

     18a. Leaves cuspidate or mucronate at the apex (flowers white)
          --19.

     18b. Leaves obtuse at the apex (flowers white or greenish; 2-6 dm.
          high) --20.

19a. Flowers very numerous in terminal panicles (stem 3-8 dm. long)
                                             =Bedstraw, Galium mollugo.=

19b. Flowers in axillary clusters (1-3 dm. high)
                                            =Bedstraw, Galium tricorne.=

19c. Flowers few, in small loose terminal cymes --20.

     20a. Stem smooth or nearly so (2-4 dm. high)
                                           =Bedstraw, Galium concinnum.=

     20b. Stem hispid with reflexed bristles (5-15 dm. long)
                                           =Bedstraw, Galium asprellum.=




CAPRIFOLIACEAE, the Honeysuckle Family

Shrubs or herbs, with opposite leaves; corolla regular or irregular,
petals 4 or 5, united; stamens 4 or 5; ovary inferior, 1-5-celled.


1a. Leaves compound (shrubs 1-4 m. high; flowers white, in large
    clusters in early summer) (Elder) --2.

1b. Leaves simple --3.

     2a. Pith of the twigs white; inflorescence flattened or convex
                                           =Elder, Sambucus canadensis.=

     2b. Pith of the twigs brown; inflorescence pyramidal
                                             =Elder, Sambucus racemosa.=

3a. Plant trailing; flowers nodding, in pairs (1 dm. high; flowers pink,
    summer)              =Twin Flower, Linnaea borealis var. americana.=

3b. Erect herbs (6-12 dm. high; flowers dull-red, axillary, early
    summer) (Feverwort) --4.

3c. Shrubs, small trees, or woody vines --5.

     4a. Leaf-bases broadly connate and 2-5 cm. wide
                                     =Feverwort, Triosteum perfoliatum.=

     4b. Leaf-bases narrowly connate, not over 1 cm. wide
                                     =Feverwort, Triosteum aurantiacum.=

5a. Climbing vines (spring and early summer) (Honeysuckle) --6.

5b. Erect or spreading shrubs or small trees --11.

     6a. Flowers in 2-flowered axillary clusters (flowers white or pink)
                                       =Honeysuckle, Lonicera japonica.=

     6b. Flowers in terminal clusters --7.

7a. Leaves distinctly pubescent beneath (flowers yellow) --8.

7b. Leaves glabrous beneath, or very minutely puberulent --9.

     8a. Leaves pubescent above         =Honeysuckle, Lonicera hirsuta.=

     8b. Leaves glabrous above      =Honeysuckle, Lonicera glaucescens.=

9a. Corolla purple on the outside, glabrous within
                                    =Honeysuckle, Lonicera caprifolium.=

9b. Corolla yellow on the outside (or slightly tinged with purple),
    pubescent within --10.

     10a. Corolla-tube 6-8 mm. long      =Honeysuckle, Lonicera dioica.=

     10b. Corolla-tube 11-14 mm. long
                                    =Honeysuckle, Lonicera sullivantii.=

11a. Corolla tubular at base; style long and slender --12.

11b. Corolla rotate or somewhat bell-shape, style very short (flowers
     white, late spring or early summer) --22.

     12a. Flowers yellow or yellowish (spring and early summer) --13.

     12b. Flowers white, pink, or red --18.

13a. Leaves serrate (5-10 dm. tall)
                                 =Bush Honeysuckle, Diervilla lonicera.=

13b. Leaves entire; flowers in pairs (Honeysuckle) --14.

     14a. Each pair of flowers subtended by 2 broad leaf-like bracts
          (1-3 m. high)             =Honeysuckle, Lonicera involucrata.=

     14b. Bracts at the base of each pair of flowers linear or narrowly
          lanceolate --15.

15a. Native species of woods and bogs --16.

15b. Introduced species, growing mostly near dwellings; leaves very
     pubescent beneath                =Honeysuckle, Lonicera xylosteum.=

     16a. Peduncles 15 mm. long or more (1-4 m. high) --17.

     16b. Peduncles about 5 mm. long (1 m. high, or less)
                          =Honeysuckle, Lonicera coerulea var. villosa.=

17a. Leaves ciliate                  =Honeysuckle, Lonicera canadensis.=

17b. Leaves not ciliate            =Honeysuckle, Lonicera oblongifolia.=

     18a. Corolla irregular, over 1 cm. long (1-4 m. high; spring)
                                       =Honeysuckle, Lonicera tatarica.=

     18b. Corolla regular, less than 1 cm. long (5-15 dm. high; flowers
          white or pink, in axillary clusters, early summer) --19.

19a. Flowers in axillary spikes
                               =Wolfberry, Symphoricarpos occidentalis.=

19b. Flowers almost sessile in the axils --20.

     20a. Flowers numerous in each axil
                           =Indian Currant, Symphoricarpos orbiculatus.=

     20b. Flowers 1 or 2 in each axil (Snowberry) --21.

21a. Leaves green beneath         =Snowberry, Symphoricarpos racemosus.=

21b. Leaves whitened beneath
                 =Snowberry, Symphoricarpos racemosus var. pauciflorus.=

     22a. Leaves palmately lobed --23.

     22b. Leaves not lobed --25.

23a. Outermost flowers of the cluster enlarged and imperfect (1-4 m.
     high)            =Cranberry Tree, Viburnum opulus var. americanum.=

23b. All flowers of the cluster alike --24.

     24a. Flower-clusters 4-10 cm. broad (1-2 m. high)
                                     =Arrow Wood, Viburnum acerifolium.=

     24b. Flower-clusters 2-3 cm. broad
                                    =Squashberry, Viburnum pauciflorum.=

25a. Outer flowers of the cluster enlarged and imperfect (1-3 m. high)
                                     =Hobble-bush, Viburnum alnifolium.=

25b. All flowers of the cluster alike --26.

     26a. Leaves finely serrate; the veins not prominent --27.

     26b. Leaves coarsely serrate, all or most of the teeth terminating
          in a prominent vein --29.

27a. Peduncle of the flower-cluster, below its branches, at least 2 cm.
     long (1-3 m. high)               =Withe-rod, Viburnum cassinoides.=

27b. Peduncle of the cluster 1 cm. long, or even shorter (3-8 m. high)
     --28.

     28a. Leaves distinctly acuminate   =Sheep-berry, Viburnum lentago.=

     28b. Leaves obtuse or barely acute
                                      =Black Haw, Viburnum prunifolium.=

29a. Leaves densely pubescent beneath (6-15 dm. high)
                                       =Arrow-wood, Viburnum pubescens.=

29b. Leaves glabrous beneath, or with tufts of hairs in the forks of the
     veins (1-4 m. high)                =Arrow-wood, Viburnum dentatum.=




VALERIANACEAE, the Valerian Family

Herbs with opposite leaves and small nearly or quite regular flowers;
petals 5, united; stamens 3; sepals minute or wanting; ovary inferior.


1a. Stem-leaves pinnately cleft (3-10 dm. high; flowers white or
    pinkish, summer) --2.

1b. Stem-leaves entire or dentate (2-6 dm. high; flowers white, summer)
    (Corn Salad) --3.

     2a. Leaf-segments parallel-veined Valerian, Valeriana edulis.

     2b. Leaf-segments net-veined
                                  =Swamp Valerian, Valeriana uliginosa.=

3a. Upper stem-leaves entire
                              =Corn Salad, Valerianella chenopodifolia.=

3b. Upper stem-leaves dentate       =Corn Salad, Valerianella radiata.=




DIPSACACEAE, the Teasel Family

Herbs with opposite leaves, and small pale blue flowers aggregated in
dense heads; calyx minute; petals 4, united; stamens 4, attached to the
corolla; ovary inferior.


One species in Michigan, 1-2 m. high, with prickly leaves and stem,
blooming in summer                        =Teasel, Dipsacus sylvestris.=




CUCURBITACEAE, the Gourd Family

Herbs, climbing by tendrils, with alternate palmately lobed leaves and
imperfect flowers; staminate flowers in showy clusters, with 5-6 petals
and 3 stamens; pistillate flowers small.


1a. Leaves 5-angled or shallowy 5-lobed (flowers white, summer)
                                       =Bur Cucumber, Sicyos angulatus.=

1b. Leaves 5-lobed to about the middle (commonly cultivated and
    frequently wild; flowers white, summer)
                                   =Wild Cucumber, Echinocystis lobata.=




CAMPANULACEAE, the Bellflower Family

Herbs with alternate simple leaves and milky juice; sepals 5; petals 5,
united; stamens 5, attached at the very base of the corolla; ovary
inferior.


1a. Stem-leaves circular or nearly so, cordate-clasping at base (2-6 dm.
    high; flowers blue, axillary, in summer)
                          =Venus' Looking-Glass, Specularia perfoliata.=

1b. Stem-leaves linear or nearly so, not over 1 cm. wide (summer) --2.

1c. Stem-leaves ovate to lanceolate, 2 cm. wide or more (flowers blue,
    in a terminal spike or raceme, summer) (Bellflower) --4.

     2a. Stem and leaves glabrous (or rarely pubescent) (1-6 dm. high;
         flowers blue)               =Harebell, Campanula rotundifolia.=

     2b. Stem and leaves rough with reflexed bristles (marsh plants,
         with weak slender stems 3-10 dm. long; flowers white or
         pale-blue) (Marsh Bellflower) --3.

3a. Corolla 5-8 mm. long      =Marsh Bellflower, Campanula aparinoides.=

3b. Corolla 10-12 mm. long      =Marsh Bellflower, Campanula uliginosa.=

     4a. Corolla rotate; flowers in spikes (6-15 dm. high)
                                      =Bellflower, Campanula americana.=

     4b. Corolla bell-shape; flowers in one-sided racemes (4-10 dm.
         high)                    =Bellflower, Campanula rapunculoides.=




LOBELIACEAE, the Lobelia Family

Herbs with alternate simple leaves and milky juice; flowers irregular;
petals 5, united; corolla split down the upper side; stamens 5, united
by their anthers into a ring or tube surrounding the style; ovary
2-celled, inferior. Flowers in summer and autumn.


1a. Leaves all basal, tubular; flowers on leafless stalks (aquatic, 1-4
    dm. high; flowers blue)          =Water Lobelia, Lobelia dortmanna.=

1b. Leaves normal, on the stem --2.

     2a. Flowers more than 2 cm. long (5-10 dm. high) --3.

     2b. Flowers about 1 cm. long, or shorter (flowers light blue) --4.

3a. Flowers scarlet               =Cardinal Flower, Lobelia cardinalis.=

3b. Flowers blue                   =Great Lobelia, Lobelia siphilitica.=

     4a. Flowers in loose racemes, pedicelled --5.

     4b. Flowers in slender terminal spike-like racemes, nearly sessile
         (4-10 dm. high, usually unbranched)
                                             =Lobelia, Lobelia spicata.=

5a. Foliage pubescent (3-8 dm. high)
                                      =Indian Tobacco, Lobelia inflata.=

5b. Foliage glabrous (1-4 dm. high)           =Lobelia, Lobelia kalmii.=




COMPOSITAE, the Composite Family

Herbs, with various types of foliage, but with flowers of characteristic
structure, resembling a sunflower, a thistle, or a dandelion. Each
apparent flower is a head of numerous small flowers, attached side by
side to the expanded end of the stem, and subtended and partly enclosed
by a series of bracts, called the involucre, which resembles a calyx.

The calyx of the individual flower is minute or actually wanting, and is
usually modified to aid in seed dispersal. It appears at the base of the
corolla, at the summit of the inferior ovary, and is known as pappus.
The structure of the pappus is best observed in the ripe fruit.

The corolla of the individual flowers consists of 5 (or rarely 4) united
petals. In some flowers the petals are united to form a tubular or
bell-shape corolla. In others they are united to form a flat or
strap-shape corolla. The stamens are attached to the corolla, and are
united by their anthers into a tube which surrounds the style, and above
which the 2-lobed stigma protrudes.

The apparent flower of a Composite, composed of several or many
individual flowers, is termed a head. It may be composed entirely of
tubular flowers, as the thistle or bone-set; or entirely of strap-shape
flowers, as the dandelion; or of both sorts together, as the aster or
sunflower. In the latter case, the tubular flowers invariably occupy the
center of the head, called the disk, and the larger strap-shape flowers
are at the margin, where their projecting corollas, called rays, may be
very conspicuous. Such heads are called radiate.

In a few composites (see 1a below) the flowers have minute corollas
without colored parts.

In identifying a composite, determine first whether the heads are
composed of tubular flowers, of strap-shape flowers, or of both sorts
together; and, secondly, observe the nature of the pappus, using
preferably the ripe heads, or at least the oldest flower-heads
available. No further difficulties will be encountered.


1a. Flowers without petal-like or brightly colored parts; staminate and
    pistillate flowers in separate heads (or rarely in the same heads);
    coarse weeds with inconspicuous flowers (summer and autumn) --2.

1b. Flowers with some petal-like parts, usually brightly colored or
    white --10.

     2a. Leaves toothed or lobed --3.

     2b. Leaves deeply pinnatifid or dissected (4-15 dm. high; flowers
     in erect spikes) (Ragweed) --7.

3a. Fruit or pistillate flowers thickly covered with sharp hooked spines
    (3-10 dm. high) (Cocklebur) --4.

3b. Fruit not spiny --8.

     4a. With spines on the stem at the base of the leaves
                                         =Cocklebur, Xanthium spinosum.=

     4b. Without any spines on the stem --5.

5a. Body of the bur smooth or slightly hairy
                                        =Cocklebur, Xanthium canadense.=

5b. Body of the bur and the spines densely pubescent --6.

     6a. Body of the bur more than twice as long as thick; a common weed
                                          =Cocklebur, Xanthium commune.=

     6b. Body of the bur less than twice as long as thick
                                        =Cocklebur, Xanthium echinatum.=

7a. Leaves twice-pinnatifid          =Ragweed, Ambrosia artemisiifolia.=

7b. Leaves once-pinnatifid             =Ragweed, Ambrosia psilostachya.=

     8a. Leaves deeply 3-lobed (1-5 m. high)
                                      =Giant Ragweed, Ambrosia trifida.=

     8b. Leaves serrate or obscurely lobed --9.

9a. Stem simple or sparingly branched; pistillate heads in the axils of
    the upper leaves (1-3 m. high)
                    =Giant Ragweed, Ambrosia trifida var. integrifolia.=

9b. Stem much branched; heads all alike, in panicles
                                         =Marsh Elder, Iva xanthifolia.=

     10a. Flowers all strap-shape; juicy milky. (The central flowers
          must be examined carefully, since they are frequently much
          smaller than the marginal ones) --11.

     10b. Flowers all tubular, with regular. 4-5-lobed corollas --45.

     10c. Flowers both tubular and strap-shape; heads radiate (in a few
          species the rays are small and may be overlooked by mistake)
          --108.

11a. Flowers blue (summer and autumn) --12.

11b. Flowers orange, yellow, white, or purplish --15.

     12a. Heads 2.5 cm. wide, or larger --13.

     12b. Heads 1.5 cm. wide, or smaller --14.

13a. Leaves linear; bracts longer than the flowers, heads 5-10 cm. wide
     (6-15 dm. high)                  =Salsify, Tragopogon porrifolius.=

13b. Leaves broader, mostly serrate; bracts shorter than the flowers;
     heads 2.5-4 cm. wide                  =Chicory, Cichorium intybus.=

     14a. Heads in a narrow crowded cluster (5-15 dm. high) --30b.

     14b. Heads in a spreading open panicle (Wild Lettuce) --22.

15a. Heads solitary at the summit of leafless stalks --16.

15b. Heads several, on leafy, naked, or scaly stalks --19.

     16a. Basal leaves strictly entire; heads about 2.5 cm. wide (summer
          and autumn) --35a.

     16b. Basal leaves toothed, lobed, or pinnatifid (spring and summer)
          --17.

17a. Heads 8-14 mm. wide (1-4 dm. high)
                                    =Dwarf Dandelion, Krigia virginica.=

17b. Heads 25-50 mm. wide (1-6 dm. high) (Dandelion) --18.

     18a. Outer involucral bracts reflexed
                                      =Dandelion, Taraxacum officinale.=

     18b. Outer involucral bracts erect or spreading
                                  =Dandelion, Taraxacum erythrospermum.=

19a. Pappus none; heads about 1 cm. wide (4-10 dm. high; summer)
                                         =Nipplewort, Lapsana communis.=

19b. Pappus of an inner row of bristles and an outer row of short
     scales; heads about 3 cm. wide (3-8 dm. high; early summer)
                                        =Cynthia, Krigia amplexicaulis.=

19c. Pappus of feathery bristles (summer) --20.

19d. Pappus of simple bristles --25.

     20a. Flower-stalk scaly, without foliage leaves (2-6 dm. high)
                                 =Fall Dandelion, Leontodon autumnalis.=

     20b. Stem leafy (3-10 dm. high) --21.

21a. Leaves entire, linear-lanceolate
                                 =Meadow Salsify, Tragopogon pratensis.=

21b. Leaves serrate, oblong-lanceolate    =Picris, Picris hieracioides.=

     22a. Pappus tawny in color (1-3 m. high) --23.

     22b. Pappus white --24.

23a. Leaves pinnatifid                  =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca spicata.=

23b. Leaves undivided, dentate
                      =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca spicata var. integrifolia.=

     24a. Upper leaves entire; heads about 1.5 cm. wide (5-10 dm. high)
                                      =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca pulchella.=

     24b. Upper leaves dentate or lobed; heads about 1 cm. wide (1-3 m.
          high)                       =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca floridana.=

25a. Achene tipped with a slender beak, bearing the pappus at its summit
     (summer) (Wild Lettuce) --26.

25b. Achene without a beak --29.

     26a. Leaves hirsute or hispid on the mid-veins beneath --27.

     26b. Leaves glabrous --28.

27a. Leaves pubescent on both sides (1-2 m. high)
                                        =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca hirsuta.=

27b. Leaves glabrous, except on the mid-vein (5-15 dm. high)
                        =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca scariola var. integrata.=

     28a. Leaves entire or sparsely toothed (1-2 m. high)
                                   =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca sagittifolia.=

     28b. Leaves chiefly sinuate-pinnatifid (1-3 m. high)
                                     =Wild Lettuce, Lactuca canadensis.=

29a. Flowers white, cream-color, or purplish (summer and autumn)
     (Rattlesnake Root) --30.

29b. Flowers bright-yellow or orange --33.

     30a. Heads nodding (6-20 dm. high) --31.

     30b. Heads pointing in various directions, in spike-like panicles;
          involucres pubescent (5-15 dm. high)
                               =Rattlesnake Root, Prenanthes racemosus.=

31a. Heads with 5-7 flowers in each
                               =Rattlesnake Root, Prenanthes altissima.=

31b. Heads with 8-12 flowers --32.

31c. Heads with 20 or more flowers
                              =Rattlesnake Root, Prenanthes crepidinea.=

     32a. Pappus dark reddish-brown
                                    =Rattlesnake Root, Prenanthes alba.=

     32b. Pappus pale-brown or nearly white
                              =Rattlesnake Root, Prenanthes trifoliata.=

33a. Pappus tawny or brown in color (summer and autumn) (Hawkweed) --34.

33b. Pappus white --42.

     34a. Heads 2.5 cm. in diameter, or larger --35.

     34b. Heads 1-2 cm. in diameter (4-10 dm. high) --37.

35a. Leaves all basal (1-4 dm. high)    =Hawkweed, Hieracium pilosella.=

35b. Stem-leaves present (4-15 dm. high) --36.

     36a. Leaves rounded at the sessile base
                                        =Hawkweed, Hieracium canadense.=

     36b. Leaves narrowed toward the base
                                       =Hawkweed, Hieracium umbellatum.=

37a. A rosette of basal leaves conspicuous at flowering time --38.

37b. No rosette of basal leaves at time of flowering --41.

     38a. Leaves glabrous on the upper side --39.

     38b. Leaves hairy on the upper side --40.

39a. Stem glabrous, leafless or with one or two leaves
                                          =Hawkweed, Hieracium venosum.=

39b. Stem with several leaves, hairy below
                                         =Hawkweed, Hieracium marianum.=

     40a. Leaves with short scattered hairs above
                                         =Hawkweed, Hieracium gronovii.=

     40b. Leaves and stem densely covered with very long hairs
                                       =Hawkweed, Hieracium longipilum.=

41a. Leaves glabrous                  =Hawkweed, Hieracium paniculatum.=

41b. Leaves very hairy                    =Hawkweed, Hieracium scabrum.=

     42a. Bracts of the involucre smooth (5-20 dm. tall; summer and
          autumn) (Sow Thistle) --43.

     42b. Bracts of the involucre hairy --44.

43a. The clasping leaf-bases acute     =Sow Thistle, Sonchus oleraceus.=

43b. The clasping leaf-bases rounded       =Sow Thistle, Sonchus asper.=

     44a. Heads 2.5-5 cm. broad; involucre 2 cm. long (4-10 dm. high)
                                        =Sow Thistle, Sonchus arvensis.=

     44b. Heads 1-2 cm. broad; involucre 6-10 mm. long (3-6 dm. high;
          summer)                         =Hawksbeard, Crepis tectorum.=

45a. Leaves or involucre or both spiny (thistles, burdock, etc.) --46.

45b. Neither leaves nor involucre spiny --60.

     46a. Leaves 1-4 dm. broad, not spiny (flowers purple or white;
          summer) (Burdock) --47.

     46b. Leaves narrower, not spiny --48.

47a. Diameter of involucre at flowering time 3-5 cm. (1-3 m. high)
                                               =Burdock, Arctium lappa.=

47b. Diameter of involucre at flowering time 1.5-3 cm. (5-15 dm. high)
                                               =Burdock, Arctium minus.=

     48a. Each head 1-flowered; heads aggregated in a globular
          head-like cluster (1-2 m. high; flowers blue or white, summer)
                              =Globe Thistle, Echinops sphaerocephalus.=

     48b. Each head many-flowered --49.

49a. Principal involucral bracts with stout spreading spines 2-4 cm.
     long (5-15 dm. high; flowers purple, summer)
                                       =Milk Thistle, Silybum marianum.=

49b. Principal involucral bracts with slender spines or none --50.

     50a. Pappus feathery; receptacle bristly (summer and autumn)
          (Thistle) --51.

     50b. Pappus not feathery (flowers purple, summer) --59.

51a. Heads subtended by a circle of large leafy bracts (5-15 dm. high;
     flowers pale-yellow)                =Thistle, Cisium spinoissimum.=

51b. Heads not subtended by several leafy bracts --52.

     52a. Leaves conspicuously white-woolly on both sides (4-10 dm.
          high) --53.

     52b. Leaves conspicuously white-woolly or brown-woolly below, not
          above (flowers purple or pink) --54.

     52c. Leaves green on both sides (flowers pink or purple, rarely
          white) --56.

53a. Leaves deeply pinnately parted with linear divisions; flowers
     almost white                           =Thistle, Cirsium pitcheri.=

53b. Leaves irregularly pinnatifid; flowers purple-pink
                                           =Thistle, Cirsium undulatum.=

     54a. Stem-leaves entire or shallowly lobed (1-3 m. high)
                                          =Thistle, Cirsium altissimum.=

     54b. Stem-leaves obviously pinnatifid (1-2 m. high) --55.

55a. Leaves decurrent on the stem        =Thistle, Cirsium lanceolatum.=

55b. Leaves not decurrent                   =Thistle, Cirsium discolor.=

     56a. Outer and middle involucral bracts appressed, pointless or
          with weak short prickles --57.

     56b. Outer and middle bracts erect, not appressed, acuminate into a
          long slender more or less prickly tip (4-10 dm. high) --58.

57a. Heads numerous 2-2.5 cm. broad, in close clusters (5-12 dm. high)
                                      =Canada Thistle, Cirsium arvense.=

57b. Heads few or solitary, 3-5 cm. broad (1-2 m. high)
                                             =Thistle, Cirsium muticum.=

     58a. Principal bracts with a conspicuous viscid stripe down the
          middle; heads 6-19 cm. broad, solitary or few
                                              =Thistle, Cirsium hillii.=

     58b. Principal bracts not viscid        =Thistle, Cirsium pumilum.=

59a. Receptacle not bristly; heads 3-5 cm. wide (1-3 m. high; flowers
     pale-purple, summer)         =Cotton Thistle, Onopordum acanthium.=

59b. Receptacle bristly; heads 2-2.5 cm. wide (5-12 dm. high; flowers
     purple to white, late summer)           =Thistle, Carduus crispus.=

     60a. Leaves basal; stem-leaves none or reduced to scales (2-8 dm.
          high; flowers whitish, in spring) --61.

     60b. Stem-leaves present; basal leaves present or absent --62.

61a. Leaves toothed or lobed; flower-stalk not scaly
                                     =Adenocaulon, Adenocaulon bicolor.=

61b. Leaves deeply cleft; flower-stalk scaly --197a.

     62a. Leaves compound or dissected (flowers in summer and autumn)
          --63.

     62b. Leaves merely lobed, never truly compound or dissected --72.

     62c. Leaves entire or serrate --78.

63a. Some of the involucral bracts leaf-like, longer than the heads
     (3-20 dm. high; flowers yellow or greenish, summer and autumn)
     (Beggar Ticks) --126.

63b. Bracts short and not leaf-like --64.

     64a. Heads 7-20 mm. wide, in a flat-topped or convex cluster (3-10
          dm. high; flowers yellow, summer) (Tansy) --65.

     64b. Heads smaller, in spikes, racemes, or panicles (flowers yellow
          or greenish, late summer and autumn) (Wormwood) --66.

65a. Heads 7-10 mm. wide, numerous in a dense cluster
                                             =Tansy, Tanacetum vulgare.=

65b. Heads 10-20 mm. wide, few, 2-10 in a loose open cluster
                                           =Tansy, Tanacetum huronense.=

     66a. Heads 2-3 mm. broad (4-15 dm. high) --67.

     66b. Heads 4-6 mm. broad (3-10 dm. high) --69.

67a. Leaf-lobes narrowly linear, strictly entire
                                          =Wormwood, Artemisia caudata.=

67b. Leaf-lobes serrate --68.

     68a. Heads in a loose spreading panicle
                                            =Wormwood, Artemisia annua.=

     68b. Heads in axillary clusters, producing a leafy spike-like
          panicle                         =Wormwood, Artemisia biennis.=

69a. Leaf-lobes narrowly linear --70.

69b. Leaf-lobes oblong to obovate, not linear --71.

     70a. Shrubby; involucre pubescent
                                    =Southernwood, Artemisia abrotanum.=

     70b. Herbaceous; involucre glabrous or rarely pubescent
                                       =Wormwood, Artemisia canadensis.=

71a. Leaves finely gray-pubescent on both sides
                                       =Wormwood, Artemisia absinthium.=

71b. Leaves smooth or nearly so above, densely white-woolly beneath
                                          =Mugwort, Artemisia vulgaris.=

     72a. Heads 2-4 cm. broad, purple, blue, or rarely white (3-6 dm.
          high; summer) --92.

     72b. Heads 1 cm. wide or less --73.

73a. Leaves densely white-woolly beneath (flowers yellowish, late
     summer) --74.

73b. Leaves smooth or hairy, never white-woolly --75.

     74a. Heads 6-8 mm. wide (4-8 dm. high)
                                      =Wormwood, Artemisia stelleriana.=

     74b. Heads 3-4 mm. wide (5-10 dm. high)
                                      =Wormwood, Artemisia ludoviciana.=

75a. Principal bracts of the involucre 5, with frequently a few much
     smaller ones --76.

75b. Principal bracts of the involucre numerous --77.

     76a. Heads few in small terminal clusters; foliage somewhat
          viscid-pubescent (6-15 dm. high; flowers yellow, summer)
          --114a.

     76b. Heads very numerous in flat-topped clusters; foliage never
          viscid-pubescent (1-2 m. high; flowers white, late summer)
          --105c.

77a. Leaves broadly halberd-shape, 3-lobed (1-2 m. high; flowers white,
     late summer) --105b.

77b. Leaves lobed only at the base (5-10 dm. high; flowers yellow,
     summer) --93a.

77c. Leaves pinnatifid (2-8 dm. high; flowers yellow) --172.

     78a. Bracts of the involucre dry and chaffy, at least at the tip;
          plants always pubescent and usually white-woolly --79.

     78b. Bracts of the involucre green or colored, but never dry and
          chaffy --90.

79a. Pappus none; heads 3-4 mm. wide, in ample panicled spikes (flowers
     yellowish, late summer) --74b.

79b. Pappus a minute ring or crown; leaves crenate (5-10 dm. high;
     flowers yellow, summer) --93a.

79c. Pappus of hairs; heads in flat-topped clusters or slender spikes
     --80.

     80a. Heads sessile or subsessile in small flat-topped clusters;
          flowering in spring or early summer; principal leaves basal
          (1-4 dm. high; flowers white or purplish) (Everlasting) --81.

     80b. Heads in terminal spikes (2-6 dm. high; flowers purplish,
          summer)                       =Cudweed, Gnaphalium purpureum.=

     80c. Heads in small or large flat-topped clusters, flowering in
          summer or autumn; principal leaves on the stem --88.

81a. Stolons from the basal rosette of leaves leafy throughout and
     ascending at the tip --82.

81b. Stolons prostrate throughout, leafy only at the tip --87.

     82a. Basal leaves 2-5 cm. long, 1-nerved --83.

     82b. Basal leaves 5-12 cm. long, 3-nerved --84.

83a. Basal leaves spatulate or oblanceolate, smooth above
                                   =Everlasting, Antennaria canadensis.=

83b. Basal leaves obovate, pubescent above
                                    =Everlasting, Antennaria neodioica.=

     84a. Basal leaves smooth above
                                     =Everlasting, Antennaria parlinii.=

     84b. Basal leaves dull green and pubescent above --85.

85a. Heads 6-8 mm. high       =Everlasting, Antennaria plantaginifolia.=

85b. Heads 8-11 mm. high --86.

     86a. Leaf-blade ovate or obovate
                                       =Everlasting, Antennaria fallax.=

     86b. Leaf-blade spatulate, with rounded tip
                                 =Everlasting, Antennaria occidentalis.=

87a. Styles crimson                  =Everlasting, Antennaria neglecta.=

87b. Styles pale yellow            =Everlasting, Antennaria petaloidea.=

     88a. Erect; involucral bracts pearly white (4-9 dm. high)
                           =Pearly Everlasting, Anaphalis margaritacea.=

     88b. Erect; involucral bracts dull white or pale brown, somewhat
          pubescent (4-8 dm. high) (Cudweed) --89.

     88c. Diffusely branched; heads in dense clusters; bracts brown (1-2
          dm. high)                    =Cudweed, Gnaphalium uliginosum.=

89a. Leaves decurrent on the stem       =Cudweed, Gnaphalium decurrens.=

89b. Leaves not decurrent on the stem
                                     =Cudweed, Gnaphalium polycephalum.=

     90a. Twining vine (flowers white, summer)
                                          =Hemp Weed, Mikania scandens.=

     90b. Not twining or climbing --91.

91a. Involucral bracts deeply fringed at the tip (flowers purple, blue,
     or rarely white, summer; 3-6 dm. high) --92.

91b. Involucral bracts entire or nearly so --93.

     92a. Upper leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate
                                        =Corn Flower, Centaurea cyanus.=

     92b. Upper leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate
                                            =Knapweed, Centaurea nigra.=

93a. Pappus none or a short ring or crown (5-10 dm. high; flowers
     yellow, summer)
                  =Costmary, Chrysanthemum balsamita var. tanacetoides.=

93b. Pappus of 2-4 stiff awns (2-15 dm. high; flowers yellow, late
     summer) (Bur Marigold) --130.

93c. Pappus of hairs or bristles --94.

     94a. Leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate, entire; heads never in a
          large flat-topped cluster --95.

     94b. Leaves not linear --99.

95a. Heads showy, purple, in a long spike or raceme (late summer)
     (Blazing Star) --96.

95b. Heads not showy, in a loose panicle or raceme --240b.

     96a. Involucral bracts rounded at the tip, appressed (5-15 dm.
          high) --97.

     96b. Involucral bracts pointed (3-6 dm. high) --98.

97a. Heads 8-12-flowered                =Blazing Star, Liatris spicata.=

97b. Heads with 25 flowers or more     =Blazing Star, Liatris scariosa.=

     98a. Involucral bracts long-acuminate, spreading
                                      =Blazing Star, Liatris squarrosa.=

     98b. Involucral bracts mucronate, appressed
                                    =Blazing Star, Liatris cylindracea.=

99a. Flowers yellow (2-8 dm. high) --172b.

99b. Flowers bright-red or purple, in flat-topped clusters (8-20 dm.
     high; late summer) (Ironweed) --100.

99c. Flowers blue (3-8 dm. high; late summer)
                                  =Mist Flower, Eupatorium coelestinum.=

99d. Flowers flesh-color, pink, cream-color, or white (flowers in
     summer) --103.

     100a. Leaves glabrous beneath or minutely pubescent; heads
           15-30-flowered --101.

     100b. Leaves tomentose beneath; heads 30-50-flowered --102.

101a. Inflorescence densely crowded; usually 1 m. or less high
                                       =Ironweed, Vernonia fasciculate.=

101b. Inflorescence loose and open, 15-30 cm. wide; 1-2 m. high
                                         =Ironweed, Vernonia altissima.=

     102a. Pappus tawny in color         =Ironweed, Vernonia missurica.=

     102b. Pappus purple               =Ironweed, Vernonia illinoensis.=

103a. Leaves alternate --104.

103b. Leaves opposite --106.

103c. Leaves whorled (1-3 m. high; flowers pink or purple, late summer)
      (Joe-Pye Weed) --107.

     104a. Heads 5-flowered (5-20 dm. high; flowers white or pinkish,
           late summer) (Indian Plantain) --105.

     104b. Heads 10 25-flowered (5-10 dm. high; flowers white, late
           summer)                =False Boneset, Kuhnia eupatorioides.=

     104c. Heads with more than 50 flowers (3-20 dm. high; flowers
           white, summer)           =Fireweed, Erechtites hieracifolia.=

105a. Leaves entire, with many veins from base to apex
                                    =Indian Plantain, Cacalia tuberosa.=

105b. Leaves sharply serrate      =Indian Plantain, Cacalia suaveolens.=

105c. Leaves broadly triangular or kidney-shape, sinuate or entire
                              =Indian Plantain, Cacalia atriplicifolia.=

     106a. Leaves united at the base (5-15 dm. high)
                                      =Boneset, Eupatorium perfoliatum.=

     106b. Leaves sessile but not united at the base (5-15 dm. high)
                             =Upland Boneset, Eupatorium sessilifolium.=

     106c. Leaves petioled (4-12 dm. high)
                            =White Snakeroot, Eupatorium urticaefolium.=

107a. Inflorescence ovoid or pyramidal
                                   =Joe-Pye Weed, Eupatorium purpureum.=

107b. Inflorescence depressed or flattened
                    =Joe-Pye Weed, Eupatorium purpureum var. maculatum.=

     108a. Rays yellow or brown --109.

     108b. Rays white to blue or red, never yellow or brown --197.

109a. Principal leaves basal, the stem merely with bract-like scales
      --110.

109b. Principal leaves on the stem, opposite or whorled --111.

109c. Principal leaves on the stem, alternate, or with smaller ones
      clustered in their axils --132.

     110a. Flower-stalk 1-5 dm. high, 1-flowered (spring)
                                         =Coltsfoot, Tussilago farfara.=

     110b. Flower-stalk 1-3 m. high, several-flowered (summer)
                              =Prairie Dock, Silphium terebinthinaceum.=

111a. Ray-flowers pistillate (the 2-lobed style protrudes from their
      base) --112.

111b. Ray-flowers with neither stamens nor pistil --118.

     112a. Principal leaves lobed (summer) (Leafcup) --113.

     112b. Principal leaves toothed or entire, not lobed --115.

113a. Rays 10 or more (1-2 m. high)        =Leafcup, Polymnia uvedalia.=

113b. Rays 5 (5-15 dm. high) --114.

     114a. Rays shorter than the involucre or none
                                         =Leafcup, Polymnia canadensis.=

     114b. Rays about 1 cm. long
                            =Leafcup, Polymnia canadensis var. radiata.=

115a. Stem 6 dm. high or less; pappus of slender hairs (spring)
                                            =Arnica, Arnica cordifolia.=

115b. Stem usually 8-20 dm. high; pappus of short scales or none
      (summer) --116.

     116a. Leaves united at base into a cup surrounding the stem
                                      =Cup Plant, Silphium perfoliatum.=

     116b. Leaves closely sessile with a rounded base
                                   =Rosin Weed, Silphium integrifolium.=

     116c. Leaves tapering to a short petiole; principal leaves whorled
                                     =Rosin Weed, Silphium trifoliatum.=

     116d. Leaves abruptly rounded at the sessile base, all opposite
           (Ox-eye) --117.

117a. Leaves smooth                   =Ox-eye, Heliopsis helianthoides.=

117b. Leaves rough                           =Ox-eye, Heliopsis scabra.=

     118a. Principal stem-leaves lobed or divided --119.

     118b. Principal stem-leaves entire or serrate --127.

119a. Submerged aquatic; leaf-segments filiform
                                        =Water Marigold, Bidens beckii.=

119b. Terrestrial plants; leaves merely 3-lobed (3-8 dm. high; late
      spring and summer) (Tickseed) --120.

119c. Terrestrial plants; leaves compound or dissected (summer and
      autumn) --121.

     120a. Leaf-lobes linear-oblong, all about equal
                                          =Tickseed, Coreopsis palmata.=

     120b. Lateral leaf-lobes very much smaller than the terminal
                                       =Tickseed, Coreopsis lanceolata.=

121a. Leaf-segments entire (Tickseed) --122.

121b. Leaf-segments serrate (5-15 dm. high) (Tickseed Sunflower) --124.

     122a. Leaf-segments numerous, linear or nearly so (4-10 dm. high)
           --123.

     122b. Leaf-segments 3-5, lanceolate (1-3 m. high)
                                        =Tickseed, Coreopsis tripteris.=

123a. Rays yellow throughout         =Tickseed, Coreopsis verticillata.=

123b. Rays brown, at least at the base  =Tickseed, Coreopsis tinctoria.=

     124a. Achenes wedge-shape, the inner ones less than 2 mm. wide
           --125.

     124b. Achenes obovate, the inner ones more than 2 mm. wide
                                  =Tickseed Sunflower, Bidens aristosa.=

125a. Leaf-lobes lanceolate   =Tickseed Sunflower, Bidens trichosperma.=

125b. Leaf-lobes linear
               =Tickseed Sunflower, Bidens trichosperma var. tenuiloba.=

     126a. Outer leaf-like bracts 10-16; achenes brown
                                         =Beggar Ticks, Bidens vulgata.=

     126b. Outer leaf-like bracts 5-8; achenes black
                                        =Beggar Ticks, Bidens frondosa.=

     126c. Outer leaf-like bracts about 4
                                       =Beggar Ticks, Bidens discoidea.=

127a. Bracts of the involucre all essentially alike in form and texture
      (flowers in summer and autumn) (Sunflower) --179.

127b. Bracts of the involucre in two distinct sets, differing in form or
      consistency or both --128.

     128a. Leaves entire (3-8 dm. high; late spring and summer) --120b.

     128b. Leaves serrate (late summer and autumn) (Bur Marigold) --129.

129a. Rays large and conspicuous, 2-3 cm. long (3-10 dm. high)
                                          =Bur Marigold, Bidens laevis.=

129b. Rays 1 cm. long or less --130.

     130a. Outer bracts leaf-like, serrate, 3-8 cm. long (4-15 dm. high)
                                          =Bur Marigold, Bidens comosa.=

     130b. Outer bracts 1-2.5 cm. long (2-15 dm. high) --131.

131a. Heads nodding after flowering       =Bur Marigold, Bidens cernua.=

131b. Heads permanently erect            =Bur Marigold, Bidens connata.=

     132a. Heads small, seldom more than 1 cm. wide, including the rays,
           blooming in late summer and autumn; flowers numerous, crowded
           in spikes, racemes, corymbs, or panicles (Goldenrod) --133.

     132b. Heads medium size or large, more than 1 cm. and usually
           exceeding 2 cm. in width, including the rays --165.

133a. Heads chiefly in clusters or short racemes in the axils of
      ordinary foliage leaves, or occasionally the upper compacted into
      a leafy cluster terminating the stem --134.

133b. Heads crowded at or near the ends of the branches at about the
      same distance from the base of the panicle, forming a rounded or
      flat-topped inflorescence --140.

133c. Heads more or less uniformly distributed along the length of the
      branches, forming a cylindrical or pyramidal inflorescence, never
      flat-topped --146.

     134a. Stem and both sides of the leaves more or less pubescent or
           rough (4-10 dm. high) --135.

     134b. Stem and both sides of the leaves essentially smooth or with
           very short hairs (3-10 dm. high) --136.

135a. Rays white                          =Goldenrod, Solidago bicolor.=

135b. Rays yellow                         =Goldenrod, Solidago hispida.=

     136a. Basal leaves abruptly narrowed to winged petioles --137.

     136b. Basal leaves not abruptly narrowed to winged petioles --138.

137a. Involucre 2-5 mm. long            =Goldenrod, Solidago latifolia.=

137b. Involucre 8-12 mm. long         =Goldenrod, Solidago macrophylla.=

     138a. Lower leaves broadly oval, obtuse, thickish, crenate; achenes
           glabrous                        =Goldenrod, Solidago erecta.=

     138b. Lower leaves lanceolate, acuminate, thin, sharply serrate;
           achenes hairy --139.

139a. Stem usually simple; heads few in very small clusters
                            =Goldenrod, Solidago caesia var. axillaris.=

139b. Stem usually diffusely branched; heads numerous
                                           =Goldenrod, Solidago caesia.=

     140a. Lower leaves ovate, oblong, or oval, pinnately veined (5-15
           dm. high) --141.

     140b. Lower leaves linear-lanceolate. 3-5-veined (3-12 dm. high)
           --142.

141a. Stem and leaves rough-hairy          =Goldenrod, Solidago rigida.=

141b. Stem and leaves smooth            =Goldenrod, Solidago ohioensis.=

     142a. Heads very few in a small cluster; leaves few and scattered
                                       =Goldenrod, Solidago houghtonii.=

     142b. Heads very many, in a large cluster; stem very leafy --143.

143a. Leaves hairy    =Goldenrod, Solidago graminifolia var. nuttallii.=

143b. Leaves smooth --144.

     144a. Leaves folded, 8-20 mm. wide
                                        =Goldenrod, Solidago riddellii.=

     144b. Leaves flat, 1-8 mm. wide --145.

145a. Leaves 4-8 mm. wide, distinctly 3-5-ribbed
                                     =Goldenrod, Solidago graminifolia.=

145b. Leaves 1-4 mm. wide, usually with 1 mid-vein
                                       =Goldenrod, Solidago tenuifolia.=

     146a. Only 2-5 stem-leaves below the inflorescence (1-3 dm. high)
                                          =Goldenrod, Solidago cutleri.=

     146b. Stem-leaves numerous --147.

147a. Basal leaves much larger than the greatly reduced or bract-like
      upper ones --148.

147b. Leaves essentially uniform in size from base to summit of stem
      --157.

     148a. Racemes or branches of the panicle either short and arranged
           along a more or less elongated central axis, or elongated and
           ascending, scarcely recurved, forming a narrow, more or less
           elongated panicle --149.

     148b. Racemes or branches of the panicle usually elongated,
           spreading outwards, usually recurved, forming a widened
           panicle --153.

149a. Leaves mostly entire, the upper ones with smaller leaves fascicled
      in the axils (5-20 dm. high)       =Goldenrod, Solidago speciosa.=

149b. Leaves mostly serrate, at least the basal ones --150.

     150a. Heads on pedicels 5-15 mm. long; achenes pubescent; stems
           usually clustered (1-5 dm. high, or prostrate) --151.

     150b. Heads on pedicels not over 5 mm. long; achenes smooth or
           nearly so; stems usually single (6-12 dm. high) --152.

151a. Basal leaves 7-12 cm. long         =Goldenrod, Solidago racemosa.=

151b. Basal leaves 15-30 cm. long
                           =Goldenrod, Solidago racemosa var. gillmani.=

     152a. Leaves pinnately veined      =Goldenrod, Solidago uliginosa.=

     152b. Leaves 3-5-ribbed             =Goldenrod, Solidago neglecta.=

153a. Both sides of the leaf pubescent or rough --154.

153b. Leaf not pubescent or rough on both sides --155.

     154a. Stem closely pubescent (2-8 dm. high)
                                        =Goldenrod, Solidago nemoralis.=

     154b. Stem glabrous (5-12 dm. high)
                            =Goldenrod, Solidago juncea var. scabrella.=

155a. Leaves rough above, smooth below (6-15 dm. high)
                                           =Goldenrod, Solidago patula.=

155b. Leaves smooth on both sides (5-12 dm. high) --156.

     156a. Branches of the panicle spreading or recurved
                                           =Goldenrod, Solidago juncea.=

     156b. Branches of the panicle upright
                               =Goldenrod, Solidago juncea var. ramosa.=

157a. Stem more or less pubescent or hairy throughout (5-20 dm. high)
      --158.

157b. Stem smooth, at least below the inflorescence --161.

     158a. Involucre 2-2.7 mm. long    =Goldenrod, Solidago canadensis.=

     158b. Involucre 3-5 mm. long --159.

159a. Leaves pinnately veined, scabrous above
                                           =Goldenrod, Solidago rugosa.=

159b. Leaves 3-5-ribbed, pubescent but not scabrous above --160.

     160a. Stem and lower side of leaves covered with short hairs;
           common species               =Goldenrod, Solidago altissima.=

     160b. Stem and lower side of leaves with distinct, loose, soft
           hairs (shore of Lake Superior)
                           =Goldenrod, Solidago altissima var. procera.=

161a. Involucre 2-2.7 mm. long (5-20 dm. high) --158a.

161b. Involucre 3-6 mm. long --162.

     162a. Racemes or branches of the panicle either short and arranged
           along a more or less elongated axis, or elongated and
           ascending, scarcely recurved, forming a narrow more or less
           elongated panicle (5-10 dm. high)
                          =Goldenrod, Solidago speciosa var. angustata.=

     162b. Racemes or branches of the panicle usually elongated,
           spreading outward, usually recurved, forming a widened
           panicle; leaves distinctly serrate --163.

163a. Leaves pinnately veined (5-12 dm. high)
                                        =Goldenrod, Solidago ulmifolia.=

163b. Leaves 3-5-ribbed (5-20 dm. high) --164.

     164a. Leaves glabrous on both sides
                                         =Goldenrod, Solidago serotina.=

     164b. Leaves slightly pubescent beneath
                           =Goldenrod, Solidago serotina var. gigantea.=

165a. Ray-flowers pistillate (the 2-lobed style protrudes from their
      base) --166.

165b. Ray-flowers with neither stamens nor pistil --174.

     166a. Principal leaves more than 2 dm. long (1-3 m. high; summer)
           --167.

     166b. Principal leaves less than 1.5 dm. long --168.

167a. Leaves deeply lobed          =Compass Plant, Silphium laciniatum.=

167b. Leaves toothed or serrate            =Elecampane, Inula helenium.=

     168a. Leaves narrowly linear (3-6 dm. high; late summer)
                                     =Sneezeweed, Helenium tenuifolium.=

     168b. Leaves of a broader shape --169.

169a. Heads 1-2 cm. wide; flowers in spring and early summer (2-8 dm.
      high) (Ragwort) --170.

169b. Heads 2-5 cm. wide; flowers in late summer and autumn --173.

     170a. Basal leaves cordate at base       =Ragwort, Senecio aureus.=

     170b. Basal leaves narrowed to the base --171.

171a. Basal leaves obovate                  =Ragwort, Senecio obovatus.=

171b. Basal leaves oblong                 =Ragwort, Senecio balsamitae.=

     172a. Introduced annual in waste places (1-4 dm. high; spring and
           summer)                        =Groundsel, Senecio vulgaris.=

     172b. Native biennial in moist ground (3-8 dm. high; summer)
                                       =Squaw Weed, Senecio discoideus.=

173a. Leaves 2-5 cm. long, sharply spinulose-serrate; involucre viscid
      (3-6 dm. high; summer)           =Gum Plant, Grindelia squarrosa.=

173b. Leaves 5-12 cm. long, merely serrate; involucre gray-pubescent
      (5-15 dm. high; late summer)    =Sneeze Weed, Helenium autumnale.=

     174a. Disk hemispherical or oblong-cylindrical (Summer) --175.

     174b. Disk flat or somewhat convex (Sunflower) (summer and autumn)
           --179.

175a. Disk yellow or greenish-yellow (1-3 dm. high) --176.

175b. Disk gray-brown or purple (5-15 dm. high) --177.

     176a. Principal stem-leaves pinnately divided
                                     =Golden Glow, Rudbeckia laciniata.=

     176b. Principal stem-leaves merely serrate
                            =Yellow Ironweed, Actinomeris alternifolia.=

177a. Rays drooping; leaves pinnately divided
                             =Gray-headed Coneflower, Lepachys pinnata.=

177b. Rays spreading when in bloom --178.

     178a. Lower leaves deeply 3-lobed
                                        =Coneflower, Rudbeckia triloba.=

     178b. Stem-leaves sharply serrate
                      =Coneflower, Rudbeckia speciosa var. sullivantii.=

     178c. Stem-leaves entire or sparingly serrate
                                    =Black-eyed Susan, Rudbeckia hirta.=

179a. Disk-flowers brown or purple --180.

179b. Disk-flowers yellow --182.

     180a. Stem-leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate; petioles prominent,
           not winged --181.

     180b. Stem-leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate, contracted at the base
           into a winged petiole (6-15 dm. high)
                                     =Sunflower, Helianthus atrorubens.=

     180c. Stem-leaves oblong-lanceolate, very thick and rigid,
           gradually narrowed to a sessile or short-petioled base
           (5-20 dm. high)          =Sunflower, Helianthus scaberrimus.=

181a. Disk less than 2 cm. wide (3-10 dm. high)
                                     =Sunflower, Helianthus petiolaris.=

181b. Disk more than 2.5 cm. wide (1-3 m. high)
                                         =Sunflower, Helianthus annuus.=

     182a. Leaves all or chiefly at the base (5-10 dm. high)
                                   =Sunflower, Helianthus occidentalis.=

     182b. Leaves chiefly scattered on the stem --183.
           183a. Leaves mainly or all alternate, and not definitely
           3-ribbed (1-4 m. high) --184.

183b. Leaves mainly or all opposite, lanceolate to ovate, and 3-ribbed
      --186.

     184a. Stem glabrous        =Sunflower, Helianthus grosse-serratus.=

     184b. Stem hairy or rough --185.

185a. Leaves hairy beneath, rough above, lanceolate
                                      =Sunflower, Helianthus giganteus.=

185b. Leaves rough on both sides, elongated
                                    =Sunflower, Helianthus maximiliani.=

     186a. Leaves sessile (5-15 dm. high) --187.

     186b. Leaves petioled, or narrowed at the base into a petiole (5-30
           dm. high) --189.

187a. Leaves wedge-shape at the base
                                   =Sunflower, Helianthus doronicoides.=

187b. Leaves rounded at the base --188.

     188a. Stem glabrous or nearly so
                                    =Sunflower, Helianthus divaricatus.=

     188b. Stem densely and softly hirsute
                                         =Sunflower, Helianthus mollis.=

189a. Stems rough, pubescent, or hispid --190.

189b. Stems glabrous or nearly so --193.

     190a. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, more than 5 times as long as wide
                    =Sunflower, Helianthus giganteus var. subtuberosus.=

     190b. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, not more than 4 times as long as
           wide --191.

191a. Leaves rounded at base, above the petiole
                                       =Sunflower, Helianthus hirsutus.=

191b. Leaves narrowed to the base --192.

     192a. Bracts of the involucre spreading
                            =Jerusalem Artichoke, Helianthus tuberosus.=

     192b. Bracts all appressed     =Sunflower, Helianthus laetiflorus.=

193a. Heads 3 cm. wide or less, including the rays
                                  =Sunflower, Helianthus microcephalus.=

193b. Heads 4 cm. wide or more, including the rays --194.

     194a. Leaves narrowed at the base into a winged petiole --195.

     194b. Petiole slender, not winged
                                    =Sunflower, Helianthus decapetalus.=

195a. Leaves green on both sides; bracts longer than the disk
                                =Sunflower, Helianthus tracheliifolius.=

195b. Leaves paler below than above; bracts not longer than the disk
      --196.

     196a. Leaves minutely pubescent beneath
                                      =Sunflower, Helianthus strumosus.=

     196b. Leaves conspicuously downy beneath
                          =Sunflower, Helianthus strumosus var. mollis.=

197a. Leaves all basal, the flowers on scaly stalks (2-8 dm. high;
      flowers whitish, in spring)        =Coltsfoot, Petasites palmata.=

197b. Stem-leaves present, opposite --198.

197c. Stem-leaves present, alternate --200.

     198a. Leaves ovate, dentate, 2-6 cm. long (2-8 dm. high; summer)
           (Galinsoga) --199.

     198b. Leaves lobed, 10-25 cm. long --113b.

199a. Pubescence sparse, appressed    =Galinsoga, Galinsoga parviflora.=

199b. Pubescence abundant, spreading
                         =Galinsoga, Galinsoga parviflora var. hispida.=

     200a. Leaves dissected or deeply lobed or pinnatifid; pappus never
           capillary; rays white to pink (3-10 dm. high; summer and
           autumn) --201.

     200b. Leaves entire or serrate --206.

201a. Heads 4-8 mm. wide (Yarrow) --202.

201b. Heads 12-50 mm. wide --203.

     202a. Flower-clusters flat-topped   =Yarrow, Achillea millefolium.=

     202b. Flower-clusters very convex      =Yarrow, Achillea lanulosa.=

203a. Principal leaves pinnatifid --213a.

203b. Principal leaves 1-3 times pinnately parted or dissected --204.

     204a. Leaf-segments very narrowly linear; leaves 2-3-pinnate --205.

     204b. Leaf-segments linear or lanceolate; heads 2.5-5 cm. wide
                                          =Camomile, Anthemis arvensis.=

     204c. Leaf-segments ovate to ovate-oblong; heads 1-2 cm. wide
                                   =Feverfew, Chrysanthemum parthenium.=

205a. Foliage strongly scented            =Dog Fennel, Anthemis cotula.=

205b. Foliage not ill-scented       =Wild Camomile, Matricaria inodora.=

     206a. Heads 3-6 mm. broad, including the rays (summer and autumn)
           --207.

     206b. Heads 7 mm. broad or larger, including the rays --209.

207a. Rays purple (1-4 dm. high)     =Horse Weed, Erigeron divaricatus.=

207b. Rays white --208.

     208a. Leaves obovate to oblong (3-10 dm. high) --135a.

     208b. Leaves linear or narrowly lanceolate (2-25 dm. high)
                                      =Horse Weed, Erigeron canadensis.=

209a. Pappus none, or minute and not of hairs (summer and autumn) --210.

209b. Pappus of hairs --214.

     210a. Disk-flowers purple or brown (4-12 dm. high; rays pink)
           (Purple Coneflower) --211.

     210b. Disk-flowers yellow or nearly white --212.

211a. Leaves ovate or ovate-lanceolate, most of them serrate
                                =Purple Coneflower, Brauneria purpurea.=

211b. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, gradually narrowed at the base, entire
                                 =Purple Coneflower, Brauneria pallida.=

     212a. Rays broadly obovate; heads 1-2 cm. wide (3-6 dm. high)
                                        =Sneezewort, Achillea ptarmica.=

     212b. Rays oblong or narrowly elliptical --213.

213a. Leaves serrate (3-10 dm. high)
           =Ox-eye Daisy, Chrysanthemum leucanthemum var. pinnatifidum.=

213b. Leaves entire (8-25 dm. high)     =Boltonia, Boltonia asteroides.=

     214a. Involucral bracts all the same length or nearly so and
           narrow, or with a few short outer ones; plants blooming in
           spring and summer, or a few plants persisting in bloom until
           autumn (Fleabane) --215.

     214b. Involucral bracts unequal, the outer successively shorter (or
           rarely nearly equal), loosely or closely overlapping; plants
           3-15 dm. high, blooming in late summer and autumn (Aster)
           --221.

215a. Rays short and inconspicuous, barely longer than the pappus (1-5
      dm. high; summer)      =Fleabane, Erigeron acris var. asteroides.=

215b. Rays conspicuous, spreading, 3 mm. long or more --216.

     216a. Rare plants of the Northern Peninsula, with entire leaves and
           stems 1-5 dm. high, from a thick woody root (flowers white or
           purple, summer) --217.

     216b. Common species, with erect stems from fibrous roots; leaves
           toothed (except in one species) --218.

217a. Heads 3-5 cm. wide; rays about 100
                                         =Fleabane, Erigeron glabellus.=

217b. Heads 1-2 cm. wide; rays 20-30
                                     =Fleabane, Erigeron hyssopifolius.=

     218a. Stem unbranched, except for the peduncles; leaves chiefly
           basal; heads 1-9 (2-5 dm. high; flowers pale-purple, spring)
                                        =Fleabane, Erigeron pulchellus.=

     218b. Stem branched; principal leaves on the stem; heads usually
           numerous (3-12 dm. high; spring and summer) --219.

219a. Stem-leaves linear, entire           =Fleabane, Erigeron ramosus.=

219b. Stem-leaves ovate-lanceolate, the principal ones toothed --220.

     220a. Rays 100 or more, light-purple or pink
                                    =Fleabane, Erigeron philadelphicus.=

     220b. Rays much fewer, white           =Fleabane, Erigeron annuus.=

221a. Basal leaves petioled and heart-shape at the base --222.

221b. Basal leaves not petioled; stem-leaves with heart-shape clasping
      bases --231.

221c. Basal and stem-leaves sessile or petioled, but never heart-shape
      or clasping --240.

     222a. Rays white or violet --223.

     222b. Rays blue --225.

223a. Plant glandular, especially on the pedicels and branches of the
      inflorescence                         =Aster, Aster macrophyllus.=

223b. Plant not glandular --224.

     224a. Leaves rough above                  =Aster, Aster schreberi.=

     224b. Leaves smooth above               =Aster, Aster divaricatus.=

225a. Stem-leaves clasping the stem by a cordate base
                                               =Aster, Aster undulatus.=

225b. Stem-leaves not cordate-clasping --226.

     226a. Leaves entire --227.

     226b. Leaves serrate --228.

227a. Leaves glabrous above                      =Aster, Aster shortii.=

227b. Leaves rough above                         =Aster, Aster azureus.=

     228a. Involucre 4-6 mm. long --229.

     228b. Involucre 6-10 mm. long --230.

229a. Leaves rough; petioles mostly winged    =Aster, Aster lowrieanus.=

229b. Leaves smooth; petioles slender, not winged
                                             =Aster, Aster cordifolius.=

     230a. Heads few, seldom more than 10, in a loose spreading cluster
                                             =Aster, Aster lindleyanus.=

     230b. Heads numerous, in a rather elongate crowded cluster
                                           =Aster, Aster sagittifolius.=

231a. Stem hirsute or rough-pubescent --232.

231b. Stem smooth, or essentially so --236.

     232a. Leaves conspicuously serrate         =Aster, Aster puniceus.=

     232b. Leaves entire or nearly so --233.

233a. Leaves narrowed toward the base and barely clasping, linear or
      oblong-linear --234.

233b. Leaves ovate-oblong or lanceolate, with a broad conspicuously
      clasping base --235.

     234a. Involucre pubescent but not glandular
                                            =Aster, Aster amethystinus.=

     234b. Involucre glandular             =Aster, Aster oblongifolius.=

235a. Involucre very glandular and viscid; rays very numerous,
      violet-purple; leaves lanceolate     =Aster, Aster novae-angliae.=

235b. Involucre slightly glandular or not at all; rays 20-30, generally
      blue-purple; leaves ovate-oblong            =Aster, Aster patens.=

     236a. Leaves of a linear type --237.

     236b. Leaves broader than linear, at least 1 cm. wide --238.

237a. Bracts narrow, approximately equal in length --253a.

237b. Bracts of several lengths, the outer successively shorter --256a.

     238a. Leaves smooth above                    =Aster, Aster laevis.=

     238b. Leaves rough above --239.

239a. Leaves contracted below the middle and then abruptly dilated to
      the clasping base                    =Aster, Aster prenanthoides.=

239b. Leaves gradually narrowed toward the base
                                                =Aster, Aster puniceus.=

     240a. Rays conspicuous --241.

     240b. Rays minute or wanting               =Aster, Aster angustus.=

241a. Stems and leaves gray with a silky pubescence
                                                =Aster, Aster sericeus.=

241b. Stem and leaves green, not silky --242.

     242a. Bracts glandular-viscid; rays violet
                                           =Aster, Aster oblongifolius.=

     242b. Bracts bristly-ciliate --243.

     242c. Bracts smooth or pubescent, not glandular or bristly-ciliate
           --244.

243a. Leaves crowded, rigid; rays white      =Aster, Aster multiflorus.=

243b. Leaves not crowded and rigid; rays blue --234a.

     244a. Bracts narrowed at the tip into thickened firm green
           awl-shape points --245.

     244b. Bracts acute or obtuse at the flattened tip --247.

245a. Involucre 4-5 mm. long --246.

245b. Involucre 7-8 mm. high                 =Aster, Aster polyphyllus.=

     246a. Stem smooth                         =Aster, Aster ericoides.=

     246b. Stem hairy; leaves linear
                                 =Aster, Aster ericoides var. villosus.=

     246c. Stem densely white-woolly
                             =Aster, Aster ericoides var. platyphyllus.=

247a. Leaves at most 4.5 cm. long --248.

247b. Leaves larger, at least the principal ones --249.

     248a. Stems in clusters; leaves rigid, linear, with 1 vein; flowers
           blue                            =Aster, Aster linariifolius.=

     248b. Stem solitary; leaves not rigid; flowers rose-pink
                                               =Aster, Aster nemoralis.=

249a. Heads solitary at the end of minutely leafy branchlets; leaves
      linear                                     =Aster, Aster dumosus.=

249b. Heads in flat-topped clusters; leaves lanceolate or broader --250.

249c. Heads in more or less one-sided racemes --251.

249d. Heads in panicles or irregular clusters --253.

     250a. Leaves rigid, linear-lanceolate  =Aster, Aster ptarmicoides.=

     250b. Leaves not rigid, lanceolate       =Aster, Aster umbellatus.=

251a. Leaves lanceolate, sharply serrate --252.

251b. Leaves linear or narrowly linear-lanceolate, only the larger ones
      with a few teeth near the middle          =Aster, Aster vimineus.=

     252a. Stem glabrous or somewhat pubescent
                                            =Aster, Aster lateriflorus.=

     252b. Stem woolly with long hairs
                         =Aster, Aster lateriflorus var. hirsuticaulis.=

253a. Bracts narrow, approximately equal in length
                                             =Aster, Aster longifolius.=

253b. Bracts of several lengths, the outer successively shorter --254.

     254a. Heads 10-15 mm. wide, including the rays
                                             =Aster, Aster tradescanti.=

     254b. Heads 15-25 mm. wide, including the rays --255.

255a. Bracts with conspicuous dilated or subrhombic tips
                                            =Aster, Aster salicifolius.=

255b. Bracts without conspicuous green tips --256.

256a. Rays purple or rose; bog plant with linear leaves
                                                 =Aster, Aster junceus.=

256b. Rays white, or slightly tinged with blue; leaves oblong to
      narrowly lanceolate                    =Aster, Aster paniculatus.=




GLOSSARY


=Achene.= A small, dry, hard, seed-like fruit containing a single seed.

=Acuminate.= Taper-pointed.

=Acute.= Ending with an acute angle.

=Alternate.= Located singly on the stem, with other leaves above or below.

=Annual.= Living but a single season.

=Anther.= The (usually) enlarged end of a stamen, bearing the pollen.

=Ascending.= Rising or curving obliquely upward.

=Auricle.= An ear-shape appendage at the base of a leaf or other organ.

=Auricled, auriculate.= Furnished with auricles.

=Awl-shape.= Tapering to a slender stiff point.

=Awn.= An awl-shape or bristle-shape appendage.

=Axil.= The point on a stem just above the base of a leaf or branch.

=Axillary.= Arising from or produced in the axil.

=Basal.= Arising from or produced at the base.

=Beak.= Ending in a prominent slender point.

=Bract.= A small leaf near the base of a flower or flower-stalk, or in a
     flower-cluster.

=Bracteal.= An adjective derived from bract.

=Bipinnate.= A leaf with a pinnately branched axis, bearing leaflets on
     the sides of the branches.

=Calyx.= The outer portion of the flower, usually green in color. In
     some plants it is colored to resemble (or replace) the corolla,
     and in others may be minute or wanting.

=Capitate.= Shaped like a head; or arranged in a dense compact cluster.

=Capsule.= A dry fruit with usually several seeds, opening at maturity.

=Catkin.= A cylindrical or ovoid cluster of inconspicuous flowers, for
     example, the "pussy willow."

=Cells of ovary.= The cavity or cavities within an ovary, in which the
     seeds are produced.

=Ciliate.= Provided with hairs at the margin.

=Clasping.= With the base of a leaf or other organ wholly or partly
     surrounding the stem.

=Cleft.= Deeply divided toward the base or the mid-rib.

=Closed sheath.= A leaf-sheath in which the margins are united to form a
     tube.

=Composite.= A flower-cluster containing several or many small flowers,
     closely crowded together and provided with calyx-like bracts, so that
     the whole cluster resembles a single flower.

=Compound.= Composed of 2 or more similar parts united, as a compound
     ovary.

=Compound leaf.= A leaf with two or more separate leaflets on a single
     petiole.

=Connate.= Grown together.

=Cordate.= Heart-shape. A whole leaf-blade may be cordate, or the term may
     be applied to the base of a leaf only.

=Cordate-sagittate.= Intermediate in shape between cordate and sagittate.

=Corm.= An enlarged stem-base, of solid structure and usually underground.

=Corolla.= The portion of a flower next to the calyx (in ordinary cases).
     It is generally the most conspicuous part of the flower, but may be
     completely absent, or inconspicuous, or replaced by the calyx.

=Corymb.= A flat-topped or convex-topped flower-cluster.

=Creeping.= With stems prostrate on the ground and rooting at intervals.

=Crenate.= With round-pointed teeth at the margin.

=Crenulate.= Finely or minutely crenate.

=Cuspidate.= Ending with a short sharp stiff point.

=Deciduous.= Not persistent for a long time; not evergreen.

=Decompound.= Repeatedly branched with numerous leaflets.

=Decurrent.= Extending with wing-like expansions down the stem.

=Decumbent.= A stem prostrate at the base, but with the tip more or less
     ascending.

=Dehiscent.= Breaking open at maturity to discharge the contents.

=Deltoid.= Broadly triangular.

=Dioecious.= Bearing staminate and pistillate flowers upon separate
     plants.

=Dissected.= Finely divided into numerous small or narrow segments.

=Divided.= With deep segments or lobes.

=Elliptical.= Having the shape of an ellipse.

=Elliptical-lanceolate.= Intermediate in shape between elliptical and
     lanceolate.

=Entire.= With an unbroken margin, without teeth or lobes.

=Epiphyte.= A plant growing attached to the bark of another plant, and
     without connection with the soil.

=Erect.= Growing in nearly or quite a vertical position.

=Evenly pinnate.= A compound leaf terminating in a pair of leaflets.

=Filament.= The (usually) slender basal portion of a stamen, supporting
     the anther at its tip.

=Floweret.= A small flower.

=Gamopetalous.= Composed of united petals.

=Gamosepalous.= Composed of united sepals.

=Glabrous.= Smooth; without hairs.

=Glandular.= Bearing glands.

=Glaucous.= Covered with a thin bluish or whitish deposit, easily rubbed
     off.

=Glume.= A bract at the base of a spikelet of a grass.

=Half recurved.= Curved half-way backward.

=Hastate.= Shaped like an arrow-head, but with the basal lobes pointing
     outwards instead of backward.

=Head.= A dense cluster of flowers, about as broad as long.

=Hirsute.= With stiff coarse hairs.

=Imperfect.= Flowers which contain either pistil or stamens, not both.

=Incised.= With deep, sharp, irregular, divisions.

=Indehiscent.= Not breaking open at maturity to discharge the contents.

=Inflorescence.= A cluster of flowers.

=Internode.= A section of stem between two joints, or nodes.

=Involucre.= A collection of bracts at the base of a flower-cluster.

=Irregular.= Possessing similar parts of different size or form. An
     irregular flower is generally distinguished by petals of unequal
     size or shape.

=Laciniate.= Cut into narrow pointed lobes or divisions.

=Lanceolate.= Shaped like a lance-head, several times longer than wide,
     and broadest below the middle.

=Linear.= Long and narrow, but with about uniform width.

=Linear-lanceolate.= Intermediate in shape between linear and lanceolate;
     narrowly lanceolate.

=Lip.= The largest and most conspicuous petal in an irregular corolla,
     usually applied to the lower petal of an orchid.

=Lobe.= A segment or division of any organ.

=Leaflet.= One portion of the blade of a compound leaf.

=Lemma.= One of the bracts in the spikelet of a grass, and described in
     the treatment of that family.

=Membranous.= Thin or membrane-like in texture.

=Monoecious.= Bearing stamens and pistils in separate flowers, but on the
     same plant.

=Mucronate.= Tipped with a short small abrupt tip.

=Node.= A joint of a stem, at which leaves are borne and branches appear.

=Oblanceolate.= Reversed lanceolate in shape.

=Oblique.= With unequal sides.

=Oblong.= Somewhat rectangular in shape, with parallel sides.

=Oblong-lanceolate.= Intermediate in shape between oblong and lanceolate.

=Oblong-spatulate.= Intermediate in shape between oblong and spatulate.

=Obovate.= Reversed ovate in shape.

=Obtuse.= Blunt-tipped; terminating in an obtuse angle.

=Odd-pinnate.= A compound leaf terminating in a single leaflet.

=Once-compound.= A compound leaf bearing leaflets at the end or along the
     sides of the main axis.

=Once-pinnate.= A compound leaf bearing leaflets along the sides of the
     axis.

=Open sheath.= A leaf-sheath with separate margins.

=Opposite.= Situated in pairs on opposite sides of the stem or axis.

=Ovary.= The basal, usually swollen portion of the pistil, within which
     the seeds are produced.

=Ovate.= Egg-shape in outline.

=Ovate-lanceolate.= Intermediate in shape between ovate and lanceolate;
     broadly lanceolate or narrowly ovate.

=Ovate-oblong.= Intermediate in shape between ovate and oblong.

=Ovoid.= Egg-shape.

=Palmate.= With several organs or structures attached at or proceeding
     from the same point; applied chiefly to the arrangement of
     principal veins in a leaf and of leaflets in a compound leaf.

=Panicle.= A loose, more or less irregular, branching cluster of
     pedicelled flowers, usually much longer than thick.

=Parallel-veined.= With the principal veins of the leaf paralleling each
     other from the base to the apex, or (rarely) from the mid-rib to
     the margin.

=Pedicel.= The stalk of a single flower.

=Parasite.= A plant which grows attached to another and derives its
     nourishment from it.

=Peduncle.= The stalk of a flower-cluster, or of a solitary flower.

=Peltate.= Attached to the stalk by the lower surface, instead of the
     margin.

=Perennial.= Living through several seasons.

=Perfect.= Bearing stamens and pistils in the same flower.

=Perfoliate.= Clasping the stem so completely that the stem seems to pass
     through it.

=Perianth.= The calyx and corolla of a flower.

=Perigynium.= A sac-like structure surrounding the achene of a sedge.

=Persistent.= Remaining attached for a considerable time.

=Petal.= One member or segment of the corolla.

=Petiole.= The stalk of a leaf.

=Pinnate.= With several organs or structures attached at the sides of an
     axis or stalk; applied chiefly to the arrangement of the principal
     veins in a leaf and of leaflets in a compound leaf.

=Pinnatifid.= Deeply pinnately cut or divided.

=Pistil.= The central portion of a flower, consisting of ovary, style, and
     stigma; the seed-bearing part of the flower.

=Pistillate.= Bearing pistils.

=Polygamous.= Applied to plants in which some flowers are perfect and
     others either staminate or pistillate.

=Pubescent.= Hairy.

=Raceme.= A more or less elongated flower-cluster, bearing pedicelled
     flowers along a single axis.

=Racemose.= Arranged in racemes.

=Receptacle.= The end of a peduncle or pedicel upon which the organs of a
     flower, or the flowers of a head, are attached.

=Recurved.= Curved back.

=Reflexed.= Abruptly bent back or down.

=Regular.= Uniform in shape or structure. Flowers are generally considered
     regular when all the petals are of the same size and shape.

=Retrorse.= Directed backward or downward.

=Revolute.= Rolled backward or under.

=Rootstock.= A horizontal subterranean stem, sending up leaves or stems.

=Rotate.= Wheel-shape; essentially flat and circular.

=Sac-like.= Inflated; sack-like.

=Sagittate.= Shaped like an arrow-head.

=Salver-form.= A corolla having a slender tube abruptly expanded at the
     summit into a flat or spreading portion.

=Scape.= A peduncle arising directly from the base of the plant, leafless
     or bearing bracts only.

=Segment.= One member or portion of an organ.

=Sepal.= One member or portion of the calyx.

=Serrate.= With sharp teeth at the margin.

=Serrulate.= Finely or minutely serrate.

=Sessile.= Without a stalk, petiole, or pedicel.

=Sheathing.= Inclosing.

=Simple.= In one piece; not compound; usually applied to leaves with a
     single blade.

=Sinuate.= Wavy-margined.

=Sinus.= The angle between two lobes or divisions.

=Spadix.= A short fleshy spike.

=Spathe.= A large bract or pair of bracts enclosing a flower-cluster.

=Spatulate.= Shaped like a spatula, with a narrow base and an enlarged,
     more or less rounded summit.

=Spike.= An elongated flower-cluster having sessile flowers upon an
     unbranched axis.

=Spike-like.= Resembling a spike.

=Spinulose-serrate.= Provided with teeth tipped with minute spines.

=Spur.= A hollow projection from the calyx or corolla, usually slender in
     shape, and generally directed backward.

=Stamen.= One of the organs of a flower, consisting of a filament and
     anther.

=Staminate.= Bearing stamens.

=Stolon.= A short stem arising from the base of a plant, prostrate or
     nearly so, and eventually taking root.

=Striate.= Marked with fine stripes or ridges.

=Style.= A portion of the pistil, usually slender, and connecting the
     ovary and stigma.

=Superior.= A superior ovary occupies the center of the flower and is
     not attached to any other floral organs.

=Subtending.= Situated at the base of an organ.

=Subulate.= Awl-shape.

=Ternately.= Divided by threes.

=Tomentose.= Densely hairy with matted or tangled hairs.

=Trifoliate.= With three leaflets.

=Truncate.= Cut straight across at the tip, or nearly so.

=Tube.= The more or less cylindrical portion of a gamosepalous calyx or
     a gamopetalous corolla, distinguished from the expanded or lobed
     terminal portion.

=Tubular.= Shaped like a tube.

=Twice-pinnate.= Same as bipinnate.

=Two-lipped.= A calyx or corolla in which the upper half is decidedly
     different in size or shape from the lower.

=Umbel.= A flower-cluster with several or many pedicelled flowers all
     arising from the same point.

=Undulate.= With a wavy margin.

=Viscid.= Sticky.

=Villous.= With long soft hairs.

=Whorl.= An arrangement of 3 or more leaves or flowers in a circle around
     a node.

=Whorled.= In a whorl.

=Wing.= A thin flat expansion on the sides or edge of an organ.




INDEX


Abies, 1

Abutilon, 72

Acalypha, 66

Acanthaceae, 107

Acanthus Family, 107

Acer, 70

Aceraceae, 70

Acerates, 90

Achillea, 130, 131

Acnida, 30

Acorus, 8

Actaea, 39

Actinomeris, 128

Adder's Mouth, 17

Adenocaulon, 118

Adlumia, 41

Aesculus, 70

Agastache, 97

Agrimonia, 55

Agrimony, 55

Agropyron, 6

Agrostemma, 33

Agrostis, 6

Ailanthus, 65

Aizoaceae, 31

Alder, 22

Alder, Black, 69

Aletris, 13

Alfalfa, 61

Alisma, 3

Alismaceae, 3

Allium, 13

Alnus, 22

Alopecurus, 4

Alsike Clover, 61

Althaea, 72

Alum Root, 50, 51

Alyssum, 42, 46

Alyssum, Yellow, 42, 46

Amaranth Family, 30

Amaranthaceae, 30

Amaranthus, 30

Amaryllidaceae, 14

Amaryllis Family, 14

Ambrosia, 114

Amelanchier, 55

American Columbo, 88

American Ipecac, 57

Ammophila, 4

Amorpha, 58

Amphicarpa, 59

Anacardiaceae, 68

Anagallis, 87

Anaphalis, 120

Andromeda, 86

Andropogon, 5

Androsace, 87

Anemone, 38, 39

Anemone, Rue, 39

Anemone, Wood, 38

Anemonella, 39

Angelica, 82

Anonaceae, 40

Antennaria, 120

Anthemis, 130

Antirrhinum, 103

Anychia, 31

Apios, 58

Aplectrum, 16

Apocynaceae, 90

Apocynum, 90

Appalachian Cherry, 54

Apple, 54

Apple of Peru, 101

Aquifoliaceae, 69

Aquilegia, 36

Arabis, 46, 47

Araceae, 8

Aralia, 80

Araliaceae, 80

Arbutus, Trailing, 85

Arceuthobium, 25

Arctium, 117

Arctostaphylos, 85

Arenaria, 32

Arethusa, 16

Arisaema, 8

Aristolochia, 25

Aristolochiaceae, 25

Arnica, 123

Arrow Arum, 9

Arrow Grass, 3

Arrow Grass Family, 3

Arrow-head, 3

Arrow Wood, 111

Artemisia, 119

Artichoke, Jerusalem, 129

Arum Family, 8

Asarum, 25

Asclepias, 90, 91

Asclepiadaceae, 90

Ash, 88

Ash, Mountain, 52

Ash, Prickly, 65

Asimina, 40

Asparagus, 10

Aspen, 19

Aster, 132-134

Atriplex, 29

Avena, 6

Avens, 56, 57


Baby's Breath, 34

Balm of Gilead, 19

Balsam, 1

Balsam Poplar, 19

Balsaminaceae, 71

Baneberry, 39

Baptisia, 61

Barbarea, 44

Barberry, 40

Barberry Family, 40

Barnyard Grass, 5

Barren Strawberry, 55

Bartonia, 88

Basil, 97

Basil-thyme, 97

Basswood, 72

Bayberry, 21

Beach Grass, 4

Beach Pea, 59

Beaked Hazel, 22

Bearberry, 85

Beard Grass, 5

Beard-tongue, 104

Bedstraw, 108, 109

Beech, 22

Beech Drops, 84, 106

Beech Family, 22

Beggar Lice, 94

Beggar Ticks, 124

Bellflower, 112

Bellflower Family, 112

Bellwort, 12

Benzoin, 41

Berberidaceae, 40

Berberis, 40

Bergamot Mint, 98

Berula, 81

Betula, 21, 22

Betulaceae, 21

Bidens, 123, 124

Bilberry, 86, 87

Bindweed, 91, 92

Bindweed, Black, 28

Birch, 21, 22

Birch Family, 21

Bird-foot Violet, 75

Birthwort Family, 25

Bishop's Cap, 51

Bistort, 28

Bitter Cress, 45, 47

Bitter Dock, 26

Bitter Nut, 21

Bittersweet, 100

Bitter-sweet, 69

Black Alder, 69

Black Ash, 88

Blackberry, 53

Black Bindweed, 28

Black Cherry, 54

Black Currant, 49, 50

Black-eyed Susan, 128

Black Haw, 111

Black Jack Oak, 22

Black Locust, 58

Black Maple, 70

Black Medick, 60

Black Mustard, 44

Black Oak, 23

Black Raspberry, 53

Black Snakeroot, 82

Black Spruce, 1

Black Swallow-wort, 90

Black Walnut, 21

Black Willow, 20

Bladder Campion, 34

Bladder Nut, 69

Bladder Nut Family, 69

Bladderwort, 106

Bladderwort Family, 105

Blazing Star, 13, 121

Blephilia, 96

Blite, 29

Bloodroot, 41

Bloody Dock, 26

Blue Ash, 88

Bluebell, 93, 94

Blueberry, 86

Blue Cohosh, 40

Blue-eyed Grass, 15

Blue-eyed Mary, 104

Blue Flag, 15

Blue Grass, 7

Blue Hearts, 104

Blue-joint, 5

Bluets, 108

Blue Violet, 76

Blueweed, 94

Boehmeria, 24

Bog Rosemary, 86

Boltonia, 131

Boneset, False, 122

Borage, 93

Borage Family, 93

Boraginaceae, 93

Borago, 93

Bowman's Root, 57

Box Elder, 70

Brasenia, 35

Brassica, 43, 44

Brauneria, 131

Braya, 47

Bristly Locust, 58

Bristly Sarsaparilla, 80

Brome-grass, 7

Bromus, 7

Broom-rape Family, 106

Buchnera, 104

Buckbean, 88

Buckeye, 70

Buckhorn, 107

Buckthorn, 71

Buckthorn Family, 71

Buckwheat, 27

Buckwheat, False, 28

Buckwheat Family, 25

Buffalo Berry, 77

Buffalo Bur, 100

Buffalo Clover, 61

Bugbane, 39

Bugle, 98

Bugle Weed, 95

Bug-seed, 28

Bulrush, 7

Bur Clover, 60

Bur Cucumber, 112

Burdock, 117

Bur Marigold, 124

Burnet, 57

Bur Oak, 23

Bur-reed, 2

Bur-reed Family, 2

Bush Clover, 61, 63

Bush Honeysuckle, 110

Butter-and-eggs, 102

Buttercup, 36, 37, 38

Butterfly Weed, 91

Butternut, 21

Butterwort, 105

Button Bush, 108


Cacalia, 122

Cactaceae, 77

Cactus Family, 77

Cakile, 45

Calamagrostis, 5

Calamint, 97

Calla, 9

Callirhoe, 73

Callitrichaceae, 68

Callitriche, 68

Calopogon, 16

Caltha, 36

Calypso, 17

Camassia, 14

Camelina, 42

Camomile, 130

Campanula, 112

Campanulaceae, 112

Campion, 33, 34

Canada Thistle, 118

Canada Violet, 76

Canadian Blue Grass, 7

Cancer-root, 106

Cannabis, 24

Caper Family, 47

Capparidaceae, 47

Caprifoliaceae, 109

Capsella, 46

Caraway, 83

Cardamine, 45, 47

Cardinal Flower, 113

Carduus, 118

Carex, 8

Carpet-weed, 31

Carpet-weed Family, 31

Carpinus, 21

Carrion-flower, 11

Carrot, Wild, 82

Carum, 83

Carya, 21

Caryophyllaceae, 31

Cashew Family, 68

Cassia, 60

Castalia, 35

Castanea, 22

Castilleja, 102

Catchfly, 33, 34

Catnip, 98

Cat-tail, 2

Cat-tail Family, 2

Caulophyllum, 40

Ceanothus, 71

Cedar, 1

Celandine, 41

Celandine Poppy, 41

Celastraceae, 69

Celastrus, 69

Celtis, 24

Cenchrus, 5

Centaurea, 121

Centaurium, 89

Centaury, 89

Cephalanthus, 108

Cerastium, 33

Ceratophyllaceae, 34

Ceratophyllum, 34

Cercis, 58

Chaerophyllum, 83

Chamaedaphne, 86

Chamaelirium, 13

Charlock, 44

Cheat, 7

Chelidonium, 41

Chelone, 104

Chenopodiaceae, 28

Chenopodium, 28, 29

Cherry, 54

Cherry, Ground, 101

Chervil, 83

Chestnut, 22

Chickweed, 32, 33

Chickweed, Mouse-ear, 33

Chicory, 115

Chimaphila, 85

Chiogenes, 85

Chives, Wild, 13

Chokeberry, 55

Choke Cherry, 54

Chrysanthemum, 121, 130, 131

Chrysosplenium, 50

Cichorium, 115

Cicuta, 82

Cimicifuga, 39

Cinquefoil, 52, 56, 57

Circaea, 78

Cirsium, 117, 118

Cistaceae, 74

Cladium, 8

Clammy Locust, 58

Clammy-weed, 47

Claytonia, 34

Clearweed, 24

Cleft Phlox, 92

Clematis, 35

Climbing Fumitory, 41

Climbing Rose, 52

Clintonia, 13

Clover, 61

Clover, Bush, 61, 63

Clover, Hop, 60

Clover, Prairie, 60

Clover, Sweet, 61

Cocklebur, 114

Cockle, Corn, 33

Coffee-tree, 58

Cohosh, Blue, 40

Colic-root, 13

Collinsia, 104

Collinsonia, 95

Coltsfoot, 122, 130

Columbine, 36

Comandra, 24

Comfrey, 93, 94

Commelina, 9

Commelinaceae, 9

Common Blue Violet, 76

Common Cat-tail, 2

Common Vetch, 59

Compass Plant, 127

Compositae, 113

Composite Family, 113

Coneflower, Gray-headed, 128

Coneflower, Purple, 131

Conioselinum, 83

Conium, 83

Conopholis, 106

Conringia, 42

Convolvulaceae, 91

Convolvulus, 91, 92

Coptis, 39

Corallorhiza, 16

Coral Root, 16

Coreopsis, 123, 124

Corispermum, 28

Cork Elm, 24

Cornaceae, 83

Corn Cockle, 33

Corn Flower, 121

Corn Gromwell, 94

Corn Salad, 111

Cornus, 83, 84

Corydalis, 42

Corylus, 22

Costmary, 121

Cotton Grass, 8

Cotton Thistle, 118

Cottonwood, 19

Cowbane, 81

Cowherb, 34

Cow Parsnip, 82

Cowslip, 36

Cow Wheat, 104

Crab, 54

Crab Grass, 5

Crack Willow, 20

Cranberry, 85

Cranberry Tree, 111

Crane-fly Orchis, 16

Crane's-bill, 64, 65

Crassulaceae, 48

Creeping Cedar, 1

Creeping Wahoo, 69

Crepis, 117

Cress, 43-47

Cress, Bitter, 45, 47

Cress, Field, 46

Cress, Garden, 45, 46

Cress, Lake, 45, 46

Cress, Mouse-ear, 47

Cress, Penny, 46

Cress, Rock, 46, 47

Cress, Water, 45

Cress, Winter, 44

Cress, Yellow, 43

Crotalaria, 59

Crowberry, 68

Crowberry Family, 68

Crowfoot, 35

Crowfoot, Cursed, 37

Crowfoot Family, 35

Crowfoot, Sea-side, 36

Crowfoot, Small-flowered, 36

Crowfoot, Water, 35, 37

Cruciferae, 42

Cryptotaenia, 82

Cuckoo Flower, 45

Cucurbitaceae, 112

Cudweed, 120, 121

Culver's Root, 104

Cup Plant, 123

Currant, 49, 50

Currant, Indian, 110

Cursed Crowfoot, 37

Cuscuta, 92

Custard Apple Family, 40

Cut-grass, 5

Cycloloma, 29

Cynanchum, 90

Cynoglossum, 93, 94

Cynthia, 115

Cyperaceae, 7

Cyperus, 8

Cypress Spurge, 67

Cypripedium, 18


Dactylis, 6

Daisy, Ox-eye, 131

Dalibarda, 56

Dame's Rocket, 47

Dandelion, 115

Dandelion, Dwarf, 115

Datura, 100

Daucus, 82

Day-flower, 9

Day Lily, 11

Dead Nettle, 99

Decodon, 77

Deerberry, 86

Dentaria, 44

Deptford Pink, 34

Desmodium, 62, 63

Devil's Club, 80

Dewberry, 53

Dianthera, 107

Dianthus, 34

Dicentra, 41

Diervilla, 110

Digitaria, 5

Dioscorea, 14

Dioscoreaceae, 14

Diplotaxis, 42, 43

Dipsacaceae, 112

Dipsacus, 112

Dirca, 77

Ditch Stonecrop, 49

Dock, 26

Dock, Prairie, 122

Dodder, 92

Dodecatheon, 87

Dogbane, 90

Dogbane Family, 90

Dog Fennel, 130

Dog Rose, 52

Dog's-tooth Violet, 12

Dog Violet, 76

Dogwood, 83, 84

Dogwood Family, 83

Downy Mint, 78

Draba, 42, 46

Dracocephalum, 96

Dragon Head, 96

Dragon Head, False, 99

Dragon Root, 8

Drop-seed, 5

Drosera, 48

Droseraceae, 48

Duckweed, 9

Duckweed Family, 9

Dulichium, 7

Dutchman's Breeches, 41

Dwarf Birch, 22

Dwarf Dandelion, 115

Dwarf Dogwood, 83

Dwarf Ginseng, 80

Dwarf Iris, 15

Dwarf Mistletoe, 25

Dwarf Raspberry, 53

Dwarf Water Plantain, 3

Dwarf White Trillium, 12

Dyer's Greenweed, 58


Echinochloa, 5

Echinocystis, 112

Echinodorus, 3

Echinops, 117

Echium, 94

Eel Grass, 3

Elaeagnaceae, 77

Elatinaceae, 74

Elatine, 74

Elder, 109

Elder, Box, 70

Elder, Marsh, 114

Elecampane, 127

Eleocharis, 7

Eleusine, 6

Elm, 24

Elodea, 3

Elymus, 6

Empetraceae, 68

Empetrum, 68

Enchanter's Nightshade, 78

English Plantain, 107

Epifagus, 106

Epigaea, 85

Epilobium, 79

Epipactis, 17

Eragrostis, 7

Erechtites, 122

Ericaceae, 84

Erigenia, 81

Erigeron, 130-132

Eriocaulaceae, 9

Eriocaulon, 9

Eriophorum, 8

Erodium, 64

Eryngium, 80

Erysimum, 43

Erythronium, 12

Eupatorium, 121, 122

Euphorbia, 67, 68

Euphrasia, 102

Evening Primrose, 78

Evening Primrose Family, 78

Everlasting, 120

Everlasting, Pearly, 120

Evonymus, 69

Eyebright, 102


Fagaceae, 22

Fagopyrum, 27

Fagus, 22

Fall Dandelion, 115

False Asphodel, 14

False Boneset, 122

False Buckwheat, 28

False Dragon Head, 99

False Flax, 42

False Foxglove, 102

False Gromwell, 93

False Heather, 74

False Loosestrife, 78

False Mermaid, 68

False Mermaid Family, 68

False Mitrewort, 51

False Nettle, 24

False Pimpernel, 104

False Solomon's Seal, 14

Fatsia, 80

Fennel, 81

Fennel, Dog, 130

Fescue Grass, 7

Festuca, 7

Feverfew, 130

Feverwort, 109

Field Cress, 46

Field Garlic, 13

Figwort, 103

Figwort Family, 101

Filipendula, 57

Fire Pink, 33

Fireweed, 79, 122

Five-finger, 55

Flax, 63

Flax, False, 42

Flax Family, 63

Fleabane, 131, 132

Floating Foxtail, 4

Floating Heart, 88

Floerkea, 68

Flowering Dogwood, 83

Flowering Raspberry, 54

Flowering Wintergreen, 65

Flower-of-an-hour, 72

Foeniculum, 81

Fog Fruit, 99

Forget-me-not, 94

Forked Chickweed, 31

Four-o'Clock Family, 31

Foxglove, False, 102

Fox Grape, 72

Foxtail, 4

Foxtail, Floating, 4

Fragaria, 56

Frasera, 88

Fraxinus, 88

Fringed Gentian, 89

Fringed Orchis, 19

Frog's Bit Family, 3

Frost Grape, 72

Frostweed, 74

Fumaria, 42

Fumariaceae, 41

Fumitory, 42

Fumitory, Climbing, 41

Fumitory Family, 41


Galeopsis, 99

Gale, Sweet, 21

Galinsoga, 130

Galium, 108, 109

Garden Cress, 45, 46

Garden Phlox, 92

Garlic, Field, 13

Gaultheria, 86

Gaura, 79

Gaylussacia, 86

Genista, 58

Gentian, 89

Gentiana, 89

Gentianaceae, 88

Gentian Family, 88

Gentian, Spurred, 89

Geraniaceae, 64

Geranium, 64, 65

Geranium Family, 64

Gerardia, 102, 103

Geum, 56, 57

Giant Hyssop, 97

Giant Ragweed, 114

Gillenia, 57

Ginseng, 80

Gleditsia, 58

Globe-flower, 36

Globe Thistle, 117

Glyceria, 7

Gnaphalium, 120, 121

Goat's Rue, 60

Golden Alexander, 81

Golden Currant, 49

Golden Glow, 128

Goldenrod, 125-127

Golden Saxifrage, 50

Golden Seal, 38

Gold-thread,  39

Good King Henry, 29

Gooseberry, 49

Goosefoot, 28, 29

Goosefoot Family, 28

Gourd Family, 112

Gramineae, 4

Grape, 72

Grape Family, 71

Grape Hyacinth, 14

Grass Family, 4

Grass of Parnassus, 50

Grass, Star, 14

Gratiola, 104

Gray-headed Coneflower, 128

Great Lobelia, 113

Great Solomon's Seal, 11

Great-spurred Violet, 75

Greek Valerian, 92

Green Ash, 88

Green Brier, 11

Green Foxtail, 4

Green Milkweed, 90

Green Sorrel, 25

Green Violet, 75

Grindelia, 128

Ground Cherry, 101

Ground Hemlock, 2

Ground Ivy, 98

Groundsel, 128

Gum Plant, 128

Gymnocladus, 58

Gypsophila, 34

Gypsophyll, 34


Habenaria, 18, 19

Hackberry, 24

Hair Grass, 6

Halenia, 89

Haloragidaceae, 79

Hamamelidaceae, 51

Hamamelis, 51

Hand-leaf Violet, 75

Harbinger of Spring, 81

Hardhack, 53

Harebell, 112

Hare's Ear, 42

Hawksbeard, 117

Hawkweed, 116, 117

Hazel, 22

Heather, False, 74

Heath Family, 84

Hedeoma, 95

Hedge Hyssop, 104

Hedge Mustard, 44

Hedge Nettle, 99

Helenium, 127, 128

Helianthemum, 74

Helianthus, 128-130

Heliopsis, 123

Hemerocallis, 11

Hemlock, 1

Hemlock, Ground, 2

Hemlock Parsley, 83

Hemlock, Poison, 83

Hemlock, Water, 82

Hemp, 24

Hemp, Indian, 90

Hemp Nettle, 99

Hemp, Water, 30

Hemp Weed, 131

Henbane, 101

Hepatica, 38

Heracleum, 82

Herb Robert, 64

Herb Sophia, 43

Hercules' Club, 80

Hesperis, 47

Heteranthera, 10

Heuchera, 50, 51

Hibiscus, 72

Hickory, 21

Hieracium, 116, 117

Hill's Oak, 23

Hippuris, 79

Hoarhound, 96

Hoarhound, Water, 95

Hobble-bush, 111

Hog Peanut, 59

Holly Family, 69

Holly, Mountain, 69

Honewort, 82

Honey Locust, 58

Honeysuckle, 110

Honeysuckle, Bush, 110

Honeysuckle Family, 109

Hop, 24

Hop Clover, 60

Hop Tree, 65

Hordeum, 4

Hornbeam, 21

Horned Pondweed, 2

Hornwort, 34

Hornwort Family, 34

Horse Balm, 95

Horse Chestnut, 70

Horse Mint, 96

Horse Nettle, 100

Horse Radish, 46

Horse Weed, 130, 131

Hound's Tongue, 93

Houstonia, 108

Huckleberry, 86

Hudsonia, 74

Humulus, 24

Hyacinth, Wild, 14

Hybanthus, 75

Hydrocharitaceae, 3

Hydrocotyle, 80

Hydrophyllaceae, 93

Hydrophyllum, 93

Hyoscyamus, 101

Hypericaceae, 73

Hypericum, 73, 74

Hypoxis, 14

Hyssop, 98

Hyssop, Hedge, 104

Hyssopus, 98


Ilex, 69

Illecebraceae, 31

Ilysanthes, 104

Impatiens, 71

Imperatoria, 82

Indian Cucumber-root, 13

Indian Currant, 110

Indian Hemp, 90

Indian Mustard, 44

Indian Pipe, 84

Indian Plantain, 122

Indian Tobacco, 113

Indian Turnip, 8

Indigo, Wild, 61

Inula, 127

Ipomoea, 92

Iridaceae, 15

Iris, 15

Iris Family, 15

Ironweed, 122

Ironweed, Yellow, 128

Ironwood, 22

Isopyrum, 39

Iva, 114


Jack Pine, 1

Jeffersonia, 40

Jerusalem Artichoke, 129

Jerusalem Oak, 29

Jimson Weed, 100

Joe-Pye Weed, 122

Jointweed, 27

Juglandaceae, 21

Juglans, 21

Juncaceae, 10

Juncaginaceae, 3

Juncus, 10

Juneberry, 55

Juniper, 1

Juniperus, 1


Kalmia, 85

Kenilworth Ivy, 103

Kentucky Coffee-tree, 58

King-nut Hickory, 21

Knapweed, 121

Knawel, 31

Knotweed, 26, 27

Knotwort Family, 31

Kochia, 28

Koeleria, 6

Krigia, 115

Kuhnia, 122


Labiatae, 95

Labrador Tea, 85

Lactuca, 115, 116

Ladies' Tresses, 16

Lady's Slipper, 18

Lake Cress, 45, 46

Lamb's Quarters, 29

Lamium, 99

Laportea, 24

Lappula, 94

Lapsana, 115

Large-toothed Aspen, 19

Larix, 1

Larkspur, 36

Lathyrus, 59

Lauraceae, 41

Laurel Family, 41

Lead Plant, 58

Leafcup, 123

Leatherleaf, 86

Leatherwood, 77

Lechea, 74, 75

Ledum, 85

Leek, Wild, 13

Leersia, 5

Leguminosae, 58

Lemna, 9

Lemnaceae, 9

Lentibulariaceae, 105

Leontodon, 115

Leonurus, 98

Lepachys, 128

Lepidium, 45, 46

Lespedeza, 61, 63

Lettuce, 115, 116

Lettuce, Wild, 115, 116

Liatris, 121

Lilac, 88

Liliaceae, 10

Lilium, 12

Lily, 12

Lily Family, 10

Lily of the Valley, Wild, 12

Lily, Pond, 35

Lily, Water, 35

Limnanthaceae, 68

Limosella, 103

Linaceae, 63

Linaria, 102, 103

Linden Family, 72

Linnaea, 109

Linum, 63

Liparis, 17

Lippia, 99

Liriodendron, 40

Listera, 17

Lithospermum, 94

Live-for-ever, 49

Lizard's Tail, 19

Lobelia, 113

Lobeliaceae, 113

Lobelia Family, 113

Locust, 58

Locust, Honey, 58

Lombardy Poplar, 19

Long-spurred Violet, 76

Lonicera, 110

Loosestrife, 77, 87, 88

Loosestrife, False, 78

Loosestrife Family, 77

Lopseed, 107

Lopseed Family, 107

Loranthaceae, 25

Lotus, 35

Lousewort, 102

Love Grass, 7

Love-in-a-mist, 38

Low Juniper, 1

Ludvigia, 78

Lupine, 59

Lupinus, 59

Luzula, 10

Lychnis, 33

Lysimachia, 87, 88

Lycium, 100

Lycopus, 95

Lythraceae, 77

Lythrum, 77


Madder Family, 108

Mad-dog Skullcap, 96

Magnoliaceae, 40

Magnolia Family, 40

Maianthemum, 13

Mallow, 73

Mallow Family, 72

Mallow, Marsh, 72

Mallow, Poppy, 73

Mallow, Rose, 72

Mallow, Virginia, 73

Malva, 73

Malvaceae, 72

Manna Grass, 7

Maple, 70

Maple Family, 70

Mare's-tail, 79

Marigold, Bur, 124

Marigold, Water, 123

Marrubium, 96

Marsh Cinquefoil, 57

Marsh Elder, 114

Marsh Harebell, 112

Marsh Mallow, 72

Marsh Pea, 59

Marsh Speedwell, 105

Masterwort, 82

Matricaria, 130

Matrimony Vine, 100

May Apple, 40

Meadow Beauty, 77

Meadow Parsnip, 81

Meadow Pink, 34

Meadow Rue, 39

Meadow Salsify, 115

Meadow-sweet, 53

Medeola, 13

Medicago, 60, 61

Melampyrum, 104

Melastomaceae, 77

Melastoma Family, 77

Melilotus, 61

Menispermaceae, 40

Menispermum, 40

Mentha, 98

Menyanthes, 88

Mermaid Weed, 79

Mertensia, 93, 94

Mexican Tea, 29

Mezereum Family, 77

Microstylis, 17

Mignonette Family, 48

Mignonette, Yellow, 48

Mikania, 121

Milfoil, Water, 79

Milk Thistle, 117

Milk Vetch, 60

Milkweed, 90, 91

Milkweed Family, 90

Milkweed, Green, 90

Milkwort, 66

Milkwort Family, 65

Millet, 4

Mimulus, 102, 104

Mint, 98

Mint Family, 95

Mist Flower, 121

Mistletoe, Dwarf, 25

Mistletoe Family, 25

Mitchella, 108

Mitella, 51

Mitrewort, False, 51

Mocker-nut Hickory, 21

Mollugo, 31

Monarda, 96

Moneses, 85

Moneywort, 87

Monkey Flower, 104

Monkey Flower, Yellow, 102

Monotropa, 84

Moonseed, 40

Moonseed Family, 40

Morning Glory, 92

Morning Glory Family, 91

Morus, 24

Moss Pink, 92

Motherwort, 98

Moth Mullein, 101

Mountain Alder, 22

Mountain Ash, 52

Mountain Holly, 69

Mountain Maple, 70

Mountain Mint, 98

Mouse-ear Chickweed, 33

Mouse-ear Cress, 47

Mud Plantain, 10

Mudwort, 103

Mugwort, 119

Muhlenbergia, 5, 6

Mulberry, 24

Mullein, 101

Mullein Pink, 33

Muscari, 14

Musk Flower, 102

Mustard, 43, 44

Mustard Family, 42

Myosotis, 94

Myrica, 20, 21

Myricaceae, 20

Myriophyllum, 79


Naiad, 2

Naias, 2

Najadaceae, 2

Narrow-leaved Cat-tail, 2

Nelumbo, 35

Nemopanthus, 69

Nepeta, 98

Nettle, 24

Nettle, Dead, 99

Nettle Family, 23

Nettle, Hedge, 99

Nettle, Hemp, 99

Nettle, Horse, 100

Nicandra, 101

Nicotiana, 101

Nigella, 38

Nightshade, 100

Nightshade, Enchanter's, 78

Nightshade Family, 100

Ninebark, 53

Nipplewort, 115

Nodding Pogonia, 18

Norway Pine, 1

Nut Grass, 8

Nyctaginaceae, 31

Nymphaea, 35

Nymphaeaceae, 35

Nymphoides, 88

Nyssa, 83


Oak, 22, 23

Oakesia, 12

Oats, 6

Oenothera, 78

Oleaceae, 88

Oleaster Family, 77

Olive Family, 88

Onagraceae, 78

One-flowered Wintergreen, 85

Onion, Wild, 13

Onosmodium, 93

Opuntia, 77

Orache, 29

Orchard Grass, 6

Orchidaceae, 15

Orchis, 17

Orchis, Crane-fly, 16

Orchis Family, 15

Orchis, Showy, 17

Ornithogalum, 14

Orobanchaceae, 106

Orobanche, 106

Orpine Family, 48

Osmorhiza, 82

Ostrya, 22

Oswego Tea, 96

Oxalidaceae, 64

Oxalis, 64

Ox-eye, 123

Ox-eye Daisy, 131

Oxybaphus, 31

Oxypolis, 81


Painted Cup, 102

Painted Trillium, 12

Pale Violet, 76

Panax, 80

Panic-grass, 5

Panicum, 5

Pansy, 76

Papaveraceae, 41

Papaver, 41

Papaw, 40

Paper Birch, 21

Parietaria, 24

Parnassia, 50

Parsley Family, 80

Parsley, Hemlock, 83

Parsnip, Cow, 82

Parsnip, Meadow, 81

Parsnip, Prairie, 81

Parsnip, Water, 81

Parsnip, Wild, 81

Partridge Berry, 108

Partridge Pea, 60

Pasque Flower, 38

Pastinaca, 81

Patience Dock, 26

Pea, 59

Peach-leaved Willow, 20

Pear, 54

Pear, Prickly, 77

Pearlwort, 32

Pearly Everlasting, 120

Pedicularis, 102

Pellitory, 24

Peltandra, 9

Penny Cress, 46

Pennyroyal, 95

Pennywort, Water, 80

Penthorum, 49

Pentstemon, 104

Pepper Family, 19

Pepper Grass, 46

Peppermint, 98

Perfumed Cherry, 54

Periwinkle, 90

Petalostemum, 60

Petasites, 130

Petunia, 101

Phacelia, 93

Phleum, 4

Phlox, 92

Phragmites, 6

Phryma, 107

Phrymaceae, 107

Physalis, 101

Physocarpus, 53

Physostegia, 99

Phytolacca, 30

Phytolaccaceae, 30

Picea, 1

Pickerel-weed, 10

Pickerel-weed Family, 10

Picris, 115

Pignut Hickory, 21

Pigweed, 30

Pilea, 24

Pimpernel, 87

Pimpernel, False, 104

Pimpernel, Water, 87

Pinaceae, 1

Pin Cherry, 54

Pine, 1

Pine Drops, 84

Pine Family, 1

Pineweed, 74

Pinguicula, 105

Pink, Deptford, 34

Pink Family, 31

Pink, Fire, 33

Pink, Meadow, 34

Pink, Moss, 92

Pink, Mullein, 33

Pink, Rose, 89

Pin Oak, 23

Pinus, 1

Pinweed, 74, 75

Piperaceae, 19

Pipewort, 9

Pipewort Family, 9

Pitcher Plant, 48

Pitcher Plant Family, 48

Plane Tree Family, 51

Plantaginaceae, 107

Plantago, 107

Plantain, 107

Plantain Family, 107

Plantain, Indian, 122

Plantain, Mud, 10

Platanaceae, 51

Platanus, 51

Plum, 54

Poa, 7

Podophyllum, 40

Podostemaceae, 48

Podostemum, 48

Pogonia, 18

Poison Hemlock, 83

Poison Ivy, 69

Poison Sumach, 68

Pokeweed, 30

Pokeweed Family, 30

Polanisia, 47

Polemoniaceae, 92

Polemonium, 92

Polemonium Family, 92

Polygala, 65, 66

Polygalaceae, 65

Polygonatum, 11

Polygonaceae, 25

Polygonum, 26-28

Polymnia, 123

Polytaenia, 81

Pond Lily, 35

Pondweed, 2

Pondweed Family, 2

Pontederia, 10

Pontederiaceae, 10

Poplar, 19

Poppy, 41

Poppy, Celandine, 41

Poppy Family, 41

Poppy Mallow, 73

Populus, 19

Portulaca, 34

Portulacaceae, 34

Potamogeton, 2

Potentilla, 52, 55-57

Prairie Clover, 60

Prairie Dock, 122

Prairie Fringed Orchis, 19

Prairie June-grass, 6

Prairie Parsnip, 81

Prenanthes, 116

Prickly Ash, 65

Prickly Pear, 77

Primrose, 87

Primrose Family, 87

Primula, 87

Primulaceae, 87

Prince's Feather, 27

Prince's Pine, 85

Proserpinaca, 79

Prunella, 97

Prunus, 54

Psedera, 71

Ptelea, 65

Pterospora, 84

Puccoon, 94

Pulse Family, 58

Purple Avens, 57

Purple Coneflower, 131

Purple Fringed Orchis, 19

Purslane, 34

Purslane Family, 34

Purslane, Water, 78

Putty Root, 16

Pyenanthemum, 98

Pyrola, 84, 85

Pyrus, 52, 54, 55


Quack Grass, 6

Quaking Aspen, 19

Quassia Family, 65

Queen of the Prairie, 57

Quercus, 22, 23


Radicula, 43, 45, 46

Radish, 45

Radish, Horse, 46

Radish, Wild, 44, 45

Ragged Fringed Orchis, 19

Ragweed, 114

Ragwort, 127, 128

Ram's Head Lady's Slipper, 18

Ranunculaceae, 35

Ranunculus, 35-38

Raphanus, 44, 45

Raspberry, 53, 54

Rattlebox, 59

Rattlesnake Master, 80

Rattlesnake Plantain, 17

Rattlesnake Root, 116

Red Ash, 88

Redbud, 58

Red Cedar, 1

Red Clover, 61

Red Currant, 50

Red Maple, 70

Red Mulberry, 24

Red Oak, 23

Red Raspberry, 53

Red-root, 71

Red Sorrel, 25

Red-top, 6

Reed, 6

Reed Grass, 5

Rein Orchis, 18

Reseda, 48

Resedaceae, 48

Rhamnaceae, 71

Rhamnus, 71

Rhexia, 77

Rhus, 68, 69

Ribes, 49, 50

River Weed, 48

River Weed Family, 48

Robinia, 58

Rock Cress, 46, 47

Rocket, Sea, 45

Rock-rose Family, 74

Rosa, 52

Rosaceae, 51

Rose, 52

Rose Family, 51

Rose Mallow, 72

Rose Pink, 89

Rosin Weed, 123

Round-leaved Orchis, 17

Round-leaved Violet, 75

Rowan Tree, 52

Rubiaceae, 108

Rubus, 53, 54

Rudbeckia, 128

Rue Anemone, 39

Rue Family, 65

Ruellia, 107

Rumex, 25, 26

Rush, 10

Rush Family, 10

Rush, Twig, 8

Russian Thistle, 28

Rutabaga, 43

Rutaceae, 65


Sabbatia, 89

Sagina, 32

Sagittaria, 3

Salicaceae, 19

Salix, 20

Salmonberry, 54

Salsify, 115

Salsola, 28

Sambucus, 109

Samolus, 87

Sandalwood Family, 24

Sand Bur, 5

Sand Cherry, 54

Sand Rocket, 42, 43

Sand Spurrey, 32

Sand Violet, 76

Sanguinaria, 41

Sanguisorba, 57

Sanicula, 82

Santalaceae, 24

Sapindaceae, 70

Saponaria, 34

Sarracenia, 48

Sarraceniaceae, 48

Sarsaparilla, 80

Sarsaparilla Family, 80

Sassafras, 41

Satureja, 97

Saururus, 19

Saxifraga, 50

Saxifragaceae, 49

Saxifrage, 50

Saxifrage Family, 49

Saxifrage, Golden, 50

Scarlet Oak, 23

Scheuchzeria, 3

Schneck's Oak, 23

Scirpus, 7

Scleranthus, 31

Scorpion Grass, 94

Scrophularia, 103

Scrophulariaceae, 101

Scrub Oak, 23

Scutellaria, 96

Sea Rocket, 45

Sea-side Crowfoot, 36

Sedge, 8

Sedge Family, 7

Sedum, 48, 49

Self-heal, 97

Seneca Snakeroot, 66

Senecio, 127, 128

Senna, Wild, 60

Setaria, 4

Shag-bark Hickory, 21

Sheep-berry, 111

Sheep Laurel, 85

Shepherdia, 77

Shepherd's Purse, 46

Shingle Oak, 22

Shin-leaf, 84, 85

Shooting Star, 87

Showy Lady's Slipper, 18

Showy Orchis, 17

Sicyos, 112

Sida, 72, 73

Silene, 33, 34

Silphium, 122, 123, 127

Silver Maple, 70

Silver Weed, 55

Silvery Cinquefoil, 66

Silybum, 117

Simarubaceae, 65

Sium, 81

Sisymbrium, 43-45, 47

Sisyrinchium, 15

Skullcap, 96

Skunk Cabbage, 8

Skunk Currant, 49

Slender Nettle, 24

Slippery Elm, 24

Slough Grass, 5

Small-flowered Crowfoot, 36

Small-fruited Hickory, 21

Small Snapdragon, 103

Small Solomon's Seal, 11

Smartweed, 27, 28

Smilacina, 14

Smilax, 11

Smooth Alder, 22

Snake Mouth, 18

Snakeroot, Black, 82

Snakeroot, Seneca, 66

Snakeroot, Virginia, 25

Snapdragon, 103

Sneezeweed, 127

Sneeze Weed, 128

Sneezewort, 131

Snowberry, 85, 111

Soapberry Family, 70

Soapwort, 34

Solanaceae, 100

Solanum, 100

Solidago, 125-127

Solomon's Seal, 11

Sorbaria, 57

Sorrel, Red, 25

Sorrel, Green, 25

Sorrel, Wood, 64

Sour Dock, 26

Sour Gum, 83

Southernwood, 119

Sparganiaceae, 2

Spartina, 5

Spear Grass, 7

Spearmint, 98

Spearwort, 36

Speckled Alder, 22

Specularia, 112

Speedwell, 105

Spergula, 32

Spergularia, 32

Spice Bush, 41

Spiderwort, 9

Spiderwort Family, 9

Spikenard, 80

Spike Rush, 7

Spiraea, 53

Spiranthes, 16

Spirodela, 9

Spotted Wintergreen, 85

Spurge, 67, 68

Spurge Family, 66

Spurred Gentian, 89

Spurrey, 32

Spring Avens, 56

Spring Beauty, 34

Spring Vetch, 59

Spruce, 1

Squashberry, 111

Squaw-root, 106

Squaw Weed, 128

Squirrel Corn, 41

Squirrel-tail, 4

Stachys, 99

Staff Tree Family, 69

Staphylea, 69

Staphyleaceae, 69

Star Flower, 87

Star Grass, 14

Star of Bethlehem, 14

Starry Campion, 33

Steironema, 88

Stellaria, 32, 33

Stemless Lady's Slipper, 18

Stickseed, 94

Stinging Nettle, 24

Stitchwort, 32

St. John's-wort, 73, 74

St. John's-wort Family, 73

Stone Clover, 61

Stonecrop, 48

Stonecrop, Ditch, 49

Stork's-bill, 64

Strawberry, 56

Strawberry, Barren, 55

Strawberry Blite, 29

Streptopus, 11

Striped Maple, 70

Strophostyles, 58

Stylophorum, 41

Sugar Maple, 70

Sumach, 68, 69

Summer Grape, 72

Summer Savory, 97

Sundew, 48

Sundew Family, 48

Sundrops, 78

Sunflower, 128-130

Sunflower, Tickseed, 124

Swamp Birch, 22

Swamp Currant, 49

Swamp Dewberry, 53

Swamp Laurel, 85

Swamp Milkweed, 91

Swamp Rose, 52

Swamp Valerian, 111

Swamp White Oak, 23

Sweet Birch, 22

Sweetbrier, 52

Sweet Cicely, 82

Sweet Fern, 20

Sweet Flag, 8

Sweet Gale, 21

Sweet Gale Family, 20

Sweet White Violet, 76

Sweet William, 34, 92

Sweet William Catchfly, 34

Sycamore, 51

Symphoricarpos, 110, 111

Symphytum, 93

Symplocarpus, 8

Synthyris, 102

Syringa, 88


Taenidia, 81

Tall Dock, 26

Tamarack, 1

Tanacetum, 119

Tansy, 119

Tansy Mustard, 43

Taraxacum, 115

Taxaceae, 2

Taxus, 2

Tear-thumb, 28

Teasel, 112

Teasel Family, 112

Tephrosia, 60

Teucrium, 97

Thalictrum, 39

Thaspium, 81

Thistle, 117, 118

Thistle, Canada, 118

Thistle, Cotton, 118

Thistle, Globe, 117

Thistle, Milk, 117

Thistle, Russian, 28

Thistle, Sow, 117

Thlaspi, 46

Thorn-apple, 100

Thorny Amaranth, 30

Three-seeded Mercury, 66

Three-square, 7

Thuja, 1

Thymelaeaceae, 77

Thyme, Wild, 97

Thymus, 97

Tiarella, 51

Tickseed, 123, 124

Tickseed Sunflower, 124

Tick Trefoil, 62, 63

Tilia, 72

Tiliaceae, 72

Timothy, 4

Tipularia, 16

Toad-flax, 24, 103

Tobacco, Indian, 113

Tobacco, Wild, 101

Tofieldia, 14

Toothwort, 44

Touch-me-not, 71

Touch-me-not Family, 71

Tradescantia, 9

Tragopogon, 115

Trailing Arbutus, 85

Tree of Heaven, 65

Trientalis, 87

Trifolium, 60, 61

Triglochin, 3

Trillium, 12

Triosteum, 109

Trollius, 36

Tsuga, 1

Tulip Tree, 40

Tumble Weed, 30

Turk's-cap Lily, 12

Turtlehead, 104

Tussilago, 122

Tway-blade, 17

Twig Rush, 8

Twin-leaf, 40

Twin Flower, 109

Twisted-stalk, 11

Typha, 2

Typhaceae, 2


Ulmus, 24

Umbelliferae, 80

Umbrella-wort, 31

Upland Boneset, 122

Urtica, 24

Urticaceae, 23

Utricularia, 106

Uvularia, 12


Vaccinium, 85-87

Valerian, 111

Valeriana, 111

Valerianaceae, 111

Valerianella, 111

Valerian Family, 111

Valerian, Greek, 92

Vallisneria, 3

Velvet Leaf, 72

Venus' Looking Glass, 112

Verbascum, 101

Verbena, 99-100

Verbenaceae, 99

Verbena Family, 99

Vernonia, 122

Veronica, 104, 105

Vervain, 99, 100

Vetch, 59

Vetchling, 59

Vetch, Milk, 60

Viburnum, 111

Vicia, 59

Vinca, 90

Viola, 75, 76

Violaceae, 75

Violet, 75, 76

Violet Family, 75

Violet, Green, 75

Virginia Creeper, 71

Virginia Mallow, 73

Virginia Snakeroot, 25

Virgin's Bower, 35

Vitaceae, 71

Vitis, 72


Wahoo, 69

Waldsteinia, 55

Walnut, Black, 21

Walnut Family, 21

Water Arum,  9

Water Cress, 45

Water Crowfoot, 37

Water Dock, 26

Water Hemlock, 82

Water Hemp, 30

Water Hoarhound, 95

Water-leaf, 93

Water-leaf Family, 93

Water Lily, 35

Water Lily Family, 35

Water Lobelia, 113

Water Loosestrife, 77

Water Marigold, 123

Water Milfoil, 79

Water Milfoil Family, 79

Water Parsnip, 81

Water Pennywort, 80

Water Pimpernel, 87

Water Plantain,  3

Water Plantain Family,  3

Water Purslane, 78

Water Shield, 35

Water Smartweed, 27, 28

Water Speedwell, 105

Water Starwort, 68

Water Starwort Family, 68

Water-weed, 3

Water Willow, 107

Waterwort, 74

Waterwort Family, 74

Weeping Willow, 20

White Ash, 88

White Campion, 33

White Cedar,  1

White Clover, 61

White Elm, 24

White Fringed Orchis, 19

White Ground Cherry, 101

White Lady's Slipper, 18

White Mulberry, 24

White Oak, 23

White Pine, 1

White Poplar, 19

White Snakeroot, 122

White Spruce, 1

White Sweet Clover, 61

Whitlow Grass, 42, 46

Whorled Pogonia, 18

Wild Bean, 58

Wild Bergamot, 96

Wild Camomile, 130

Wild Carrot, 82

Wild Chives, 13

Wild Columbine, 36

Wild Comfrey, 94

Wild Crab, 54

Wild Cucumber, 112

Wild Flax, 63

Wild Geranium, 64

Wild Ginger, 25

Wild Gromwell, 94

Wild Indigo, 61

Wild Leek, 13

Wild Lettuce, 115, 116

Wild Lily of the Valley, 13

Wild Mint, 98

Wild Onion, 13

Wild Pansy, 76

Wild Parsnip, 81

Wild Pea, 59

Wild Plum, 54

Wild Potato Vine, 92

Wild Radish, 44, 45

Wild Rice, 5

Wild Rose, 52

Wild Rye, 6

Wild Sarsaparilla, 80

Wild Senna, 60

Wild Thyme, 97

Wild Tobacco, 101

Wild Yam, 14

Willow, 20

Willow Family, 19

Willow Herb, 79

Willow, Water, 107

Winter Cress, 44

Wintergreen, 86

Wintergreen, Flowering, 65

Wintergreen, One-flowered, 85

Wintergreen, Spotted, 85

Witch Grass, 5

Witch Hazel, 51

Witch Hazel Family, 51

Withe-rod, 111

Wolfberry, 110

Wolffia, 9

Wood Anemone, 38

Wood-grass, 6

Wood Lily, 12

Wood Nettle, 24

Wood Rush, 10

Wood Sage, 97

Wood Sorrel, 64

Wood Sorrel Family, 64

Wood Strawberry, 56

Wood Violet, 76

Wormseed, 29

Worm-seed Mustard, 43

Wormwood, 119


Xanthium, 114

Xyridaceae, 9

Xyris, 9


Yam Family, 14

Yam, Wild, 14

Yard Grass, 6

Yarrow, 130

Yellow Alyssum, 42, 46

Yellow Birch, 21

Yellow Cress, 43

Yellow-eyed Grass, 9

Yellow-eyed Grass Family, 9

Yellow Foxtail, 4

Yellow Fringed Orchis, 19

Yellow Ironweed, 128

Yellow Lady's Slipper, 18

Yellow Lily, 12

Yellow Mignonette, 48

Yellow Monkey Flower, 102

Yellow Oak, 23

Yellow Sweet Clover, 61

Yellow Violet, 76

Yellow Willow, 20

Yew Family, 2


Zannichellia, 2

Zanthoxylum, 65

Zizania, 5

Zizia, 81




 +---------------------------------------------------------------+
 | Transcriber's Notes:                                          |
 | Page xlv: Changed lobel to lobed                              |
 | Page 10: Changed ocntains to contains                         |
 | Page 39: Changed second 38a to 38b                            |
 | Page 89: Changed second 4a to 4b                              |
 | Page 94: Changed augustifolium to angustifolium               |
 | Page 108: Changed second 1a to 1b                             |
 | Page 109: Changed --21. to --20.                              |
 | Page 122: Changed (springi) to (spring)                       |
 | Page 130: Changed autum to autumn                             |
 | Page 146: Changed Eveyrlasting, Pearly to Everlasting, Pearly |
 +---------------------------------------------------------------+





