





Transcriber's Note: Printer's inconsistencies in spelling, punctuation
and hyphenation have been retained.




Always use

Opportune Flour

Made from home grown hard spring wheat

For sale by leading merchants

Williston Mill Co.

Williston, North Dakota




BRUEGGER'S

THE HOUSE OF HIGH CLASS GOODS

  Home Brand Canned Goods
  Home Brand Extracts
  Home Brand Spices
  Home Brand Pickles
  Home Brand Preserves

Complete Stock of Well Selected

Groceries Always on Hand

Phone 70




Great Northern Hotel

Richard Peyton
Manager

Telephone No. 99

     *     *     *

All Men Are Liars

Except you and me. And I have some doubts about you

The Citizens Farm Loan Company

THEY Make Farm Loans

     *     *     *

Your Insurance

Real Estate and Investments with

O. A. Houge

makes you safe and satisfied

Phone 268

Telephone Building

     *     *     *

Kather's Drug Store

Where your prescriptions always receive the most careful and prompt
attention. Everything in the drug line. Toilet Articles, Stationery,
Rubber Goods, Hospital Supplies, Books, School Supplies, Wall Paper.

Phone 82




FIRST NATIONAL BANK

R. D. Sutherland    Cashier
J. R. Schuknecht    Asst. Cashier
O. W. Bell          Asst. Cashier

Interest Paid on Time Deposits

     *     *     *

WILLIAM SNYDER

GENERAL MERCHANDISE

Headquarters for the Mishawaka Ball Brand Rubbers and Overshoes.

First Grade Pure Rubber

     *     *     *

PINGREE SHOES

FOR WOMEN WHO CARE

Buster Brown and Educator Shoes

FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

Greengard Bros.




Citizens National Bank

8324

Paid Up Capital $50,000.00

...United States Depository...

Williston, - - North Dakota

     *     *     *

THE BOSTON

Ladies and Misses Exclusive Outfitters

If you bought it at The Boston
IT IS UP-TO-DATE

129 UNION BLOCK        WILLISTON, N. D.

     *     *     *

Edwin A. Palmer        Thos. F. Craven

T. F. Burns

Palmer, Craven & Burns

....LAWYERS....

Williston, North Dakota




Daniel Bell & Company

Plumbing

Steam

and

Hot Water

Heating

TELEPHONE 243

WILLISTON, N. DAK.

     *     *     *

John Heffernan

Livery, Feed and Sale Stable

Transfer. Hack and Bus Line.

Agent Standard Oil Co.

Dealer in Live Stock.

Phone 35-2

WILLISTON     N. DAK.

     *     *     *

The Williston Bakery

GEORGE G. HICKS, Prop.

The Home of Home Baked Goods

No fictitious or imitation ingredients used

Our Specialty is Home Made Bread, Pies, Cake, Etc.

Williston, North Dakota




W. H. Westergaard, President

J. Jos. Blair, Vice-Pres.

Westergaard-Blair Co.

(Incorporated)

Capital and Surplus

$50,000.00

BONDED ABSTRACTERS for Williams County

FARM LOANS

REAL ESTATE

ABSTRACTS

WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA

     *     *     *

7 Bar Meat Market

J. Wanka, Proprietor

Phone 97

Williston, North Dakota

     *     *     *

C. Ellithorpe

REAL ESTATE

WILLISTON, N. DAK.

     *     *     *

Clothes to fit, and fit to wear

Claude K. Olsen

--Tailor--

French Dry Cleaning

The only plant in the northwest

Shirts to Measure

Williston, N. D.




Williams County State Bank

Capital $50,000

While considering the many good things to be found inside the covers of
this book, don't forget to instil into the minds of your children the
habit of thrift and of saving their earnings. It will add to their
usefulness and your happiness in the years to come. We receive deposits
of $1 and upwards and assure you of careful and painstaking
consideration of your business with this bank.

Williston, North Dakota




Miss Soura

quality canned goods

Always the best

Ask your Grocer

Williston Grocery Co.

Wholesale Grocers




The Sequel To Any First Class Cook Book Is

The People's Exchange

WEST BROADWAY

Where Producers and Consumers Meet

     *     *     *

St. Louis Candy Kitchen

A. N. KJOS, Proprietor

Manufacturer of

CANDY AND CONFECTIONERY

     *     *     *

The Model Market

DONAHUE & CARNEY

Proprietors

Meats and Provisions

Phone 69

Williston, North Dakota




Tungstolier Fixtures and Mazda Tungsten Lamps.

AN IDEAL COMBINATION

[Illustration: The Tungstolier Company.

Plate No. 2.

Dining Room

Bath.

Porch.

Up Hall

Living Room,

Bed Room

Kitchen

Bed Room.]

Is your home thus equipped.

We can lower your light bill at least 40% if you will give us the
opportunity.

Williston Electric Construction Co.

Williston, N. D.




What you buy at

G. M. Hedderich & Co's

Department Store

is, first above all, as they represent it.

In all lines their stock is complete.

Kuppenheimer Clothes
    Stetson Hats
        Walk Over Shoes

Peninsular Stoves and Ranges
    Complete Line of Groceries
        The Best Hardware

Our Dry Goods Department is Unsurpassed




"If you are fond of spicy literature read a cook book"


CIVIC LEAGUE COOK BOOK


Published under the direction of the

Domestic Science Department of the Civic League

Williston, North Dakota
1913

"Bad dinners go hand in hand with total depravity, while a properly fed
man is already half saved."




Soups

A Sweet Disposition.

    Three grains of common sense, one large heart, one good liver,
    plenty of fresh air and sunlight, one bushel contentment, one good
    husband. Do not bring to a boil.


GERMAN SOUP.--Good, fresh beef and some cracked bone are all important
for soup making. The stock when nutritious, and properly prepared,
forms the basis of meat soups. To make the stock great care must be
taken in boiling the meat. Put your meat on in cold water, enough to
cover the meat, set on the stove to boil, for four hours, slowly but
steadily; never boil very fast. When meat becomes tender, add salt,
skim carefully, repeat until no more skum arises. Now if more water is
needed, always add boiling water from tea kettle. In adding vegetables,
prepare such as one prefers, pick over and wash them, chop them, take
out the meat, strain the stock through either a fine strainer or a
cloth, return to kettle, drop in the vegetables, boil until tender. Add
also the meat after the bone is taken out; cut it up in medium sized
pieces. The vegetables give the meat a nice flavor. I use cabbage,
carrots, onions, tomatoes, peas, parsley, celery and potatoes. Now for
other soups the stock is prepared the same way. Noodle soup may be made
and rice soup; the rice to be parboiled; then there are the egg
dumplings, or barley, vermicelli, and many other kinds of ways to have
a change. Celery or parsley should always be used as it flavors the
stock very fine for any kind of soup.

POTATO SOUP.--Now this soup is made of left over meat and the bones of
roasts, put them on in cold water and boil slowly; you may also add a
little fresh meat; then dice some potatoes, strain the stock and return
to the stove, put in the potatoes and some rice, boil until tender,
then heat a little grease and fry onions until glazed, add a little
flour, brown with onions in grease, then pour the soup into this hot
mixture, and let it come to a boil. That is fine.--Mrs. George
Bruegger. (Demonstration of German Cookery No. 2.)

CREAM OF CELERY SOUP.--Take two celery roots, cut up fine and slowly
cook one hour in a pint of water; flavor with a little piece of onion;
strain through fine sieve. Mix one tablespoon of butter and two of
flour, add one quart of milk and boil twenty minutes. Add a little salt
and pepper. Serve with one cup of whipped cream added the last
minute.--Mrs. R. J. Walker.

GREEN PEA SOUP.--One pint or one can green peas, one quart boiling
water, one pint milk, two tablespoons butter, one teaspoon salt,
one-eighth teaspoon pepper, one half teaspoon sugar, two tablespoons
flour. Cook peas in water, scald milk. When peas are soft mash through
a strainer, add milk and reheat. Rub flour and butter together, stir
into them a little of the soup and turn this mixture into the rest of
the soup. Stir till smooth, season. Serve with croutons. To make
croutons, cut buttered slices of bread one-half inch thick into
one-half inch squares, heat these on a pan in the oven, stirring
occasionally. They may be kept and reheated.--Dorothy Whitehead.
Demonstrated in 7th grade Domestic Science lesson.

ONION AND POTATO SOUP.--One and one-half quarts milk (steamed), two
large potatoes and two onions chopped real fine, season with butter,
pepper and salt. Cook in a stew pan until done. When ready to serve
pour together.--Mrs. John Heffernan.

CREAM TOMATO SOUP.--One can of tomatoes put through a sieve, season
with butter, pepper and salt; thicken with two tablespoons flour,
bringing to a boil. Steam one and a half quarts milk in double cooker,
just before serving, pour together, stirring with a spoon.--Mrs. John
Heffernan.

SOUP STOCK.--Two soup bones, one of mutton and one of beef, (cracked to
get the good of them), one onion chopped fine together with two
tablespoons sugar, brown in kettle, stirring to keep from burning. Add
meat bones, turning them over a few times. Pour in four quarts cold
water, add one carrot, chopped fine, and bay leaves. Boil slowly three
hours, strain and season to taste. Any vegetable may be added to
this.--Mrs. John Heffernan.

MOCK OYSTER SOUP.--To one can tomatoes add two quarts milk, tablespoon
butter, salt and pepper. (Steam milk in double cooker.) Stew tomatoes
in sauce pan, season, and when ready to serve pour together.--Mrs. John
Heffernan.

CHICKEN GUMBO SOUP.--Fry a chicken, remove bones and chop chicken fine.
Put in a kettle with two quarts boiling water, three large ears of corn
cut from cob, six tomatoes sliced, twenty-four pods of okra cut up. Fry
the corn, tomatoes and okra brown in the chicken drippings first, then
add to the water and chicken with two tablespoons rice, pepper and
teaspoon salt. Simmer one hour.--Mrs. Whitehead. Southern Cookery
demonstration.

MULLAGATAWNAY SOUP.--Cut four onions, one carrot, two turnips and one
head of celery into three quarts of liquor in which one or two fowls
have been boiled; keep it over a brisk fire till it boils, then place
it on a corner of the fire and let it simmer twenty minutes. Add one
tablespoon of currie powder and one tablespoonful of flour; mix the
whole well together and let it boil three minutes; pass it through a
colander. Serve with pieces of roast chicken in it. Add boiled rice in
a separate dish. It must be of good yellow color and not too thick.
Half veal and half chicken will answer.--Mrs. Whitehead.

BOUQUET OF SWEET HERBS.--Two sprigs of parsley, two bay leaves, two
sprigs of thyme, two of summer savory and two of sage. Tie the dried
herbs with the parsley. Nice for seasoning soups and stews.--Contributed.

BOILED POTATO DUMPLINGS.--Grate several potatoes, add salt to taste, a
little nutmeg, one egg and some bread crumbs browned in butter, a
little flour and milk, add enough flour and milk so as to handle and
make in balls. Drop into boiling salt water. When done brown some bread
crumbs in butter and put over dumplings when on platter.--Mrs. Paul
Leonhardy.

DUMPLINGS.--Two cups of flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one-half
teaspoon salt, one cup sweet milk. Stir and drop from a spoon into
chicken broth or boiling meat. Let boil fifteen minutes with cover off
and put cover on and boil five minutes.--Mrs. A. McKay.

NOODLES.--Four eggs well beaten, one tablespoon water, 2 cups flour,
one-half teaspoon salt. Work and knead together and roll out in very
thin sheets; let them dry; roll up like jelly roll and cut into very
fine strips; then drop into boiling salted water and boil ten minutes;
or they may be boiled in soup and served with it. If wanted as a
separate dish drain them in a colander and turn them into a dish. Fry
bread crumbs in butter a light brown and turn them over the noodles and
serve. These noodles can be fried in grease instead by cutting the
sheets into strips two inches wide and four inches long, and dropping
them into hot grease. Lift out and dredge with sugar. Both very
nice.--Mrs. Paul Leonhardy.

OYSTER SOUP.--Heat one quart of milk with two large tablespoonfuls of
butter. Heat a solid pint of oysters in enough water to cover them. Add
one large teaspoonful of salt and a good deal of pepper. As soon as the
oysters get plump and the gills "ruffle" add them to the hot milk. Stir
in a cupful of crushed cracker crumbs and serve in soup plates or
bowls, with oyster crackers.--Mrs. B. G. Whitehead.

RAISED DUMPLINGS.--Soak a cake of compressed yeast in a cup of lukewarm
milk, together with a tablespoonful of sugar and a teaspoonful of salt.
Sift a pint of flour into a bowl and stir into it a cupful of milk, an
egg and the soaked yeast and work all thoroughly, adding gradually
flour for a soft dough. Do not get it stiff. Cover the bowl and let the
dough rise until it has doubled the original bulk. Flour the
kneading-board and mold the dough into small biscuits. Let these rise
for half an hour. Butter a large, round pan and set your dumplings
within it, brushing each with melted butter on top. Pour in enough milk
to reach halfway to the top of the dumplings. Set upon a brick in the
oven and bake to a light brown. Eat with vanilla sauce or prunes.

NO. TWO.--Proceed as with No. 1, but instead of baking in the oven, put
the dumplings into a steamer, not too close together. Allow for
swelling. Cover with a close lid to keep in the steam. These may also
be served with vanilla or with prune sauce.

NO. THREE.--Have ready a large kettle of boiling water, slightly
salted, and after shaping the dumplings drop them carefully into this.
Leave plenty of room to swell and puff. Or they may be steamed in clear
soup. If you like you may try all of these recipes and still have
enough dough left for a pan of biscuits.




Fish, Oysters and Shell Fish

    "He was a brave man who first ate an oyster."--Dean Swift.


FISH.--With the possible exception of salmon, fish is a less nutritious
article of diet than flesh meat, and yet it fitly supplements the
latter. The oily and coarser grained species is more nutritious than
the white, or finer grained but not so easily digested. A fish is in
good condition when its gills are bright clear red, its eyes full and
the body firm and stiff. Before cooking they should be well washed in
cold water and kept in salt water for a short time, but they should not
be allowed to stand in water for any length of time and should be kept
upon ice until wanted. Small fish are usually fried or boiled, all
large fish to be boiled should be wrapped in a cloth and tied closely
with twine, steaming is preferable to boiling. Salmon, bluefish,
halibut and shad are very palatable baked in cream. Mackerel is best
broiled and should be broiled upon the skin side first; other fish
first on the inside. In boiling fish, let simmer gently as hard boiling
breaks them; time, eight minutes to a pound, sometimes longer.

BAKED FISH.--Clean and wipe dry a white fish or any good sized fish,
stuffing made like that for poultry, but drier. Sew it up and put in a
hot pan with drippings and a lump of butter; dredge with flour and lay
over the fish a few thin slices of salt pork or bits of butter. Bake
half hour, basting occasionally.

BOILED FISH.--All fresh fish, except salmon should be placed in salted
cold water for boiling. If placed in boiling water the outside would
cook much sooner than the inside. A little vinegar added to the water
in which fish is boiled improves the flavor. Put the fish in the kettle
with the back bone down, to three or four pounds of fish put a small
handful of salt. Boil the fish gently until you can draw out one of the
fins easily. Most varieties of fish will be well done in twenty or
thirty minutes, some in less time. Serve with drawn butter, with hard
boiled eggs sliced, or if preferred, milk sauce.

BAKED WHITE FISH WITH TOMATOES.--Take a white fish or trout that will
weigh about three pounds, clean, rub with salt and pepper inside and
out. Lay a piece of salt pork, not too fat, in the flesh, put in a
covered baking dish and turn over it one pint of stewed seasoned
tomatoes, cold tomatoes left over are nice. Bake about forty minutes.

SCALLOPED SALMON.--Place in a baking dish a layer of cracker crumbs,
then a layer of salmon, then another layer of cracker and salmon,
ending with a layer of cracker. On this pour two cups of milk, one egg
whipped. Add salt, pepper and butter size of an egg. Bake.

SALMON CUTLETS.--One cup of hot mashed potatoes and one cup of salmon,
mash together and form into cakes, put in a beaten egg, roll in bread
crumbs or crackers and fry in hot lard.

FRIED FISH.--Wash the fish thoroughly, wipe dry, sprinkle lightly with
salt, dip in beaten egg then roll in cornmeal, fry in hot fat.
Note--Above fish recipes were demonstrated in American Cookery series
by Mrs. A. McKay.

FISH CROQUETTES.--Two small or one large white fish; boil, bone and
chop; add a little salt, red pepper and onions; make gravy of the water
the fish is boiled in; add milk, butter and flour; stir in fish, shape
into croquette, roll in egg, cracker crumbs and fry in hot lard.
Garnish with parsley.

TARTARE DRESSING FOR FISH CROQUETTES.--Take yolk of one raw egg; beat;
add a little salt, red pepper, mustard and mix well. Beat in salad oil
until thick; let stand on ice until needed. Then add juice of two
lemons or half cup of vinegar, one tablespoon of capers, six small
cucumber pickles chopped fine and very little onion. Serve cold with
hot croquettes.--Mrs. Whitehead.

OYSTER COCKTAIL.--Half pint of catsup, twenty-five drops tabasco sauce,
one tablespoonful horseradish, one teaspoonful dry mustard, one
teaspoonful lemon juice, oysters, pepper and salt to taste. Put four or
five oysters in glass and pour one tablespoon of this sauce over them.
Fill glass with finely chipped ice, serve at once.--Mrs. Davidson.

OYSTER COCKTAIL.--A small oyster is used, five or six being alloted
each person. For six persons mix together three teaspoons each of
vinegar, grated horseradish and tomato sauce; six teaspoons of lemon
juice and one of Worcestershire sauce. Have the oysters very cold. Put
an equal amount of the prepared sauce over the oysters in each glass.
The glass should be placed upon a plate. Serve with an oyster fork and
small spoon. This is the prevailing way of serving oysters as a first
course.--Mrs. R. J. Walker.

OYSTERS a la BECHEMEL.--Melt three tablespoonfuls of butter and blend
it with two tablespoonfuls of flour, add one large cupful of thin cream
or milk and cook thick. Plump a scant pint of oysters in their own
liquor. Season with one teaspoonful of salt, a dash of cayenne, juice
of half a lemon and one-half teaspoon of onion juice squeezed from an
onion. Add oysters to the cream sauce and cook two minutes. Serve in
pattie shells or on toast.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SALMON LOAF.--One pound can salmon, four well beaten eggs, one cup fine
cracker crumbs, one tablespoon melted butter, half teaspoon salt.
Remove bones from salmon and mince finely. Mix all together with hands,
form into loaf and steam one hour. Serve with following sauce: Take
liquid from salmon and add two tablespoons sweet milk, little salt, one
tablespoon corn starch, boil all together and pour over loaf.--Mrs.
Schollander.

SCALLOPED SALMON.--Place in a baking dish a layer of bread crumbs then
a layer of salmon, another crumbs and salmon, ending with crumbs. On
this pour two cups of milk, one egg (whipped), salt, pepper and butter
the size of an egg.--Mrs. Paul Leonhardy.

OYSTER FRITTERS.--Beat yolks of two eggs light, add one half cup milk
and one cup of flour sifted with one fourth teaspoon of salt. Beat well
and add one half teaspoon of melted butter. Set aside for an hour or so
in a cool place. When ready to use beat the whites of eggs stiff and
add them. Take a large oyster in a big spoon, dip it into the batter
and filling the spoon and drop into smoking hot grease or fry like
doughnuts. Serve with tomato catsup or any preferred sauce.

OYSTER SAUTE.--Drain select oysters, heat pan hot and brown butter in
it. Just cover the bottom of the pan with large oysters as soon as the
butter sizzles and is piping hot. When brown on under side turn and
brown well. Season with salt and pepper. Add butter as needed and turn
the oysters and butter sauce on to prepared toast points. Heat the dry
pan again, add butter and when hot brown more oysters in it. The butter
must be hot and only a few oysters should be browned at a time.

OYSTERS AND BACON BAKED.--Butter a roast pan and lay large plump
oysters in a layer on the bottom of it. Season to suit taste with salt,
pepper and lemon juice and lay three thin slices of bacon over the top.
Roast brown in a quick oven. Serve on toast with tomato sauce, if
liked, or with cream sauce. A piquant bake is made by mixing finely
chopped green apples with the oysters before baking.

PIGS IN BLANKETS.--Wrap each large oyster in a thin strip of bacon and
fasten with a tooth pick, bake in a quick oven until bacon is crisp and
oysters plump. Sometimes they are broiled over clear coals.

CREOLE OYSTERS.--Bake in ramekins or individual dishes. Put a teaspoon
of butter in the bottom of each dish, then six or seven oysters; add
one tablespoon of chili sauce and place a strip of bacon on top of
each. Place dishes in a baking pan and bake until bacon is crisp.

SAUCE FOR OYSTER COCKTAILS.--Mix three tablespoons of tomato catsup,
three tablespoons of vinegar, one tablespoon of Worcestershire sauce,
three tablespoons of grated horseradish, juice of one lemon and salt
and pepper to season well. Place on ice. Chill the oysters well, wash
and drain them, lay six in each serving glass and cover with the
prepared sauce. Serve very cold, with salted wafers.--Contributed.

OYSTERS IN CELERY SAUCE.--Clean and cut celery into small pieces and
cook until tender in boiling salted water. Rub enough of the soft
celery through a colander to make a cupful. In a saucepan melt a
tablespoonful of butter and mix smoothly into it a heaping
tablespoonful of flour. Add a cupful of hot milk and cook until creamy;
add the soft celery and half a pint of oysters, add more salt if
needed, one-eighth teaspoon of pepper and a few drops of lemon juice;
cook until the oysters curl, when the filling is ready for the
ramekins. Serve hot.

DEVILED OYSTERS.--Butter scallop shells and put into each five oysters
with their own liquor and sprinkle with a drop of Tobasco, a little
tomato catsup and a quarter-salt-spoonful of salt and cover with fine
cracker or bread crumbs. Scatter a few bits of butter here and there on
the oysters and set the shells in a hot oven. Serve on doily covered
plates.

KIPPERED HERRING.--Rinse herring in warm water, dry and put on tin or
agate plate in hot oven 15 minutes; then pour over a little melted
butter, cover and leave in 5 minutes more. This should be served on
small pieces of toast.

FINNAN HADDIE.--Put a piece of butter the size of a walnut in pan and
when hot add two cupfuls of finnan haddie picked fine. Add one cupful
of cream or milk into which one tablespoonful of flour has been rubbed
smooth. Let come to a boil and when cooled a little add a dash of
pepper and the well beaten yolk of an egg. Serve on toast.

SCALLOPED OYSTERS.--Roll one pound and a half of crisp crackers fine.
Butter a deep baking dish and spread a layer of crackers an inch deep.
Spread over them a dozen oysters in their liquor, sprinkle a generous
half teaspoon salt and a dash of pepper over them, dot with bits of
butter, (about two tablespoons) and pour in half a cupful of milk, then
add another layer cracker crumbs, oysters, etc., and proceed until one
quart of oysters and one and one half pounds of crackers are used.
Cover the top with cracker crumbs, dot generously with butter and pour
on the remaining milk and oyster liquor. Use altogether about one and
one half pints of milk to this quantity of oysters and crackers. Bake
about one hour or until crumbs are well browned and oysters
plump.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SAUCE FOR OYSTER PATTIES.--One cupful of solid oysters. Melt two large
tablespoons of butter in a stew pan, blend in two heaping tablespoons
of flour and rub smooth; add one scant pint of cream or rich milk; stir
until smooth and thick. Drain the oysters and add them with one level
teaspoon of salt and a good dash of pepper. When the oysters are plump
remove to back of range and stir in the beaten yolks of two eggs mixed
with a little cream. For canned oysters add one large teaspoon of curry
powder before serving. Serve in pattie shells of baked pastry or in
timbal cases or on buttered toast.--Mrs. Whitehead.

OYSTER PIE.--Line a baking dish with rich pastry, either pie crust or
biscuit crust. Put one quart of oysters in a double boiler with one cup
of milk, and two thirds cup of butter and steam until oysters are plump.
Slice six hard boiled eggs, mix with one half cupful of cracker crumbs
and a cupful of sweet cream; add one full teaspoon of salt and a
generous sprinkling of pepper. Mix with the prepared oysters and fill
the lined baking dish. Cover with the top crust and bake about twenty
minutes in a hot oven or the pastry shell may be baked separately if
preferred and filled with the cream. The thickened, creamed oyster patty
filling makes a good filling for oyster pie, also it may be served with
steamed dumplings or small baking powder biscuits.--Contributed.

FRIED OYSTERS.--Select large, fresh oysters. Drain them and season with
salt and pepper. Roll bread crumbs that have been crisped in the oven
very fine and then sift them. Dip each oyster in the prepared crumbs
and then into beaten egg and again into the crumbs. Heap the crumbs in
thick little piles and roll the oysters in them until a nice thick
crust is formed over each oyster. Have an iron kettle or skillet filled
two inches deep with smoking hot lard, lay the oysters in a nice frying
basket, if you have one, and plunge it into the hot grease. Cook until
nicely browned. Drain and serve hot with lemon points, tomato catsup or
any preferred sauce.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SALMON TIMBALES.--One can salmon, flaked, add the beaten yolks of three
eggs, two tablespoons of thick cream, one teaspoon of lemon juice, salt
and pepper and lastly cut in the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs.
Pour into greased individual molds, set in a pan of hot water and bake
about twenty minutes.

BAKED FISH SCALLOPS.--Two cups cold cooked fish. Remove the bones and
break fish into small flakes. Mix with a thick cream sauce, well
seasoned. Butter baking shells or individual dishes, fill with the
creamed fish, cover with fine bread or cracker crumbs, dot with butter
and bake until brown. Serve with lemon points.

CODFISH BALLS.--One cup of flaked cod fish soaked in clear water, then
drained. Boil three large potatoes until tender, then drain and mash
with the cod fish. Season with salt, pepper and butter and add one
beaten egg. Drop by the spoonful into smoking hot grease and fry like
doughnuts. Serve immediately.

SCALLOPED FISH.--Add flaked cold cooked white fish, halibut or salmon
to a thick cream sauce seasoned with minced onions, thyme or parsley
and butter, alternate with layers of cracker crumbs and bake brown.

CREAMED FISH CANAPES.--Beat an egg with half a cup of milk and add a
dash of salt. Dip circles of bread, cut half an inch thick, in this and
fry brown in butter, turning once. Spread with creamed fish or chicken
and place a poached egg on top. Dot with butter and sprinkle with salt
and pepper and serve for breakfast or lunch.




Game

    "Variety is the spice of life."--Cooper.


WILD DUCK ROASTED.--Prepare as for roasting the same as any fowl,
parboil for fifteen minutes with an onion in the water to remove the
strong flavor. A carrot will answer the same purpose. Stuff with bread
crumbs, a minced onion, season with pepper and salt, a little sage and
a good supply of butter, roast until tender. Use butter plentifully in
basting. One half hour will suffice for young ducks. If bread crumb
dressing is not liked, sliced apple stuffed in the duck is very
nice.--Mrs. A. McKay.

TO PREPARE VENISON.--Wash clean, dry well with clean dry cloth, salt,
pepper and dredge with flour, cut long gashes into roast, place in
gashes strips of salt pork or bacon; lay strips on top; place in a bake
pan with a very little water, cover roast until nearly done, take off
cover, baste and brown slightly.--Mrs. A. McKay.

BROILED PRAIRIE CHICKEN.--After dressing lay on ice for a few hours,
then divide in halves, again divide the thick sections of the breast,
sprinkle with salt and pepper and lay the pieces on a gridiron the
inside down. Broil slowly at first. Serve with cream gravy and currant
jelly.

PRAIRIE CHICKEN (STEAMED AND BAKED).--Stuff them with a dressing of
bread crumbs and seasoning of pepper and salt, mixed with melted
butter, sage, onion or summer savory may be added if liked. Secure the
fowl firmly with a needle and twine. Steam until tender, then remove to
dripping pan; dredge with flour, pepper and salt, and brown delicately
in oven. Baste with melted butter. Garnish with parsley and currant
jelly. Above game recipes given in American Cookery demonstration by
Mrs. A. McKay.

BROILED VENISON STEAK.--Venison steaks should be broiled over a clear
fire, turning often. It requires more cooking than beef. When
sufficiently done season with salt and pepper, pour over two
tablespoonfuls of currant jelly, melted with a piece of butter. Serve
hot on hot plates. Delicious steaks, corresponding to the shape of
mutton chops are cut from the loin.--Mrs. C. C. Mackenroth.

ROAST VENISON.--Rub the saddle or haunch of venison with a damp cloth
and then rub in butter. Make a thick paste of flour and water and
spread it an inch thick on the roast. Lay a buttered coarse wrapping
paper or one of the new cooking paper bags over the roast and put the
meat in the roasting pan with one cupful of hot water. Lift the paper
and baste every fifteen minutes with melted butter and hot water. Roast
in a hot oven until the meat is tender, then remove the paper and the
coat of paste. Dredge the meat with flour, one teaspoonful of salt and
pepper and baste with pan drippings and butter until meat is nicely
browned. Add a pint of hot water to the drippings and thicken with
flour for a gravy. Add a pinch of cloves, nutmeg and mace and stir in a
glass of currant jelly until it is dissolved. Strain and serve with the
meat. Venison cooked this way will be moist instead of dry and
hard.--Mrs. Whitehead.

ROAST PRAIRIE CHICKEN.--Have chicken skinned and put in cold water at
least three hours, then wipe dry and stuff with bread crumb dressing.
Put in roaster and dot with bits of butter and two or three slices of
bacon, one onion pricked with three cloves, add several pepper and all
spice kernels and a teaspoonful of salt and one cupful of water. Roast
about one and one half hours and baste occasionally.--Mrs. J. Bruegger.

ROAST WILD DUCK.--It is best to keep wild ducks a few days after they
are killed if the weather is cold. As most wild duck have the flavor of
fish, therefore it is advisable to parboil them, with a carrot in each
duck, before roasting, as this absorbs all the unpleasant taste. An
onion has the same effect, but when onion is used in dressing the
carrot is preferable. Roast the same as tame duck and use dressing for
stuffing fowl with a little onion added; bake about one half hour in
very hot oven, carefully turning them, baste them and add a little
water if necessary. A few slices of bacon roasted with it adds to the
flavor of wild game. Serve hot with the gravy it yields. The canvas
back duck requires no spices or flavors to make it perfect, as the meat
partakes of the flavor of the food the birds feed upon, which is wild
celery, and this delicious flavor is best preserved when roasted
quickly with a hot fire.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

PRAIRIE CHICKEN OR SQUAB PIE.--After the chickens are picked and drawn
as a large fowl is for roasting, wash them and put them in a saucepan
with a close cover; they should be covered with boiling water and
boiled slowly till tender, when a little salt and an onion and cloves
should be added; then take them out, drain and dry, and put in each
squab a teaspoonful of butter, a little pepper, salt, minced parsley
and thyme; then put into the cavity of each chicken a hard boiled egg;
lay them in a large baking dish three or four inches deep; strain over
them the liquor in which they were simmered, add teaspoonful of butter,
one teacup of milk or cream; sift in two tablespoonfuls of cracker
crumbs, put in a few slips of parsley, cover with a rich crust and
bake.--Contributed.




Poultry

    "Take the goods the Gods provide thee."--Dryden.


ROAST TURKEY.--Select if possible a young turkey, carefully remove all
feathers and singe it over a burning paper on the stove, then see that
it is carefully drawn and no internals broken; remove the crop
carefully; after the head is cut off, tie the neck close to the body,
by drawing the skin over it, now wash the inside of the turkey in
several clean waters, into the next to the last add a teaspoonful of
baking soda, this is to destroy that sour taste which fowls often have,
if not freshly killed. After a thorough rinsing and washing of the bird
wipe dry both in and outside with a clean cloth, rub the inside with
salt, then stuff the body and breast with dressing for stuffing fowls,
then sew up with strong thread, rub it over with a little soft butter,
sprinkle over some salt and pepper, dredge with a little flour, place
in a roaster with a little water and cook from two to two and a half
hours, turn it around occasionally so that every part will be browned
alike, when it appears done, pierce with a fork and when the liquid
runs clear, the bird is done. Serve with cranberry sauce. Garnish with
parsley, or fried oysters.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

DRESSING FOR STUFFING FOWL.--For an eight or ten pound turkey use about
three pints of stale bread crumbs, put into a dish and pour tepid water
over it, (not hot for that makes it heavy) let stand for a few minutes,
then take up a handful and squeeze dry with both hands, put into
another dish and when all is pressed dry toss it up lightly through
your fingers, this process makes it very light. Parboil the liver,
heart, and gizzard, in a little stew pan. When tender mince very fine
and add to the bread, now one teaspoon of salt, a little pepper, half
cup of melted butter; peel and chop one cooking apple, two tablespoons
of green or dry fine minced parsley; mix well, add one beaten egg, mix
again and it is ready for either turkey or chicken. For goose or duck
add a few slices of onion chopped fine. The water in which the heart,
gizzard and liver were stewed may be used with the gravy of the roast
turkey, goose, duck or chicken.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

ROAST GOOSE.--The goose should not be more than eight months old, and
the fatter the more tender and juicy the meat. After the goose has been
well washed, cleaned and wiped, rub a little salt inside, stuff with
the dressing for stuffing fowls with a little onion added to the
dressing. Do not stuff too full and stitch the openings firmly to keep
the flavor in and the fat out. Place in roaster with a little water and
bake about two and a half hours, carefully turning it frequently and
baste with water and salt. When done with all parts evenly brown, take
up, pour off the fat and to the brown gravy left, add a little water,
and some flour to thicken, bring to a boil and serve in a gravy boat.
Garnish goose with parsley.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

VIRGINIA FRIED CHICKEN.--Dress and cut up chickens, rub each piece with
salt and pepper, then dip it into beaten egg, then into flour and fry
brown in deep hot fat or butter and lard mixed, or bacon drippings.
Cover the skillet and let chicken cook slowly after it is browned well
to be sure it is done. Remove chicken to platter and turn out part of
the drippings. Add cooking spoon of flour to remaining drippings and
cook a minute, then add milk or cream to make gravy. Season with salt
and pepper and just before serving add beaten yolk of one egg mixed
with a little milk. Serve with chicken. Garnish chicken platter with
slices of cold boiled ham or crisp bacon, and corn dodgers and you will
have a typical "Old Dominion" dish. I got above recipe from a Virginia
woman.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SMOTHERED CHICKEN.--Split a young chicken down back, season with salt
and pepper and put in roaster with one cup hot water. Roast (covered)
until tender. As it begins to brown make a paste of two tablespoons
each of butter and flour, blended, and spread it over chicken, basting
often with pan dipper. Add cupful cream to drippings in pan for gravy.
If the chicken is large cut into pieces as for frying before roasting
this way.--Mrs. Whitehead.

CREOLE STEWED CHICKEN.--Boil a pint of rice in two quarts of water
until half done, then add a cut up fowl with one minced onion, blade of
mace, four large mushrooms or half a can, half a chili pepper, teaspoon
salt and three or four small tomatoes cut up and one tablespoon butter.
Stew gently until chicken is tender, stirring often and adding hot
water as needed. Serve in baked pastry shell or on toast. Mrs.
Whitehead. Above chicken recipes were demonstrated in Mrs. Whitehead's
paper on Southern Cookery.

SWEDISH DUCK FILLING.--One quart of bread crumbs, four good-sized
apples, one half cup of browned butter, cinnamon, raisins, and currants
to taste. Stuff fowl.--Contributed.

DAIRY LUNCH CHICKEN SANDWICH.--Make a thin batter of one and one half
pints of water, one pint of milk, one egg, scant half teaspoon of soda,
one tablespoon of salt, dash of pepper and flour enough to mix like pan
cake batter. Cut a young chicken into quarters, dip it in the batter
and fry brown in deep fat. Serve between slices of bread. Garnish with
dill pickles.--Mrs. T. A. McKay.

CHICKEN CROQUETTES.--One cup of the white meat of boiled fowl packed in
solid, then chopped fine and mashed till like fine powder. Add one half
level teaspoon salt, one half saltspoon paprika, or white pepper. Make
one pint thick cream sauce, with two level tablespoons butter and two
heaped tablespoons of cornstarch cooked together, diluted with one pint
of hot cream, and stirred till very smooth and thick. Season with one
half teaspoon salt and one half saltspoon pepper. Stir as much of the
hot sauce into the chicken as it will take up and enable you to handle
the mixture in shaping, remembering that the sauce will be much thicker
when cold, and so the mixture may be quite soft. The meat varies greatly
in its power to absorb the sauce, therefore it is impossible to give an
exact amount but if the sauce is thick a large portion may be used and
the croquettes will be all the more creamy for it. When cold, shape a
tablespoon of the mixture into a ball, then into a cylinder, roll in
fine dry bread crumbs, beaten egg diluted with water, then crumbs again,
and fry one minute in deep, smoking hot fat. More of the delicious
flavor of the meat will be retained with this simple seasoning of salt
and pepper than with a variety of condiments.--Contributed.

CREAMED STEWED CHICKEN.--Cut up fowl as for fricassee, put over the
fire in enough cold water to cover it well. Bring gradually to a boil.
When it begins to bubble, add a stalk of celery, some chopped parsley,
and a bay leaf. Simmer until tender before seasoning. Make a white
sauce in a frying pan of two tablespoons butter cooked with the same
quantity of flour. As soon as well mixed stir into this a large cupful
of strained and skimmed gravy from the pot, have ready one half cup
cream, heated with a pinch of soda, add this to the thickened gravy,
very slowly so as not to curdle. Do not boil after cream is in. Cook
dumplings in the gravy left, after the reserved cupful and chicken are
taken out.

DUMPLINGS FOR CHICKEN STEW.--In a pint of flour, sift a heaping
teaspoon baking powder, one fourth teaspoon salt, sift flour twice, now
rub in a tablespoonful of shortening, and wet with enough milk to make
a dough that can be rolled out. Cut into rounds and drop into the
boiling gravy. Should be done in ten minutes.--Mrs. Paul Leonhardy.

CREAMED CHICKEN.--Three pounds of chicken boiled tender in salted water
and freed of bones, skin and gristle. Cut the meat into small pieces.
Boil two sweet breads tender in salted water with the juice of half a
lemon. When tender, drain and throw them into cold water to blanch;
then free from skin and gristle and cut into small pieces; drain a can
of French mushrooms and cut them into quarters. Make a cream sauce of
two tablespoons of butter, melted and blended with two tablespoons of
flour, add one pint of hot thin cream, one teaspoon of salt, juice of
one lemon, and juice pressed from half a small onion, and a dash of
pepper, cook thick but remove from fire and add one beaten egg yolk
mixed with one cup of whipped cream. Add to the heated chicken,
mushrooms and sweet breads. Mix well and serve in patty shells, or
timbales. (The whipped cream may be omitted.) For escalloped chicken
turn the above mixture into a buttered baking dish, cover with fine
rolled bread crumbs, dot with butter and bake until well browned.
Reserve the chicken broth for soup or make a gravy of it and serve with
baking powder biscuit or dumplings.--Contributed.

CROQUETTES.--Cook one large tablespoon of butter with two tablespoons
of flour, add one cup milk or cream, one teaspoon onion juice, one
teaspoon salt, dash of pepper and nutmeg and one beaten egg. Mix with
one cup of minced meat or chicken, form into croquettes after the
mixture has stood an hour. Fry brown in deep fat after rolling in egg
and bread crumbs.--Contributed.

HOT TAMALES.--Cook a three pound chicken tender in salted water to
cover. Chop chicken meat fine and return bones to the kettle. Cut open
six large chilli peppers or chillies, wash, cut out seeds and cut into
halves. Cover with boiling water and cook until soft and press through a
fine sieve. Brown a golden color two medium sized chopped onions in hot
butter, add the chilli pulps with half a cup of chicken broth, cover pan
and cook slowly fifteen minutes. Put one quart of corn meal into a bowl
and pour over it enough hot chicken broth to make a dry paste; work with
the hands into a soft but not wet paste. Have broad six inch long corn
husks soaked until pliable in warm water. Open these and down the center
of each put a wide strip of corn meal paste; mix the chopped chicken
with the chilli mixture and spread it on the corn meal paste down the
center; roll up the husks, fold in the ends and tie with narrow strips
of husks. The corn meal must surround the chicken mixture. Lay the
prepared tamales carefully on top of the bones keeping them above the
broth. Sprinkle with a teaspoon of salt and cover the kettle and cook
steadily one hour, being careful that the broth doesn't boil over the
tamales. For the novice, it is easier to steam the tamales over the
broth in a flat covered steamer. Serve very hot in the husks. Minced
beef may be used instead of chicken and often one cup of chopped
tomatoes are added to the chillies before cooking.--Contributed.

CHILE-CON-CARNE.--Cook chillies as in tamale recipe, add to the sieved
chillies one pint of thick strained tomato pulp, one minced large
onion, one fourth teaspoon salt and cover and simmer fifteen minutes.
Cut dark meat from a boiled or roasted chicken, into small pieces or
use small pieces of cooked veal, cover with the chilli sauce and stew
slowly one hour or stand over hot water and steam about an hour or
until chicken has practically absorbed the sauce.--Contributed.

CHILLI MINO PAN CAKES.--Make a light fritter or pan cake batter and fry
cakes in hot olive oil or butter shaking them until they are set.
Spread these cakes with chicken and chilli mixture (as prepared for
tamales) roll up the pan cakes, pour over more of the sauce, sprinkle
with grated cheese and serve immediately.--Contributed.

RICE AND CHICKEN CON-CARNE.--One pint of stewed chicken cut up in
chicken broth and seasoned with three cooked chillies (sieved) half a
cup of washed rice, half a pint of finely minced cooked tongue, one
teaspoon of salt. Stir often and cook until rice has absorbed most of
the broth but do not let it scorch. Serve with half a pint of strained
tomato cooked with one tablespoon of butter and a little
salt.--Contributed.




Meat

    "Room! Make way! Hunger commands. My valour must obey."--Beaumont
    and Fletcher.


TO JUDGE GOOD BEEF.--Good beef, if young, will be of a bright red
color, fine grained and firm to the touch. The fat of a clear straw
color with a little of it through the muscles, giving the meat a
marbled appearance. The suet should be dry and crumbly and of a darker
shade than the fat. In old beef both flesh and fat will be darker, much
coarser in fiber and decidedly dry compared with young beef. If the
beef is of a pale, dull color, and flabby, it is not well matured; if
very dark and colored and coarse grained with deep yellow fat it will
be found tough and tasteless and if it bears greenish tints and feels
slippery on the surface it is already stale and unfit for use. When
meat is tough add a little vinegar or a piece of lemon to the water in
which it is boiled. This will result in a shortening of time and a
saving of fuel, while the meat will be rendered more easy of digestion;
also any slight taint that may be about the meat will be entirely
removed by this process. A pinch of baking soda can be used instead of
lemon or vinegar.

POT ROAST.--Take a nice piece of the round beef weighing about four
pounds, season well with salt and pepper and dust over thoroughly with
flour. In a flat bottomed kettle melt a piece of butter the size of an
egg, when hot put in the meat, turning until well browned on every
side. When roast is brown add a little onion, six cloves, six allspice
and enough boiling water to come up half way to the top of the meat.
Cook slowly for three hours. When done take out meat, add one
tablespoon of flour to a little cold water to thicken gravy.

MEAT BALLS.--Two pounds round steak, put through sausage grinder three
times, season with salt and pepper, nutmeg and a little cream. Beat two
eggs and mix all together; shape into balls and roll in cracker crumbs
and fry in butter to a light brown.

BAKED VEAL CUTLETS.--One and one half pounds of veal cutlets laid in
well buttered roasting pan with one cup of water; over this spread
dressing made of two cups bread crumbs; two onions chopped fine, two
well beaten eggs; butter size of an egg, salt and pepper. Mix well, add
water to moisten. Lay tin cover on top of pan to prevent scorching.
Bake from half to three quarters of an hour. Remove cover to brown.

ROAST SPARE RIBS.--Trim off ends neatly, crack ribs across the middle,
rub with salt, sprinkle with pepper, fold over, stuff with turkey
dressing, sew up tightly, place in dripping pan with one pint water,
baste often. Turn over once so as to bake both sides equally.

ROAST VEAL LOAF.--Four pounds of veal, one pound of pork, one or two
eggs, one cup of crackers rolled fine, one tablespoon of salt, one
teaspoon of pepper, one teaspoon of sage, mix and make into roll. Bake
three hours.

STEAMED VEAL LOAF.--To two pounds of veal, put through a grinder or
chopped very fine, add two teaspoons of salt, one fourth teaspoon
pepper, butter size of an egg, one cup freshly grated bread crumbs, two
eggs, two tablespoons milk. Knead until well mixed. Butter baking
powder cans, coat with bread crumbs and fill compactly with the meat
and put on cover. Stand in a kettle of water almost to the top of mold.
Boil steadily one and one half hours. When cool take out at once.

STUFFED BEEF STEAK.--Prepare a dressing as for chicken, of one cup of
bread crumbs moisten with one tablespoonful of melted butter, one
tablespoonful of chopped parsley, salt and pepper to taste. Trim off
the fat from a sirloin steak, spread on the dressing; roll up; tie to
keep in shape, and bake one hour. Baste often with stock and drippings.
When done remove the string that it may not unroll and serve with brown
sauce. Mushrooms may be added to the dressing if desired. (Roll may be
steamed instead of roasted if desired.)

SAUCE.--Melt and brown one large tablespoonful butter, add to it two
tablespoonfuls of flour, stir until it is smooth and brown, then add
one pint of the liquid strained from the pan. Stir until it thickens,
take from the fire and add one tablespoonful of Worcestershire sauce;
season with salt and pepper.

DIRECTIONS FOR BOILING HAM.--Put the ham in cold water over night and
boil in the same water in the morning. When done skin it and roll it in
crackers mixed with pepper, and put into oven to brown.

VEAL LOAF.--Two pounds of veal chopped, one half pound salt pork,
chopped or put through meat grinder twice. Add one egg, twelve
crackers, rolled fine, salt and pepper to taste. Bake one and one half
hours. (The above meat recipes were demonstrated in American Cookery
series by Mrs. A. McKay.)

VEAL STEW, WITH LEMON AND EGG SAUCE.--Four pounds veal, salt and
pepper, stew the veal until tender, drain off the broth, leaving barely
enough to cover the meat. Beat six eggs and add slowly to them, beating
all the time, the juice of three lemons. Pour this over the veal and
heat but do not boil.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

NORWEGIAN MEAT PUDDING.--Take five pounds of round steak, quarter pound
beef suet, grind ten or twelve times, add salt, nutmeg, one cup sweet
cream, one pint milk, mix well. Bake in pudding tin with funnel in
center. Set tin in pan of boiling water. Bake one hour.

PUDDING SAUCE.--Drain liquid from pudding when done. To this add sweet
cream, thicken with flour and milk. Season with salt, nutmeg and
capers. This will serve ten or twelve people.--Mrs. R. Meidell.




German Cookery


BOILED MEAT BALLS.--One pound of round steak, one egg, one slice of
bread, two tablespoons melted butter, one teaspoon salt, a dash of
pepper. Trim off all the fat, skin and bones, wash them and put on
stove in cold water with one onion, piece of celery, a little parsley
and salt to taste. Let boil one hour. Chop or grind the meat, soak the
bread in water and press, then mix with all ingredients and form into
balls the size of an egg, and boil in the above broth ten minutes. For
the gravy brown one tablespoon butter, one of flour, add the broth and
stir smooth. Put meat balls into a deep dish and pour gravy over
them.--Mrs. J. Bruegger.

MARYLAND BAKED HAM.--Soak a ham over night in cold water and boil it
tender in sweet cider or water, putting it on in enough liquid to
cover. It must be tender but not broken. Remove the rind, outline the
fat on top into diamonds, placing a clove in each. Rub half a cup of
maple syrup into ham, sprinkle with pepper, place in oven and brown,
sprinkling with sifted bread crumbs if liked. Serve hot or if sliced
cold, lay plate and heavy weight on ham over night to make nice firm
slices.--Mrs. Whitehead. Southern Cookery demonstration.

LULA'S CORNED BEEF.--Five pounds rump beef or sirloin, five tablespoons
salt, three tablespoons brown sugar. Saltpetre size of a hickory nut.
Dissolve the ingredients in enough water to cover the beef, and let the
meat stand in the brine twenty four hours. Boil meat in the same brine
three and a half hours. Quick, simple and good as it gives the
purchaser a chance to select the cut of meat she prefers for
corning.--Contributed.

SPICED BEEF LOAF.--Two and one half pounds of round steak put through a
food chopper, with one fourth pound of salt pork; one teaspoonful of
dried and rolled bread crumbs; two scant cupfuls of milk, one beaten
egg, one teaspoon of butter; one teaspoonful of salt; one half teaspoon
each of cinnamon, cloves, mace and allspice, a dash of cayenne pepper.
Mix into one large loaf and lay in a buttered roasting pan. (I use two
individual bread tins using one loaf hot for dinner and reserving the
other to slice cold.) Add a cupful of hot water to each baking pan;
sprinkle sifted bread crumbs over the meat and dot with butter. Bake
covered until brown and tender basting often but do not cook until hard
and dry. Serve with the gravy or hot tomato sauce, horseradish or
mayonaise.--Mrs. Whitehead.

FAAR I KAAL. NORWEGIAN.--Get twenty cents worth of leg of mutton, cut
in small pieces. Put in the kettle one layer of mutton, one medium
sized head of cabbage cut into six pieces, four potatoes, cut in
halves, two medium sized carrots, quartered. Between each layer of meat
and vegetables add salt, whole peppers and a little flour. Set the
kettle on the stove and add about one quart of water. Let boil slowly
for at least three hours. When done remove from fire and serve. This
will serve three people.--Mrs. R. Meidell.

ROUND STEAK STEW.--Take one and one half quarter pounds of round steak
and pound it well, roll in flour and fry (same as any other steak) over
this pour one pint of boiling water, season with salt, pepper and a
little onion. Let stew one hour or until tender.--Mrs. R. Meidell.

STEAMED VEAL LOAF.--Take two pounds raw veal, grind, two teaspoons
salt, one fourth teaspoon pepper, butter size of an egg, one cup
freshly grated bread crumbs, two eggs, two tablespoons milk, knead
until well mixed. Butter baking powder cans, coat with bread crumbs,
fill compactly with the meat, put on cover, stand in kettle of water
almost to the top of the mold. Boil steadily one and one half hours.
When cool remove from molds at once. Can be eaten hot.--Mrs. Paul
Leonhardy.

JELLIED VEAL OR CHICKEN.--Three pounds of stewing veal shank or
chicken, one tablespoon of chopped onion, one tablespoon chopped
celery; one level teaspoon of salt, dash of pepper. Cover with water
and boil steadily until the meat is very tender and liquor reduced.
Remove the meat from the liquor, free it from gristle and bones and
chop fine. Strain the liquor, stir it through the meat and pack in a
square mold, laying a heavy weight on top. Serve it cold, cut in thin
slices and garnished with sliced hard boiled eggs, sliced lemon or
pickled beets.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SCRAMBLED CALF'S BRAINS.--Soak two pounds of calf's brains in strong
salt water one hour. Then carefully remove all membrane and blood
clots. Dip the brains in flour and fry brown in hot drippings, bacon
preferred. Hash the brains with a knife and scramble four fresh eggs
with them, season with salt and pepper, tossing well together with a
knife until nicely browned. Serve with toast or hot buttered rolls or
baking powder biscuit.--Contributed.

CROWN OF LAMB WITH CURRIED RICE BALLS.--Have the marketman prepare the
rack of lamb for a "crown" roast by scraping the flesh from the ribs
half way down, joining the rack together and fastening it firmly.
Sprinkle with pepper and salt, wrap the ribs in oiled paper and roast
in a brisk oven. Baste often and allow fifteen minutes to each pound.
Garnish with rice balls made as follows: Steam one cupful of rice until
tender. Make two cupfuls of sauce by melting two tablespoonfuls of
butter, adding one teaspoonful currie powder, one saltspoonful of onion
juice, and two tablespoonfuls flour, and stock, or water and milk, and
one half teaspoonful of salt. Cook until smooth, then add sufficient
sauce to the rice to form into balls; reheat them in a steamer, dip
them in the sauce which has been kept warm and fill the crown.

MINT JELLY.--Is a toothsome accompaniment to roast lamb, and is a novel
variation to the customary mint sauce. Soak one cupful of chopped mint
in one pint of water for one hour. Strain, heat to the boiling point
and pour over one half box of gelatin which has been softened in half a
teacup of cold water. Add three tablespoonfuls of sugar, four
tablespoonfuls lemon juice and a saltspoonful of salt. Pour into molds
and set in a cold place to harden. Turn out on chilled saucers just
before serving.--Contributed.

TONGUE IN PORT WINE.--Boil a beef's tongue until it is tender enough to
stick a fork through; put it in cold water and remove the skin; set it
away until cold; save the water in which it was boiled and put it on
the stove with four small onions and two small carrots, boil until the
vegetables are tender, then remove the carrots and mash the onions into
pieces; brown two tablespoonfuls of brown sugar, add it to the liquor,
with a level teaspoonful each of allspice, cloves and mace, and pepper
and salt to taste. Blend two tablespoonfuls each of butter and flour,
thicken the liquor with this and add three quarters of a cup of port
wine. Split the tongue lengthwise, put it in the liquor and heat
thoroughly, and serve with the sauce.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SYRIAN STEW.--To be eaten with boiled rice. Neck of mutton will do
nicely for this. Separate the fat from the lean meat. Mince the fat and
melt it in frying pan. Cut the lean meat into chunks about a cubic
inch, more or less, in size, and fry in a hot fat. Have at hand an
earthen cooking vessel; remove the meat from frying pan when done and
drop into the earthen vessel. Have ready the vegetables, also cut into
chunks (not slices), and brown in the fat, removing them as they brown
and putting them with the meat. Next, slice two large or four small
Spanish onions (slicing not into rings, but first into halves,
lengthwise; next slicing each half lengthwise), and fry until well done
(sprinkling them with salt hastens the process). Add these to the meat
and vegetables, then add a cupful of canned or fresh tomato and a small
quantity of water, seasoned with salt and that brown pepper which is
more spicy than hot; let it come to a boil and simmer gently. It should
be begun two hours before mealtime. Any vegetable will do. Vegetable
marrow is excellent, but this should be allowed to steam for awhile
with the meat and onions before the tomatoes are added and cooked
without water. For potatoes, add a few cloves or a small piece of
cinnamon bark to flavor. Celery stew is excellent and cabbage also is
good; but for either of these omit the tomatoes and add some lemon
juice shortly before removing from fire. Such vegetables as celery,
cabbage and haricot beans should not be browned in the fat, but stirred
about for awhile in the cooking vessel with the meat and onions, and
thus fried slightly before adding the water. There is an infinite
variety of these stews, all on the same principle.

BOILED RICE.--To accompany Syrian stew.--A double boiler is not
necessary. Wash the rice until the water is clear, removing any foreign
grains or dirt. Have ready in a saucepan double the quantity of boiling
water that you have of rice, in which has been melted a lump of butter.
When the water boils hard drop in the rice, add a rounded teaspoonful
of salt to every cup of rice and boil gently, uncovered. Do not stir.
For very hard rice allow two and one half cups of water to a cup of
rice. You will soon learn just the quantity required. By the time the
water dries out the rice should be done and each grain firm and
separate. Allow a generous teaspoonful of butter to each cup of rice.
One cup is sufficient for two persons. When the water gets low, taste
the rice, and if you find it is still hard add a little more boiling
water, or cover and remove to the back of the stove to finish
slowly.--Contributed.

HOME MADE SAUSAGE.--Grind six pounds of raw lean fresh pork and three
pounds of raw fat pork to a pulp. Put it in a large graniteware pan and
add twelve teaspoons of powdered sage, six teaspoons of ground black
pepper, six teaspoons of dry salt and one teaspoon each of ground
cloves, allspice and nutmeg. Mix the seasoning well into the meat and
pack it into stone jars, as closely as possible. Pour melted lard or
paraffine wax over the top, which will be all the protection it will
require. All winter as wanted make it into small cakes and fry
brown.--Contributed.

HEAD CHEESE.--This is made of the head, ears and tongue of a pig. Boil
them after cleaning them, in salted water until tender. Strip the meat
from the bones and chop (not grind) very fine. Season with salt,
pepper, sage and powdered cloves, to taste; then add one cup of good
vinegar. Mix all together thoroughly and pack hard into molds or bowls,
interspersing bits of the tongue cut into oblongs and triangles an inch
in length. Wet a plate and press down on the top of each mold and place
a weight on top of that. In two days it will be ready to eat. If you
desire to keep it several weeks you can turn it out of the molds and
immerse in cold vinegar in stone jars. This will preserve it admirably
and you have only to pare away the outside if too acid for your
taste.--Contributed.

PHILADELPHIA SCRAPPLE.--Take a cleaned pig's head and boil until the
flesh slips easily from the bones. Remove all the bones and chop fine.
Set the liquor in which the meat was boiled aside until cold, take the
cake of fat from the surface and return the liquor to the fire. When it
boils, put in the chopped meat and season well with pepper and salt.
Let it boil again and thicken with corn meal as you would in making
ordinary corn meal mush, by letting it slip slowly through the fingers
to prevent lumps. Cook an hour, stirring constantly at first,
afterwards putting back on the range in a position to boil gently. When
done, pour into a long, square pan, not too deep, and mould. In cold
weather this can be kept several weeks. Slice and saute in butter or
dripping.--Contributed.

MUTTON ROAST.--Just cover the breast of mutton with water, adding a
little salt. Set over the fire, and when it comes to a boil place over
a more moderate heat and simmer for three hours. Then take it up on a
platter, draw out the bones, make a stuffing of bread crumbs, parsley,
thyme, salt, pepper and a little melted suet or butter; lay this on the
meat, roll it up and fasten with skewers. Cover thickly with egg and
bread crumbs and bake in a good oven fifteen minutes to each pound of
meat. When it begins to brown baste frequently with the pan drippings.
Serve on a bed of cress.--Contributed.

FRIED HAM WITH CREAM SAUCE.--Trim off the edges; put into a hot pan
with one teaspoonful of drippings, put over hot fire and keep turning
the ham. Never put into pan and fry on one side before turning. You
must keep turning constantly. When nice and brown on both sides remove
to a hot platter. Put one tablespoonful of flour into pan, mix well and
add one cup of cold milk slowly, stir and boil three minutes. Pour over
ham.--Contributed.

HAM JELLY.--Mix two cupfuls of boiled ham, chopped and pounded very
fine, with one teaspoonful of French mustard, a good dash of cayenne,
one teaspoonful of granulated gelatin dissolved in one half cupful of
hot water (with a teaspoonful of beef extract if at hand), and
finally with one half cupful of cream which has been whipped. When
thoroughly blended press into a wet square mold and place on ice for
two or three hours. It will keep for a day or two. When ready to
serve cut in thin slices and put on each a teaspoonful of mayonnaise
dressing in which a little freshly grated horseradish and whipped
cream have been stirred. Two tablespoonfuls of mayonnaise, four
tablespoonfuls of whipped cream and one tablespoonful of horseradish
will be the right proportions.--Contributed.

GOULASH.--Use two pounds of lean beef cut into neat pieces; chop an
onion, half a carrot and one eighth of a green pepper; place all in a
kettle with two cups of stock, or water will do, cover and stew gently
for two hours; add five small sour pickles in the kettle with the meat,
a teaspoonful of salt; continue to stew for half an hour longer. Remove
the meat on a hot platter, place the pickles around the meat, thicken
the gravy with a little flour and water and pour the gravy around the
meat.

JELLIED VEAL.--One or two knuckles of veal boiled until very tender in
water to cover. Strain the juice and cut the meat into small pieces or
chop fine, season with salt, pepper and a little powdered sage; put
back into strained broth and boil until nearly dry. Add juice of one
lemon and turn into a mold, press well and let it stand until cold and
firm. Slice in thin slices. For pressed beef use minced parsley instead
of sage and omit the lemon juice. For pressed chicken omit the parsley
and sage, add the lemon juice to the chicken broth and mould with a
layer of sliced hard boiled eggs placed in the center of the
loaf.--Contributed.

PORK PATTIES.--One cup chopped pork, two cups bread crumbs, two beaten
eggs and one half cup milk, season with butter, salt and pepper, (and
sage if liked). Fill buttered gem tins and bake until nicely
brown.--Mrs. A. McKay.

CREAMED DRIED BEEF.--Pick half a pound of chipped dried beef into small
pieces and bring it to a boil in water to cover. Drain, add one
tablespoon of butter and dredge with one large tablespoon of flour, add
two cupfuls of milk or cream and cook thick. Season with pepper. Nice
for breakfast or lunch. Make creamed codfish the same way.--Contributed.

HAMBURG HASH.--One pound hamburg steak, two tablespoonfuls butter,
eight or ten potatoes, one small onion, one small bunch parsley, one
teaspoonful celery salt, half teaspoonful common salt, paprika for
seasoning, half cupful hot water. Having all these things chopped and
ready, melt the butter in a frying pan and toss the onion about in the
pan until it becomes colored. Add the chopped beef and stir it until it
has become nicely browned. Add the hot water, stirring thoroughly; then
add the potatoes, parsley, paprika and salt. Stir about until well
cooked. Turn out on a hot dish and serve promptly, garnished with
parsley.

CORN BEEF HASH.--Make like above hamburg hash but use cold, chopped
cooked corn beef and omit the onion and celery salt.




Sauces for Meat, Fish, Fowl and Game

    "It is not what we intend, but what we do that makes us
    useful."--H. W. Beecher.


TOMATO SAUCE.--Take a quart can of tomatoes, put it over the fire in a
stew pan, put in one slice of onion, add two cloves, a little pepper
and salt, boil about twenty minutes; then remove from the fire and
strain it through a sieve. Now melt in another pan an ounce of butter,
and as it melts sprinkle in a tablespoonful of flour, stir it until it
browns and froths a little. Mix the tomato pulp with it, and it is
ready for the table. Excellent for mutton chops and roast beef.

TOMATO SAUCE.--Melt one tablespoon of butter, rub in one tablespoon of
flour, half teaspoon salt, a little pepper, add one pint hot milk, cook
until well done, stirring all the time to keep it smooth. Pass a few
stewed tomatoes through the sieve to remove seeds, enough to give
thirteen teaspoons for the sauce. Stir in just before serving. Serve
with fish by pouring a few spoonfuls over each piece.

CREAM SAUCE.--Put two tablespoons butter in a pan, add two tablespoons
flour, mix well together, pour on gradually one cup scalded milk,
stirring all the time, one quarter teaspoon salt and a little white
pepper. Cook thick.

CREAM SAUCE.--One tablespoon flour, half pint of cream or milk, one
tablespoonful of butter, half teaspoonful of salt, dash of pepper. Melt
the butter being careful not to brown it, add the flour, mix until
smooth then add the cream or milk, stir continually until it boils; add
salt and pepper, and use at once. If you are not quite ready to use it
stand over boiling water to keep warm, stirring often to prevent a
crust forming on top.

HOLLANDAISE SAUCE.--For baked or boiled fish. One half cup butter,
yolks of two eggs, juice of half a lemon, one saltspoonful salt,
quarter saltspoonful cayenne pepper, one and one half cups boiling
water. Rub the butter to a cream in a bowl with wooden or silver spoon,
add the yolks, one at a time and beat well, then add lemon juice, salt
and pepper. About five minutes before serving add boiling water, place
bowl in saucepan of boiling water and stir rapidly until it thickens
like boiled custard. Pour the sauce around the fish.

HORSE RADISH SAUCE.--Grate sufficient horseradish to make four good
sized tablespoonfuls, add this to half pint of salad dressing and serve
with cold beef.

SALMON SAUCE.--One cup of milk, heated to boiling point and thickened
with a tablespoonful of corn starch, the oil from salmons, one large
tablespoonful of butter, one egg well beaten, juice of one lemon,
cayenne pepper to taste. Add the egg to the thickened milk when you
have stirred in the butter and oil. Take from fire, season and let
stand in hot water three minutes covered, then put in lemon juice and
turn over salmon immediately. Note: Above recipes for sauces were
demonstrated by Mrs. A. McKay at Domestic Science club.

HORSERADISH SAUCE.--Add to six tablespoonfuls of grated horseradish the
yolk of one egg and half a teaspoonful of salt. Mix thoroughly; add a
tablespoonful of good vinegar and then carefully a quarter of a cupful
of cream whipped to a stiff froth. If the horseradish is already in
vinegar omit the tablespoonful of vinegar and press dry the
horseradish. This is one of the nicest sauces to serve with cold mutton
or with hot corned beef.

HORSERADISH CREAM SAUCE.--Beat one tablespoonful of cream until stiff.
As cream begins to thicken add gradually three-fourths teaspoonful of
vinegar. Season with a few grains of salt and a dash of paprika, then
fold in one half tablespoonful of grated horseradish root.

SAUCE HOLLANDAISE.--Heat two tablespoons of butter in 2 tablespoons of
vinegar and of chopped onion and one half pint of boiling water. Beat
the yolks of two eggs light and mix with one tablespoon of flour, one
half teaspoon of salt and a saltspoon of pepper. Cook gently in the hot
vinegar and water and strain at once into the serving dish. This is
nice with fish and with white asparagus boiled, drained and chilled on
the ice. Serve the sauce hot.

MUSHROOM SAUCE.--Add one can of mushrooms to white or cream sauce and
stand over hot water ten minutes but do not cook. Serve with chicken or
sweet bread.

CUCUMBER SAUCE.--Pare four cucumbers, throw them into cold water for
half an hour then grate them and drain. Add one tablespoon of grated
onion and one half teaspoon of salt, one saltspoon of pepper and two
tablespoons of vinegar (Tarragon if convenient). Whip six tablespoons
of cream stiff, and stir gradually into the cucumber mixture and serve
at once with creamed fish, deviled salt fish or baked or broiled fish
or with cold boiled or baked mutton.

CLARET OR WINE SAUCE FOR GAME.--One half pint of claret or sherry, four
tablespoons soup stock or water, one tablespoon lemon juice, one
teaspoon grated horseradish, one saltspoon paprika and one half
teaspoon of salt. Heat gently but do not boil. Serve hot with game.

SAUCE TARTARE.--Add two olives, one pickle or gherkins, one tablespoon
of capers and one tablespoon of parsley all chopped fine together, to
one half pint of mayonnaise dressing or to hot hallandaise sauce.

MINT SAUCE.--Twelve stalks of fresh mint, one tablespoon of sugar and
one half cup of vinegar or lemon juice. Strip the mint leaves from the
stalks and wash them, chop them very fine, add the sugar and mix well,
add the vinegar, stir well, and cover and stand aside for an hour.
Serve in sauce boat, with spring lamb.

APPLE SAUCE.--One pound green apples, one pint water, one half cup
sugar. Core the apples but do not pare them. Cook with the water in a
covered sauce pan. Press through a colander, add sugar to the pulps and
cool. Serve with duck, goose and pork roast.

GOOSEBERRY SAUCE.--One pint green gooseberries, one tablespoon of
butter, one saltspoon of grated nutmeg, four tablespoons soup stock,
one half teaspoon of salt. Cook the gooseberries tender with the water
in a covered saucepan about ten minutes. Press through a sieve and add
other ingredients. Rhubarb may be substituted for the gooseberries.
Nice with salt meats and mackeral and other salt fish.

CRANBERRY SAUCE.--One quart cranberries cooked with one pint of water
for five minutes. Press through a colander, add one pound or two cups
of sugar to the hot pulp, stir until melted and then cool. Serve with
turkey, chicken, mutton or game and with escalloped oysters.

CURRANT JELLY SAUCE.--Add one glass of currant jelly to four
tablespoons of hot water or rich soup stock. Turn this into the dish in
which game has been roasted, bring to a boil and serve.

CURRY SAUCE.--One tablespoon butter, cooked with one tablespoon chopped
onion, add one teaspoon of curry powder, one tablespoon of flour and
stir smooth, then add one half pint of boiling water. Add one half
teaspoon of salt and one tablespoonful of lemon juice after the sauce
has cooked thick. Serve with canned chicken; with oysters, and with
boiled rice, lima beans, cauliflower or cooked tomatoes.

BECHAMEL SAUCE.--Make like cream sauce using half cup of chicken stock
and half cup of milk instead of milk alone adding one tablespoon
chopped cooked carrots, one tablespoon chopped onion, cooked, and one
saltspoon of celery seed. For French Bechamel sauce add one half can
mushroom and two tablespoons of cream.

EGG SAUCE.--Add four hard boiled eggs, chopped fine, to cream sauce.

CAPER SAUCE.--Add one tablespoon capers to cream sauce.

BROWN SAUCE.--Drain the liquor from the pan in which meat is roasted
reserving about four tablespoons of the fat for the sauce. Leave it in
the roasting pan and brown two tablespoons of flour in it over the
fire, blending it well. When smooth add one pint of hot stock or water,
and a little salt or kitchen bouquet if preferred. To this gravy or
meat sauce, variety is given by adding one tablespoon of tomato catsup
or of Worcestershire sauce, or of mushroom catsup or of onion juice or
one half can of mushrooms.

QUICK TOMATO AND CHILI RELISH FOR LOBSTER, SHELL FISH AND HAM.--Six
tomatoes peeled, chopped and drained, two tablespoons minced celery or
one half teaspoon celery seed, two tablespoons of vinegar, a little
garlic or onion, one chopped chili pepper or one drop of tabasco sauce
and one teaspoon of salt. If chili pepper is used bake it until skin
cracks open, then peel and seed and chop fine. Let it cool and add to
the tomato mixture. This is a relish served when ripe tomatoes are in
season. It is not cooked. By substituting one cup of whipped cream for
the vinegar and omitting the tabasco sauce, a nice sauce is quickly
made to serve with cold beef, mutton or veal.

PIQUANTE SAUCE OR OLIVE OR VINEGAR SAUCE.--One tablespoon of chopped
onion, one tablespoon of capers, two tablespoons of chopped pickles, or
teaspoon of sugar, one half teaspoon of salt, two tablespoons of
vinegar, one half saltspoon of pepper, four tablespoons of soup stock
or water, and last if liked, three olives stoned and chopped fine or
one tablespoon of minced parsley. Heat the soup stock, add vinegar and
other ingredients. Serve with calf's head, boiled mutton, lobster or
pigs feet.

SPANISH SAUCE.--One and one half pints stock, one tablespoon gelatine
dissolved in water, four tablespoons of butter, two tablespoons of
flour, two tablespoons chopped onion, a sprig of parsley, one
tablespoon chopped celery, one tablespoon chopped carrot, one bay leaf,
three whole cloves, a blade of mace, one teaspoon of salt and half
saltspoon of pepper. Boil stock with the seasoning, until it is reduced
to a pint, rub flour and butter together and add, cook thick and
strain. At the last moment add the gelatine and serve with any fowl or
meat that requires a rich brown sauce.

CELERY SAUCE.--One bunch of celery, one tablespoon of flour, and one of
butter; one pint of stock, six tablespoons of cream, one level teaspoon
of salt, dash of white pepper. Wash and cut up the celery, using green
tops. Cook in the stock or water until very tender. Press through
sieve; rub flour and butter together and cook in the celery puree, add
the seasoning and serve with boiled mutton, chicken or rabbit.

OYSTER SAUCE.--Drain half a pint of oysters, wash and cook them in a
saucepan until gills curl. Add to cream sauce and serve with boiled
poultry or fish.

SAUCE SAUBISE.--Boil three chopped onions in water until tender; drain
and add to cream sauce. Serve with fowl.




Bread and Rolls

    "The loaf is, after all, the thing that's most essential."--J. W.
    Foley.


WHITE AND RYE BREAD.--While boiling potatoes I save the potato water,
about one pint. After it is cooled and only luke warm, I soak in it one
cake of yeast foam, one teaspoonful of sugar and a small pinch of
ginger, and then let it dissolve until supper time; then take a quart
of wheat flour and mix with a little warm water, or water and milk, and
add your yeast so that the sponge will not be too thin, but like a
stiff batter. Let it stand over night in a warm place to raise. Next
morning I divide the sponge, using two thirds of it for wheat bread and
one third for rye bread, as you can bake six loaves of bread from one
cake of yeast; four of wheat and two of rye. To the two thirds part of
sponge I take two quarts of wheat flour, one tablespoonful of salt and
water enough to make quite a stiff dough. For the rye bread one quart
of rye flour with one and one half cups of wheat flour and one
teaspoonful of salt. Knead it same as for wheat bread, then let it
raise again and when it has doubled in size, it is ready for the tins
and after raising there until light, it is ready for the oven in which
if hot it will bake in from three fourths to one hour. Before putting
it in the oven, I usually wash it with luke warm milk to give it a nice
brown color while baking.--Mrs. John Bruegger. Demonstration of German
Cookery, breads and cookies.

GERMAN COFFEE CAKE.--Next comes German coffee cake and rolls. I set the
sponge with one cake of yeast as for bread and mix it the next morning
with two cups of sugar, one tablespoonful of butter, two tablespoons of
lard, three eggs, grated rind and juice of one lemon, a little nutmeg,
a teaspoonful of salt, add two quarts of white flour, and knead with
milk and water, not quite so stiff as for bread. Let it raise two hours
after which put it in tins and let raise again; then melt butter and
spread on coffee cake and sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon, and it is
ready for the oven and ought to be quickly baked. From this dough you
can bake quite a variety, for instance, one dozen rolls, two plain
coffee cakes, one dozen raised doughnuts and one loaf cake. For the
loaf cake you add one cupful of raisins, a little chopped citron,
almond extract, one egg and a little butter, beat well with a spoon and
fill in a sponge cake tin and let it raise before putting it in the
oven to bake, then bake three quarters of an hour.--Mrs. John Bruegger.
German Cookery demonstration.

RYE BREAD.--To one pint of water (luke warm) add one cake of yeast
foam, one teaspoon salt, two tablespoons sugar, and one medium sized
boiled potato. Mash this fine and mix with the salt and sugar in the
water; let this stand until evening, then add enough well sifted flour
to make a stiff batter. Set in a warm place to rise over night. Next
morning add one quart of luke warm water, one heaping teaspoon salt,
one quart of white flour, and two quarts of rye flour all well sifted,
and work all together, then knead for ten minutes, adding a little
flour from time to time until it ceases to stick to the fingers or mold
board, then put into a large bread pan and set in warm place to rise
again, until light, then knead again, and make into loaves. Put into
well greased bread pans, let raise and bake from one to one and a half
hours. When done take out and brush lightly with melted butter or
drippings.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

WHITE BREAD.--Scald one pint of milk with three tablespoons of lard
then put in bread pan with one quart of warm water; add two tablespoons
sugar, two tablespoons salt. Stir in flour to make a thick batter one
yeast cake that has been soaked well in water. I make sponge after
dinner and let set till evening then mix into a large loaf; let stand
till morning. Before breakfast knead into loaves. This will make from
three to four loaves of bread.--Mrs. Southard.

GRAHAM BREAD.--Make the yeast sponge as above but add one half cup
cooking molasses and a little more sugar. Do not make sponge too thick
with white flour. Mix in evening, with graham flour but not quite as
stiff as white bread. Graham bread is very slow to raise.

DATE BREAD.--One cup of chopped dates, two cups milk, one third cup
sugar, one fourth yeast cake, one fourth cup luke warm water, one half
teaspoon salt, five cups of sifted flour. Mix and knead like bread and
bake in loaves.

POCKET BOOK ROLLS.--Warm one quart new milk, add one cup butter or
lard, four tablespoons sugar and two well beaten eggs. Stir in flour
enough to make a moderately stiff sponge. Add a small cup of yeast and
set in a warm place to rise, which will take three or four hours, then
mix in flour enough to make a soft dough and let rise again. When well
risen dissolve a lump of soda, size of a bean, in spoon of milk and
work into the dough and roll into sheets one half inch thick. Spread
with butter, cut into squares and fold over, pocket book shape. Put in
tins, let rise a while and bake.--Mrs. L. L. Lampman.

ROLLS.--Take two teacupsful of light sponge. Add to it one half cup
shortening, one cup of sugar and two cups of warm water. Mix with flour
and knead but do not make a very stiff dough. Let raise all day. In
evening form rolls and let them raise all night. Bake in moderate
oven.--Mrs. Harry Hanson.

RAISED BISCUITS.--One cup of flour scalded with generous pint of hot
potato water. (Boil potatoes and drain water for this). When cold add
one cake of yeast dissolved in luke warm water. Mix this at noon and
let it stand, uncovered, until night, then add one pint of warm water
and enough flour to make a light sponge, beating well. Let stand until
morning in a warm place or in a covered bread pan well wrapped to
retain the heat. Add to this sponge in the morning one small cup of
sugar, two eggs and one half cupful lard and a generous tablespoon of
salt. Mix stiff with flour. Let stand until light then knead well, let
raise an hour and knead again and make into biscuits. Put in greased
baking pans and let raise until very light. Bake in a moderate
oven.--Mrs. George W. Newton.

ALMOND WREATH.--Two ounces of flour; two cakes of yeast; one pint of
luke warm milk; a tablespoonful of salt. Mix into a light sponge and
let it rise all night. In the morning add six ounces of butter and the
same of pulverized sugar, six eggs, one pint of rich cream and enough
flour to make a soft dough. Let it rise again until very light. Then
roll out with few and swift strokes of the rolling-pin into a sheet
less than half an inch thick and cut into strips. Braid these into a
coronet about some round object in the center. Or you may make it into
a round cake if you like. Shell half a pound of sweet almonds, blanch
and shred them and dry in the oven for a few minutes. Then mix them
with granulated and coffee sugar and cinnamon and strew over the cakes
when you have washed the surface with white of egg to make the mixture
stick. Bake in a moderate oven. This quantity will make at least six
large cakes.

YEAST.--Three heaping tablespoons flour, two of salt, two tablespoons
of sugar. Pour one dipperful of boiling water on this and add twelve
mashed potatoes. Add cold water enough to cool for yeast. Add one yeast
cake which has been soaked one half hour in tepid water. Use half of
this for one baking.--Mrs. A. McKay.




Biscuits, Jems, Pancakes and Fritters

    "What an excellent thing did God bestow on man when He gave him a
    good stomach."--Beaumont and Fletcher.


FRITTERS.--Beat four eggs very light. Do not separate yolks and whites
but beat together about five minutes; add one scant cupful of milk, one
small teaspoon of salt and just a dash of baking powder (about as large
as a small bean). Quickly whisk in enough sifted flour to make a thin
pan cake batter. Beat smooth. Drop by spoonfuls into deep smoking hot
lard and fry like doughnuts. Drain, and serve immediately with maple
syrup, honey or jelly sauce.--Mrs. B. G. Whitehead.

SOUTHERN WAFFLES.--Mix together one scant pint of sifted flour and one
generous pint of milk until smooth; add one half cupful of melted
butter and the well beaten yolks of three eggs; then the well beaten
whites and one half teaspoon of salt. Just before baking add two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder and hot lard. Bake in a hot, well greased
waffle iron and serve immediately with butter and maple syrup or
honey.--Mrs. B. G. Whitehead.

PAN CAKES.--For a family of six, take one quart of butter milk or of
slightly clabbered sour milk. Beat into it two level teaspoons of soda
and one small teaspoon of salt. Add the beaten yolks of two eggs and
then enough flour to make a smooth batter, not too stiff. If too thick
add a little more milk. Lastly add one tablespoon of melted butter and
the stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Rub the smoking hot griddle with a
piece of suet fastened to a skewer or fork, drop butter on by
tablespoonful and bake the cakes a nice brown, turning once. Serve
immediately on hot plates. These cakes may be served with butter and
syrup or they may be spread with jam or jelly and rolled. Using half
flour with half corn meal makes good corn cakes or half graham flour
for graham cakes.--Mrs. Whitehead.

CORN OYSTERS OR CORN FRITTERS.--Grate eight large ears of corn, or
split each row of corn down the center and scrape out all of the pulp.
Beat the yolks of two eggs, add them to the corn pulps with half a
teaspoon of salt and the beaten whites of eggs and then add enough
rolled cracker crumbs to make a thick batter. Fry oyster shape, in
deep, smoking fat and put in the oven to crisp while the balance of the
cakes are frying. Do not use flour to thicken the batter. The crackers
are much nicer and give the true oyster flavor. These are made from
fresh, green corn, only.--Mrs. Whitehead.

CORN DODGERS.--Put one cup of corn meal, one half teaspoon of salt in
double boiler; add one cup boiling water; beat smooth and add one
tablespoon butter. Cook and steam covered for one hour. Butter a
griddle, drop by spoonful on it, put down fat and when browned put bit
of butter on each, before turning. Good served with broiled ham or
cooked in frying pan after bacon or sausage.

HOE CAKE.--Put one quart of white corn meal in a bowl; add one teaspoon
salt, add sufficient boiling water to just moisten, stirring all the
time, beating to stiff batter. Moisten hands in cold water and make
corn meal into small round cakes. Bake on plank in front of open fire
three quarters of an hour or fry slowly on griddle. When done pull
apart, butter and send to table hot.

BEATEN BISCUIT (VIRGINIA).--Three pints pastry flour mixed with one cup
lard; one teaspoon salt, mix together like pie crust. Make into stiff
dough with milk or milk and water mixed, and knead well; beat or pound
with a rolling pin or mallet one hour. The dough should be smooth and
glossy and bits should break off with a snap. Shape in thin, flat
cakes. Pick all over with a sharp fork and bake until a delicate brown
and until the edges crack a little. Must bake thoroughly or they will
be heavy in the middle.

JOHNNY CAKE OR CORN BREAD.--One cup corn meal, one half cup flour, two
small teaspoons sugar, two tablespoons butter, or drippings, one beaten
egg; salt; one cup of sour milk; one level teaspoonful of soda
dissolved in a bit of hot water. Beat well and bake in greased tin. May
be made with sweet milk and baking powder if preferred. Makes one pan
of bread. The foregoing recipes were demonstrated by Mrs. Whitehead in
a paper on Southern Cookery.

POPOVERS.--Cup sweet milk, one egg, two tablespoons melted butter, two
cups flour, two heaping teaspoons baking powder. Bake in gem pans in a
hot oven.--Mrs. Mary Harvey.

GRAHAM MUFFINS.--One egg, one and one half cups sour milk, one teaspoon
soda, a little salt, two tablespoons melted butter, two tablespoons
molasses, graham flour to make a light batter. Bake in gem tins.--Mrs.
Mary Harvey.

WHEATEN GEMS.--Mix one teaspoon baking powder and a little salt into
one pint of flour; add to the beaten yolks of two eggs one teacup sweet
milk or cream; a piece of butter (melted) half the size of an egg, the
flour with baking powder and salt mixed and the well beaten whites of
the two eggs. Beat well and bake immediately in gem pans in a hot
oven.--Mrs. L. L. Lampman.

PRUNE BROWN BREAD.--One cup corn meal, two cups graham flour, one half
cup molasses, one cup sour milk, one teaspoon soda and same of salt,
one cup dried prunes washed, pitted and chopped fine. Scald the corn
meal and then add the other ingredients; put in greased tins and steam
three hours.--Mrs. L. L. Lampman.

MRS. BURK'S NUT BREAD.--Baking powder. One cup sugar, one egg, two cups
sweet milk, a pinch of salt, four teaspoons baking powder, four cups
flour, one cup of chopped walnuts or more, mix together, let raise
twenty minutes, pour into greased coffee cans (uncovered). Bake in
moderate oven till brown (45 minutes or more). Slice cold.--Mrs. S. J.
Creaser.

BAKING POWDER BISCUITS.--One quart flour, three teaspoons baking
powder, one teaspoon salt, sifted through the flour, mix smooth with
three tablespoons of butter and lard in equal portions, mix lightly
into a soft dough with about three cups milk. Roll and cut in small
biscuits. Bake in greased tins in a quick oven.--Dorothy Whitehead.

SWEDISH TIMBALE CASES.--Beat one egg well; add one fourth cup of milk,
a few grains of salt, one teaspoon of olive oil and one half cup of
flour or enough to make almost a drop batter. Beat it until very nice
and smooth. Pour it into a small cup just large enough to hold the
timbale iron. Heat the timbale iron in the hot fat for about ten
minutes, then lower it into the batter about one inch, turn it partly
over as you take it out so the cases will not slip off, then plunge the
iron into the fat and when browned slightly lift it up, and drain and
slip the cup from the iron. When all are fried fill the cases with any
delicate meat, game, fish or oysters, cut small and warmed in a rich
cream sauce.--Contributed.

PANCAKES.--One cup sour milk, half cup of sour cream, small teaspoon
soda dissolved in water and stirred in the milk; half teaspoon salt,
one teaspoon baking powder mixed with flour enough to make thin
batter.--Mrs. L. L. Lampman.

PANCAKES.--Two cups flour, two cups milk, two teaspoonfuls sugar, two
teaspoonfuls baking powder, one teaspoonful salt, one tablespoonful
melted butter, two eggs beaten separately. Have griddle hot and clean
but do not grease. Blueberries stirred into pancake batter, as many as
you wish, are excellent.--Mrs. Davidson.

TIMBALES.--One fourth cup flour, one half teaspoon salt, one teaspoon
of sugar, one egg (beaten), one tablespoon olive oil or butter. Mix the
dry parts together and add milk, egg and olive oil. Strain through
sieve. Dip hot tambale iron into the grease then into the batter then
into the hot grease to cook. Drain and use as pastry shells for creamed
peas, chicken, mushroom or oysters.

WITH BEER.--Timbales are very tender and nice made with stale beer or
ale. Let one half pint of beer stand in an open dish over night. Omit
the sugar and milk and mix flour with the beer, following other
directions as given above.--Contributed.

MRS. ALLEMAN'S APPLE FRITTERS.--One cup flour, one teaspoon baking
powder, pinch salt, and yolk of two eggs beaten light, with cup of milk.
Grate in three medium sized apples, beat well and fold in stiffly beaten
whites of two eggs. Drop by spoonful into hot fat and fry until nicely
browned. Drain on brown paper and serve with maple syrup. For corn
fritters use one cup of canned corn in place of apples.--Contributed.

POP OVERS.--Two cups flour, two cups sweet milk, two eggs, one teaspoon
sugar, one quarter teaspoon salt. Beat well together. Put in hot gem
tins and bake in hot oven.--Contributed.

PAN CAKES.--One cup of flour sifted with one teaspoon of baking powder,
one half teaspoon of salt and one teaspoon of sugar, add enough milk to
wet it, then beat in one egg thoroughly, add three teaspoons of melted
butter and then thin to a smooth batter with milk, beat thoroughly and
bake on a well greased, hot griddle.--Mrs. A. McKay.

JENNY LIND PANCAKE.--Two eggs, pinch of salt, tablespoonful sugar,
small cup of flour, one cup of milk, one half teaspoon baking powder.
Bake in an omelette pan, put jelly on top, roll and sprinkle with
powdered sugar.--Mrs. Lynch.

DATE MUFFINS.--Beat the yolks of two eggs until light. Add one cupful
of milk. Sift together one and a half cupfuls of entire wheat flour,
one and a half teaspoonfuls of baking powder and one quarter teaspoon
of salt. Add the milk and eggs and a tablespoonful of melted butter,
and give the batter a good beating. Now add half a cup of dates chopped
coarsely and floured, and last of all add the stiffly beaten whites.
Mix. Fill gem pans two thirds full and bake in a moderately hot oven
for half an hour. These are excellent.




Sandwiches

    "There is no higher art than that which tends toward the
    improvement of food."--Henry Ward Beecher.


Bread for sandwiches should be at least one day old. Cut into thin
slices of uniform size, remove all crust and then cut into the desired
shape either with the sharp, pliable knife or a sharp cookie cutter.
The butter should be soft enough to spread smoothly and the most
essential thing is to have good bread and fresh sweet butter. Meat for
filling should either be sliced very thin or chopped fine and other
ingredients minced or mashed to make as smooth a paste as possible and
mix evenly with the salad dressing or other dressing used. Sandwiches
are better eaten as soon as made. If necessary to let them stand an
hour or so, wrap the plate of sandwiches in a dampened napkin and put
in a cold place so the bread will not become hard and dry. Be careful
not to let the dressing run over the outer edge of the slices of bread.
Sandwiches must be dainty to be appetizing and easily handled. Cut the
slices as thin as you can and make into small triangles or squared
sandwiches, or oblong ones two or three inches long.

SANDWICHES.--Mince the white meat of a roast chicken, and mix it with
half a can of French mushrooms, chopped fine, and a half cupful of
chopped English walnuts. Season to taste with melted butter. Put the
mixture between slices of whole wheat bread.

WALNUT SANDWICHES.--Shell English walnuts. Blanch and chop, and to
every tablespoonful of nuts allow a good half teaspoonful of cream
cheese. Rub well together and spread on thin slices of crustless white
or graham bread.

DEVILED EGG SANDWICHES.--Mash the yolks of hard boiled eggs to a powder
and moisten with olive oil and a few drops of vinegar. Work to a paste,
add salt, pepper and French mustard to taste, with a drop or two of
tabasco sauce. Now chop the whites of the eggs as fine as possible or
until they are like a coarse powder and mix them with the yolk paste.
If more seasoning is necessary, add it before spreading the mixture
upon sliced graham bread.

ROAST BEEF SANDWICHES.--Chop rare roast beef very fine, taking care to
use only the lean portions of the meat. Sprinkle with salt, pepper and
a saltspoonful of horseradish. Mix and make into sandwiches with thinly
sliced graham bread.

PEANUT SANDWICHES.--Shell and skin freshly roasted peanuts and roll
them to fine crumbs on a pastry board. Add salt to taste and mix the
powdered nuts with enough fresh cream cheese to make a paste that can
be easily spread on unbuttered bread. Keep in a cold, damp place until
wanted.

STUFFED EGGS.--Boil eggs hard and throw them into cold water. When cool
remove the shells, cut the eggs in half carefully and extract the
yolks. Rub these to a powder with the back of a spoon and add to them
pepper and salt to taste, a little melted butter to make the mixture
into a smooth paste. If ham is not at hand any other cold meat will do,
and either anchovies or anchovy paste may be used. Make the compound
into balls about the size and shape of the yolks and restore them to
their place between the two cups of the whites.

HAM AND OLIVE SANDWICHES.--Chop lean ham fine and beat into each cupful
of the minced meat a tablespoonful of salad oil, a teaspoonful of
vinegar, a saltspoonful of French mustard, six olives chopped fine and
a teaspoonful of minced parsley. Work all to a paste and spread on thin
slices of white bread.

SALMON SANDWICHES.--Small can salmon, one small onion chopped, two hard
boiled eggs chopped, and chopped celery to taste. Mix with a good
mayonnaise dressing and spread between thin, buttered slices of
bread.--Mrs. L. L. Lampman.

HAM SANDWICH.--Run boiled ham through the food chopper or mince it very
fine. This may be spread plain on buttered bread or it may be mixed
with the ground yolks and whites of hard boiled eggs and mixed with
mayonnaise dressing to a paste and spread between thin slices of
buttered bread.

ROLLED SANDWICHES.--Cut the crust from a loaf of bread lengthwise of
the loaf in thin slices. Butter, spread with the ham mayonnaise paste
and roll up like jelly roll, pressing firmly together. Cut in slices
like jelly roll cake slices.

NUT BREAD SANDWICHES.--These are made of nut bread slices spread with
butter. Raisin bread also makes nice sandwiches and so does date bread.

ENGLISH SANDWICHES.--Spread toasted muffins (cold muffins cut into
slices and toasted) with butter, then with cottage cheese or grated
cream cheese. Cover with a thin layer of plum (blue damson preferred)
marmalade, and cover with top slice of toasted muffin.

SARDINE OR ANCHOVY SANDWICHES.--Mix ground yolks of five hard boiled
eggs with three boned sardines or anchovies, mashed, two small pickles
or as many capers chopped, one teaspoon of butter. Spread between thin
slices of buttered graham bread.

EVENING SANDWICHES.--Three hard boiled eggs, one half pint olives and
one fourth pound walnuts, minced together fine and mixed with salad
dressing. Spread on rye bread or graham bread, with lettuce leaves
between. One cup chopped celery, six stoned olives and two tablespoons
salted nuts, minced together with salad dressing. Salted almonds rolled
fine and mixed to a paste with butter are nice on crackers, with a
chafing dish lunch. Bone sardines and mash them to a paste with lemon
juice or oil and spread on thinly sliced bread. Mince canned lobster,
shrimp or crabs fine, mix with minced hard boiled eggs and salad
dressing and spread between buttered slices of bread.

ANCHOVY SARDINES.--Spread small triangles of bread or toast with
anchovy paste. Serve either hot or cold. No top crust for these. Pass
lemon slices.

CAVIAR SANDWICHES.--Spread thin slices of rye bread with caviar and
sprinkle with finely minced young onions or onion juice. No top crust
for these. Serve with lemon points.

CHEESE WAFERS.--Grate cheese and spread it on buttered cracker wafers
or buttered wafers of toast and sprinkle lightly with salt and cayenne
pepper. Melt cheese in the oven and serve hot.

BOILED EGG SANDWICHES.--Run hard boiled eggs through meat grinder and
mix with dry mustard, salt, cayenne pepper and lemon juice or vinegar.
Spread between thin slices of buttered bread. Minced celery or celery
seed is nice mixed with this paste. The grated rind of a lemon added to
ground hard boiled eggs (three), one half cup butter, two tablespoons
of lemon juice, salt and half teaspoon of dry mustard makes a good
devil paste for sandwiches.

OLIVE AND COTTAGE CHEESE SANDWICHES.--Stone olives, or use the stuffed
olives, and chop them fine; mix with an equal quantity of cottage
cheese. Make into a smooth paste with soft butter. Spread between
graham or rye bread slices. Olives may be mixed likewise with grated
cream cheese.

CUCUMBER SANDWICHES.--Use the fresh, sliced cucumbers or cucumber
pickles chopped fine. Mix with mayonnaise salad dressing and spread on
buttered bread, cover with shredded lettuce and lay slice of buttered
bread on top.

WALNUT AND CHEESE SANDWICHES.--Chop walnuts fine and mix with grated
cream cheese and a little lemon juice or with soft butter or salad
dressing. Spread on lettuce leaves and place between buttered slices of
bread.

CELERY SANDWICHES.--Mince celery fine; mix it with chopped nuts and
chopped olives and blend together with mayonnaise dressing. Spread
between slices of buttered bread.

CHEESE SANDWICHES.--Mix grated cheese with the grated yolks of hard
boiled eggs and add a few drops of lemon juice. For a change a few
canned, sweet red peppers, chopped fine are nice added to the mixture.
Spread between thin slices of buttered white bread.

COTTAGE CHEESE SANDWICHES.--Spread cottage cheese between thin slices
of buttered graham, whole wheat or rye bread. Chopped dill pickles are
nice mixed with this cheese and spread on rye bread.

NUT AND CHEESE SANDWICHES.--Grate cream cheese and mix it with ground
salted peanuts. Make into a paste with butter or thick cream. Spread on
graham bread.

DUTCH LUNCH SANDWICH.--Grate cream cheese or cut up Swiss cheese and
spread it on thin slices of buttered rye bread; spread with German
prepared mustard and press buttered slices of bread on top. Pass dill
pickles.

PEANUT SANDWICHES.--Spread thin slices of Boston brown bread with
peanut butter or with ground salted peanuts mixed with butter. White
graham bread is also used this way.

CLUB HOUSE SANDWICHES.--Spread bread or toast with butter, lay on a
thin slice of cold meat chicken, (white meat preferred), spread with
mayonnaise salad dressing then put on a layer of shredded lettuce,
covered again with mayonnaise dressing and cover top with another thin
slice of buttered bread or buttered hot toast. The sliced meat and
bread must be cut very thin to make dainty sandwiches of this delicious
combination. Garnish with quartered dill pickles and olives or pimentos
and parsley.

HOT EGG SANDWICH.--Toast bread in thin slices; lay on a thin slice of
hot boiled bacon or ham and upon this place a hot fried egg or an egg
scrambled fine. Lay another hot slice of toast on top and serve.

MINCED MEAT SANDWICHES.--Minced cooked chicken or veal, mixed with
minced celery and then with mayonnaise dressing is the usual paste for
meat sandwiches. The flavor may be varied by adding minced sweet
pickles, sweet canned peppers, olives, pimentos, mushrooms or nuts to
this paste as fancy dictates. Minced boiled ham and boiled chicken in
equal portions make a nice combination. If mayonnaise isn't liked bind
together with soft butter, thick cream, lemon juice or prepared
mustard.

LAYER SANDWICHES.--These are made of different varieties of bread
combined in the same sandwich or of two or more kinds of thinly sliced
cold, cooked meat, placed in alternate layers between slices of
buttered bread or toast. Cold roast duck, either wild or tame, sliced
thinly and placed between buttered slices of raisin bread is nice. Duck
may first be dipped in mayonnaise. Cold boiled tongue sliced thin and
covered with lettuce mayonnaise and then with a thin slice of chicken
or cold boiled ham, make a good layer sandwich. Flaked white fish,
spread with minced shrimp mayonnaise and lettuce or minced celery is
another. Brown bread and white bread cut as thin as wafers, buttered
and spread with cream or cottage cheese and minced olives or nuts and
put together in alternate layers then cut through like layer cake into
oblong strips or finger sandwiches make pretty luncheon sandwiches. Nut
bread and raisin or date bread, sliced, buttered and built in layer
sandwiches are delicious. Rings of Boston brown bread alternated with
rings of white bread and spread with peanut butter is another popular
combination.

SWEET SANDWICHES.--Chop figs, raisins and stoned dates together and
spread on buttered slices of graham or white bread. Dates minced with
nuts and spread on thin slices of buttered bread or upon cracker wafers
make dainty afternoon tea sandwiches. Grated sweet chocolate and ground
nuts mixed smooth with butter or cream is another filling. Grated
cocoanut and dates minced to a paste is another favorite filling.

GAME SANDWICHES.--Cut thin slices of prairie chicken, wild duck or
goose or venison. Dip shredded celery into mayonnaise dressing; lay the
sliced meat on buttered bread, scatter shredded celery over it and
press bread on top. With sliced venison spread currant jelly on the
meat and omit the salad dressing. With sliced turkey use cranberry
jelly. With boiled ham cider jelly, grape jelly or apple jelly is nice.
With sliced roast veal tomato jelly is best. With wild fowl use mild
plum jelly or currant jelly.--Contributed.

HICKORY NUT AND BANANA SANDWICHES.--Slice two bananas and mix with one
half cupful of chopped hickory nut meats or pecans. Spread between thin
slices of buttered brown bread.

APPLE AND CELERY SANDWICHES.--Mince celery fine and mix with chopped
apples, sprinkle lightly with salt and spread between slices of
buttered brown bread.

NUT SANDWICHES.--Waldorf. Chop fine equal quantities of sour apples,
celery and pecans or other nuts. Salt them, spread on buttered bread,
then spread lightly with mayonnaise dressing and make into sandwiches
with brown bread.

SMOKED DUCK SANDWICHES.--Cut thin slices from smoked breasts of duck or
goose. Cut hard boiled eggs into thin rings, lay over the duck and
squeeze lemon juice on them; sprinkle with salt and pepper and place
between buttered slices of bread, rye bread preferred.

SMOKED SALMON SANDWICHES.--Cut thin slices of bread, butter it and lay
a thin slice of smoked salmon between them, or mash the salmon smooth
with minced hard boiled egg and mix with butter to a paste and spread
on bread.

BEAN SANDWICHES.--Spread buttered brown bread with cold baked beans,
sprinkle with chopped pickles or with salted water cress or nasturtium
leaves minced fine.

PICQUANT SANDWICHES.--Garden cress or pepper grass dipped lightly in
salt and spread between thin slices of buttered bread makes dainty
picquant sandwiches. Minced nasturtium leaves are used likewise.

FRUIT SANDWICHES.--Mince seeded malaga grapes, sliced canned pineapple
and mashed bananas together to a paste. Spread on slices of plain white
or graham bread or on nut bread. Cover with a thin layer of salad
dressing and press thin sliced buttered bread on top.

DIXIE SANDWICHES.--Spread sliced nut bread with butter and grated cream
cheese, or with melted cream cheese and press buttered bread on top.

RAISIN SANDWICHES.--Spread raisin bread slices with grated cheese and
cover with a slice of buttered raisin bread.

NUT AND CHOCOLATE SANDWICHES.--Spread thin slices of buttered nut bread
with chocolate fudge or fondant. Raisin bread is nice used the same
way.

MARSHMALLOW SANDWICHES.--Toast marshmallows and place between thin
slices of buttered nut bread. Mushrooms may be steamed with a little
cream, spread on buttered bread and covered with a thin coating of
chocolate fudge or fondant. Set the fondant dish in hot water to melt
it for spreading.




Salads

    "How in the name of thrift does he rake this together?"--Shakespeare.


SALAD DRESSING.--One cup sugar, one tablespoonful salt, pinch cayenne
pepper, one tablespoonful mustard, stir all together. Add four eggs
beaten, one cup cream, add one cup butter, put on fire in double
boiler. When it boils remove and beat in one half pint vinegar a little
at a time. This will keep till used.--Mrs. C. C. Mackenroth.

SALAD DRESSING.--Yolks of six eggs, two tablespoons butter, three
fourths cup sugar, two thirds cup vinegar, two teaspoons mustard, one
half teaspoon salt. Mix sugar, salt and mustard then add butter. Mix
until smooth. Lastly add beaten yolks and vinegar. Cook until
thick.--Mrs. F. Kleinsorge.

SALAD DRESSING.--Yolks of four eggs, one half cup vinegar, two
tablespoons sugar, butter the size of walnut, salt and pepper to taste.
Beat yolks until light, add sugar and beat again, then add vinegar,
butter, salt and pepper. Cook in double boiler until quite thick
stirring all the while. When cold thin with cream. A very little flour
may be added while cooking. This will keep for several days. Adding
cream only as you use it.--Mrs. McGuiness.


A Group of Salad Dressings

OIL MAYONNAISE.--Mix the yolk of one raw egg, one half teaspoon of
salt, a little mustard and a few grains of cayenne, add one cup of oil
in small portions, and two tablespoons lemon juice. Make as you would
any mayonnaise dressing, and when ready to serve stir in one half cup
of sour cream.--Contributed.

SOUR CREAM SALAD DRESSING.--Stir one tablespoon of sugar, one half
teaspoon of salt, one fourth teaspoon of pepper and one tablespoon of
lemon juice into one cup of sour cream. Serve it on cucumbers, onions,
cabbage or lettuce.--Contributed.

FRENCH DRESSING.--With many people the French dressing is usually hit
or miss. There is, however, a set formula that ensures having the
proportions right every time. Put into a bowl or bottle a half
teaspoonful salt, and a salt spoonful of pepper. Add four
tablespoonfuls olive oil, stir with a fork or shake it in a bottle. Add
one tablespoonful of lemon juice or vinegar, mix thoroughly and pour
over the salad. Tarragon vinegar may be substituted in whole or part of
the cider or white wine vinegar.--Contributed.

ENGLISH SALAD DRESSING.--Mash the yolks of two hard boiled eggs to a
paste. Add a saltspoonful of salt, a scant teaspoonful of powdered
sugar, a few grains cayenne; a teaspoonful of cold water and mix it
well. Stir in by degrees a half cupful of cream, then stirring very
rapidly, add a tablespoonful of strong Chili vinegar and one of cider
vinegar. Six tablespoonfuls of olive oil may be used instead of cream,
adding gradually.--Contributed.

CHICKEN SALAD.--Boil a chicken tender in salted water, cut the meat
into small pieces; add half as much diced celery or chopped cabbage.
Mix with salad dressing. Add one cupful of broken English walnuts just
before serving.

SALAD DRESSING.--Yolks of five eggs and one whole one, beaten with one
large tablespoon of sugar, one teaspoon of mustard, dash salt and
cayenne pepper. Cook thick in one half cup of hot vinegar and three
tablespoons of butter. Remove from fire and beat smooth. When ready to
serve thin with half a cup of sweet cream.--Mrs. Fred Southard.

APPLE SALAD.--One cup chopped celery, two cups of chopped apples, one
half cup of nuts. Mix and serve with salad dressing.--Mrs. Southard.

SALMON SALAD.--One large can of salmon, four hard boiled eggs minced
with salmon. Mix with salad dressing.--Mrs. Southard. (Editorial
note.--Above recipes for salads were demonstrated by Mrs. Southard in
her paper on "Salads" for Domestic Science club.)

CHICKEN SALAD.--Cut cooked chicken into dice and add half as much diced
celery. Mix with half of salad dressing and pour the balance over it at
serving time. Dressing: Yolks of four eggs, one teaspoon of salt, one
heaping teaspoon of sugar, one teaspoon mustard, one cup weak vinegar
and speck of cayenne. Cook thick in double boiler. When cold add one
cup of whipped cream.--Mrs. W. S. Davidson.

SHRIMP SALAD.--One can of shrimps, wash thoroughly, then pick to
pieces; two cups cabbage sliced fine; two cups chopped celery, one cup
English walnuts cut quite fine. Mix together and serve with salad
dressing.

SALAD DRESSING.--Yolks of five eggs and one whole egg well beaten, one
tablespoon sugar, six tablespoonfuls of vinegar and three of butter
boiled together and turned slowly over beaten eggs, one tablespoonful
of dry mustard, one teaspoonful of salt, dash of red pepper. Cook in
double boiler until thick. When wanted for table add whipped
cream.--Mrs. T. A. McKay.

LOBSTER SALAD.--One cup of chopped celery, five hard boiled eggs
coarsely diced, one large or two small cans of lobster coarsely
shredded, season with salt and a dash of cayenne, mix lightly with
fork. Dressing for above: One half cup vinegar, one teaspoon mustard,
one half teaspoon salt, three tablespoons melted butter, three level
tablespoons of sugar. Cook in double boiler. When well heated add well
beaten yolks of four eggs and one whole egg, stirring continuously till
thick and smooth. When ready to mix with salad thin to proper
consistency with sweet or sour cream, place salad on lettuce and pour
dressing over it.--Mrs. Harry McKay.

SHRIMP SALAD.--One can shrimps, one small head celery, one cucumber,
cut all into dice. Dressing: Yolks of two eggs; pinch of salt; dash of
cayenne pepper. Beat well. Have olive oil very cold and pour it in and
keep beating until it gets thick. Then add either vinegar or lemon
juice. Mix with shrimps, just before serving.--Mrs. Will Lynch.

HAZELS HERRING SALAD.--Take equal quantities of cold boiled potatoes
and herring and two or three small onions. Cut potatoes in cubes,
remove bones from herring and cut in small pieces or pick to pieces,
add onions and let stand on ice till ready to serve, cover with sweet
cream and season with salt and pepper.--Mrs. Schollander.

POTATO SALAD.--I do not know much about salads different from the every
day style, with the exception of an old fashioned German potato salad.
Boil your potatoes with the jackets, peel and slice while hot; heat
bacon drippings in which glaze onions which must be cut very fine, then
add flour, brown, add diluted vinegar, let it come to a boil, cool, add
a little sweet cream, turn it over your potatoes, which were previously
seasoned with pepper and salt. Garnish with either sliced or chopped
hard boiled eggs and green parsley.

STRING BEAN SALAD.--Cut ends of tender green beans, string them, cut
them either lengthwise, or just break them, boil until tender, add
salt, drain. Slice onion very fine, mix with beans, season with pepper,
and another pinch of salt, pour diluted vinegar over them, turn diced
fried bacon quite hot over this mixture.

CABBAGE SALAD OR DUTCH SLAW.--Select a nice clean cabbage, slice very
fine, something like sauer kraut; place in a stew pan, pour boiling
water on, let stand for half hour, then drain, slice onion fine, mix
with cabbage, season with salt and pepper, turn over this hot bacon
grease, with bacon dices in diluted vinegar. Above vegetable salads
were given by Mrs. Bruegger in her German Cookery demonstration.

BEET AND CHEESE SALAD.--Make cottage cheese into balls, stick on either
side half English walnut. Slice small sweet beets and put two cheese
balls and three beet slices on lettuce leaf. Keep on ice until just
before time to serve. Add French dressing just before serving. This is
a simple salad and so tasty that you will be sure to like it.

FRENCH DRESSING.--Mix three teaspoonfuls of cider vinegar with three
and one half tablespoonfuls of olive oil, one large pinch of salt, one
tiny pinch of black pepper and red pepper.

TOMATO SALAD.--Choose smooth, red tomatoes, peel; cut into halves, set
on ice. Dip each piece into vinegar, lay on lettuce leaf. Drop a
spoonful of mayonnaise on each and garnish with nasturtiums.--Mrs. R.
J. Walker.

SPINACH SALAD.--Chop cold boiled spinach fine, season well with salt and
pepper, and a little nutmeg and mould into small cups. When cold and
formed, turn out on lettuce leaves and garnish with hard boiled eggs
sliced or the yolks of hard boiled eggs run through a ricer. Serve with
mayonnaise. Strips of Spanish red peppers may be used for garnishing in
place of the eggs. The nutmeg can be omitted if distasteful, but most
people find it an attractive addition.--Contributed.

SHRIMP AND TOMATO SALAD.--Add to the contents of one can of shrimps, an
equal amount of crisp white celery cut in small pieces. Mix with a
cream or mayonnaise dressing. Place a thick slice of tomato on a crisp
lettuce leaf, and a mound of the salad mixture on the tomato. Decorate
with a few stuffed olives on each serving, and top with a spoonful of
the mayonnaise. If ripe tomatoes are too expensive or not obtainable at
this season the salad may be served on tomato jelly cut in thick slices
or else molded in the form of cups.--Contributed.

TOMATO JELLY.--To make the tomato jelly salad, soak a quarter cupful of
gelatine in the same amount of water. When softened put into a sauce
pan with a cupful of strained tomato, a quarter cupful cold water, a
teaspoonful of salt, the same amount of onion juice, a tablespoonful of
tarragon vinegar, and a quarter teaspoonful of white pepper. Stir over
the fire until the gelatine is dissolved, but not a moment longer, turn
at once into egg cups or small molds and set away to harden. Serve on
lettuce leaves with mayonnaise.--Contributed.

TOMATO SALAD WITH MAYONNAISE.--Have as many hallowed out tomatoes or
molded tomatoes as there are guests to serve and set each in a crisp
lettuce leaf. Upon this lay half of an egg that has been deviled and
with this three little silvery sardines. Sprinkle with pieces of green
pepper, cut fine and dress with mayonnaise.--Contributed.

FANCY EGG SALAD.--Select perfect lettuce leaves and arrange in circles
on a large platter or on individual plates. Cut hard boiled eggs into
halves, remove the yolks and cut the whites into petals shaped like
water lilies. Arrange these strips in the center of the lettuce leaves
(which simulate lily pads) to form a circle, leaving a small circular
opening in the middle. Then put in a second row of petals, placing the
pieces between those in the first circle. Lastly press the egg yolks
through a ricer, heaping them in the center of the white petals, to
represent the heart of a lily. Pass a bowl of mayonnaise with the salad
or heap lightly on the surface.--Contributed.

POTATO SALAD.--Boil six medium sized potatoes in jackets, until done
but do not let them break into pieces. They should be firm and dry.
Peel them and cut into thin slices or small dice; mix with two small
onions chopped and two hard boiled eggs, sliced. Mix thoroughly with
boiled salad dressing, after dressing the potatoes first with lemon
juice or vinegar and salt. Let stand on the ice an hour or more.
Garnish the salad bowl with shredded lettuce, diced, boiled or pickled
beets or radish roses or olives, sweet peppers or any favorite
garnish.--Contributed.

FRENCH DINNER SALAD.--The dinner salad should always be delicate and
light. Heavy meat or fish salads are reserved for luncheon or buffet
suppers, where they form the main dish of the meal. The most popular
dinner salad is lettuce dressed with oil and lemon juice or vinegar.
Cress is often used and of late years bleached dandelions are much in
favor. Sliced cucumbers and onion, or sliced tomatoes with shredded
lettuce or chopped celery, and the typical spring salad of shredded
lettuce, sliced young onions and sliced radishes are all liked. In
France the French dressing of oil and vinegar or lemon juice is always
used but in America many prefer the richer mayonnaise dressing. In any
case the salad is never mixed until time to serve it, and then the
dressing should be lightly tossed in when all of the ingredients must
be crisp and cold.--Contributed.

PIMENTO SALAD.--Select sweet, red or green peppers, steam them till the
skin cracks, then skin and seed. Place on the ice and shred with cold
boiled fish, or shell fish or with a mixture of cold, cooked and diced
potatoes, green peas or beans and sliced cucumbers or celery. The
canned sweet red peppers or pimentos may be substituted. Spiced or
pickled green peppers are also nice with a crisp green salad.--Mrs.
Whitehead.




Vegetables

    "Dyspepsia is largely the result of trying to force square meals
    into round stomachs."


TIME FOR BOILING VEGETABLES.--Turnips should be peeled and boiled from
forty minutes to one hour. Beets; boil from one to two hours then put
in cold water then slip the skin off. Spinach; boil twenty minutes in
uncovered kettle if green color is to be retained. Parsnips; boil from
twenty to thirty minutes. String beans should be boiled one and one
half hours, covered. Shelled beans require one hour to cook. Onions
should be boiled from forty minutes to one hour, covered. Green corn;
boil ten to twenty minutes. Green peas should be boiled in very little
water, boil twenty minutes. Asparagus should be cooked the same as
peas. Serve on toast with cream gravy or melted butter. Cabbage should
be boiled from one to two hours in plenty of salted water. Carrots
should be boiled from forty minutes to one hour. Whole potatoes should
be put in boiling salted water and boil rapidly in covered kettle from
fifteen to thirty minutes according to size and age. Test with the
tines of a fork. Drain as soon as tender, remove the cover and set on
back of range to dry. If they are to be mashed do not let them stand
long.

VEGETABLES.--Vegetables of all kinds should be thoroughly picked over
and well washed, and it is good sometimes to lay them into cold water a
short time before cooking. Salt should not be added until partly
cooked, as it has a tendency to harden them; they should cook steadily,
do not allow them to stop boiling or simmering until they are
thoroughly done. Drain, take some butter, heat it, add a little flour,
mix smooth in the butter, add milk enough to make a smooth gravy, turn
over vegetables, and let it heat through, then serve. This sauce is
nice for many kinds. For asparagus, carrots, peas and a few others I
keep some of the liquid they were boiled in, as it gives them a better
flavor than milk alone.

GERMAN CABBAGE.--Another way of preparing cabbage in a German way: Cut
up a cabbage and pick over carefully, wash well, heat some lard, drop
cabbage into the hot grease, stir, so as to get it all heated, then let
fry for a short time, but watch carefully to avoid burning, then add a
quartered cooking apple; now when it gets too dry add hot water from
the tea kettle, and let it simmer for three or four hours, the longer
the better, add salt when almost tender, and about half hour before
serving add quarter cup of sugar, quarter cup of vinegar, and let
simmer the last half hour. This is the real German way.

GREEN STRING BEANS.--Select tender green string beans, cut the ends and
remove strings, dice and wash thoroughly, put on in cold water to
cover, add salt when partly cooked, then diced potatoes, and boil with
beans about half an hour. Then heat either bacon drippings or common
lard, add flour and brown, when ready turn the beans, potatoes, liquor
and all into the hot mixture, add a little vinegar and pepper. Summer
savory sprigs added to above give it a fine flavor.--Mrs. George
Bruegger, German Cookery demonstration of vegetables.

CREAMED POTATOES.--Cut cold boiled potatoes into one half inch cubes,
put these in a sauce pan. Add white sauce and finely cut parsley.
Serve.

WHITE SAUCE.--Two tablespoons butter, two tablespoons flour, one cup
milk, salt and pepper. Rub flour and butter together with spoon in
sauce pan, add milk, add salt and pepper and potatoes. Cook
thick.--Dorothy Whitehead.

STUFFED POTATOES.--Bake the desired number of potatoes, cut open the
top, scoop out inside, mash. Add butter, salt and pepper, moisten with
hot milk or cream to taste and add beaten whites of two eggs. Fill skin
with this mixture, heap well, brush over with yolk of egg and brown in
oven. Serve hot.--Mrs. R. J. Walker.

STUFFED CABBAGE.--One large cabbage, two pounds beef chopped fine, one
half cup melted butter, one half cup sweet cream or milk, one half
teaspoon ginger, one half teaspoon allspice, salt and pepper to suit
taste, whites of two eggs beaten stiff. Cut the stem end off the
cabbage far enough down to form a cover, scoop out enough of the center
of the cabbage to allow room for the meat. Mix the meat and other
ingredients together and place in the cabbage, put on the cover, tie in
a cloth and boil for three hours, or until the cabbage is done, in salt
water.

SAUCE.--Two thirds cup butter, one half teaspoon each of ginger and
allspice; salt and pepper to suit taste, and one quart milk, thicken
with flour.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

NORWEGIAN SAUERKRAUT.--One medium sized head of cabbage cut in fine
long strips with a knife, put in kettle, to this add three quarters of
an ounce of flour sprinkled over the top of cabbage, one teaspoon salt,
one teaspoon caraway seed, one pint beef broth. Let this boil slowly
until tender, stir every few minutes to keep the cabbage from burning.
When done add one teaspoon sugar and one teaspoon vinegar.--Mrs. R.
Meidell.

STEWED OKRA AND TOMATO (CREOLE).--Twelve pods of okra sliced thin, four
tomatoes sliced. Stew with salt and pepper and butter, half an hour
slowly, add dash cayenne pepper and serve.

SOUTHERN SWEET POTATOES.--Slice cold boiled sweet potatoes. Lay in a
buttered baking dish, sprinkle with sugar and dot with butter. Bake
Brown.--Mrs. Whitehead, Southern Cookery demonstration.

SCALLOPED SWEET POTATOES.--Boil six sweet potatoes in salted water and
cut them into thin slices in a baking dish. Mix with a well seasoned
cream sauce, cover with fine bread crumbs and dot with butter. Brown in
the oven.

POTATO SOUFFLE.--Four good sized potatoes boiled and mashed fine, one
half teacup of milk, one tablespoon butter. Let butter and milk come to
a scald, add potatoes, a little salt and pepper, beat to a cream, add
slowly the beaten yolks of four eggs. Beat the whites to a stiff froth,
add them to the mixture. Do not beat often adding the white of egg.
Bake twenty minutes in a brisk oven. Serve while hot with meats that
have gravy.--Mrs. Mary Harvey.

COLD SLAW.--This is a creole dish and very delicious. Cut very fine a
quarter of a head of firm white cabbage. Put it into a covered dish,
pour over it one half cupful of vinegar, one half tablespoonful of salt
and toss it about lightly with a fork. Into a skillet pour one half
cupful of milk, a teaspoonful of butter and one quarter of a cupful of
sugar. Beat one egg light. Let the milk come to a boil, mix a
teaspoonful of the milk with the egg, add sugar and butter, allow it to
cook until a custard is formed, then pour over the sliced cabbage.
Allow it to become very cold before using. As vinegars differ do not
use so much if very strong.--Mrs. A. McKay.

CANNED STRING BEANS.--Prepare the beans as for dinner--that is, string
and break into one inch pieces. Have your cans and top all cleansed;
then fill the cans with the beans--after washing them, of course--and
shake them down. Put one teaspoonful of salt to a quart of beans after
the cans are full. Now put fresh cold water upon them to overflowing. I
run a thin knife between the can and the beans to get all the air
bubbles out. Put on the rubbers and then the lids, but not tight--only
as you can with the thumb and one finger. Lay thin boards in the bottom
of the boiler and set your can on them; fill to the lids with cold
water. I let them boil two hours after they are fairly at it; then I
take them out one by one, and screw down the tops and set to get cold
before putting away. When we eat them I drain off all the water, put in
a piece of butter and pepper and milk, or any way I want them. I never
lost a can.--Contributed.

NUT LOAF.--Two cupfuls bread crumbs, one cup chopped walnuts, one half
cup butter, one cup strained tomatoes, one small grated onion, one egg,
salt and pepper to taste. Pack in a can and steam one hour.--Mrs. A.
McKay.

POTATOES A LA MAITRE D'HOTEL.--Two cups potato balls or cubes, one cup
hot milk, three level tablespoons butter, yolk of one egg, one half
level teaspoon salt, one eighth level teaspoon paprika, one teaspoon
lemon juice, one level teaspoon chopped parsley. Cook the potato in
boiling salted water until tender. Drain and put into double boiler;
add milk and cook until it is nearly absorbed. Cream the butter, add to
it the egg yolk slightly beaten, add the salt, paprika and lemon juice.
Stir this mixture into the potatoes and as soon as cooked turn into a
hot dish, sprinkle with the parsley and serve.--Contributed.

HOMINY FRITTERS.--Break up two cups of cold cooked hominy with a fork.
Add one scant cup of milk, a pinch of salt, one beaten egg and one half
cup of flour in which one level teaspoon of baking powder is sifted.
Drop by spoonfuls into hot lard and fry until a delicate
brown.--Contributed.

TOMATO SOUFFLE.--One can tomatoes, two level tablespoons butter, two
level tablespoons flour, one half teaspoon salt, one eighth level
teaspoon paprika, one teaspoon onion juice, one fourth cup fine bread
crumbs, three eggs. Drain the tomatoes and cook the liquid down to one
cup. Cut the tomatoes into small pieces using one cup free from seeds.
Melt the butter. Add the flour, salt and paprika and when blended add
the cup of tomato liquid. Stir until thick and smooth. Add the onion
juice, tomato and the bread crumbs. Remove from the fire, and add the
yolks of the eggs beaten very light. Then fold in the white beaten
stiff. Pour into a buttered baking dish and bake in a moderate oven
until light and firm in the center.--Contributed.

POTATO CROQUETTES.--Prepare one pint of hot mashed potatoes seasoned
with one tablespoonful of butter, one half teaspoonful of salt, one half
teaspoonful onion juice. Beat all together until very light, and when
slightly cool add the yolk of one egg. Mix well and put through a sieve
to be sure there are no lumps, as it is almost impossible to get them
out by mashing the potato. And one teaspoonful of chopped parsley. Shape
into smooth round balls. Roll them in bread crumbs, then dip into beaten
egg, then roll them in crumbs again. Fry in smoking hot lard one minute,
drain on soft paper and serve in the form of a pyramid.--Contributed.

MUSHROOM AND POTATO CROQUETTES.--Take one pound of mushrooms (the fresh
are preferred to the canned), break in small pieces after rinsing, drop
into three tablespoonfuls of hot butter, dust with half a teaspoonful
of salt and a trifle of pepper, cover and steam slowly for ten minutes;
add to three small cupfuls of seasoned mashed potato, beat in two eggs
and a tablespoonful of chopped parsley: form into cones, egg and crumb
and fry in hot fat.

GERMAN FRIED POTATOES.--Or fried raw potatoes make an appetizing dish
for breakfast. Slice raw potatoes as thin as an egg shell and put them
into a frying pan in which an equal amount of butter and lard is
boiling. Sprinkle them over with salt and pepper and cover with a close
fitting lid and let the steam partly cook them. Fry until golden color.

FRENCH SPINACH.--Boil one half peck spinach until tender in salted
water. Drain, throw into a colander and drench well with cold water.
This gives it a certain firmness and delicacy. Shake free from water,
chop fine and put in a hot sauce pan, salt delicately and heat with
butter and cream. Then heap in a vegetable dish and garnish with
poached or boiled eggs.

WILTED LETTUCE.--Pick fresh, young garden lettuce when it is just big
enough to eat. Wash it and shred it, sprinkle with salt, pepper and a
little sugar. Minced young green onions may be mixed with it if liked.
Cut four or five slices of bacon into cubes or as much ham and fry it
brown in its own grease. Add two tablespoons of vinegar and the yolk of
an egg beaten together and heat in the grease; turn hot over the
prepared lettuce and stir quickly with a fork. Same dressing is nice on
young cooked string beans.--Mrs. Whitehead.

BUTTERED ASPARAGUS.--Cut the tough ends from a bunch of asparagus
(white variety preferred) or the canned may be used. Leave it in five
inch stalks and boil it tender in salted water. Drain, melt three
fourths cup of butter. Lay the asparagus on individual serving plates,
and pour the butter generously over it, or it may be served on toast.
Two tablespoons of thick cream added is liked by many, especially when
the fresh asparagus is used. Asparagus is nice served in the same
manner, cold, with sauce tartar or a thick mayonnaise dressing heaped
at one side of the plate. Dip each stalk in it as it is eaten.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

SCALLOPED CABBAGE.--Chop a head of cabbage quite coarse. Boil it twenty
minutes in salted water, drain. Make a cream sauce and add to the
cabbage, cover with bread crumbs and bake. For varieties take and
sprinkle the top thickly with grated cheese and serve cabbage au
gratin.--Contributed.

CORN SOUFFLE.--One pint of fresh or canned corn cooked in one cup of
milk ten minutes. Season with salt, pepper, one teaspoon of sugar and
one teaspoon of butter. Let it get cold, then add beaten yolks of three
eggs and lastly cut in the stiffly beaten whites of the eggs and bake
in a buttered pudding dish.--Contributed.

BEETS.--Boil young beets tender in water to cover. Drain and cover with
cold water then skin them and slice fine. Heat half cup diluted
vinegar, salt, pepper and butter, turn over the prepared beets and
serve.--Contributed.

GREEN BEANS (GERMAN).--String the beans and shred into lengthwise
strips. Cook in salted water until tender, then drain and add some
vinegar dressing as for beets. Serve either hot or cold.--Contributed.

BOILED STRING BEANS AND BACON.--Fill a kettle with green or wax beans,
shredded or broken into inch lengths, insert a piece of bacon or salt
pork (about one pound) in the center of the beans, cover with cold
water and boil gently two or three hours covering the kettle. Add more
salt, if necessary and a good dash of pepper. Let the water about cook
off the beans and serve either hot or cold. Fresh pork may be used with
equal success.

SCALLOPED POTATOES.--Pare and slice six or eight potatoes of uniform
size. Butter a baking dish and spread a thin layer of potatoes on the
bottom. Mix one teaspoon of salt and one quarter teaspoon of pepper
with three tablespoons of flour. Sprinkle a teaspoon of this mixture
over each layer of potatoes, dot each layer with butter and cover with
milk, then add another layer of potatoes and continue until all are
used. Dot the top with butter and put in enough milk to just cover the
potatoes. Cover the baking dish and bake forty minutes or more, uncover
and brown. For potatoes au gratin sprinkle each layer with grated
cheese.--Mrs. Whitehead.




Pickles, Condiments and Spiced Fruits

    "Mingle, mingle, mingle, you that mingle, may."


RIPE CUCUMBER PICKLES.--Pare and seed ripe cucumbers, slice lengthwise
and cut into pieces desired size. Let them stand twenty-four hours
covered with cold vinegar. Drain, then put in fresh vinegar with two
pounds of sugar and one ounce of cassia buds to one quart of vinegar
and a tablespoonful of salt. Boil all together twenty minutes. Put in a
crock and cover closely.--Mrs. W. C. Lynch.

GREEN TOMATOES AND ONIONS.--One peck of green tomatoes sliced, and use
about one half as many onions as tomatoes and to this quantity add
three peppers (either green or red) cut in small pieces. Sprinkle
lightly with salt and let stand over night. Drain off liquor and when
dry put them in hot vinegar which has been sweetened and spiced with
cinnamon and cloves. Boil until tender. Leave spice bag in jar.--Mrs.
Lynch.

UNCOOKED MUSTARD PICKLES.--(Excellent). Four quarts small cucumbers,
four quarts small onions, three heads cauliflower, six green peppers.
Dressing: One gallon of vinegar, two pounds of brown sugar, one pound
mustard, one cup of flour. Let pickles stand over night in mild brine.
Drain and put in jar. Then make dressing as follows and pour boiling
hot over them. Boil vinegar and sugar together and thicken with flour
dissolved in cold water. Pour this while boiling over pickles, when
cold add mustard which has been dissolved in cold vinegar.--Mrs. Lynch.

PEACH PICKLE.--Make syrup by using two cups of sugar to one of vinegar.
Tie whole spices up in sacks and put in the syrup. When it comes to
boil drop in peaches from which the skins have been removed by pouring
over boiling water. Stick whole cloves in each peach. Cook until
tender. Be careful not to get mushy by over cooking. I pickle pears in
same way.--Mrs. Harry McKay.

MUSTARD PICKLE.--Get small pearl onions, cauliflower and small
cucumbers. Stand in brine for a week, changing each day. At end of time
pour off brine and rinse in cold water. Prepare the following dressing
and cook pickles for ten minutes. One and a half quarts vinegar,
thicken with cup mustard, same amount of flour and cup sugar and a
tablespoon of curry powder rubbed to paste in water, add one half cup
melted butter, stir well and bottle while hot.--Mrs. Harry McKay.

CHILI SAUCE.--One peck of tomatoes, one quarter as many onions, one
half teacupful of salt, two and one half teacups brown sugar, one and
one half quarts of vinegar, three teaspoons cloves, one tablespoon of
cinnamon, two teaspoons of nutmeg and two of ginger, scant teaspoon
cayenne pepper, more if taste requires. Peel and slice tomatoes and
onions, add the ingredients as above and boil in porcelain or aluminum
kettle three hours, simmering the last hour.--Mrs. Harry McKay.

CHOW CHOW (Excellent).--Four quarts of chopped tomatoes, four quarts of
chopped cabbage, two quarts of chopped onions, sprinkle salt over, let
drain over night. In the morning put over to boil one gallon of
vinegar, stir one and one half pounds of mustard into enough cold
vinegar to mix thoroughly, add to boiling mixture. Then stir into this
the chopped mixture. Keep stirring until it comes to a boil. When cool,
add two ounces of curry powder. Seal in glass cans. Will keep for
years. Excellent for meats.--Mrs. A. McKay.

PICALILLI.--One peck of green tomatoes, eight large onions, seven large
cucumbers, two small heads of cabbage. Pear and chop medium fine. After
well mixed add three quarters cup of salt and let them stand over
night. In the morning, drain well, and add two cups of water, one cup
of vinegar. Boil all together twenty minutes, drain, put back into
kettle, turn over them two quarts of vinegar, one pound of sugar, two
tablespoonfuls of cinnamon, one teaspoonful of cloves, one teaspoonful
of ginger, one teaspoonful of allspice, one half teaspoonful of cayenne
pepper, one cup of chopped horseradish, one tablespoonful of curry
powder. If you use curry powder use less spices. Boil fifteen minutes.
Seal.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

CHILI SAUCE.--Two quarts ripe tomatoes, three green peppers, three
onions, one cup of sugar, three cups of vinegar, two teaspoonfuls of
salt, one teaspoonful each of cinnamon and cloves. Cook the tomatoes
tender, chop the onion and peppers very fine, mix all well and cook a
few minutes. Celery improves it. Bottle and seal.--Mrs. Lynch.

GERMAN SAUER KRAUT.--For this use nice, white, firm cabbages, slice
them in very fine shreds, on one of these kraut cutters; place a layer
of salt into a jar or keg, and alternately cabbage and salt, being
careful to have salt on top. As each layer of cabbage is added it must
be pounded down with a heavy pestle, and layers added as soon as the
juice floods on the surface. When the jar is full, it must be set in a
dry place, covered with a cloth, a wooden cover and then weight it down
heavy, after it ferments the pickle must be drawn off and replaced by
fresh until the liquor is clear. Renew the cloth and wash weight and
cover and let stand for a month, then it is ready for use. Great care
must be taken to have the cover perfectly clean. Each time the jar is
opened it must be properly closed and be sure to always have some
liquor on top. Either clear or salt water may be added. Now to boil the
kraut. Put on in cold water, let it come to a boil, and never boil very
fast but let it simmer for four or more hours. Parboil a nice fat piece
of fresh pork and place in same kettle with kraut; let it boil together
for some hours; about one hour before taking it up grate half a small
raw potato into the kraut, let it simmer away. This gives it a nice
flavor and also tends to give it a smoother appearance. The oftener you
warm over sauer kraut the better it gets. They say it should be cooked
nine times. I never tried it for ours never lasted that long.--Mrs.
George Bruegger, demonstrated at Domestic Science club.

GERMAN DILL PICKLES.--Select medium sized cucumbers, as near of a size
as possible, soak over night in a weak brine, or plain well water. Next
day wipe each one carefully, so as not to bruise them, then pack
alternately in grape leaves and dill, start with a layer of leaves and
dill then a layer of cucumbers, and so on; be sure and have leaves on
the top; while packing add a couple of roots of horse radish. Some wrap
each cucumber in grape leaves, and claim it keeps them more solid and
makes them much nicer. After they are all carefully packed then make a
brine which will bear an egg, then add as much water as you have brine,
to each gallon add one quart of strong vinegar, weight them down, but
not too heavy. Remove all the scum which arises.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

CHILI SAUCE (Very nice).--One quart onions, two quarts cabbage, two
quarts tomatoes, green, two quarts cucumbers, two quarts mangoes, one
quart celery. Soak the tomatoes over night in salt water, run all the
vegetables through food chopper and scald all together in clear water
ten minutes then drain this water off. Mix one half cup flour, one and
one half cups sugar, ten cents worth of mustard seeds, five cents worth
of turmeric powder, five cents worth of celery seeds, two quarts
vinegar. Pour over all and boil fifteen minutes. This has to be put in
sealed jars.--Mrs. Southard.

CURRANT CATSUP.--Five pounds currants, three pounds sugar, one half
pint vinegar, one teaspoonful cloves, one teaspoonful cinnamon, one
teaspoonful salt, one teaspoonful allspice, one teaspoonful black and
red pepper mixed. Boil one half hour and seal.--Mrs. Davidson.

SPICED CURRANTS.--Four pounds currants, five pounds sugar, one pint
vinegar, two tablespoons cinnamon, two tablespoons cloves, two
tablespoons allspice. Boil until thick.--Mrs. Mary Harvey.

CHUTNEY SAUCE.--One half pound brown sugar, eight tomatoes, eight
ounces raisins, one quarter ounce cayenne pepper, one quarter ounce
ginger, three ounces garlic, four ounces salt, one quart of vinegar.
Boil all to a mush for several hours.--Mrs. Schollander.

GREEN APPLE CHUTNEY.--Pare and core six pounds of greening apples; boil
in one quart of vinegar; set off until cool. Boil two pounds of moist
brown sugar in one pint of vinegar; add two pounds of Sultana raisins,
washed, picked and dried and four ounces of garlic pounded with
vinegar; four ounces of green ginger; two ounces of red pepper and four
ounces of salt. Mix well together with more vinegar if too thick. Keep
on the back of the stove one day, slowly simmering, stirring
occasionally with a wooden spoon. Bottle on the next day.

ORIENTAL CHUTNEY.--Peel and core three pounds of tart apples. Mix with
a pound of stoned tamarinds, three quarters of a pound of seeded
raisins, a head of garlic, two pods of red pepper, and one ounce of
grated ginger roots. Pound all together until reduced to a pulp. Add to
the mixture a pint of brown sugar and a tablespoon each of currant
jelly and thick tomato catsup. Blend well with a wooden spoon. Put in
small jars and seal. This chutney improves with age and is most
pungent.

EAST INDIA CHUTNEY.--Into three pints vinegar put a bag containing two
ounces of ground mustard, four ounces of mustard seed, one ounce of
cayenne pepper and one quarter ounce of turmeric. Add a pound of brown
sugar and scant half pound of salt. Chop together thirteen large ripe
apples, one pound of seeded raisins, seven large ripe tomatoes, four
small onions and two cloves of garlic. Mince fine. Boil in the vinegar
mixture for two hours. Press through a colander and bottle while hot.
This is fine for cold meat, particularly so with roast pork.

GREEN GOOSEBERRY CHUTNEY.--This relish has not yet become common in
America, though it is found on all well supplied English tables. Four
pounds green gooseberries (not too ripe), one half ounce cayenne
pepper, two ounces garlic, two ounces dried ginger, three pounds loaf
sugar, two ounces mustard seed, two scant quarts best vinegar. Put the
berries, when picked over, into a preserving kettle with one quart of
vinegar and sugar and let simmer for an hour; pound the seeds, garlic,
etc., and add, stirring with wooden spoon; when well mixed add more
vinegar until the mass is of the proper consistency for chutney. Cool
and bottle.

CORN SALAD.--Take one dozen ears of corn, (cut corn from cobs), one
large head of cabbage chopped quite fine, not quite a half box of
mustard, one cup sugar, one tablespoon chopped peppers, two tablespoons
salt, mix with about four cups of good vinegar and boil about ten
minutes, first mix the mustard with some of the vinegar. If too thick
when done add more vinegar. Put in jars while hot. Will keep all
winter, very nice with meat and potatoes.--Mrs. Paul Leonhardy.

MIXED PICKLES.--Two quarts green tomatoes chopped, one quart cabbage
chopped, one quart onions chopped, two green peppers chopped, one quart
brown sugar, one tablespoon each of cinnamon, cloves, celery seed,
white mustard seed. Salt to taste. Boil about twenty minutes.--Mrs. D.
E. Plier.

PRESERVED GREEN TOMATOES.--Take one peck of green tomatoes, peel and
slice them, slice four lemons without removing the skins, put to this
quantity six pounds of granulated sugar, and boil until transparent,
and the syrup thick.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

OIL PICKLES.--(Sliced). Slice but do not pare medium sized cucumbers,
sufficient to fill a gallon jar. Sprinkle one half cup of salt through
the sliced cucumbers and stand in cool place two or three hours, then
drain from the salt. Use one ounce black mustard seed, one ounce white
mustard seed, one ounce celery seed, or one cup of finely minced
celery, one half pint of olive oil, two onions chopped fine. Spread the
cucumbers in the jar in layers sprinkling the seeds over them and
spreading with part of the olive oil repeating the layers until the jar
is filled, then cover all with cold, strained vinegar. Cover and set
aside for future use.--Contributed.

SPICED BEETS.--Boil beets tender, lay in cold water, remove skins and
unless small, slice and pack in fruit cans. Boil one cup of vinegar,
three cups of water, one cup of sugar and spices to suit taste. Pour
hot over the beets and seal.--Contributed.

UNCOOKED CHILI SAUCE.--Skin one peck of ripe tomatoes and chop them
fine, add two cups skinned and chopped onions, two cups chopped celery,
two cups sugar, one cup salt, four tablespoons white mustard seed, two
teaspoons ground cloves, six or eight red peppers chopped fine, two
teaspoons of ground black pepper and one quart of pure vinegar. Seal in
air tight bottle.--Contributed.

PICKLES.--To a gallon of rain water add one cup of salt. Boil it and
cover a gallon jar of pickles with the brine, drain off water, bring to
a boil and turn over pickles for nine successive mornings. Then take
out the pickles, pack in jars with layers of mixed spices. Boil enough
vinegar (diluted if very strong) and add one cup of sugar to each
gallon of vinegar and add a piece of alum size of a small walnut. Pour
hot over the pickles in the jar, cover and put a weight on them and
store in a dry, cool place. Good.--Contributed.

EASY PICKLES.--Take pickles of uniform size (about three inches long)
wash and pack in fruit jars as tightly as you can. Add one cup of salt,
one cup of sugar, an ounce of mixed white and black mustard seed, an
ounce of whole cloves and cinnamon bark mixed or any spices preferred
and alum the size of a walnut to one gallon of vinegar. Bring to a good
boil, then turn over the pickles in the jars and seal. A piece of horse
radish root is nice placed in each jar.--Contributed.

WATER MELON PICKLES.--Peel and cut the water melon rind into small
cubes and boil it until tender and clear in water to cover, with alum
the size of a pea. Drain and boil again in a syrup made of one pint of
diluted vinegar and three pints of sugar. Add cloves and cinnamon in
spice bag, to suit taste. Pour over the pickles, bring to a boil and
cover pickles for three days in succession. Then seal.--Contributed.

CANNED CURRANT JUICE.--Express juice from currants by mashing through
colander. Mix one pound of sugar with each pint of juice. Cook five
minutes and seal. Use one tablespoon of canned juice to a glass of ice
water and fill with crushed ice. Raspberry, strawberry and cherry
juices may be canned likewise using a little less sugar.

SPICED GOOSEBERRIES.--Six quarts of gooseberries, four and one half
quarts sugar. Boil one hour, add one pint vinegar and one tablespoon
each of cloves, cinnamon and allspice. Boil three minutes then seal.

SPICED PLUMS.--Ten pounds of blue plums, eight pounds sugar, one pint
vinegar and one tablespoon cloves and cinnamon. Boil to a jam and seal.

SPICED GRAPES.--Pulp seven pounds of grapes by separating skins and
pulp and pressing pulp through a colander to extract seeds, then mixing
it with the skins. Boil with four and one half pounds of sugar and one
teaspoon each of cloves, cinnamon and allspice. Boil twenty minutes or
to a soft jam.

SPICED CURRANTS.--To four quarts of ripe currants, add three and one
half pounds brown sugar, one pint vinegar and one tablespoon each of
cloves and cinnamon. Cook until currants are tender. Boil syrup thick
first then adding the currants.

SPICED GREEN TOMATOES.--Chop eight pounds of green tomatoes fine, add
four pounds brown sugar, boil three hours then add nearly one quart of
vinegar and one teaspoon each of cloves, cinnamon and mace. Boil
fifteen minutes and seal.

PEPPER HASH.--(Uncooked.) Chop one head of cabbage, one bunch celery,
one half dozen green peppers and one half dozen peeled and sliced
onions fine together and let stand over night. Drain in the morning and
mix the chopped vegetables with one quart of vinegar, two cups white
sugar, one half cup of salt, two tablespoons of mustard seed and one
tablespoon of celery seed. Seal in jars, keeps well all
winter.--Contributed.

SPICED GOOSEBERRIES AND SPICED CURRANTS.--Make a syrup of three pounds
of sugar and one pint of vinegar, add steamed gooseberries (about six
pounds) and when cooked thick add one tablespoon of cinnamon and one
half tablespoon of cloves and allspice. For spiced currants substitute
fresh red currants freed from stems but cook only until the currants
are tender as too much boiling makes them hard and tough. Boil the
syrup quite thick before adding the currants and then bring to a boil
and simmer five minutes.

PICKLED CHERRIES.--Five pounds of stoned cherries, one quart of
vinegar, two pounds of sugar, one half ounce each of cinnamon, cloves
and mace. Tie spices in a thin bag and boil with the vinegar and sugar
to a thick syrup. Pour over the cherries and seal. If the large dark
California cherries are used do not stone them.

TOMATO CATSUP.--Wash and cut up one half bushel of tomatoes and six
onions, mix with two pounds brown sugar, one fourth pound whole black
peppers, one fourth pound each allspice and of salt, one ounce of
cloves, cayenne pepper to suit taste. Boil all together about two
hours, strain through flour sieve and mix with one quart of vinegar.
Boil thick and seal hot. Spices may be omitted if not liked.

GOOSEBERRY CATSUP.--Cook gooseberries soft in water, press through
colander. Allow three pounds of sugar to five pounds of pulp, half a
pint of vinegar, and small teaspoon each of cinnamon and salt. Boil
until thick and seal. For grape catsup follow same directions, adding
cloves to the spices.




[Advertisement:

Asbury Quality Grocery Store

Telephone 46 and 87

       *       *       *       *       *

This is the flour I use for cakes. I've never used anything else.

[Illustration:

SWANS DOWN PREPARED CAKE FLOUR

Not Self-Rising

AWARDED GRAND PRIZE
ST. LOUIS WORLD'S FAIR
1904

Makes Lightest, Whitest, Finest Cakes

CAKE SECRETS, a valuable book brimful of Cake Recipes and information
on baking fine Cakes SENT FREE on receipt of 2c stamp and your Grocer's
Name.

Address Dep't

Each Package Contains Flour for 12 Cakes and 12 Cake Recipes

IGLEHEART BROS., Evansville, Ind.]

I buy my groceries at ASBURY'S. I do too.

       *       *       *       *       *

Where Quality is Sold

Williston, N. D.]




Cakes


GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR MAKING CAKE.--Cream the butter and sugar,
usually beat the whites and yolks of eggs separately, mix the yolks
with the butter and sugar, add the milk, sift the baking powder with
the flour and stir in a little at a time then the whites of the eggs,
then the flavoring. For cakes containing no butter beat the egg yolks
until very light and thick. Add the sugar gradually beating until very
light and spongy. Add flavoring and liquid. Have the whites beaten to a
stiff froth adding them alternately with the sifted flour (mixed with
the baking powder or cream of tartar) and cut both in very lightly.

GOLD CAKE.--Yolks of eight eggs, one and one fourth cups granulated
sugar, three fourths cup butter, three fourths cup water, two and one
half cups flour, two heaping teaspoons baking powder, one half teaspoon
of lemon extract. Sift flour and measure, add baking powder and sift
three times. Cream butter and sugar until light and creamy, add yolks
beaten light and beat well together, then add water and flavoring and
the flour. Beat hard. Bake in greased tin or in layers. Loaf cakes are
nicer baked in a funnel cake pan.--Mrs. Fred Southard.

DELICATE CAKE.--One half cup of butter creamed with one cup of sugar
until very light, add one half cupful of milk and one and one half cups
of flour sifted with one teaspoon of baking powder. Lastly add the
flavoring and stiffly beaten whites of four eggs. Bake in one sheet or
in two layers and ice with brown carmel or white frosting. Nice for
small family. For large layer cake double the recipe.--Mrs. Whitehead.

LULA'S WHITE CAKE.--One and one half cups of sugar creamed with one
half cup butter until very light, add one cup of milk alternately with
three cups of sifted flour. (Sift flour four times). Whites of six eggs
beaten very stiff. When partly beaten add two even teaspoons of cream
of tartar to the eggs. Dissolve one even teaspoon of soda in one
tablespoon of the milk and add it with the milk. Cut in the beaten
whites of eggs last, as you do for sponge cake. Flavor with lemon,
vanilla or almond extract as preferred. Bake in a greased funnel tin.
Bake twenty minutes in a moderately warm oven, then increase the heat
and bake to fifty minutes or until done. Ice with boiled
frosting.--Mrs. Whitehead.

GOLD CAKE.--One cup of butter, one and one half cups of sugar, eight
yolks of eggs, three cupfuls of pastry flour, one teaspoon of baking
powder, one teaspoon of lemon flavor. Cream butter and sugar, add the
well whipped yolks, then the flour with baking powder and lastly the
flavor. Two cupfuls of common flour with one cup of corn starch may be
used instead of pastry flour.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

NO EGG CAKE.--One and one half cups of sugar, one quarter cup of
butter, one cup of sour cream, two cups of chopped raisins, one
teaspoon cinnamon, one half teaspoon cloves, one half teaspoon nutmeg,
one tablespoon grated chocolate, one teaspoon of soda dissolved in hot
water, four cups of flour. Mix spices and chocolate into flour, and add
to the above, and add raisins dredged in flour. Bake one hour.--Mrs.
George Bruegger.

MAHOGANY CAKE.--One half cupful chocolate cooked in one half cup of
sweet milk, one and one half cups of sugar, one half cup of butter, two
and one half cups of flour, one half cup sweet milk, three eggs, level
teaspoon of soda, dissolved in milk. Bake in layers.--Mrs. Wolpert.

SWEET CREAM CAKE.--One large egg, beaten very light, one cup sugar
beaten with egg till light as cream, one cup thick, sweet cream, one
half spoon salt, one and one half cups flour, one teaspoonful baking
powder. Flavor with lemon. Beat continuously while mixing. Bake either
in layers or as a loaf cake.--M. E. Cooper.

SILVER OR GOLD CAKE.--Three fourths cup butter, one and one half cups
sugar, one half cup cold water, with one half teaspoon of soda
dissolved in it, two and one half large cups of flour sifted with one
level teaspoon of cream of tartar (or use two level teaspoons of baking
powder and omit the soda and cream of tartar) and lastly the flavoring
and stiffly beaten whites of eight eggs. Cream butter and sugar until
light and smooth, add water but do not stir, then beat in the flour and
beat five minutes. Cut in the whites and bake in a greased funnel loaf
cake tin in a moderate oven forty minutes or until done when tested
with a broom straw. For gold cake add the beaten yolks of eight eggs to
the creamed butter and sugar and omit the whites and use scant measure
of flour. Ice the gold cake with white boiled frosting.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

CORN STARCH CAKE.--Two cups sugar, one cup butter, one cup of sweet
milk, two cups flour, one cup corn starch, whites of seven eggs, one
and one half teaspoons of baking powder. Flavor.--Contributed.

JELLY ROLL.--One cup sugar, three eggs well beaten, one cup flour, one
teaspoon baking powder, one half cup boiling water added last, one half
teaspoon lemon or vanilla, pinch of salt. Spread in well buttered
dripping pans. When done turn out, spread with jelly and roll quickly.
Makes two rolls.--Contributed.

BREAD CAKE.--Three cups bread sponge, one cup lard or butter, one pound
raisins, two cups sugar, two eggs, one teaspoon soda in a little water,
nutmeg and spices. Mix, raise until light and bake in one loaf.

MOCHA CAKE.--Bake a sponge cake mixture in two round layer cake pans
and spread smoothly between the layers and on the outside with Mocha
cream. Wash one half cup of butter, then beat to a cream and add slowly
enough thick syrup to sweeten. Make syrup as follows: Cook together one
cup of sugar and one half cup of clear, strong coffee until a thick
syrup is formed; cool before using. (New and delicious.)

MOCHA ICING.--One quarter pound chopped almonds, blanched, put in oven
to dry, one half cup of butter, eight tablespoons of icing sugar, one
tablespoon of brandy or whisky; mix butter and sugar to a paste, then
add almonds and whisky.

PARIS STICKS.--Three cupfuls of chopped almonds, two and one half
cupfuls of pulverized sugar, the whites of five eggs beaten to a stiff
froth, the grated rind of two lemons. Mix the ingredients and roll out
on pulverized sugar, cut into strips an inch wide and put into
paraffined pans. Bake in a slow oven. Excellent.

SUNSHINE CAKE.--Whites of seven eggs, yolks of five eggs, one third
teaspoon cream of tartar, one cup sugar, one cup of flour, a little
salt and vanilla. Beat whites stiff, add salt and cream of tartar, add
sugar, then beaten yolks, then flour which has been sifted several
times. Flavor and bake in a funnel tin.--Contributed.

MOCK ANGEL FOOD.--One cup sweet milk, bring to boiling point, one cup
flour, one cup sugar, three teaspoons of baking powder. Sift dry
ingredients together four times, add warm milk and stir well then fold
in beaten whites of two eggs. Flavor. Bake in angel cake
tins.--Contributed.

ANGEL CAKE.--Whites of twelve eggs--or, measured, one and one quarter
cups of whites of eggs. Add one third of a teaspoonful of salt, and
beat until stiff. Sift into this 1-1/4 cups of granulated sugar, and
beat. Have at hand one cup of flour that you have sifted five times;
sift this in and mix one teaspoonful of extract of bitter almonds, or
any preferred flavor. Bake in slow oven, and do not grease your pan.
With a gas stove one young friend puts the grate in the oven in its
lowest sliding place and bakes her angel cake there, lighting both
burners for one minute. Then she turns the front out and the other so
low that it looks like a row of blue beads. She bakes it one hour.
Another, equally successful, puts her grate a little higher than the
middle of the oven, and bakes the cake there for one half hour with a
very moderate oven.

MOCHA CAKE.--One cupful of sugar, one cupful of flour and one teaspoon
of cream of tartar and one half teaspoon of soda sifted all together
twice, blend in one large teaspoon of melted butter and break in the
eggs and stir well, then add one half cup of boiling milk. Bake in one
loaf in a moderate oven.

MOCHA FILLING.--One cupful of powdered sugar, a small piece of butter,
two tablespoons of coffee, two teaspoons of vanilla. Cream butter and
sugar, add coffee and flavoring gradually and a little more sugar if
necessary. Spread with a knife dipped in hot water.--Contributed.

MARSHMALLOW FILLING.--One cupful of brown sugar, one cupful of white
sugar, one cupful water and one tablespoon of vinegar boiled together
like candy. Beat two eggs very light and stir into the candy with one
quarter pound of marshmallows, cut up. Spread on layers of
cake.--Contributed.

DEVIL'S FOOD.--Two eggs, one cup sugar, one half cup butter, two thirds
cup sweet milk, one teaspoon vanilla, one half cup melted chocolate,
one half teaspoon soda, one teaspoon baking powder, two scant cups of
flour.--Mrs. Creaser.

DEVIL'S FOOD CAKE.--One egg, one cup sugar, half cup sour milk, one
tablespoon butter, one fourth cup boiling water, 1 teaspoon soda, one
and one half squares chocolate and one cup flour. (Can use sour cream
instead of milk and butter.) Cream eggs and sugar. Melt chocolate over
hot water and add butter to melt it, then add eggs and sugar. Dissolve
soda in water.--Mrs. G. A. McIntosh.

BOISE BROWN CAKE.--One and one half cups sugar, three fourths cup
butter, four eggs, three fourths cup grated chocolate, one cup milk,
one cup chopped nuts, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one
teaspoon vanilla, one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon cinnamon, one
teaspoon allspice, one half teaspoon salt.--Mrs. D. E. Plier.

MASHED POTATO CAKE.--Two cups sugar, three quarters cup butter, one cup
mashed potatoes, four eggs, one cup chocolate, one half cup sweet milk,
one teaspoonful cloves, one teaspoonful vanilla, one cup chopped
walnut, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder.--Mrs. F.
Kleinsorge.

CHOCOLATE LOAF CAKE.--One half cake of chocolate shaved in a bowl or
three fourths cup of cocoa. Pour one cup of boiling water on this
mixture and let it stand while you are mixing the cake. Cream three
fourths cup of butter with two cups of sugar until light. It is best to
cream the butter first and add sugar gradually especially if the butter
is hard and cold. Beat in yolks of two eggs, one half cup of sour milk
or butter milk, one teaspoon of soda dissolved in a little water,
(about two tablespoonfuls,) two cups of flour sifted, and beaten whites
of two eggs. Beat well, then add the chocolate. Bake in one sheet in a
dripping pan lined with greased paper. Let the cake stand in the pan.
Ice with boiled frosting and when firm and cold, cover with one square
of chocolate that has been melted in one teaspoon of butter in a cup
placed in a pan of hot water for five minutes. Pour the chocolate over
the white frosting and spread evenly with a silver knife. Cut the cake
diagonally across the pan into two inch diamond shaped pieces. A cupful
of floured chopped nuts may be added to the cake batter before baking,
if nut loaf is liked, and sometimes I place a half English walnut in
the center of the frosting on each diamond. This chocolate and white
frosting is also nice with white layer cake and chopped nuts make it
extra nice for a thick filling to a square two layer cake, shaking the
nuts over the white frosting and then baking them with the
chocolate.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SPONGE CAKE.--Beat four eggs and one cupful of granulated sugar until
mixture is creamy white. Add four tablespoons of cold water and one cup
of flour sifted several times with a teaspoonful of baking powder. Bake
in a moderate oven. Flavor with lemon. May be baked in layers.--Mrs. H.
Hanson.

SPONGE CAKE.--Six eggs, (reserve whites of two for frosting), two cups
sugar. Beat (not stir) eggs and sugar until almost cream colored, two
and one half cups flour, one teaspoon flavoring, and one teaspoon
baking powder last, one cup boiling water, the water must be added
gradually. While adding flour and water stir instead of beating. Bake
in loaf in a moderate oven thirty or forty minutes.--Mrs. C. C.
Mackenroth.

HOT WATER SPONGE CAKES.--Four eggs beaten 15 minutes, two scant cups
sugar, 2 cups sifted flour, 2 teaspoons baking powder, two thirds cup
boiling water, flavor with lemon or vanilla. Bake in a deep square
tin.--Mrs. Southard.

BOILED SPONGE CAKE.--Five eggs, one cup white sugar, one cup flour,
juice of one half lemon, one teaspoon vanilla. Boil the sugar with
three tablespoons water until it threads. Pour over the stiffly beaten
whites of eggs, beat this fifteen minutes, then add egg yolks,
flavoring and the flour sifted three times. Bake in angel food
tin.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

GOLD SPONGE CAKE.--Whites of eleven eggs beaten very stiff, yolks of
four eggs beaten very light with one and one half cups of powdered
sugar. Cut in the whites and add one cup of swans down flour sifted
with one teaspoonful of baking powder. Flavor. Cut flour in lightly as
you would for sponge cake. Bake in one loaf.--Mrs. C. H. McKay.

SNOW SPONGE CAKE WITH COCOANUT FILLING.--Beat the whites of ten eggs
very light, add one and one half cupfuls of powdered sugar and beat
until the bowl can be inverted and retain the eggs. Add one teaspoon
cream tartar to one cupful of flour and sift several times. Cut this
into the egg mixture, flavor with almond extract and turn into square
ungreased cake tins, baking in two sheets. Fill with cocoanut frosting
made by boiling two cupfuls of sugar with water until it hairs from the
spoon, turn it hot on to the beaten whites of two eggs and whip to a
frosting. Add one small cocoanut which has been freed from the shell
and all brown skin and grated fine. Flavor with lemon or vanilla. If
fresh cocoanut cannot be obtained try soaking the shredded cocoanut in
warm milk and steaming it an hour or two before using and then squeeze
it dry. This will make it more moist. If you have only one angel cake
tin, split the cake through the center after it is cold and put the
icing between the layers. Swans down flour is best for this cake and
the fresh cocoanut make a delicious filling.--Mrs. B. G. Whitehead.

SUNSHINE CAKE.--Whites of ten eggs, yolks of six, one level teaspoonful
of cream of tartar, one and one half cupfuls of sugar, sifted, one
cupful of flour, sifted twice, the grated peel of one orange or one
teaspoonful of lemon or vanilla or one half teaspoon of almond extract.
Beat whites very stiff, then beat in one half of the sugar, beat yolks
light about ten minutes, add the flavoring and balance of the sugar and
beat five minutes. Mix yolks and whites lightly together and cut in the
flour that has been sifted with the cream of tartar. Bake in an
ungreased, funnel angel cake tin about an hour in a slow oven or 45
minutes in a moderate oven. Avoid baking too long as it makes the cake
dry and coarse. When the cake shrinks from the tin at sides of the pan
it is sufficiently baked. Invert the tin and let it stand until cold.
If it sticks then run a knife around the edge of cake, pat the tin
slightly on the bottom and sides until it drops from the pan. If a
frosted cake is preferred ice it with white boiled icing.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

MOCHA CAKE.--One cup sugar, one half cup butter, three quarters cup
milk, two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one spoon vanilla,
three eggs beaten separately. Bake in small dripping pan. When cold cut
into small squares. Put into oven to brown. Three cups shelled peanuts,
pour over three teaspoons melted butter. When slightly browned put
through meat grinder. Whip one half pound butter with two cups powdered
sugar to a cream. Butter each piece of cake with this cream paste and
roll into ground nuts.--Mrs. A. McKay.

NUT LOAF CAKE.--One cup sugar, one half cup butter, one half cup sweet
milk, one and one half cups sifted flour, one cup chopped walnuts or
hickory nuts, two eggs, two teaspoons baking powder.--Mrs. Schollander.

BLITZ KUCHEN.--One cup sugar, three fourths cup butter, four eggs, one
cup of flour, one half teaspoon baking powder, grated rind and juice of
one lemon. Cream butter and sugar and then add eggs, one at a time and
stirring each five minutes, then add the flour and spread dough in
square tin about half an inch thick. Chop one fourth pound almonds, mix
with sugar and cinnamon and sprinkle on top of cake before putting in
the oven. Bake about thirty minutes.--Mrs. J. Bruegger. German Cookery.

SOUR CREAM NUT CAKE.--Break two eggs into a large cup and fill with
sour cream. Put in a mixing bowl and add a level teaspoonful of soda
and one cupful of sugar, beat all well add flour to make quite stiff
and flavor with vanilla. Take a pound of English walnuts, chop all but
what you wish to put on top of cake and stir into the batter. Bake in
moderate oven. Ice the tops and lay on the half meats.--Mrs. G. A.
McIntosh.

DARK CAKE.--One cup sugar, one cup butter and lard mixed, three eggs,
one half cup black molasses, one cup cold coffee, one level teaspoon
soda, two pounds raisins, flour to thicken. Bake in moderate
oven.--Mrs. W. C. Lynch.

DARK COFFEE CAKE.--One cup sugar, pinch of salt, one cup shortening
(butter and lard) one cup cold coffee, one cup sour cream or milk (add
that ingredient), three fourths cup molasses, two level teaspoonfuls
soda dissolved in warm water, cloves, cinnamon, allspice and nutmeg to
suit the taste, one pound raisins, and flour enough to make a nice
batter. Nuts may also be used if desired.--Mrs. W. S. Davidson.

RAISIN CAKE.--Four eggs, one cup butter, two cups brown sugar, three
cups flour, one cup sour milk, one teaspoon soda, dissolved in very
little water, one small teaspoon each of cinnamon, cloves and allspice,
one half teaspoon vanilla. This is very nice used as a layer cake with
carmel icing.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

COFFEE CAKE.--One cup sugar, one cup butter, one cup coffee, one cup
molasses, one teaspoon soda, one teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon
allspice, one half teaspoon cloves, nutmeg and lemon essence. Four cups
flour, one half pound raisins.--Mrs. Mary Harvey.

FRUIT SPICE CAKE.--One scant cup butter, one cup brown sugar, one
fourth cup molasses, whites of three eggs, yolks of three eggs, three
fourths cup water, one fourth teaspoonful baking soda. Three cups
flour, one teaspoon each of cinnamon, allspice, cloves and nutmeg,
mixed. One half cup raisins, one fourth cup currants, and one fourth
cup citron. Mix like any batter cake adding molasses to the butter and
sugar. Remember to add soda last.--Dorothy Whitehead.

SALT PORK CAKE.--One pound of salt pork chopped fine. Pour one half
pint of boiling water on it, add one cup molasses, one teaspoon of
soda, two cups sugar, spices to suit taste, one pound of seeded and
dredged raisins and of currants and one cup of nuts, chopped. Stir
thick with flour about three and one half cups. Bake in one loaf. Cut
into pieces and steamed, this cake makes delicious pudding, served with
pudding sauce. It calls for no butter or eggs so is a cheap cake when
these foods are scarce and high priced.--Mrs. Whitehead.

CHOCOLATE COFFEE CAKE.--One cup granulated sugar, one half scant cup of
butter, yolks of two eggs and one white, one half cup strong coffee
warmed on stove with two squares of Bakers chocolate, one and one half
cups of flour sifted with two small teaspoons of baking powder. Cream
butter and sugar, then beat in eggs. Cool coffee and chocolate and add
lastly the flour, and a cup of chopped nuts. Bake in a moderate oven in
one loaf or in two layers. Ice with chocolate or white icing.--Mrs. A.
D. Paulson.

BREAD CAKE.--Three cups bread dough, three cups sugar, one cup of
butter, three eggs, one teaspoon each cinnamon, cloves and mace, a
little ginger, one cup raisins, one cup currants, one half teaspoon
soda. Let rise one hour and bake.--Mrs. R. J. Walker.

COFFEE CAKE.--Two or three cups of bread sponge, one cup of sugar, two
eggs well beaten, one pint of milk, (luke warm), two tablespoons of
melted butter or lard, one teaspoon of lemon extract or lemon juice,
one half teaspoon of nutmeg, one teaspoon salt. Mix all well and add
enough flour to make a stiff batter, set aside to rise, when light take
out and spread into well greased dripping pans. Spread melted butter
over top then mix three tablespoons of melted butter, one cup of sugar
and flour enough to make it dry and lumpy, to this add a little
cinnamon then sprinkle over top quite thick and bake twenty to thirty
minutes.

FIG CAKE.--One pound of powdered sugar, ten eggs, ten crackers rolled
fine, one half cake of sweet chocolate grated, one half pound of figs,
chopped fine, one teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon allspice, one
teaspoon baking powder. Whip the yolks of eggs very light, add sugar,
then beat again, add part of rolled cracker, then add the grated
chocolate, chopped figs, spices and lastly the well beaten whites of
eggs alternately with remaining crackers, into which the baking powder
is mixed. Bake in medium oven one hour very quietly, being careful not
to shake the stove.

RYE BREAD TORTE.--One pound powder sugar, ten eggs well beaten, three
ounces of rye bread, (grated), one half cake of sweet chocolate
(grated), one half cup of fine chopped sweet almonds, one half cup of
citron, cut fine, one teaspoon cloves, one teaspoon baking powder. Whip
the yolk of egg, add the sugar and beat again, add a portion of the
bread crumbs, then add the chocolate, citron, spice and almonds, mix
the baking powder in the remaining bread crumbs, lastly the well beaten
whites of eggs, alternately with the bread crumbs. Bake in a medium
oven about one hour. This may also be made in layers and whipped cream
placed between.--Mrs. George Bruegger.

GRIES TORTE OR FARINA CAKE.--One cup farina, one cup sugar, eight eggs.
Beat sugar and yolks of eggs one half hour then add farina slowly, and
the well beaten whites last. Bake one hour by slow fire. When cooled
put sliced pineapple on top and whipped cream.--Mrs. J. Bruegger.

FRUIT CAKE.--Cream one pound of brown sugar and one pound of butter,
add one pound of eggs (beaten light) one pound of flour sifted with two
teaspoons of baking powder, one nutmeg (grated) one tablespoon each of
cloves and allspice, half a pint of brandy and two pounds each of
seeded raisins and of currants, one half pound of chopped citron. Flour
the fruit well before adding to cake mixture. Bake in one loaf in
moderate oven. Pour half a pint of wine over it while it is warm, after
baking.--Mrs. George Newton.

MOTHER'S FRUIT CAKE.--One pound of butter, one and one half pounds of
sugar, one pound of flour, one cupful of New Orleans molasses, one
teaspoon of soda dissolved in two tablespoons of water, two teaspoons
of cinnamon, one teaspoonful of cloves and one teaspoonful of mace, one
dozen eggs, one gill or one cup of brandy, three pounds of raisins,
(seeded), two pounds of dried currants, one pound of shredded citron,
one pound stoned dates and one pound of shelled English walnuts or
pecans, cream the butter and sugar until light, add beaten yolks of
eggs, add the molasses, soda and spices. Clean and cut the fruit and
dredge thoroughly with part of the flour, stir it into the mixture
alternately with the flour and beaten whites of eggs. Mix well and
lastly add the brandy. Bake in one large loaf very slowly. Test with a
broom straw to be sure that the cake is well baked. The batter will
seem thin but do not add extra flour if you want a rich moist fruit
cake. Put in cake box and it will keep many months. Pieces of it can be
quickly steamed and used with foam sauce as plum pudding for dessert in
an emergency which is sometimes worth the price of the cake.--Mrs. B.
G. Whitehead.

FRUIT CAKE.--Rub one pound butter and one and one half pounds sugar to
a cream, add eight eggs and beat. Now add one tablespoon lemon extract,
one grated nutmeg, one tablespoon cinnamon, one half teaspoon cloves,
one pint sour cream. Now add four pounds raisins, one pound citron, two
pounds almonds, two pounds English walnuts, two pounds flour with two
teaspoons soda in it, one glass jelly. Bake three and one half hours in
moderate oven. Pour one cup brandy over the top of cake after it is
baked.--Mrs. Southard.

IMPERIAL FRUIT CAKE.--One pound of sugar, one pound of flour, three
quarters pound of butter, one pound of almonds, blanched and cut fine,
1-2 pound of citron, 1-4 pound candied cherries and as much pineapple,
one half pound of seeded raisins, rind and juice of one lemon, two
pieces of candied orange, one nutmeg, ten eggs. This is very delicious
and will keep for months. No baking powder or soda are used but the
eggs are beaten separately, yolks added to creamed butter and sugar and
the stiff whites put in last of all. Bake in one loaf in a slow oven.
Ice with white boiled frosting.--Contributed.

BLANCHE'S DATE CAKE.--Beat three egg yolks with one cup of sugar, add
one cup of flour sifted with one teaspoon of baking powder, stiffly
beaten whites of three eggs and one pound of stoned dates and one pound
chopped nuts, (pecans, English walnuts or hickory nuts). Bake in one
loaf in a moderate oven. Remove from oven and while it is hot pour one
cup of sour cream over it. The cream soaks into the cake and makes it
moist like fruit cake. No butter is used in this recipe.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

GINGER BREAD.--One half cup sugar, one half cup butter, one cup
molasses, each one teaspoon (heaped), ginger, cloves and cinnamon, two
level teaspoons soda in one cup boiling water, three scant cups of
flour, two well beaten eggs. Make it in the above order. Eggs
last.--Mrs. F. Kleinsorge.

GINGER BREAD.--One cup of butter, one cup of sugar, one cup of
molasses, (New Orleans), one cup of boiling water, two eggs beaten in
batter one at a time, one teaspoon of soda dissolved in the water, two
and one half cups of flour, two tablespoons of ginger, one teaspoon of
nutmeg. Bake in a loaf or in gem tins.--Mrs. John Heffernan.

GOOD PLAIN GINGER BREAD--One cup of molasses, one cup of sugar, one cup
of boiling water, two level teaspoons of soda dissolved in the hot
water, one half cupful (generous) of butter or shortening, one large
teaspoon of ginger and a little salt. Add enough flour to make pretty
stiff, about three cups. Bake in moderate oven in one sheet. As
molasses cake of any kind burns easily care should be taken not to have
the oven too hot. Eat warm for luncheon. Is nice sliced cold and served
with whipped cream as a dessert also.--Mrs. Whitehead.

WALNUT FILLING FOR CAKE.--One pound chopped walnut meats, yolks of six
eggs, two cups sugar, one cup sour cream, flavor with vanilla. Boil in
double boiler until thick and beat until cool. Spread between layers of
cake.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

RAISIN FILLING FOR CAKE.--One tablespoon of butter, two tablespoons of
flour, four tablespoons of sugar. Mix well together, add enough hot
water to cream it. Cook in double boiler until thick. Remove from fire
and add one half package of raisins and two tablespoons of
frosting.--Mrs. John Heffernan.

BOILED FROSTING.--Two cups of sugar boiled with water till it threads
from spoon. Beat whites of two eggs very stiff. Pour the thick hot
syrup gradually into the whites, beating continually until light and
thick. Flavor to suit taste. For chocolate frosting add one third cake
of Bakers chocolate cut or shaved fine, while the frosting is warm
enough to melt it. For tutti-fruitti filling add mixed chopped nuts,
raisins, figs, dates or crystalized fruits to two thirds of the
frosting, reserving the balance for icing the top of cake. For cocoanut
cake, spread the layers with frosting and sprinkle thickly with grated
cocoanut. Marsh mallows may be steamed, mixed with nuts, and served
through the frosting too.--Mrs. Whitehead.

WHITE CARAMEL OR FONDANT FROSTING.--Two cups of sugar, boiled with one
and three fourths cups of milk or thin cream to the soft ball stage.
Test it by dropping a spoonful in cold water. If you can pick it up in
a soft ball take the carmel from the stove. Add one tablespoon of
(uncolored) butter and one teaspoon of vanilla and beat steadily until
it creams or turns to a fondant. Spread immediately on the cake.
Chopped nuts are nice added to this or halved English walnuts may be
placed regularly on top of a square cake. Chocolate may be added to the
warm fondant before beating it. White icing like this is nice covered
with thin layer of chocolate melted with butter or English walnuts
buried in the white icing and then covered with chocolate fondant makes
a delicious filling for layer cake. This caramel filling with nuts is
especially nice on Devil's Food or dark chocolate. Brown sugar caramel
is made likewise using half granulated and half brown sugar for the
fondant.--Mrs. Whitehead.

MARSHMALLOW FILLING OR ICING FOR ANGEL FOOD CAKE.--Steam one pound of
marsh mallows with one pint of milk, and beat into this half a pint of
whipped cream and one half cup chopped nuts. Flavor with vanilla and
spread between layers of Angel Food or sponge cake. May cover this
filling with melted chocolate icing, also if liked.--Contributed.




Cookies, Drop Cakes and Doughnuts

    "Bake, bake, bake! For the cookie jar piled high
    But yesterday, in some curious way,
    Is empty again, O my!
    Stir, stir, stir, in the froth of yellow and white
    For well she knows how the story goes
    Of a small boy's appetite."--J. W. Foley.


GERMAN CHRISTMAS COOKIES.--There are many different kinds and I will
give you the names of them just as they are called in German as some
names cannot be well translated into English language. The first will
be Springelie. One pound of sugar, one pound of flour, four eggs,
butter the size of a walnut and one half teaspoon of baking powder.
Beat sugar and butter, and eggs one at a time, beating for fifteen
minutes, then add flour with baking powder, now roll and cut, sprinkle
baking board with flour and anise seeds, and lay cookies on that until
next morning, then bake in a moderate oven a light yellow.

WEISSE PFEFFER NUSSE.--One pound of flour, one pound of sugar, four
large eggs, three ounces of citron, the grated rind of one lemon, one
nutmeg, one tablespoon cinnamon, one teaspoonful of cloves, one
teaspoon of baking powder. Eggs, sugar, baking powder and spices must
be well beaten, then mix with flour and citron; roll and cut and let
lay over night or form into little balls and bake until they become dry
inside.

EIER KRANZE.--One pound of flour, one pound of butter, one fourth pound
of sugar, the yolks of six hard boiled eggs, one half cupful of brandy.
Rub the boiled yolks and mix with the flour and butter, (which have
been rubbed smooth together like pie crust) then sugar is added and the
grated yolks of hard boiled eggs; then add brandy. Roll and cut with
doughnut cutter, brush with beaten egg and sprinkle with sugar,
cinnamon and chopped almond. Bake in hot oven.

BAISORS OR KISSES.--Beat the whites of six eggs and three cups of sugar
one hour or until the egg beater will stand in the mixture without
falling, then flavor with vanilla and drop by spoonful on a tin and
bake in a moderate oven.--Mrs. John Bruegger demonstrated all of the
above recipes in the German Cookery series for the club meeting of June
9, 1909.

COOKIES.--Take two quarts of flour and two cups of sugar, sift the two
together, then add one heaping cup of lard or butter; rub well through
the flour and sugar and then add four teaspoons of baking powder and
rub well through the flour, sugar and butter. Then make a hole in the
center and into it break five eggs and a half cup of sweet milk and
flavor to taste. Stir these contents together, roll out and bake in hot
oven.--Mrs. F. Kleinsorge.

MRS. HAYES' DATE COOKIES.--One cup butter, one half cup lard, one and
one half cups brown sugar, one half cup sour milk, one teaspoon soda,
three cups oat meal, two cups flour, mix, one pound dates, one cup
sugar, one cup water, boil one hour till it is a smooth paste. Roll the
dough as thin as you can and cut with a small round cutter. Place one
teaspoon of date paste on a cooky, then cover with another. Bake in a
moderate oven.--Mrs. Creaser.

ROSETTES.--Two eggs, one teaspoonful of sugar, one fourth teaspoonful
salt, one cup of milk, one cup of flour, (a little more if necessary).
Mix flour and milk smooth then add sugar and salt and the beaten eggs.
Heat the rosette iron in the hot lard then dip into batter, not letting
batter come over the top of iron, now return to the hot lard covering
the iron with same for at least twenty five seconds. Drain and sprinkle
with powdered sugar and serve as cakes.--Mrs. J. Bruegger.

MARGUERITES.--One cup sugar, one third cup water. Boil until it threads
or hairs and beat into beaten white of eggs. Add nuts and spread on
Saratoga flakes and brown in oven.--Mrs. G. A. McIntosh.

OAT MEAL COOKIES WITH DATE FILLING.--One cup light brown sugar, one and
one half cups butter, one half cup sour milk, three cups oat meal, two
cups flour, one teaspoon soda in milk.

DATE FILLING.--One pound dates chopped, one cup sugar, one cup boiling
water, cook until thick. Spread between cookies. Press together on
edges and bake.--Mrs. G. A. McIntosh.

OAT MEAL COOKIES.--One cup butter, one cup sugar, two eggs, six
tablespoons sweet milk, three fourths teaspoon soda, one half teaspoon
each of cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg, one cup chopped raisins, one half
cup currants, two cups flour, two cups oat meal, three fourths cup
chopped walnuts. Drop from teaspoon into greased pan and
bake.--Contributed.

OAT MEAL COOKIES, DATE FILLING.--Four cups of oat meal, two cups of
flour, one cup of shortening, three quarters cup of sugar, one teaspoon
of soda, water to roll. Roll thin, bake and put two together with
cooked dates.--Mrs. Geo. Farries.

OAT MEAL DROP COOKIES.--Three quarters cup butter, one cup sugar, cream
together, three eggs well beaten, two cups flour, two cups of rolled
oats, one and one half cups seeded chopped raisins, one teaspoon
cinnamon, three quarters teaspoon soda. Drop on buttered tins and bake
in slow oven.--Mrs. Geo. Farries.

GOOD COOKIES.--One and a half cups sugar, three fourths cup butter. Rub
butter and sugar to a cream, (three eggs) beating them into the cream
one at a time, three tablespoons of cream, or sweet milk, one teaspoon
cream tartar, half teaspoon soda, (soda dissolved in milk, cream of
tartar put through sieve with flour), flour enough to roll thin, flavor
with teaspoon nutmeg and vanilla. Sprinkle with sugar and cut out. Bake
in a hot oven.--Mrs. John Heffernan.

CHOCOLATE COOKIES.--One tablespoon lard, one half cup butter, one cup
sugar, pinch of salt, one half teaspoon cinnamon, one half teaspoon
soda, dissolve in very little cold milk, two ounces melted chocolate,
two cups flour. Roll very thin, cut and bake in greased tins.--Mrs.
Aaron J. Bessie.

EGGLESS COOKIES.--Two cups sugar, one cup sweet milk, one cup butter,
one half teaspoon soda, (dissolved in cold water), lemon extract, flour
enough to roll out.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

OAT MEAL COOKIES.--One cup butter, one and one third cups sugar, two
eggs, one and three fourths cup raw oat meal, two cups flour, three
fourths teaspoon of soda, one half teaspoon salt, one teaspoonful
cinnamon, one and one half cups raisins, and three fourths cup of sour
milk. Drop by teaspoonful into floured tins and bake in a very moderate
oven.--Clara Cooper.

ALMOND RINGS.--Three fourths pound of butter creamed with one half
pound powdered sugar; add three yolks of eggs (beaten) and one pound of
flour. Flavor with vanilla or almond extract. Mix and roll thin. Cut in
large rings. Beat three whites of eggs to a froth, brush over the
cookies and sprinkle thickly with chopped almond, granulated sugar and
cinnamon. Brown in the oven.--Mrs. Whitehead.

CHOCOLATE NUT KISSES.--Ten ounces of powdered sugar beaten with the
whites of six eggs for one hour. Add ten ounces of grated chocolate and
seven ounces of ground almond. Bake like kisses in a moderate
oven.--Mrs. Whitehead.

COCOANUT DROP CAKES.--Two cupfuls of sugar boiled with one cupful of
water until it threads from the spoon. Beat the whites of two eggs very
light. Beat in the hot syrup and beat until light and thick, flavor
with vanilla or lemon and stir very stiff with shredded cocoanut. Drop
in little stiff cakes on buttered papers on tins and brown a delicate
color in a moderate oven. Invert the papers and brush the backs of
paper with a little cold water when the cakes will readily slip off.
Chopped pecans may be used instead of cocoanut but there must be enough
nuts to make a stiff mixture that will not run when dropped on the
papers.--Mrs. Whitehead.

ROCKS.--Two cups brown sugar, one cup butter, one cup cold strong
coffee, two eggs, one level teaspoon soda, one teaspoon baking powder,
sifted with three cups flour, one teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon
nutmeg, two cups seeded raisins, one cup nuts chopped but not fine.
Roll out and cut into cookies. Bake in quick oven. Very good.--Mrs.
Alta Southard.

VANILLA WAFERS OR CRISP COOKIES.--One half cup of lard and butter
mixed. Cream with one cup of sugar; add one well beaten egg, one fourth
cup of milk, two and one half cups of flour, one teaspoon baking
powder, one half teaspoon of salt and two teaspoons of vanilla. Mix
soft in order given, flour board and roll very thin. Cut into small
cookies and bake in a hot oven.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SUGAR COOKIES.--One half cup butter creamed with one cup sugar, add two
beaten eggs, one fourth cup milk, two and one half cups flour, one
large teaspoon baking powder, one half teaspoon of lemon extract and
grated nutmeg if liked. Mix soft and roll but sprinkle with sugar, roll
it in then cut and bake in greased pans in a hot oven.--Contributed.

BROWN COOKIES.--Mix two cups of brown sugar with one cup of lard, add
one cup of cooking molasses, and one cup of boiling water with two
teaspoons of soda dissolved in it, one tablespoon of ginger. Mix in
flour enough to make a stiff dough and let it stand over night. Roll
out quite thick, cut and bake. When cool spread with a stiff icing of
lemon juice and powdered sugar.--Mrs. Harry Hanson.

MOTHER'S WHITE COOKIES.--Two eggs, one cup of sugar, one cupful of
butter, one half cupful of sour milk, one half teaspoon of soda, nutmeg
to taste, one teaspoonful of baking powder. Flour enough to make soft
dough. Roll thin and bake.--Mrs. E. G. Schollander.

GINGER SNAPS.--Heat to boiling point one cup butter, add one cup
molasses, two cups brown sugar, one tablespoon ginger, one tablespoon
cinnamon, one scant teaspoon soda. Take from fire, beat well, add two
eggs. Roll with six cups of flour. Let stand over night.--Mrs. E.
Schollander.

CLARA'S DROP CAKES.--Two cups sugar, two eggs, one cup sweet milk, one
teaspoon soda, one teaspoon cinnamon, one cup raisins, one cup
shortening, one cup molasses, four cups flour, one teaspoon salt, one
teaspoon cloves, one cup currants. Mix together sugar and shortening,
stir in eggs beaten lightly, add soda dissolved in molasses, cloves,
cinnamon, milk, fruit, mixed with a little of the flour and lastly the
flour and salt sifted together. Drop from teaspoon on greased tin and
bake in moderate oven. This makes quite a large amount.--Clara Monroe.

PEPPER GINGER COOKIES.--One cup sugar, one cup molasses, one cup
shortening (mixed lard and butter, one tablespoon ginger, 1 fourth
teaspoon (scant) black pepper, one teaspoon soda in one cup boiling
water. Mix with flour enough to roll out, about three large cups. Roll
thin, cut into cookies and bake in greased tins in a moderate oven.
Cheap and good.--Contributed.

OAT MEAL COOKIES WITH DATE FILLING.--One cup of sugar, one cup butter,
creamed together, add two eggs, beat and then add one half of a large
cup of sour milk with one teaspoon soda dissolved in it, two cups of
raw rolled oats and two cups of flour, a little salt. Flavor with
vanilla or lemon and roll and cut into small cookies. Chopped raisins
may be mixed with the dough or a date filling may be used, made as
follows: Boil one pound of stoned dates with one cup of water and one
cup of sugar to a thick paste. Spread a teaspoon of Dates on each
cookie, cover with another cookie, press edges together firmly and bake
in moderate oven.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SOFT MOLASSES COOKIES.--Two cups molasses boiled, one cup lard and
butter put into boiling molasses, two eggs or yolks of four or five,
two cups sugar, one cup sour milk, one half teaspoon nutmeg, one half
teaspoon cloves, one heaping teaspoon each of ginger and cinnamon,
pinch of salt, two heaping teaspoons soda, flour to roll very soft. Do
not let molasses boil more than a minute or two.--Mrs. Paul Leonhardy.

HERMITS.--One and one half cups brown sugar, one cup butter, one half
teaspoon soda, three eggs, pinch of salt, nutmeg, one and one half cups
chopped raisins or dates, one and one half cups chopped nuts, three and
one half cups flour, one teaspoonful of cream of tartar. Drop these in
small, stiff, rough cakes on greased tins and bake brown. For chocolate
hermits, add one half cup of grated Bakers chocolate before baking or
shave the chocolate and melt it in a little hot water. Cocoa may be
substituted for chocolate.--Contributed.

FATTIGMAND. (Scandinavian).--Three well beaten eggs, three tablespoons
of sugar, three teaspoons of cream, add cardamom seeds to flavor and
one teaspoon of brandy. Stir well together, add flour to roll soft,
roll, cut in fancy strips or small cookies and fry in hot lard like
crullers.--Contributed.

BERLINER KRARZE. (Scandinavian). Four raw egg yolks, three hard boiled
egg yolks (grated), one cup sugar, one cup butter, three and one half
cups of flour. Flavor with one tablespoon of brandy or with any
favorite extract. Roll thin, cut, dip cookies into beaten whites of
eggs, then into rolled loaf sugar and bake or finely chopped nuts and
cinnamon may be sprinkled on them just before baking.--Contributed.

"S" FINGERS. (Scandinavian).--One cup sugar, one half cup butter, two
eggs, four tablespoons of milk, two teaspoons of baking powder. Flour
to roll stiff and flavoring. Roll thin, cut into letter "S" fingers and
bake in greased pans.

JUMBLES.--One cup sugar, one cup molasses, three eggs, one cup sour
cream mixed with two level teaspoons of soda. Add four cups flour, one
half teaspoon ginger, one fourth teaspoon cloves and a little salt.
Drop in small cakes on greased pans and bake in moderate
oven.--Contributed.

PUFF BALLS.--Three eggs, one cup sugar, four cups of flour, two
teaspoons melted butter, one and one half cups sweet milk, two
teaspoons baking powder. Flavor, mix and drop in small balls into deep,
smoking hot fat. Drain and roll in powdered sugar.--Wahpeton Cook Book.

HERMITS.--Two eggs, one and one half cups brown sugar, one cup butter
and lard mixed, two thirds cup sour milk, one teaspoon of soda, one
teaspoon cinnamon, one teaspoon vanilla, one half teaspoon cloves, one
cup chopped raisins, one cup chopped nuts, about three cups of flour.
Drop dough on buttered pans with spoon. Bake.--Contributed.


Doughnuts

    "Cook says it's awful 'scouragin' to bake and fret and fuss,
    An' w'en she thinks she's got 'em in the crock they're all
      in us!"--J. W. Foley.

DOUGHNUTS.--One and one half cups sugar, three eggs, one cup sour
cream, one half cup milk sweet or sour, one half teaspoon soda
dissolved in water and stirred into the cream, two teaspoons baking
powder with flour to make soft dough, season to taste.--Mrs. L. L.
Lampman.

DOUGHNUTS.--Three eggs beaten light, one cup sugar, two tablespoons
butter, one cup sour milk, one teaspoon soda dissolved in hot water,
one half teaspoon nutmeg, a little salt, one half teaspoon baking
powder. Use swansdown cake flour to make a nice smooth dough. Roll, cut
and fry brown in deep smoking hot lard.--Mrs. Southard.

DOUGHNUTS.--Two cups sugar, two eggs, one cup sweet milk, one heaping
teaspoon butter, one and one half cups mashed potatoes, salt, nutmeg,
three teaspoons baking powder. Mash the potatoes and while they are hot
add the butter, sugar, salt and nutmeg. Beat the eggs and add with the
milk, sift baking powder with flour twice. Use only flour to roll out,
the less flour used the better doughnuts will be.--Mrs. Aaron J.
Bessie.

SOUR CREAM DOUGHNUTS.--One and one half cups sour milk, one half cup
thick sour cream, one level teaspoon of soda, one and one half cups
sugar, three eggs, a little salt and nutmeg or other flavoring. Flour
to roll soft, about six cups, cut. Brown in deep, smoking hot fat,
drain and sift powdered sugar over them, (two eggs will
do).--Contributed.

EXTRA GOOD DOUGHNUTS.--One cup sugar, one cup sweet milk, one half
(scant) cup sour cream, three eggs, two level teaspoons baking powder,
one level teaspoon soda, salt. Flour to roll soft. Pour sweet milk over
sugar, add soda to cream, stir in milk and sugar, then eggs and then
flour, flavoring, etc.--Contributed.




Pastry, Pies and Tarts

    "Cook your husband what he likes, and save a hundred household
    strikes."


PIE CRUST.--For one pie, mix one large cup of flour sifted with half a
teaspoon of salt, with one half cup of lard and butter mixed. Blend
these ingredients thoroughly with the hands or cut and shape with a
knife, then lightly mix in one quarter cup ice cold water, just enough
to bind the flour and lard together. Use scant measure of water and do
not handle much. Flour the molding board and quickly roll half the
dough into a thin crust and line the pie tin. Fill the pie with
prepared fruit, wet the edges of the crust with water, roll out the
balance of the dough for the upper crust, gash it across the center and
lift it carefully and cover the pie, pressing edges together with a
fork. If a glazed crust is wanted rub the crust over with a little
milk, egg and sugar slightly mixed together. This insures a nice brown
crust. The oven should be hot enough to turn white note paper a nice,
rich brown color in five minutes time. Pastry requires a brisk oven but
not too hot. The ingredients for pastry should be very cold. The
measure of shortening (lard) should be generous and the water scant and
it should not be handled after the water is added only sufficient to
lift out of the mixing bowl and roll out. Flour the board well and
flour the rolling pin.

CURRANT PIE.--One cup currants (fresh fruit), one cup sugar, one
tablespoon flour, two tablespoons water, one lump of butter and yolks
of two eggs. Beat all together and bake in one crust. When done frost
with the beaten whites of the eggs.--Mrs. Davidson.

CHERRY PIE.--Line a pie plate with pie crust, fill it generously half
full of fresh, stoned sour cherries, and sprinkle a generous cupful of
sugar over them mixed with one large tablespoon of flour, dot with one
level tablespoon of butter cut into bits, cover with another layer of
cherries sprinkled lightly with sugar. Cover with an upper crust
wetting the edges and pressing well together to prevent juice escaping.
Cut a gash in center of top crust to allow steam to escape and bake in
a moderate oven for forty minutes or until cherries are tender and the
juice bubbles in a simp. If a novice at the work, test the fruit with a
broom straw through the gash in the upper crust. If the straw can
pierce the fruit easily the pie is done.--Mrs. Whitehead.

FRESH FRUIT PIES.--The recipe for cherry pie applies to all fresh berry
or fruit pies gauging the sugar and flour according to the juicy
sweetness of the fruit. Gooseberries, currants, strawberries,
cranberries and plums will take good full measures of sugar and flour.
Raspberries, blue berries and black berries require less sugar and
apricots and peaches and apples small measures of flour. A little
butter improves the flavor of all fruit pies and apple pie needs a
dusting of nutmeg or cinnamon before adding the top crust. Canned fruit
may be drained free of its syrup and used the same way using less sugar
and adding half a cupful of the syrup.--L. W. W.

LEMON PIE. Crust.--One half large cup of flour, one heaping tablespoon
of lard, pinch of salt. Mix well. Add enough water to make paste. Roll
thin, put in tin, prick with fork and bake. Filling. One large cup of
sugar, two heaping tablespoons of flour, one large cup of boiling
water, butter the size of a walnut, juice and grated rind of one lemon,
yolks of two eggs. Mix the flour and sugar together, add boiling water,
put on the stove and let come to a boil, then add butter, yolks of two
eggs, juice and grated rind of one lemon. Remove from fire at once.
Beat the whites of two eggs with two tablespoons of sugar and put on
top. Put in oven to brown.--Mrs. R. Meidell.

AMERICAN PRUNE PIE.--Stew about twenty four or thirty prunes, pitt and
sweeten the prunes. Bake a pie crust. Whip one half pint of cream,
sweeten with sugar, flavor with vanilla. Put a layer of prunes in the
crust, then the whipped cream on top and serve cold.--Mrs. R. Meidell.

PUMPKIN PIE.--One cupful of mashed pumpkin, three quarters cup of
sugar, one teaspoonful of salt, one half teaspoonful each of mace,
cinnamon and ginger. Heat one teacupful of milk and beat three eggs and
add to mixture. Bake with under crust only.--Mrs. H. Hanson.

PUMPKIN PIE.--One quart milk, three cups stewed pumpkin, one tablespoon
flour, four eggs, one and one half cups brown sugar, one half cup
molasses, one teaspoon salt, one level tablespoon cinnamon, one
teaspoon ginger, one tablespoon melted butter. Bake with an under
crust. Makes three pies. Beat eggs, add pumpkin, then flour, sugar,
salt, spices, molasses and butter and lastly the milk which may be
partly cream. Mix well, fill pie tins which have been lined with pie
crust and bake from thirty to forty minutes.--L. W. W.

RHUBARB PIE.--One cup diced fresh rhubarb, one cup sugar, one
tablespoon flour. Mix all together, turn into a pie tin lined with pie
crust. Dot bits of butter over the top of rhubarb, sprinkle with one
tablespoon of water. Cover with top crust and bake in moderate oven
about forty minutes.--Contributed.

CREAM PIE.--Two yolks of eggs beaten with one half cup sugar, add one
large tablespoon of flour and a scant tablespoon of corn starch
dissolved in a little milk. Cook in one pint of boiling milk on back of
range, stirring constantly. Flavor with vanilla or lemon. Fill baked
pastry shell, cover with meringue and brown in oven. Serve cold.--L. W.
W.

CUSTARD PIES.--The rule for custard pie is four beaten eggs and one
scant cup sugar to each quart of milk. For one small pie use half this
recipe. Mix all together and add flavoring of vanilla, lemon, almond or
nutmeg. Line deep pie tin with pie crust and fill with the raw custard
and bake in a moderate oven until the custard sets and can be cut clean
with a silver knife. Do not bake too long or it will be dry and tough
and use scant sugar measure to avoid a watery custard. Cocoanut custard
pie is made by adding one cup of shredded cocoanut before baking. Date
pie is made by pressing stewed dates through a colander and adding to
the custard. Open fruit custard pies are made by laying a layer of
prepared fruit on the crust in the tin and covering with the raw
custard. All custard pies are baked with an under crust only. Pumpkin,
squash and sweet potato pies are made by adding a quart of the cooked
and mashed vegetable to each quart of custard and adding spices and
salt to suit individual taste.--Contributed.

CREAM PIES.--The cream fillings are cooked on top of stove until thick.
Line pie tins with a rich pie crust, pick with a fork to let out air
while baking, and bake a golden brown, then fill with the cooked
filling, cover with a meringue and bake until meringue sets. The rule
for the cream filling is two eggs beaten with half a cup of sugar and
one large tablespoon of flour or one scant tablespoon of cornstarch
mixed smooth with a little milk, add flavoring. Bring two small cups of
milk or water to a boil, add the egg mixture and cook thick. If liked
add one teaspoon of butter to the milk or water. For chocolate pie
double the sugar and use two squares of chocolate shaved fine and heat
with the cream filling. For pineapple add grated pineapple to the cream
filling, double the measure of flour as acids thin the mixture
considerably. For lemon cream pie use the juice and grated rind of one
large lemon or two small ones and double the flour and sugar measure.
(For orange pie use juice of one large orange and half a lemon.) In
lemon and orange pie water is generally used in preference to milk and
if a rich pie is liked use an extra egg yolk and a large measure of
sugar.--Contributed.

MERINGUE.--To make the meringue, beat the whites of two eggs very light
and stiff, cut in two level tablespoons of sugar and beat five minutes.
Spread on top of the filled pie, sprinkle lightly with sugar and brown
in a slow oven. When meringue is firm to the touch it is done and will
not fall or shrink, if under-done it falls. If the oven is too hot
leave the oven door open for three minutes before putting the meringue
in to bake. Long beating of the whites of eggs and sugar however will
usually make a good, thick and firm meringue.--Contributed.

ENGLISH ORANGE CHEESE CAKES OR TARTS.--One half pound sugar (one cup)
mixed with one fourth pound butter (one half cup) add three eggs,
(reserving white of one); juice of two oranges and grated rind of one;
juice of one lemon. Beat well. Simmer until like honey. Fill baked
patty or tart shells of pie crust. Make a meringue of the stiffly
beaten white of egg and one tablespoon of sugar. Frost the tarts,
sprinkle with sugar and brown in a moderate oven. Serve cold.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

DEVIL'S FOOD CAKE.--One and one half cups of sugar, creamed with one
half cup butter, yolks of three eggs, one half cup milk, one square
chocolate melted in half cup boiling water, two cups flour sifted with
two heaping teaspoons baking powder. Add vanilla and the unbeaten
whites of the three eggs the last thing.--Mrs. T. B. Huff.

BURNT SUGAR CAKE.--One and one half cups sugar creamed with one half
cup butter, yolks of three eggs, one large cup cold water, three large
tablespoons of thick burnt sugar or enough to make a light brown in
color; two cups flour sifted with two heaping teaspoons baking powder.
Add the unbeaten whites of the three eggs and vanilla the last thing.
Frost with boiled frosting to which has been added one tablespoon of
burnt sugar and a half cup broken nut meats.--Mrs. T. B. Huff.

TO MAKE BURNT SUGAR.--Put in a sauce pan one cup sugar and cook,
stirring constantly; the sugar will then form into lumps, then melt and
throw off a thick black smoke. Now take from fire and add three
tablespoons hot water and place on stove and let come to a good boil;
it is then ready to use and can be kept indefinitely.--Mrs. T. B. Huff.

CHOCOLATE FROSTING.--To make a good chocolate frosting make a quantity
of fudge, beating it until very smooth and until it sets. Then add a
teaspoon, or the necessary amount of cream, or milk, until the right
consistency to spread.--Mrs. T. B. Huff.

BAKED FISH.--Large white fish, pike or cat fish are best, but small
fish can also be used. Put in a pan, sprinkle well with salt and pepper
and cover with bits of butter; then pour a little water or milk in the
pan and bake, basting the fish often, and adding more water or milk as
needed. This takes about a half hour to bake in a hot oven. Make a
white gravy of milk, butter and flour, season well and add a can of
mushroom and serve over the fish. Delicious.--Mrs. T. B. Huff.

COCOANUT CHEESE CAKES OR TARTS.--Boil one pint of sugar with two thirds
of a pint of water and add one and one half cups of shredded cocoanut
and boil slowly twelve minutes; remove to rear of range and while warm
beat in one half cup of butter until smooth; then beat in the beaten
yolks of five or six eggs. Flavor with lemon juice or vanilla or almond
extract. Line patty pans or gem tins with a rich pastry crust, fill
with the cocoanut custard and bake. They are pretty capped with a cube
of currant jelly. Serve either hot or cold.

APPLE CHEESE CAKES.--One pint of steamed, sweetened and stewed apple
sauce heated. Add grated rind of half a lemon, two level tablespoons of
butter and beat smooth, then cut in two eggs beaten well. Bake in patty
pans lined with pastry. Good way to use left over pie crust and apple
sauce.

MINCE MEAT.--Four pounds of lean boiled meat, chopped fine; twice its
weight in sour apples, peeled, cored and chopped fine, one pound of
minced suet; three pounds of seeded raisins, two pounds of currants;
one pound of brown sugar; one pint of molasses and of maple syrup or of
fruit syrup, two quarts of sweet fresh cider, one pint of cider boiled,
one tablespoon of salt, one scant teaspoon of pepper, one tablespoon
each of mace, allspice and cloves, four tablespoons of cinnamon. Mix
well and bring to a boil on the stove. When nearly cold stir in one
pint of brandy and one pint of wine. If these are not liked use syrup
from pickles or pears or unfermented grape juice. Pack in a large stone
crock or seal in Mason jars and keep covered in a cool place. Will keep
good all winter. Half of this recipe will suffice for the winter for a
small family. Considering that the mince meats put up in cartons and
packages contain no meat and often an inferior grade of dried apples,
it certainly pays to make mince meat at home out of fresh material,
when butchering is done and apples are cheapest.--Mrs. Whitehead.

MINCE MEAT. (Small jar for small family.) Two cups chopped boiled meat,
or of hamburger steak, steamed tender in a double boiler, four cups of
chopped apples, one pint of sweet cider or of juice from pickled
peaches, one cup molasses, two cups sugar (scant), juice of three
lemons, one cup shredded or chopped suet or one half cupful of butter
or sweet drippings, one teaspoon of salt, mixed spices to suit taste.
Cook five minutes. When ready for pie thin the mixture with cider or
with a glass of tart jelly melted and add seeded raisins or currants
and a little brandy if liked. Bake between two crusts of pastry and
serve warm. One heaping cup of mince meat will make one pie. Fruit
juice left from canned fruit is nice added to mince meat and often can
be nicely utilized this way.

NEOPOLITANS.--Take pie crust left over after mixing pie. Roll it into a
thin sheet and cut into oblong strips three by two inches. Bake in
quick oven. Spread half with jam, lay balance of strips over that like
sandwiches and spread jam or jelly on top. Dust with powdered sugar.
Lemon or orange cake filling or frosting may be used instead of juice
or marmolade, and crushed fresh, sweetened berries make a good filling
and covering if capped with whipped cream.

ENGLISH CHEESE PIE.--One cupful of thick sour cream or milk curd,
salted slightly, two beaten eggs, three fourths cup of sweet milk, one
half cup sugar, one half cupful of English currants (dried). Rub curd
thoroughly first and mix with other ingredients. Bake in a deep pie tin
lined with pie crust. Powder with cinnamon.

FRENCH TART.--Pound eight macaroons fine, pour boiling milk over them
to make a soft batter, add six well beaten eggs and one half cupful of
sugar. Cook thick, add one half cup of butter and the juice of an
orange. Line a pie with pastry, fill with the mixture and bake. Dust
with powdered sugar before serving. Eight good sized macaroons will
take from two to three cups of milk.

PATTIES.--Three cups flour, one cup lard, three fourths cup of ice
water, one teaspoon baking powder, one teaspoon salt. Mix and roll like
pie crust. Bake in patty pans. Makes thirty patties.

PIE CRUST.--One and one quarter cups flour, pinch baking powder, mix
with one half cup lard and one teaspoon salt. Add ice cold water enough
to roll out--about one fourth cup. Flour board and roll thin.

BERRY TARTS.--One pint of buttered strawberries or red raspberries, one
cup sugar, the beaten white of one egg stirred through the sugar. Mix
with the berries. Bake between two crusts until egg is set then serve
with whipped cream.--Contributed.




Fancy Desserts

    "They make maple syrup out of corn cobs that you can't tell from
    the adulterated." Abe Martin.


SPONGE CAKE DESSERT.--Take hot water sponge cake, cut it into thin
slices and line the sides of stem sherbet glasses. Fill in with
sweetened strawberries and whipped cream.--Mrs. Southard, demonstration
fancy desserts.

SPONGE CIRCLES.--Cut round pieces of sponge cake. Lay a border of
sweetened strawberries around the edge of each piece of cake and fill
in the center with ice cream.--Mrs. Southard, demonstration fancy
desserts.

PEACH CUSTARD.--Bake a custard pie. Slice and sugar nice ripe peaches.
Spread the peaches on top of the custard and cap with whipped
cream.--Mrs. Southard, demonstration of fancy desserts.

PINEAPPLE DESSERT.--Thick slice of canned, or of fresh sugared
pineapple, heap each slice with sweetened whipped cream flavored with a
dash of vanilla and powder lightly with chopped nuts. Serve with
cake.--Mrs. Southard, demonstration fancy desserts.

STRAWBERRY SPONGE.--One quart strawberries, one half package Knox
gelatine, one and one half cups water, one cup sugar, juice of one
lemon, whites of four eggs. Soak gelatine until soft in one cup water.
Mash strawberries, add half of sugar. Boil balance of sugar with the
water twenty minutes. Rub strawberries through a sieve. Add gelatine to
the strawberry juice and the hot, thin syrup. Remove from fire, add
berry pulp and lemon juice and beat five minutes in dish set in ice
water. Add whites of eggs and beat until mixture thickens. Other
berries, crushed peaches, plums and other fruits may be used the same
way. Serve with cream or with custard sauce.--Mrs. Southard, domestic
science demonstration of fancy desserts.

WHISKEY SPONGE PUDDING.--One quart sweet cream, yolks of ten eggs, one
package gelatine, one small cup whiskey, one large cup sugar, one
teaspoon vanilla. Dissolve the gelatine and beat well with the eggs,
then add half of the cream, boiled, add sugar, vanilla and whiskey, and
the rest of the cream whipped stiff. Allow to stand until cold and
thick; at least six or eight hours.

SAUCE.--One glass of jelly, one half cup sugar, one cup water. When
boiling thicken very little with corn starch. Use cold.--Mrs. Aaron J.
Bessie.

COFFEE GELATINE.--One and one half cups milk, one cup cold coffee, two
thirds cup sugar, three eggs beaten separately, one pinch of salt, one
rounded tablespoonful of granulated gelatine, one half teaspoon of
vanilla. Put the milk, coffee and gelatine in a double boiler, add
sugar, salt and beaten yolks. Cook till it thickens or starts to
separate, stirring occasionally. Take from fire. Add vanilla, add
beaten whites of eggs, stir and turn into a mold which has been dipped
in cold water.--Mrs. Creaser.

MAPLE MOUSSE.--Four eggs beaten stiff, one cup maple syrup. Cook until
it thickens, then beat until cool. One pint whipped cream, beaten
together.--Mrs. Schollander.

BUTTERCUP JELLY.--Dissolve one box of Knox gelatine in one pint of cold
water. Add three cupfuls of boiling water, one and one half cupfuls of
sugar and the juice of four lemons and two oranges. Cook five minutes
and strain through cheese cloth. Divide into two portions. Add the
beaten yolks of three eggs to one portion and one half cupful of chopped
nuts. Add one half pint of cream to the other portion and whip until
stiff or the beaten whites of two eggs if you haven't cream. Place in
moulds. Cut the white jelly into cubes and heap them at the base of the
yellow mold. Serve with whipped cream which may be capped with chopped
pineapple. Maraschino cherries or fresh strawberries.--Mrs. Whitehead,
pudding demonstration.

FRUIT GELATINE PUDDING.--Juice of three lemons, one pint of cold water,
one and one half pints boiling water, one cup sugar, one box Knox
gelatine. Soak gelatine in the cold water, pour on boiling water, add
other ingredients. Strain and turn over mixed sliced and sugared fruits
and nuts, and serve with sweetened whipped cream flavored with
vanilla.--Mrs. Whitehead, pudding demonstration.

CARAMEL PUDDING.--Put pint of milk in double boiler. When hot add three
heaping teaspoons of corn starch dissolved in one third cup cold milk.
Add pinch of salt. Take one and one third cups of brown sugar and put
in pan on stove and melt, stirring continuously to prevent scorching.
When melted add very slowly one third cup boiling water. Now stir this
into the thickened milk. Cook for half an hour stirring very often. Add
beaten eggs five minutes before taking off stove. Serve with whipped
cream.--Mrs. G. A. McIntosh.

SNOW PUDDING.--Pour one pint of boiling water on one half a box of
gelatine; add the juice of one lemon and two cups of sugar. When nearly
cold strain; add the whites of three eggs beaten to a froth, beat the
whole together, put in mold and set on ice. With the yolks of three
eggs, one pint of milk, one large teaspoon of corn starch, make a
boiled custard, flavor to suit taste. Serve cold by pouring the custard
around portions of the snow placed in saucers.--L. W.

CARAMEL CUSTARD.--Put one cup of sugar in a skillet and let it melt and
brown, stirring constantly. When it smokes, add one cup boiling water
and cook to a thick syrup. Four eggs beaten with one half cup sugar,
add one quart milk and a little vanilla. Pour the syrup in the bottom
of custard cups, turn in the custard and bake, set in a pan of boiling
water. As soon as the custard will cut clean with a knife it is done.
Too much sugar and too much cooking makes custard "watery."--Mrs.
Whitehead.

ORANGE AND BANANA COMPOTE.--For six bananas a little underripe make a
syrup of one cup of sugar and a half cup of water. Flavor with six
whole cloves and one inch stick cinnamon. Boil eight minutes without
stirring. Add the bananas and simmer until they begin to clear. Put in
the juice of two oranges, a half lemon and a half glass of grape juice.
Remove the cloves and cinnamon and serve on rounds of toast or sponge
cake with whipped cream.

PRUNE WHIP.--(Dessert.) Take about twenty four well cooked prunes,
remove pits and chop up pulp. Add one heaping tablespoon sugar, three
eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately and half teaspoon vanilla.
Beat all together thoroughly and pour in buttered baking dish. Bake in
moderate oven thirty or thirty five minutes. This makes enough for a
family of four.--Mrs. Monroe.

BANANA SHORT CAKE.--One cup sugar, one fourth cup butter, three eggs,
one half cup milk, one and one third cups flour, one and one half
teaspoons baking powder, flavoring. About one hour before serving slice
six bananas, add one and one half cups sugar, juice of two lemons, four
tablespoons water. Stir three times. When ready to serve put between
layers, add chopped walnuts and heap whipped cream over all.--Mrs. D.
E. Plier.

CREAM PUFFS.--One half cup melted butter, one cup hot water, cup flour,
stir the flour into the water and butter while boiling. It will not
lump. Let stand until cold, then stir in separately with a fork three
eggs not beaten. Bake in greased gem pans or drop in greased pans and
bake thirty minutes. When cold open at side and fill with stiffly
beaten cream sweetened and flavored.--Contributed.

STRAWBERRY BAVARIAN CREAM.--Scald one cupful of milk or thin cream,
pour it slowly over one egg yolk slightly beaten with one quarter
cupful of sugar, return to double boiler, add one half tablespoonful of
granulated gelatine dissolved in one quarter cupful of cold water; stir
until mixture coats the spoon, strain at once into a bowl. When cool
and beginning to show signs of stiffening beat in one half cupful of
strawberries which have been mashed and sweetened with a tablespoonful
of sugar, then fold in the stiffly beaten white of an egg and finally
one half cupful of cream, whipped very stiff. Fill wet molds and leave
on ice three hours. Serve with or without whipped cream.

STRAWBERRY CHARLOTTE.--Whip one cupful of cream very stiff. Beat the
white of one large egg or two small ones very stiff. Beat into the
white one half cupful of fine sugar. Combine this with the whipped
cream, then lightly stir in one cupful of strawberries cut in quarters.
Spoon into a mold lined with lady fingers or slices of sponge cake and
place on ice for one hour.

ANOTHER STRAWBERRY CHARLOTTE.--Mash one cupful of strawberries and
sweeten according to the acidity of the berry. Let stand to draw the
juice, an hour, then strain. Dissolve one level tablespoonful of
granulated gelatine in two tablespoonfuls of cold water. Set the bowl
containing it in a pan of hot water and stir until smooth, add it to
the strained strawberry. Now whip one cupful of cream, sweetened with
two level tablespoonfuls of sugar, lightly fold the strawberry gelatine
in, a few drops at a time. Turn into a wet mold and put on ice for two
hours. If carefully mixed there will be no settling at the bottom. The
mold for this need not be lined with cake, but a delicate wafer of some
sort, preferably vanilla, should be served with it if it is molded
plain.

LEMON JELLY.--Soak one box Knox sparkling gelatine in one pint cold
water, two minutes; add two pints boiling water, one and one half cups
sugar, and stir until dissolved; add juice of three lemons, strain
through jelly bag into molds.

CHOCOLATE BLANC MANGE.--One half box Knox sparkling gelatine, one quart
sweet milk, one half cup cold water, one cup sugar, two ounces grated
chocolate. Soak the gelatine in the cold water; boil the sweet milk
with sugar and grated chocolate and a little salt, five minutes; then
add dissolved gelatine, stirring constantly; flavor with vanilla, and
pour into mold; serve with whipped cream.

PINEAPPLE JELLY.--Read this recipe carefully and follow instructions.
Soak one box Knox gelatine in one pint cold water, set on stove in
double boiler to dissolve; when gelatine is cold and beginning to set,
beat into it pineapple juice and pineapple, and place on ice to harden.
Be sure you follow the above, for if you mix pineapple and its syrup
with gelatine when you first make it, the acid in it will digest the
gelatine so it will not harden.

WINE JELLY.--Soak one box Knox sparkling gelatine in one half pint cold
water two minutes, add one quart boiling water, one and one half cups
sugar, and stir until dissolved; add one half pint wine and juice of
two lemons; strain and pour into mold.

NUT CREAMS.--Soak two large tablespoons of gelatine in one half cup
milk. Set in hot water until melted, but do not heat. Whip one pint
cream, reserving a cupful after it is whipped. Turn the gelatine into
the cream adding one half teaspoonful of sugar, the beaten white of an
egg, a teaspoon of vanilla and a large cup of chopped hickory and
walnuts. Whip until stiff. Mold in small cups that have been wet with
cold water. When ready to serve turn on a flat dish, put on remainder
of whipped cream and sprinkle with chopped nuts.--Mrs. Alleman.

MAPLE CREAM GELATINE.--One half package Knox gelatine dissolved in one
cup cold water; one cup maple syrup heated to boiling point, mix with
gelatine, strain through a cloth and cool. Beat one pint of cream, mix
in and add one cup nuts.--Mrs. Schollander.

BROD TORTE.--One cupful of rye breadcrumbs, eight eggs, a cupful of
granulated sugar, one quarter pound of almonds, sliced or ground, (I
prefer them sliced), one quarter pound of citron, sliced thin; one half
ounce of bitter chocolate (grated), a lemon, juice and rind; one
teaspoonful of ground cinnamon, one half teaspoonful of cloves, a
wineglassful of brandy. Dry the bread in the oven and put through food
grinder or sifter. Mix almonds, citron, chocolate and spices with the
crumbs. Beat the yolks of the eggs with the sugar until thick; add
lemon juice and heat again. Mix the dry ingredients with beaten eggs
and sugar; next put in the brandy and, lastly, the whites of four eggs
beaten stiff, are folded into the mixture. (Reserve the other four for
the meringue. Pour into a "spring form" and bake in a moderate oven.
When the "torte" is done, spread jelly on the top and the meringue made
with the reserved eggs upon the jelly. Put back into the oven until the
meringue is lightly colored.

GERMAN PAN CAKES FOR DESSERT OR LUNCH.--Beat yolks of six eggs and then
beat whites of three to a stiff froth. Mix with three fourths cup
grated bread crumbs, one cup cream and a large cupful of flour, pour in
a buttered sauce pan, sprinkle with sugar and stir over the fire until
thick then fry in butter, on a hot skillett, like pan cakes. Put on a
hot dish, sift powdered sugar on them and sprinkle with lemon juice and
serve hot.--Contributed.

FRUIT TRIFLE.--Beat whites of six eggs light, add six tablespoons of
sugar and beat about half an hour then beat in one cupful of grated
pineapple or cut up fresh strawberries or fresh raspberries or cut up
fresh, ripe peaches or apricots or any fruit jam or jelly and beat five
minutes. Serve ice cold in sherbet glasses as it is or chopped with
flavored whipped cream. "Trifle" is sometimes made by using whipped
cream, sweetened, and adding one cupful of cut up fresh berries, or
peaches or orange pulp or bananas chopped, or half a glass of any
fruit, jam or any jelly cut into small pieces. Beat it through the
whipped cream. This is a simple and palatable dessert which can be
quickly made.--Mrs. Whitehead.

JUNKET.--One quart of warm milk, two tablespoons brandy; wine or
vanilla; two tablespoons sugar, one junket tablet or one tablespoon of
rennet. Stir well together, then let it stand undisturbed until thick,
then place on ice. Serve with sugar, nutmeg and cream. This is another
dainty and easily made dessert.--Mrs. Whitehead.




Ice Cream, Sherbets, Ices and Frozen Dainties

    "Which is not amiss to cool a man's stomach this hot
    weather."--Shakespeare.


ICE CREAM.--In packing the freezer use rock salt and crush the ice very
fine. Put it in a heavy grain sack and pound and mash until nearly as
fine as snow. Measure ice and salt allowing four parts ice to one of
salt or ten pounds of ice to three of salt. Pack ice in layers three
inches deep, then shake over one large saucerful of salt, then another
three inch layer of ice and more salt, alternating ice and salt until
you reach top of can. Pack the can with cream, put on the top of
freezer, and let cream stand until it freezes on edges, then turn the
dasher slowly for ten minutes, then quickly until cream is frozen thick
but not too hard. Remove the dasher, put on the top and cork, repack
freezer with ice, cover with heavy carpet and let cream ripen two or
three hours.--Mrs. C. H. McKay.

ICE CREAM.--Without cooking. Two quarts of thick cream, two cups sugar.
Mix and stand until sugar dissolves. Flavor to suit taste and
freeze.--Mrs. C. H. McKay.

CARAMEL ICE CREAM.--Beat three eggs, one cup sugar and one half cup of
flour together and cook with one pint rich milk. Brown one cupful of
granulated sugar to a caramel and add to this hot custard. Cool and add
one quart thick cream. Freeze.--Mrs. C. H. McKay.

CHOCOLATE ICE CREAM.--Let one large pint of milk come to a boil, add
one cup of sugar and one third cup of flour mixed with the beaten yolks
of three eggs; three fourths cake of sweet chocolate. Cook until thick
and creamy, stirring constantly. Cool and add one quart of cream, one
cup sugar and pinch of salt. Add vanilla flavoring and freeze. When
partly frozen add the beaten whites of the eggs and freeze until firm
but not too hard. Pack freezer well, cover and let it ripen two or
three hours if possible.--Mrs. C. H. McKay.

MARYLAND ICE.--Two quarts ripe strawberries mashed with four cups
sugar. Stand one hour and squeeze out the juice through a sieve or
cheese cloth. Add two quarts of water and freeze. Remove water from
freezer when ice is half frozen, pack, and let it stand twenty minutes.
Then scoop out the center; leave wall intact. Make a filling of one
pint of cream, one half cup sugar, one teaspoon flavoring beaten and
whipped until stiff. Add one half cup of chopped or rolled nuts. Fill
the cavity in the strawberry ice with this mixture. Repack the freezer
and let it ripen four or more hours. When ready to serve, remove
freezer can, wrap it in a cloth dipped in boiling water, let stand one
minute when the mould of ice cream will slip out easily onto the
serving platter. Serve in thick slices.--Mrs. C. H. McKay.

MOUSSE.--(Without cream.) Rub one quart of berries through a sieve, add
one cupful of powdered sugar, one ounce of dissolved gelatine, and the
whites of five eggs beaten stiff. Put in a mold and pack in ice and
salt for three or four hours.--Mrs. C. H. McKay. (Editorial Note.--The
above recipes were demonstrated by Mrs. McKay in her paper on "Ice
Cream, Ices and Frozen Dainties" at Domestic Science club.)

VANILLA ICE CREAM.--One quart thick cream, seven tablespoons of sugar,
one half of a vanilla bean. Cut bean into halves, scrape out seeds and
mix with sugar. Add sugar to half of the cream, and put in the balance
of the bean. Heat and dissolve sugar in hot cream. Remove from fire,
strain and cool. Add remaining cream and freeze. The flavor of the bean
makes delicious ice cream but of course good vanilla extract may be
substituted. Use a tablespoon of extract. Plain ice cream is nice
served with hot chocolate caramel sauce or with maple sauce and chopped
nuts.--Mrs. Whitehead.

CHOCOLATE CARAMEL SAUCE.--One and one half cups brown sugar, one half
cup of milk, four ounces of chocolate. Stir all together on back of
range until chocolate is melted and smooth; then boil until it forms a
soft ball when tried in cold water. Serve hot over the ice cream. Makes
a nice pudding sauce also and is nice on cream puffs or eclairs.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

RED RASPBERRY ICE CREAM.--Follow directions for chocolate ice cream
given above, omitting the chocolate and adding one quart of ripe red
raspberries pressed through a sieve and sweetened, when the cream is
half frozen, and when the meringue is added also. Proceed with the
freezing and ripen two or more hours before serving. Strawberries,
apricots and peaches are equally as good used this way.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

TORTONI ICE CREAM.--Boil one and one half cups sugar with water to
cover until it threads from the spoon. Pour it over the stiffly beaten
whites of three eggs and beat well. Scald one quart of new milk and add
beaten yolks of eggs. Cool and mix with one pint of cream (may be
whipped but isn't necessary) and six crumbled almond macaroons. Flavor
with vanilla or almond extract. Mix all together and freeze. Cocoanut
may be used in place of macaroons but it should be sprinkled with sugar
and slightly browned in the oven first.--Mrs. Whitehead.

MAPLE MOUSSE.--Boil a cupful of maple syrup three minutes and stir into
the beaten yolks of three eggs. Put back in dish syrup was boiled in
and boil two minutes. Cool. Whip a quart of cream and add the cooled
mixture and freeze. Do not stir. In the winter it may be simply set out
of doors, or may be packed in ice and salt.--Mrs. G. A. McIntosh.

CARAMEL PUDDING.--Take one and one third cups of brown sugar and put in
pan on stove and melt, stirring constantly to prevent burning. When
melted add very slowly one third cup of boiling water.--Mrs. G. A.
McIntosh.


Cold Desserts

MAPLE MOUSSE.--Four eggs beaten stiff, one cup of maple syrup. Cook
until it thickens, then beat until cool. Then add one pint of whipped
cream, pack in salt and ice for several hours.

FROZEN RICE PUDDING.--One cup rice, one quart milk, one quarter
teaspoon salt, one cup sugar, one cup cream, one teaspoon flavoring.
Cook rice in milk until soft, add sugar, salt and flavoring and pour
into freezer when cold. Whip cream and add to the mixture when nearly
frozen.--Mrs. Schollander.


Fruit, Ices or Sherbets

LEMON SHERBET.--One pound of sugar and one quart of water boiled to
thin syrup and when cool add the grated rind of two lemons and the
juice of six. For a water ice stir it now and then in the freezer and
freeze slowly until like wet snow. For a sherbet freeze quickly until
light and stiff. For a sorbet, add a meringue made of the beaten white
of egg and sugar to the partially frozen ice.

ORANGE SHERBET.--Add the juice of six oranges and grated rind of three
and the juice of one lemon to the above sugar and water syrup and
freeze.

PINEAPPLE SHERBET.--Add one pint of grated pineapple and juice of one
lemon to above syrup and freeze rapidly.

MINT SHERBET.--Pound the leaves of two dozen stalks of mint to a pulp,
add to the syrup as above with the juice of two lemons and freeze or
use mint extract.

GRAPE SHERBET.--Add the juice of one lemon and a pint of grape juice to
the above syrup and freeze.

BERRY SHERBET.--Add one pint of the berry juice and juice of two lemons
to above syrup and freeze.

CRANBERRY SHERBET.--One pint of strained and sweetened cooked cranberry
juice and the juice of two lemons added to above syrup and freeze
stiff. Fruit jellies may be melted and strained and used as substitutes
for the fresh fruit juice.

FROZEN STRAWBERRIES.--Mash one quart of berries, add one and one half
cups sugar and the juice of one lemon. Let it stand one hour, then add
one pint of water and freeze like ice cream. Serve in punch glasses
with whipped cream. Peaches and apricots are also nice frozen likewise
as are cooked cranberries pressed through a colander.

FRAPPE.--This is strictly speaking of drink partially frozen until like
wet snow. Grape Frappe is frozen coffee and lemon Frappe is partly
frozen lemonade. A punch is merely a cold fruit drink with a block of
ice floating in it. It is usually made of a combination of fruit juices
sweetened and wines and liquors are frequently added to it.

PARFAIT AND MOUSSE.--This is frozen whipped cream, sweetened and
flavored to suit the taste. It is packed in a mould and buried in
crushed ice and salt for several hours. The cream should be frozen one
and one half inches deep. The center remains soft. The opening of the
mould should be bound with a strip of muslin dipped in melted suet or
butter. Quick parfait is made by adding whipped cream to ice cream. At
serving time beat in the whipped cream. Coffee ice cream with whipped
cream is much liked, as are chocolate and caramel ice cream served this
way. Macaroon mousse is made by adding crushed and rolled macaroons to
whipped cream and burying the mould in ice and salt. Chopped nuts are
used the same way and crushed fruit.

LEMON ICE.--Two and three fourths cups sugar, two tablespoons corn
starch; add one quart boiling water. When cool add juice of eight
lemons and when half frozen add whites of three eggs and one pint thick
cream.--Mrs. D. E. Plier.

CURRANT ICE.--One pint currant juice (or two glasses of currant jelly),
two lemons and one orange, three cups sugar, two quarts water. Pour
juices over sugar and stir until dissolved then add water and freeze.
The whites of two eggs may be added just before the freezing is
completed.--Mrs. Schollander.

PINEAPPLE SHERBET.--One quart of granulated sugar, and one quart cold
water brought to a boil. Pour over one quart can of grated pineapple
and juice of six lemons. Strain and put into freezer. When cold add
whites of three eggs beaten stiff with one tablespoon of sugar.
Freeze.--Mrs. W. S. Davidson.

PISTACHO MOUSSE.--Whip a pint of cream very stiff, beat into it lightly
four tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar; flavor to taste with pistacho
extract and stir in one half cupful of chopped nuts. Last of all color
a delicate green with vegetable coloring mixture. Turn all cream into a
mould and pack with ice and salt for four hours.--Mrs. J. D. Wolpert.

STRAWBERRY ICE CREAM.--Three cupfuls of cream and one of milk, or one
quart of thin cream, three quarters of a cupful of sugar; scald, but do
not boil. Beat until cold, add one cupful of strawberries mashed with
their juice and one half cupful of sugar. Place in freezer, pack in ice
and salt, using three quarters ice and one quarter salt, and freeze
until as stiff as can be turned. Remove dasher, work up and down with a
long handled spoon to pack solidly and set aside for twenty minutes or
longer. Serve garnished with a half cupful of strawberries cut in two.
For individual servings a simple way is to pack the ice cream in pound
or half pound baking powder tins after it has been frozen and bury it
in ice and salt. It then may be turned out and sliced in rounds, one
round to a person, and the strawberries used to decorate each service.
Of course, if this is done the cream must be very firm and should be
packed at least two hours before it is used. To avoid much melting the
bucket may be put in the ice box in a tin pan.

STRAWBERRY MOUSSE.--Dissolve one tablespoonful of granulated gelatine
in one quarter cupful of water by placing the bowl containing it in a
pan of hot water; when smooth add three quarters of a cupful of
powdered sugar and stir until cool. Strain gradually into two cupfuls
of cream whipped very stiff, add one cupful of fresh strawberries which
have been chopped fine with a silver knife and sugared with one third
cupful of sugar. Have the mould already packed in ice and salt, put the
mousse into it by the spoonful, first being sure that all the
ingredients are well mixed; cover with buttered paper, put on the lid
of one mould and pile ice and salt on top. Put in a cold place for two
to four hours. Unmold and serve with halved strawberries and sponge
cake or angels food.

ORANGE WATER ICE.--Juice of six oranges, two teaspoons extract of
orange, juice of one lemon, one quart water, one pound powdered sugar,
one gill rich, sweet cream, add all together and strain. Freeze same as
ice cream.--Mrs. H. J. Liddell.

LEMON SHERBET WITH CREAM.--Mix four large cups of sugar with three
level tablespoons of flour and stir in two quarts of boiling water and
cook thick. Cool and add the juice of one dozen lemons. Strain and
freeze. When half frozen add one pint of cream whipped stiff with half
a cupful of sugar and add the beaten whites of two eggs. Stir well
through the half frozen sherbet and finish freezing. When firm, remove
the dasher from the freezer, repack and cover freezer with a carpet or
heavy blanket. Let it ripen two hours or more. Makes one gallon of
sherbet.--Mrs. Whitehead.

LEMON SHERBET.--Juice of three or four lemons, according to size, two
cups sugar, one quart of fresh sweet milk. Mix lemon juice and sugar
and put them in the freezer and let stand while you pack freezer,
quickly stir in ice cold milk and freeze quickly. The milk must be
fresh morning's milk and it must commence to freeze immediately or it
will curdle. Grated pineapple may be added to this if liked. After it
is frozen the beaten whites of two eggs mixed with two tablespoons of
sugar, should be stirred through the sherbet and left to ripen until
serving time. Cream may be used instead of milk but half of it should
be scalded with half of the sugar and cooled before mixing with the
lemon juice.--Mrs. Whitehead.

HOT CHOCOLATE SAUCE FOR ICE CREAM.--Two cups of light brown sugar, 2
tablespoons of chocolate, 1/2 cup sweet milk, butter size of a walnut.
Boil until it forms a soft ball when dropped in cold water. Do not
beat. Flavor with vanilla and let it stand a moment, pour the sauce on
ice cream in the dishes just before serving. Maple sauce is made the
same way substituting maple sugar for the brown and omitting the
chocolate. Caramel sauce is made by browning sugar in a hot skillet
until it melts and smokes and then adding the sweet milk and butter and
cooking to soft ball stage. Minced nuts may be sprinkled over the sauce
on top of ice cream.--Mrs. Whitehead.

STRAWBERRY FRAPPE.--For one quart of ripe berries use four lemons,
three cupfuls of sugar and three pints of water. Crush the berries with
the sugar, and let them stand an hour before adding the juice of the
lemons and the water. Mix well, pour into a freezer and stir for
fifteen or twenty minutes. Pack in ice for an hour or two and serve in
glasses with or without whipped cream on top.

MELON SHERBET.--Boil one pint of water with half a pound of sugar for
twenty minutes, then stir in a little gelatine melted in cold water.
Add the strained juice of two lemons, half a pint of melon juice and
then the beaten whites of two eggs. Whisk all together and partially
freeze.

ANGEL FRAPPE.--Dip half a pound of lump sugar in the strained juice of
some white currants and boil them to the "thread" point. Beat the
whites of two eggs till stiff, then pour on the sugar and continue
beating. Whip a pint of double cream, add a quarter of a pint of
currant juice, mix all quickly together and freeze without stirring
until nearly solid. Serve in tall glasses with a few white currants in
the bottom of each.

SHERBET PINEAPPLE.--Boil together one cup of sugar and one quart of
water. Dissolve in one half cup of water one teaspoon of gelatine;
juice of two lemons, one can of pinapple. Put in freezer and add one
pint of water. When partly frozen add the whites of three eggs and one
cup of sugar and finish freezing.--Mrs. F. Kleinsorge.




Puddings and Pudding Sauces

    "Since Eve ate apples much depends upon dinner."--Lord Byron.


ENGLISH PLUM PUDDING.--Two cups sugar, five eggs, one nutmeg, one
tablespoon salt, one quart sweet milk, one loaf bread without crusts,
one large piece citron chopped, four cups suet, two cups currants, four
heaping cups raisins, three pints flour. This makes a large pudding and
if cooked in one mould, must boil ten hours.--Mrs. Mary Harvey.

BROWN BETTY PUDDING.--Take stale pieces of bread and lightly brown them
in oven until thoroughly dry and crisp. With rolling pin crush the
bread into small crumbs. Put into pudding dish a layer of these crumbs,
then a layer of apples, and arrange in layers until dish is full, last
layer crumbs. Flavor with sugar, cinnamon, lemon and butter on each
layer and bake slowly. Serve with sweet sauce, cream or milk.--Mrs.
Mary Harvey.

SUET PUDDING.--One cup chopped suet, one cup raisins, one cup brown
sugar, two tablespoons syrup, one tablespoon soda, salt, and one egg,
three cups flour, one teaspoon cinnamon. Steam from two to three hours
and serve with pudding dip made of one cup sugar, scant, one tablespoon
butter, two tablespoons flour, one cup boiling water, flavor to
taste.--Mrs. D. E. Plier.

PLUM PUDDING.--One and one half pounds suet, one pound stoned raisins,
one pound currants, eight eggs, one and one half nutmeg, two ounces
candied peel, one teaspoon ground ginger, one half pound bread crumbs,
one half pound flour, two pounds of dark sugar, one half pint
milk.--Mrs. A. McKay.

SPONGE PUDDING.--Two large tablespoons sugar, two large tablespoons
butter, four large tablespoons flour, six eggs, two cups sweet milk.
Let milk scald, while hot add butter, then sugar, then flour mixed with
cold milk. Stir well until it boils, remove from the fire, add yolks
well beaten, then add whites beaten stiff. Pour into buttered dish, set
in pan of hot water and bake one hour. Half of this will serve six
people.--Mrs. Schollander.

ANGEL PUDDING.--Two eggs, one cup of sugar, one cup of chopped walnuts,
one cup of dates, two tablespoons flour, one teaspoon baking powder.
Bake twenty minutes, serve with hard sauce or whipped cream.--Mrs.
Schollander.

SNOW BALLS.--One half cup of butter, one half cup milk, one cup sugar,
one and one quarter cups flour, three and one half teaspoons baking
powder, whites of four eggs. Cream butter, add sugar gradually, then
milk. Add flour mixed and sifted with baking powder, then add the
whites of eggs beaten stiff. Steam thirty five minutes. Serve with
orange sauce. Orange sauce. Whites of three eggs, one cup of powdered
sugar, juice and rind of two oranges and juice of one lemon. Beat
whites until stiff, add sugar gradually, and continue beating. Add rind
and fruit juices.--Mrs. Schollander.

PRUNE PUDDING.--Whites of six eggs, beaten stiff, and one cup of sugar.
Boil and pit twenty prunes and chop fine. Mix all and bake forty
minutes. Serve with whipped cream.--Mrs. R. J. Walker.

CHOCOLATE PUDDING.--One half cup sugar, a piece of butter the size of
an egg, one heaping teaspoon baking powder, one egg, one half cup milk,
one cup flour, two squares of chocolate grated. Bake as a cake and
serve cold. Sauce: Yolks of two eggs and one cup of sugar beaten to a
cream, one half cup of cream, whipped, whites of two eggs, beaten
stiff, and added last. Flavor with vanilla.--Mrs. C. C. Mackenroth.

ANGEL PUDDING.--Two eggs, one cup sugar, one cup chopped nuts, one cup
dates, two tablespoons flour, one teaspoon baking powder, bake twenty
minutes, serve with whipped cream.--Mrs. Schollander.

CORN PUDDING.--Score the rows of corn in a dozen big ears and press out
the juice and pulp. To two cups of pulp, add two well beaten eggs, one
tablespoon of butter, one small teaspoon of salt, a dash of pepper and
two scant cups of sweet milk. Bake in a greased pudding dish until firm
and brown. Serve with hard sauce made by creaming half a cup of butter
with one cupful of sugar until light, add a dash of nutmeg and put a
tablespoon of sauce on each piece of hot pudding.--Mrs. Whitehead,
Southern Cookery Demonstration.

PRUNE WHIP.--One pound prunes, cook until tender, put through colander
(to remove pits) add half cup sugar, when cold add the whites of four
eggs, well beaten; beat all together, put dish in oven four minutes.
Serve cold, with whipped cream. This amount will serve six to eight
people.--Mrs. Liddell.

ENGLISH PLUM PUDDING.--One pound chopped suet, one pound chopped
raisins, one pound English currants, one ounce citron and lemon peel,
six eggs, three cups of bread crumbs, three cups dark brown sugar, one
teaspoon of cloves, cinnamon and nutmeg, one pint of sweet milk. Mix
all well together, then add flour until the consistency of fruit cake.
Tie it in a strong, new cloth, allowing room to swell, and boil it in a
kettle of boiling water constantly for six hours.--Mrs. Eleanor
Wilkinson.

LEMON PUDDING.--Slice one large or two small lemons in a pudding dish
with one and one half cups hot water, one cup sugar, and one tablespoon
butter. Set on stove to get warm while you prepare batter, by mixing
one half teaspoon butter, one half cup sugar, yolks of two eggs, one
quarter cup sweet milk, one teaspoon baking powder, three fourths cup
sifted flour. Pour over the lemons and bake. When done cover with a
meringue and brown.--Mrs. A. D. Paulson.

MOTHER'S BOILED INDIAN PUDDING.--Two cupfuls of corn meal, one cupful
of flour, three teaspoons of baking powder or two level spoons of soda,
one half cup of molasses, two beaten eggs, one tablespoon of salt, and
enough sweet or sour milk (if soda is used) to make a thin batter. Turn
into a floured, wet pudding bag or into a greased double boiler and
boil steadily from two to three hours. Serve with cream and sugar
alone, or spiced with nutmeg, or with any favorite pudding sauce.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

CHOCOLATE PUDDING WITH RAISINS.--Sauce: One cup sifted flour, one and
one half level teaspoons baking powder, one half teaspoon cinnamon, one
quarter teaspoon salt. Sift several times. Beat one yolk of egg with
one third cup sugar, three tablespoons melted butter and one quarter
cup milk. Stir into the flour mixture then beat in two squares of
chocolate melted over hot water; add beaten white of egg, and steam
half an hour in buttered cups. Raisin sauce: Chop one half cup raisins
and stew in a little water then add one half cup sugar and cook to a
thick syrup, then thin with hot water, one half cup, and serve.--Mrs.
Whitehead, pudding demonstration.

RAISIN SAUCE.--Stew one cup seeded raisins in one pint of water until
soft. Mash them and strain them through cheese cloth. Put the liquor on
to boil, add one tablespoon lemon and sugar to taste. Thicken with one
tablespoon corn starch wet in cold water, and cook until smooth. Add
one tablespoon of butter just before serving.

PEACH COBBLER.--Two cups flour, two teaspoons baking powder, one half
teaspoon salt, one half beaten egg mixed with three fourths cup milk,
one quart sweetened peaches. Mix dry ingredients like pie crust, add
milk and egg, roll out, line greased pudding pan, fill in with
sweetened fruit. Cover with crust and bake.--Mrs. Whitehead, pudding
demonstration.

FRENCH APPLE PUDDING.--Two cups of flour, two teaspoons baking powder,
one half teaspoon salt, one cup sugar, two cups milk, one half cup
butter, two eggs. Cream butter and sugar, add eggs, beat, add milk and
other ingredients. Butter deep pan, fill it with peeled and quartered
cooking apples. Cover with sugar and cinnamon or grated nutmeg. Turn
the batter over it and bake brown. Invert the pudding pan and serve
with cream and sugar, or pudding sauce.

STEAMED APPLE PUDDING.--(In cups.) Fill cups half full of prepared
apples, sugared, buttered and spiced to taste. Make a drop batter of
one cup flour sifted with one teaspoon baking powder, one quarter
teaspoon of salt and mixed soft with sweet milk. Fill cups with batter
and steam three quarters of an hour. Serve with lemon or vinegar sauce,
made as follows: One tablespoon each of butter, flour and sugar,
stirred over the fire together, add boiling water, about one pint, and
cook thick. Season with one tablespoon vinegar, lemon juice or
vanilla.--Mrs. Whitehead, pudding demonstration.

STRAWBERRY PUDDING SAUCE.--Cream one half cupful of butter and two
cupfuls of sugar until very light, gradually add one pint of crushed
strawberries and serve with bread, tapioca or rice pudding.

LEMON HONEY SAUCE.--Cream one half cup of butter with one cupful of
sugar and add yolks of three eggs. Beat together and cook in double
boiler, add slightly beaten whites of eggs and juice of two lemons.
When cold add one half pint of whipped cream. Serve on gelatine or snow
pudding.--Mrs. Whitehead.

FOAM SAUCE.--Three eggs beaten light with one cupful of sugar, add one
teaspoonful of butter, one teaspoonful of vanilla and one tablespoonful
of brandy or whiskey or orange juice if liquor is not liked. Just
before serving add one cupful of boiling water. Serve with suet or plum
pudding.

ANOTHER FOAM SAUCE.--One beaten egg, one half cup sugar, three
tablespoons boiling milk, flavor with vanilla.

ENGLISH SWEET SAUCE.--Yolks of two eggs, beaten with three quarters cup
powdered sugar. Add one cup sweet cream and the grated rind of one
orange. Cook over slow fire five minutes, stirring all of the time.

MAPLE SYRUP SAUCE FOR PUDDINGS.--Melt one tablespoon of butter and
blend with half as much flour, add one half cup of hot maple syrup and
cook thick. Serve as sauce on apple pudding. Brown sugar syrup may be
used instead of maple syrup and caramel sugar syrup is equally as good
used the same way.--Mrs. Whitehead, sauces demonstrated in paper on
puddings and pudding sauces.

VANILLA SAUCE.--Norwegian. Put three pints of fresh milk in a kettle
over the fire and let come to a boil (but do not let it boil). Four
ounces of sugar, yolks of five eggs, beaten together about ten or
fifteen minutes. Add this to the hot milk, flavor with vanilla. Get
cool. To be served with fruit gelatine or sliced oranges.--Mrs. R.
Meidell.

STEAMED FRUIT PUDDING.--One cupful each of molasses, bread crumbs,
water, flour and currants and raisins or dates. Soak bread crumbs in
the water until soft, add one beaten egg, three level tablespoons of
melted butter or beef drippings, one teaspoon of soda, a little salt
and cinnamon. Mix all ingredients together and steam in a greased steam
cooker or double boiler for two hours. Serve with any favorite pudding
sauce. As it is something like plum pudding foam sauce is liked best
with it.--Mrs. Whitehead, demonstration of puddings.

CORN STARCH PUDDING.--One quart milk, eight tablespoons corn starch,
pinch of salt and one half cup sugar. Heat milk to boiling point and
stir in sugar, salt and corn starch mixed together. When cooked
sufficiently turn over the beaten whites of two eggs and stir. To make
it yellow use the yolks of eggs. Serve (without) with or without
cream.--Dorothy Whitehead.

CHOCOLATE PUDDING.--One quarter cup butter, one cup sugar, yolks of two
eggs, one half cup milk, one and three eighths cups of flour, three
teaspoons baking powder, whites of three eggs, one and one third
squares Bakers chocolate, one eighth teaspoon salt and one fourth
teaspoon vanilla. Cream the butter, add one half of the sugar, beat
yolks and add remaining sugar, combine mixture, add milk, flour, baking
powder and salt, then add the whites beaten stiff, melted chocolate and
vanilla. Bake in cake pan. Fill the center with whipped cream sweetened
and flavored and pour around chocolate sauce.

CHOCOLATE SAUCE.--Boil one cup sugar, one half cup water until a thin
syrup. Melt one and one half squares Bakers chocolate and pour
gradually over the hot syrup.--Dorothy Whitehead, demonstrated in 7th
grade Domestic Science class at school.

SUET PUDDING.--One cup chopped suet, one cup milk (or water) one cup
chopped raisins, one cup molasses, two and one half cups flour, one
teaspoon soda, one half teaspoon each salt, cloves, cinnamon and
nutmeg. Sift flour, soda, salt and spices. Add suet and raisins. Mix
milk (or water) and molasses, beat into the dry mixture and steam three
hours. Dressing for pudding: One cup sugar, one egg, one tablespoon
flour, two tablespoons cold water, beat well and stir in half pint
boiling milk or water. Add butter size of an egg, flavor with
vanilla.--Mrs. W. C. McGuiness.

NUT PUDDING.--One cup sugar, one cup butter, one cup milk, two eggs,
two and one half teaspoons salt, two teaspoons baking powder, two cups
flour, one cup nuts. Steam good three hours and do not uncover at all
while steaming or it will fall. Eat with golden sauce. One heaping
teaspoon butter, one cup powdered sugar, two egg yolks, four or six
tablespoons cream, flavoring. Beat whites of two eggs well, and add
last, do not boil.--Mrs. Paul Leonhardy.

STRAWBERRY SHORT CAKE.--Sift one quart of flour with three teaspoons of
baking powder and a tablespoon of sugar and one half teaspoon of salt.
Work in three rounding tablespoons of butter to a mealy mixture or
until the butter and flour are thoroughly blended; now lightly mix in
enough milk to make a soft dough, (a little over a pint). Handle just
enough to roll out after the milk is added to the flour. Roll in two
round or square sheets, put in greased tins, dot with butter and bake a
nice brown in a quick oven. Crush two quarts of strawberries with sugar
to sweeten. Build the short cake in layers with the berries between
cakes and generously spread on top. The whole berries are often
reserved for the top. Serve with thick cream or with sweetened whipped
cream. Raspberries, grated pineapple and fresh sliced peaches or
oranges are used in season as well as strawberries.--Mrs. Whitehead,
demonstration Southern Cookery.

RICE PUDDING.--Mix one half cup of rice with two quarts of sweet milk,
two thirds cup of sugar and a little salt. Powder with cinnamon or
nutmeg if liked. Place dish in a pan of cold water and bake two hours
or more, stirring frequently until milk has cooked out and rice is
creamy.--Contributed.

STEAMED CUP PUDDING.--Two eggs, one half cup sugar, one tablespoon
butter, one cup milk, two teaspoons baking powder, flour to make a
stiff batter. Steam twenty minutes in well greased cups and serve with
pudding sauce.--Mrs. A. McKay.




Cheese

    "It seems as tho' science has condemned everything we relished when
    a boy. * * * We have had this pure food idea pounded into us until
    we can't find anything any more that 'taint tainted."--Sam Clark.


COTTAGE CHEESE.--Heat two quarts of lobbered milk slowly until curd is
formed; drain through cheese cloth and when dry add one teaspoonful of
salt and one half cup of sweet or sour cream.--Mrs. J. Bruegger.

CHEESE AND BREAD.--One cup bread crumbs, two cups milk, soak. Add one
half pound grated cheese, one tablespoon butter, two or three eggs,
beaten lightly, pepper and salt to suit taste. Brown lightly. For a
small family use one half the amount.--Mrs. Davidson.

CHEESE SCALLOP.--One cup grated cheese, 2 egg yolks beaten, 2
tablespoons of melted butter, one cup bread crumbs soaked in one and
one half cups milk, dash of cayenne pepper. Mix all together, then add
stiffly beaten whites of eggs. Bake in a greased dish in a hot oven
covering the top with fine bread crumbs.--Contributed.

CHEESE AND BREAD OMELET.--Soak a cupful of bread crumbs until soft,
then drain, add a cupful of milk and three egg yolks to the bread and
salt and pepper. Stir the stiffly beaten whites of eggs into the bread
and one cupful of grated cheese. Cook like an omelet with butter in a
hot skillet. Fold over and serve.--Contributed.

CHEESE AND MACARONI.--Boil a cupful of broken macaroni tender in
boiling salted water. Make a cream sauce of two tablespoons of butter
blended with as much flour and cooked with one half pint of milk. Add
salt and cook thick. Then add four large tablespoons of grated cheese
and one beaten egg. Mix with the drained macaroni in a baking dish,
cover with crumbs and brown in the oven.--Contributed.

CHEESE SOUFFLE.--Stir one tablespoon of flour into one tablespoon of
melted butter in a pan on the stove until well blended, add one cup of
milk and cook until smooth. Add one cup of grated cheese and well
beaten yolks of three eggs, lastly add well beaten whites of eggs and a
pinch of salt. Put into a greased baking dish, set in a pan of hot
water and bake about twenty minutes or until light and brown. Eat as
soon as it is baked.--Contributed.

CHEESE AND POTATO OMELET.--Spread mashed potatoes an inch thick in a
hot, heavy skillet with one tablespoon of hot butter or drippings.
Brown on bottom and grate cheese thickly over top; add pepper. Cook and
when potatoes are well browned on the bottom fold over like an omelet
and serve.

ITALIAN MACARONI.--Cook a cupful of macaroni in salted water until
tender. Drain off the water and put the macaroni into a colander. Have
ready in a saucepan a large tablespoonful of butter, heated. Put into
this a sliced onion and cook tender. Turn into the saucepan, then a can
of tomatoes and one chili pepper (or in quantity according to its
"hotness"). Salt and cook fifteen minutes. Arrange the macaroni
alternately in layers with the tomato in a bake dish, finishing of
course, with the tomatoes. Cover with grated cheese and bake fifteen or
twenty minutes.

TOMATOES STUFFED WITH MACARONI AND CHEESE.--Cook one cup broken
macaroni or spaghetti tender in salted water; drain and blanch in cold
water. Skin light tomatoes and scoop out centers. Fill with the
macaroni, dot with butter and season with salt and pepper, then cover
top with grated cheese. Bake in a moderate oven thirty minutes. Serve
plain or with cream sauce. For Italian macaroni, chop the tomatoes,
dredge with flour and mix with the above ingredients, putting a thick
layer of cheese on top. Bake until brown.--Contributed.

CHEESE CROQUETTES.--Make a thick stiff cream sauce as for chicken
croquettes; add yolks of two eggs; one and one half cups grated cheese
and salt and cayenne pepper to suit taste. When cold form into
croquettes, dip into egg and fine bread crumbs and fry in deep hot fat.

CHEESE STRAWS.--Grate cheese on rolled pie crust, fold over, grate more
cheese thickly on, fold again and roll out. Cut into strips and bake.
Sprinkle with cayenne.--Contributed.




Beverages

    "Serenely pure yet divinely strong."--Pope.


COFFEE.--Three parts Java to one part Mocha coffee ground fine
together. Allow one tablespoonful of coffee to each cup of cold water.
Mix in one third of a whole egg for five cups of coffee. Bring to a
good boil. Remove from fire, add a dash of cold water and serve.--Mrs.
C. H. McKay, demonstration of beverages.

CHOCOLATE.--One half cup grated chocolate, one half cup sugar mixed.
Add to one quart of milk. Bring to a boil. Let it stand on back of
range half an hour, then reheat it. Serve whipped cream in each
cup.--Mrs. C. H. McKay, demonstration.

TEA.--Water for making black tea should be boiling. Allow level
tablespoon tea to a pint of water. Let it stand covered three to seven
minutes. Water for green tea should not be boiling hot, as green tea
should be a smooth and oily beverage. The Japanese serve tea warm but
not hot. Allow same proportions as above. Let it stand three minutes.
Add hot water to tea leaves left in tea pot and leave again. Use an
earthen tea pot always. Soft water makes better tea than hard
water.--Mrs. C. H. McKay, demonstration of beverages.

CLARET FREEZE.--Claret wine to taste. Fill glass half full of chopped
ice, add wine and sweeten to taste with cherry syrup. Add sliced lemon
or pineapple, rose leaves, or Maraschino cherries. Serve with straws.

MALTED MILK.--One egg sweetened with vanilla syrup, one spoonful of
Horlick's malted milk. Shake in a shaker with crushed ice. Strain;
grate nutmeg on top and serve.

LEMONADE.--One quart of water, juice of three lemons, one cup sugar.
Stir well and serve with crushed ice. Crushed fruits may be added to
this, or Port wine, if liked.

COFFEE.--One tablespoonful of finely ground coffee to each cup of
water. Add a white or half the white of an egg to the coffee; mix with
a spoon. Add one cup of cold water to each tablespoon of coffee. Cook
till it starts to boil. Don't let it boil. Serve at once.--Mrs.
Creaser.

COCOA WITH WHIPPED CREAM.--Heat one quart of milk with a pinch of
cinnamon. Mix four level tablespoons of cocoa with as much sugar and
add one cupful of hot water. Stir until smooth. Add to the hot milk and
simmer five to ten minutes, stirring often. Whip one cupful of cream
stiff, add one teaspoonful of sugar and half a teaspoonful of vanilla
extract to it. Whip lightly and serve a generous tablespoonful in each
cup of cocoa. Chocolate is made by shaving one ounce of chocolate,
mixing it with two large tablespoons of sugar and then heating over the
fire with one tablespoonful of boiling water until smooth and glossy.
Add to hot milk as directed above. Marshmallows added to a cup of cocoa
or chocolate give a delicious flavor.--Contributed.

KENTUCKY PUNCH.--Put into punch bowl one cup sugar, juice of six lemons
and stir. Add three peeled lemons, sliced thin, and at least one dozen
large sprigs of mint and one quart of pounded ice, stir and let stand
several moments and then pour in from a good height two or three
bottles of imported ginger ale.

A DELICIOUS CREOLE RECIPE.--Select fine oranges. Cut through the skin
around the orange and loosen the skin from the orange, turning it back,
wrong side out, into a cup. Now cut the orange into halves, leaving a
cup on top of each half. Place the orange, face down, on a dainty
plate, acting as a standard for the skin cup as it were. Into the cup
put one whole clove, a bit of bay leaf, small piece of stick cinnamon,
one lump of sugar and pour over the sugar two tablespoons of brandy.
Bring to the table with the after dinner coffee and place in front of
each guest. Touch a match to the brandy, and let each guest baste the
sugar with the brandy until the alcohol has burned away, then pour the
remaining liquor and spices into the coffee. The burning of the brandy
and spices in the orange skin gives a very delicious flavor and a
pungent, agreeable perfume.

STRAWBERRY PUNCH.--Crush two quarts of strawberries and pour over them
three quarts of cold water. Set in the ice for three hours before
straining through a cheesecloth bag, pressing hard. Add then the
strained juice of two lemons and two cups of granulated sugar. Stir
until the sugar is fully dissolved and set in the ice until you are
ready to serve. Fill each tumbler halfway to the brim with finely
cracked ice before pouring in the strawberry mixture.

STRAWBERRY FRUIT PUNCH.--Make as directed in foregoing recipe, and,
just before serving, add two bananas, sliced very thin, two large sweet
oranges cut into small dice and a cupful of the largest, ripest
strawberries you can get. Use a dipper in filling the glasses, that
some of each kind of fruit may go into each.

MINT PUNCH.--Express the juice from four large lemons and strain it
over a cupful (heaping) of granulated sugar. Stir until the sugar is
dissolved. Now peel two lemons and one orange and slice as thin as
paper. Add to the melted sugar and set in the ice until you are ready
to serve. Have ready a dozen or more sprigs of freshly grated mint,
which has been carefully washed and the dead leaves picked off. Lay the
mint in the bottom of a chilled punch bowl and pour the syrup, with the
sliced fruits, upon it. Next, stir in at least two quarts of shaved or
pounded ice, and pour from a height upon all three bottles of the best
ginger ale. There is no more delicious summer drink than this. Serve at
once before the effervescence ceases.

ROMAN PUNCH.--Four cups of steamed lemonade, two wine glasses of rum,
juice of three oranges, one half pound sugar. Shake and mix well. Place
block of ice in center of punch bowl and pour in this mixture. Add one
pint of Maraschino cherries and serve in punch glasses. If preferred
the mixture may be frozen to a soft mush in a freezer and serve as a
dinner course.--Contributed.

CHAMPAIGNE PUNCH.--Make a syrup of two cups sugar and one quart of
water and make a lemonade with juice of five lemons. Add one gill
brandy, one half gill Jamaica rum and one pint of champaigne. Whip
white of one egg to a snow and sweeten and beat again. Mix with the
punch and freeze like lemon ice, or omit the egg. Mix well and serve
from punch bowl with large block of ice floating in the
liquid.--Contributed.

TEMPERANCE PUNCH.--One quart strained lemonade, one pint unfermented
grape juice; juice of six oranges with two cups sugar diluted in it.
Mix all well together with one gallon of ice water. Taste and add more
sugar if needed. Sliced or diced pineapple, cherries or any fresh
fruits may be added to this in season. Have block of ice in punch bowl
and stir well.

WEDDING PUNCH.--(No liquors.) One tumbler each of currant, raspberry
and blackberry jelly, juice of twelve lemons, juice and pulp of two
oranges, one pint grape juice, one pint of grated pineapple, one pint
of preserved strawberries, one quart of canned peaches, one fourth
pound conserved cherries, two pounds sugar, one quart ginger ale, three
quarts water. Make syrup of the water and sugar; strain. Add all the
jellies to hot syrup. When cool add strained lemon juice then the
grated pineapple, orange pulp, and other fruits. Cover and stand over
night. At serving time turn into punch bowl with one quart of shaved
ice or a big block of clear ice. Add other ingredients, stir well and
serve in punch cups or glasses.--Contributed.

WINE PUNCH.--Make a gallon of rich lemonade, strain it and add a bottle
of port wine, sherry of claret. Mixed conserved cherries, pineapple and
orange pulp may be stirred through this. Add a quart of shaved ice or
use a big block of clear ice and stir frequently, adding water and
sugar as needed or more lemonade to the drips in the bowl.

GINGERALE.--One half glass of currant jelly, one half cupful of sugar,
two teaspoons of ginger. Stir well together; put it into a quart
pitcher and fill with ice water. Serve in glasses of shaved ice.

GRAPE LEMONADE.--Two quarts of sweet lemonade, one pint bottle of
unfermented grape juice. Mix thoroughly and serve with ice.

FRUIT DRINK.--Use one tablespoon of diluted currant, strawberry,
raspberry or grape jelly to each glass of iced water and serve with
shaved ice. Or the canned fruit juice may be used instead of jelly.

GINGER ALE PUNCH.--Add to a half pint of shaved ice one tablespoon
brandy, one tablespoon powdered sugar and one well beaten egg. Add half
a pint of imported ginger ale. Let it stand five minutes.

BLACKBERRY CORDIAL.--One gallon of blackberry juice, add two pounds of
loaf sugar, half an ounce of cloves, one ounce nutmeg, cinnamon and
allspice; boil together twenty five minutes. When cold add one quart of
brandy.

ORANGE PUNCH.--Dissolve one fourth pound loaf sugar in one pint boiling
water; add juice of one lemon, one pint of orange juice, one half cup
brandy, one half cup rum. Used either hot or cold.--Contributed.

HOT BRANDY PUNCH.--One fourth pint Jamaica rum, one half pint brandy,
one quarter pound sugar, one lemon and one pint boiling water. Put
sugar and lemon juice in a punch bowl or large pitcher; pour in the
boiling water; add the rum and brandy and mix thoroughly. Grate nutmeg
on top and serve. For mint julep add one dozen sprigs of fresh mint to
the lemon juice and sugar before adding the water.--Contributed.

SHERRY FLIP.--Break an egg into a quart Mason jar, add half a can of
shaved ice and one tablespoon of sugar. Fasten top securely on the can
and shake hard until egg is light and foamy. Add two tablespoons of
sherry wine and shake again. Serve with a grating of nutmeg.--Contributed.

FRUIT NECTAR.--Put the thinly sliced rind of three lemons in a jar with
one pound of chopped raisins, and one and one half pounds of sugar.
Pour two gallons of boiling water over it. When cold add juice of
lemons and let stand in a cold place for a week, stirring it every day.
Strain through a jelly bag until clear, then seal in bottles.

RASPBERRY SHRUB.--Place raspberries in a jar and cover with good cider
vinegar, let it stand over night; next morning strain and to each pint
of juice add a pint of sugar; boil ten minutes; bottle while hot. Use
one half glass of the shrub to one half glass shaved ice and water.
Good summer drink. Same directions for currant shrub.

MILK SHAKE.--Fill your glass two thirds full of milk, sweeten to taste
with any fruit syrup, or with sugar, then flavor with vanilla or
orange. Fill glass with shaved ice and shake in a covered Mason jar or
a milk shaker until well mixed.

MULLED ALE.--Heat one quart of good ale with a little nutmeg; beat five
eggs light and mix with a little cold ale; then pour the hot and cold
ale back and forth several times to prevent curdling. Warm and stir
until sufficiently thick; add a glass of brandy; strain and serve in
tiny glasses.

ICED COFFEE.--Make two pints of good, strong coffee, and clear it with
the beaten white and shell of an egg. Strain, sweeten, and let it get
cold. Add the juice of one lemon and set the mixture in ice for an
hour. Serve in cups or claret glasses with a little whipped cream on
top.

TEA NECTAR.--Draw one and a half pints of strong tea for three minutes
and pour off into a bowl. Sweeten to taste with sugar, the juice of a
lemon and a wineglassful of brandy. Ice for an hour, decorate with thin
slices of lemon cut in quarters and serve in small glasses.

ORANGE PUNCH.--Stir a cupful of sugar into a scant cup of water and
simmer for half an hour. Skim and let it get cold before adding the
strained juice of four oranges and half as much lemon juice. Beat all
well together; fill chilled tumblers with pounded ice and pour in
enough of the syrup to fill up the interstices.




Refreshing Beverages for Convalescents


FOR FEVER CONVALESCENT.--One half fresh peach, one teaspoon brandy, one
tablespoon sugar, juice of half a lemon. Press through sieve and add
plenty of shaved ice. Sip a little at a time.

ICED MINT.--One fourth teaspoon peppermint essence, one tablespoon of
powdered sugar, one tablespoon of water, one tablespoonful of wine, one
teaspoon of brandy. Mix well together, fill glass with shaved ice and
sip through a straw.

STERILIZED LEMONADE.--Boil one pint of water and mix it with juice of a
lemon, four lumps of sugar and grated rind of lemon. Cover and stand
two hours. Strain and serve ice cold. For orangeade add juice of two
oranges to above and two extra lumps of sugar.

EGG-NOG.--Scald one pint of milk, but do not boil. Beat three eggs to a
froth with one fourth cup sugar, add half a gill of beet brandy and one
tablespoon of rum and a little nutmeg. Beat well and add the scalded
milk, either hot or cold.

LEMON WHEY.--Good to induce perspiration, to break up a cold. Boil half
pint of milk and add one tablespoon of lemon juice; add more if this
does not turn the milk. Let it boil up then turn into bowl to settle;
strain, sweeten and add hot water to suit taste.

FRUIT JELLY DRINKS.--Melt currant, raspberry or cranberry jelly in hot
water, sweeten to suit taste and set aside to cool. The juice of fresh
berries is pleasing to a patient when the berries are forbidden. Strain
the fruit through a fine sieve or through cheese cloth and cool with
shaved ice and sweeten.

FLAX SEED TEA.--One ounce of flax seed and a little powdered licorice
root and pour on a pint of hot water. Steep four hours then strain.
Good for a cold.

BARLEY COFFEE.--Roast Barley until well browned and boil 1 tablespoon
of it in a pint of water five minutes, strain and add a little sugar,
if liked. Nourishing drink for fever convalescent.

APPLE WATER.--Roast two tart apples until soft. Pour a pint of cold
water on them and stand in cold place one hour. Good for patients in
fever and eruptive diseases. Do not sweeten.




Eggs

    "Twelve studies in white and gold,
    Oh, egg, within thy oval shell,
    What palate tickling joys do dwell."


STUFFED EGGS.--Cook eggs twenty minutes just below boiling point.
Remove shells, cut in half lengthwise. Take out yolks and mash them.
Add one half quantity finely minced ham or chicken, moisten with one
tablespoon of butter softened and seasoned with salt, pepper and
mustard. Fill whites with this mixture and press halves together. Roll
in fine bread crumbs, then into beaten egg and again in crumbs. Fry
brown in very hot fat. Serve garnished with parsley.--Mrs. H. C.
Windel.

EGGS LYONNAISE.--Boil eight eggs twenty minutes and throw in cold water
and remove shells. Separate yolks and whites and chop whites fine. Put
whole yolks in a dish over boiling water to keep warm. Peel and chop
two medium sized onions and fry golden brown in two tablespoons of
butter. Season with salt, pepper and nutmeg and add a cupful of white
sauce. Stir gently to boiling point, then add chopped whites and cook
two minutes. Pour over hot whole yolks, sprinkle with minced parsley
and serve.--Mrs. H. C. Windel.

HAM AND EGG ON TOAST.--A good way to use small pieces of left over ham
or other cooked meat is to chop them fine. Toast several slices of
bread and lay on a platter. Beat three eggs slightly, pour in a little
milk, cook over the fire a few minutes, but not till it is thick, stir
in the chopped meat and pour over the toast.--Mrs. Geo. Farries.

ONION EGGS.--Boil six eggs hard, slice three of the eggs, cut three
onions in slices, fry in butter, lay them on a platter; place the
sliced eggs over them, cover to keep hot, grate the other three eggs,
season with salt and pepper, boil up in a little cream and pour over
the eggs and onions.--Mrs. Geo. Farries.

SHIRRED EGG.--Grease a shallow pan and break eggs carefully into it.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper and heat with butter. Steam or bake until
the whites are set and serve. Shirred eggs are usually served in the
individual dishes they are baked in. A little minced parsley is often
sprinkled over the top of each plate.

LAYER EGGS.--Fry two onions, sliced thin until they are tender and
brown. Cut hard boiled eggs into slices. Add half a bowl of good gravy
to the hot onions and then the eggs. Season with salt and pepper and
serve.

SCRAMBLED EGG.--(New.) Break eight fresh eggs into a saucepan, add a
piece of butter the size of an egg, eight tablespoons of cream; two
tablespoons of soup stock, one scant teaspoon of salt and a little
pepper. Set over the fire and stir until the eggs begin to thicken then
remove from the fire and beat with a Dover beater until they are light
and delicate. Heat over the fire again and serve in a warm dish. Very
nice for breakfast and lunch.

CREAM TOAST WITH EGG.--Heat a quart of milk; toast slices of bread,
butter them and dip each into the milk a second. Lay in a deep serving
dish. Now add a tablespoon of butter and a pinch of salt to the hot
milk. Beat the yolk of an egg, adding gradually a small tablespoon of
flour and two tablespoons of cold milk. Stir into the boiling milk and
cook until creamy, then pour it over and around the toast and serve
immediately. May be served with poached eggs, too.

SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH ASPARAGUS TIPS.--Beat six eggs a trifle with two
tablespoons of cream and scramble in hot pan. Season and stir in the
tips of a bunch of stewed asparagus. Add a dash of pepper and serve on
toast.

EGGS, NEW YORK STYLE.--Boil six eggs half an hour. Drop them into cold
water; shell and quarter them and lay them in a buttered baking dish.
Make a white sauce of one pint of hot milk with butter, and flour
enough to thicken. Season and stir until smooth. Chop two large boiled
onions, add to the sauce and pour over the eggs, sprinkle the top with
cracker crumbs, dots of butter and two tablespoons of grated cheese.
Bake until a nice brown and serve immediately.

CREOLE EGGS.--Poach eggs in deep, boiling salted water and serve with a
highly seasoned tomato sauce.

CREAMED EGGS.--Poach eggs and serve with a thickened, seasoned cream
sauce or a browned gravy sauce, mushrooms, asparagus tips, minced
parsley or minced cold boiled ham, cauliflower, green corn, oysters,
sausage or dried beef may be added to any cream sauce and served over
poached eggs or hard boiled eggs, cut into slices or quartered. Or any
of these sauces may be spread on an omelet, folded over and served.

CHEESE AND EGGS ON TOAST.--Beat three eggs with three tablespoons of
bread crumbs, soaked soft in milk and drained. Add three tablespoons of
melted butter, one teaspoon of mustard, salt and pepper and lastly one
half pound of grated cheese. Spread evenly on slices of toast and brown
quickly in the oven.

EGGS AND POTATOES.--Fry diced cold boiled or baked potatoes brown in a
butter, seasoning with salt and pepper; break in three or four eggs and
scramble lightly. Add two tablespoons of thick cream and serve
immediately.

SWISS EGGS.--Line a pie plate with thin slices of cheese. Mix a cup of
milk with one teaspoon of mustard, a dash of cayenne and a little salt.
Pour half of this mixture over the cheese. Then break carefully five
eggs on the cheese; pour over the rest of the milk and bake until the
eggs are set. The cheese will melt and thicken the milk.

HONEYCOMB EGGS.--Set a granite pan with a tablespoon of butter in the
oven to heat. Beat five eggs with one third cup of milk and salt and
pepper exactly one minute. Pour into the hot pan and bake in a quick
oven until eggs rise to the top. Serve immediately.

OMELET, NEWPORT STYLE.--Soak a pint of bread crumbs in one pint of
milk. Beat eight eggs very light and stir with the crumbs, beating five
minutes. Heat two tablespoons of butter in a pan, pour in the mixture,
season with salt and pepper and stir and scramble the mixture quickly
with the point of a knife, tossing it lightly. Cook about three minutes
and serve on toast.

PLAIN OMELET.--Separate four eggs. Beat the yolks with half a cup of
milk or water, season with salt and pepper. Beat the whites in a bowl
very light or until the bowl can be inverted and retain the whites of
eggs. Cut the whites into the yolks and turn into a hot frying pan with
melted butter. Let it stand over the fire undisturbed until it is
nicely browned on the bottom. Then run the pan into a hot oven and
brown on top. Serve immediately with or without sauce. Vegetable omelet
is made by spreading hot thickened creamed vegetables over the omelet
just before serving. Asparagus omelet is excellent. Fruit omelets are
made by spreading with stewed fruit or jelly or crushed sweetened fresh
fruit like strawberries, raspberries or peaches, or jams made of these
fruits. Fruit omelets are spread with powdered sugar usually. Rice,
macaroni or hominy are often seasoned in a favorite way with cheese or
gravy and spread on the omelet before serving. Macaroni cooked with
tomatoes and cheese makes an excellent omelet filling. Thickened,
stewed tomatoes are nice, and mushrooms may be added with green peas to
the tomatoes for Spanish omelet. In fact there are a thousand good
combinations and there isn't a nicer way to use a small portion of any
left over than to use it for an omelet filling if it will harmonize
with eggs at all. Four eggs in an omelet combination of this kind will
do nicely for a meal for a family of six people.--Contributed.

BREAD OMELET.--Soak one half cup of bread crumbs in one half cup of
milk. Separate four eggs, beat separately. Beat bread crumbs into the
yolks, add salt and pepper, beat whites till stiff. Add them to yolks
stirring with a spoon and pour into a hot spider at once. Cook on top
of stove till the bottom is browned then place in the oven till it is
cooked through.--Mrs. Creaser.

HAM OR MEAT OMELETS.--Soak one cupful of bread crumbs in one cup of
milk; add one cupful of minced cold boiled ham, veal, beef, corned
beef, tongue, fish or chicken; season with salt and pepper. Beat two
eggs very light, stir in lightly. Turn into a buttered hot frying pan,
brown on the bottom well, then run the pan into a hot oven and brown on
top. Or they may be fried in deep lard by dipping a spoonful of the
mixture into the smoking hot grease.--Contributed.

CODFISH OMELET.--Cook one tablespoon of flour with one of butter, add
one half cup hot milk. Add one cup of shredded codfish that has been
parboiled until tender, and drained. Add two cups cold boiled potatoes
that have been chopped fine. Mix well. Brown butter in a hot frying
pan, turn in the mixture, brown on the bottom, then fold over and
serve.--Contributed.

BAKED EGGS.--Break eight eggs into a well buttered dish; salt and
pepper them, add bits of butter and four tablespoons of cream; cover
top with grated cheese. Bake about twenty minutes.--Contributed.

EGGS WITH MUSHROOMS ON TOAST.--Break one cupful of mushrooms into small
pieces, dredge them with flour and put them into the saucepan with
three tablespoonfuls of butter, a few drops of onion juice, salt and
paprika. Cook for ten minutes. Beat three eggs slightly, not separating
them, and season them with salt and pepper. Add them to the mushrooms
and scrape them from the bottom as they cook until the mixture is thick
and creamy. Serve on hot buttered toast.




Left Overs

    "Beware of little extravagances; a small leak will sink a big
    ship."--Benjamin Franklin.

Left Overs Roll Call Responses


BREAD AND POTATOES.--Break up scraps of bread into small pieces,
moisten with a little hot water; cover and steam a few moments. Add to
diced cold boiled potatoes, season, and fry in butter.--Mrs. A. McKay.

HASH.--Use twice as much cold boiled potatoes as you have cold cooked
meat. Chop fine, separately; mix until moist with hot water and season
with salt and cayenne pepper and a little onion, if liked. Spread on
baking pan, pour bacon drippings on top and bake brown.--Mrs. T. A.
McKay.

EIER BROD.--Cut scraps of bread into small dice and fry brown in plenty
of butter. To a pint of crumbs, beat five or six eggs lightly with two
or three tablespoons of milk; add a dash of salt and turn eggs over the
bread. Scramble all together until the eggs are cooked. Serve
hot.--Mrs. Paul Leonhardy.

BROILED BOILED HAM.--Take thin slices of boiled ham, put on a broiler
and broil crisp. Nice for breakfast or lunch.--L. W.

SWEET AND SOUR STEW.--Cut up two onions and fry until glazed; add one
tablespoon of flour. Brown and add one quart cold water, one bay leaf,
a little salt and pepper, one cooking spoon of vinegar and the same of
sugar. Boil and add diced, cold boiled meat. Stew about one hour.--Mrs.
George Bruegger.

SECOND DAY CHICKEN STEW.--Three fourths cup chicken broth, one cup
thick cream, dash of salt, two tablespoons of flour rubbed with butter.
Thicken the above hot broth with this and add left over diced chicken
and one half can mushrooms.--Mrs. T. A. McKay.




Candies

    "Sweets to the sweet."


SEA FOAM CANDY.--Two cups light brown sugar, whites of one or two eggs
according to size of cup used, one cup of nut meats, one teaspoon
vanilla. Beat the eggs stiff. Put sugar on stove with enough water to
cover and cook until it forms a soft ball in water. Beat this into the
eggs very vigorously and add nuts and vanilla. Drop by spoonful on
buttered paper.--Mrs. Davidson.

MARSH MALLOWS.--Three cups white sugar, sixteen tablespoons hot water.
Put on stove and boil until it forms a soft ball when dropped in water.
Have ready one package Knox's gelatine, No. 1, and twelve tablespoons
cold water. Pour hot syrup over this slowly and beat twenty minutes.
Pour on buttered paper sprinkled with powdered sugar. Let stand one
hour then cut in squares and roll in powdered sugar.--Mrs. Davidson.

CHOCOLATE CREAMS.--One and one half cups white sugar, one large
tablespoon glucose, three fourths cup water. Put all together and place
on back of stove for ten minutes, then place on brisk fire and boil
until you can pick it up when dropped in cold water. Have ready the
white of one egg beaten to a froth. Pour the hot sugar slowly over it
and beat until stiff enough to drop in balls. Use any flavor desired.
Dip in melted Baker's chocolate.--Mrs. Davidson.

FUDGE.--Take three cups of sugar and one cup of milk or cream, add one
cupful of chocolate and let all boil for about fifteen minutes. Then
beat well and add butter size of an English walnut, flavor with vanilla
and add chopped nuts.--Mrs. Harry Hanson.

DIVINITY FUDGE.--Put two cups of sugar, one half cup water, one half
cup corn syrup into a pan and boil till it strings when dropped from a
spoon. Beat into the whites of two beaten eggs. Add nuts when cold and
put into buttered tins. Before real cold cut into squares.--Marguerite
Heffernan.

PENOCHE.--One cup granulated sugar, three cups brown sugar, one lump
of butter, half the size of an egg. Boil until it will harden when
dropped in a cup of cold water. Add cup of broken nuts and stir fast
until hard enough to pour. Turn into buttered tins and cut into
squares.--Marguerite Heffernan.

CHOCOLATE FUDGE.--Two cups of sugar, one cup of milk, butter size of an
egg, chocolate to suit taste. Put the sugar and milk and butter on to
boil. When nearly done add chocolate and nuts, boil until it hardens in
cold water. Pour into buttered tins to cool.--Marguerite Heffernan.

HEAVENLY BLISS CANDY.--Two and a quarter cups granulated sugar, one
half cup water, one cup walnut, one half cup corn syrup, whites of two
eggs, vanilla to suit taste. Boil together sugar, syrup and water until
it hardens when tried in water. Beat up whites of eggs until real
stiff, then pour in syrup stirring and beating constantly, add walnut
and vanilla, beat until quite stiff. Put on greased tins, cut in
squares when cold, or put in well buttered mould and cut in slices.
Care should be taken in boiling syrup long enough.--Mrs. Monroe.

FUDGE.--Two cups sugar, two squares chocolate, butter size of walnut,
two thirds cup water, one half cup walnut meat, vanilla. Heat sugar,
water, butter and chocolate slowly until chocolate is melted. Boil
until when tried in water will form a soft ball. Remove from fire, add
walnuts and vanilla and beat until creamy. Pour on buttered tins and
cut in squares when cool.--Mrs. Monroe.

DIVINITY FUDGE.--Two cups of sugar, one half cup of corn syrup, one
half cup of water, whites of two eggs, one cup of chopped nuts,
flavoring to taste. Boil the sugar, corn syrup and water until brittle
enough to break when tried in cold water. Have the whites of eggs
beaten stiff and add the syrup slowly. Beat or stir constantly and when
it begins to cool add nuts and flavoring. When thick put on buttered
plates.--Mrs. D. E. Plier.

GINGER DATES.--Prepare the following mixture and use it to fill the
cavities in stoned dates. Chop fine some seeded raisins and an equal
amount of soft preserved ginger root, mix thoroughly and fill the dates
until plump and smooth, then roll in powdered sugar.

NOUGAT.--Two cups sugar, one half cup light corn syrup, one half cup
boiling water. Boil until it makes a hard ball in water. Have ready the
whites of two eggs beaten and into this stir the syrup. Flavor and beat
in chopped nuts until quite thick. Turn in buttered tin. Set in cool
place until next day.--Mrs. F. Kleinsorge.

STUFFED DATES.--Remove seeds, stuff with blanched almond or with cream
or chocolate fondant or half English walnut meat. Roll in powdered
sugar.--Mrs. Whitehead.

SALTED ALMONDS OR PEANUTS.--Melt an ounce of butter in a baking pan.
Blanch a pound of shelled almonds by letting them stand in hot water
till skins can be slipped off easily. Dry well, mix with the butter,
sprinkle with salt and brown a golden brown in the oven, shaking or
stirring often. Cool by drawing on brown paper. Serve cold on small
dishes. All varieties of nuts may be roasted this way.--Mrs. Whitehead.

BROWN SUGAR TAFFY.--Two cups brown sugar, one cup granulated sugar, one
tablespoon butter. Boil with water to cover, until it is crisp and
brittle when tried in cold water. Flavor with tablespoon of vanilla and
pour carefully into greased pans to cool. Cut into small squares before
it becomes hard, then break apart. Do not stir this candy while
cooking.--Mrs. Whitehead.

VANILLA TAFFY.--Two cups granulated sugar, three fourths cup cold
water, one tablespoon of vinegar, one tablespoon of butter. Mix well
and boil without stirring until it is crisp and brittle when tested in
cold water. Add vanilla extract and turn into greased pans (sprinkle
with nuts if liked). Let it get cool enough to handle then pull until
white. Twist into a rope and cut with scissors into small cubes and put
on buttered plates.--Mrs. Whitehead.




Canned Fruit, Preserves, Jelly and Wines

    "Preserving the sweetness of proportion and expressing itself
    beyond expression."--Ben Jonson.


CANNED BERRIES.--Fill the glass cans with the cleaned berries as full
as you can crowd them in the jars. Make a syrup of sugar and water,
allowing a pint of sugar to each pint of water for the sour berries and
a quarter less sugar for the sweet fruits. Boil to a medium thick
syrup. Fill the cans of fruit with this syrup and seal, but not air
tight. (Put the tops lightly on). Stand the jars in a large dish pan or
preserving kettle half filled with boiling water. Cover and let the
water boil for twenty minutes, then remove the jars and seal as tight
as possible. Invert the cans and let them stand over night then place
cans each in a paper bag to exclude the light and pack in a cool dry
place. It is better to use wash boiler if much fruit is canned at a
time and a cloth should be laid on the bottom of the boiler to prevent
breaking of the cans. Fruit canned this way retains its shape, color
and flavor. Strawberries, cherries, red or black raspberries, black
berries, currants, gooseberries, huckleberries, grapes and plums are
best canned by this method. If peaches, pineapple, apricots, pears and
crab apples are canned this way they should cook twenty minutes longer
to assure tender fruit. They are perhaps more satisfactory cooked in a
thick syrup in an open kettle and then canned, as they are not soft
enough to lose their shape and it is more convenient to test them and
judge as to tenderness and flavor.--Mrs. B. G. Whitehead.

BERRY JAM.--Weight the cleaned berries and take an equal weight of
sugar for the sour fruit and crush and beat together until well mixed
in the preserving kettle, then boil steadily and gently over the fire
until thick, stirring frequently. Gooseberries should be boiled in
water to cover until the skins break, then add the sugar slowly and
cook half an hour. Currants should be cooked only long enough to let
the fruit get tender, as the juice jellies easily anyway, and the
currants get hard and tough if cooked too long. Red raspberries are
nice combined with currant juice and sugar.--Mrs. Whitehead.

MARMALADES.--Marmalade differs from jam because the fruit is cooked in
water to cover and when soft and tender is pressed through a colander
or sieve. Then the sugar is added and the pulp is cooked to a smooth,
thick consistency over a steady fire, stirring often to prevent the
fruit from sticking to the kettle. The fruit is weighed before cooking
and an equal weight of sugar is used. Fruit "butters" are thick
marmalades but they are usually not sweetened as much as marmalades and
are cooked longer. Sour fruits like cherries, gooseberries, plums,
peach and apples make the best "butters." Black berries, oranges,
apricots, grapes, peaches and pears make the best marmalades. The hard
seeds of blackberries and grapes are nicely disposed of in marmalade
and yet the pulp and fine flavor of the fruit is retained. Cook them as
long as you would jelly.--Mrs. Whitehead.

CURRANT JELLY.--Wash the currants, steam them and fill a large
preserving kettle with two pints of water added. Wash the fruit and
boil five minutes. Strain through a jelly bag and measure the juice,
allowing a pint of sugar to each pint of juice. Put the juice over the
fire and boil steadily twenty minutes. Warm the sugar in the oven, add
it to the boiling juice and stir well. Boil three minutes. Try a little
on a saucer. If it "jells," pour into jelly glasses, placing a silver
spoon in each to prevent cracking the glass. Set in the sun until it is
firm, then cover with melted paraffine. Another method is to boil the
strained juice ten minutes, then add the sugar and boil ten more
minutes. This makes a stiff, firm jelly but the first method makes more
delicate jelly. Make grape jelly the same as currant, using green
grapes if possible. Grapes must be fresh and not over ripe or they will
not "jell" nicely.--Mrs. Whitehead.

RASPBERRY JELLY.--Select red raspberries that are firm and if possible,
not quite ripe. Set them over a slow fire after crushing them with a
potato masher. Boil five minutes, then strain through a jelly bag and
measure. Use the same measure of sugar. Boil the juice fifteen minutes,
add the sugar and boil five minutes. Or to each three pints of
raspberry juice add one pint of currant juice and proceed as for
currant jelly. Strawberries are used the same as raspberries, selecting
firm, solid fruit that is practically ripened, if possible. It may also
be combined with apple juice instead of currant juice, if liked.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

CRAB APPLE JELLY.--Wash and quarter fresh, firm crab-apples and cover
with water allowing one quart of water to each pound of fruit. Cover
the kettle and boil twenty minutes. Drain in jelly bag over night.
Allow half a pound of sugar to each pint of juice. Boil juice ten
minutes, add warm sugar, boil up once and try the jelly, which should
jelly instantly.--Mrs. Whitehead.

WILD PLUM JELLY.--Sprinkle the washed plums with a little soda; cover
with boiling water and stand ten minutes; then drain and cover with
fresh boiling water and cook thoroughly, to a mush. Squeeze through a
jelly bag and proceed as in making currant jelly. Cultivated plums are
cooked in a little water until soft and tender and then strained in a
jelly bag and used like currants. Many colors are possible from the
different varieties of plums and as many fine flavors.

FANCY JELLIES.--Three pints of pineapple juice to one pint of apple
juice and an equal measure of sugar makes nice pineapple jelly. A rose
geranium leaf in each glass of apple jelly is liked by many. A
delicious mint flavor may be given to apple jelly by lining the bottom
of a jelly glass with mint leaves or the juice may be flavored with
essence of mint or winter green before it is boiled with the sugar.
Even red peppers are boiled in their own juice by chopping them and
placing them in a double boiler and cooking until all of the juice is
extracted. Allow an equal measure of sugar and boil until it thickens
and put in small glasses, and serve with cold meats. The seeds of two
vanilla beans added to twelve pounds of apples made into jelly, just
before turning the jelly into the tumblers makes a delicious jelly for
cake fillings and desserts. Rhubarb, apricots and quinces are sometimes
used for jelly but are difficult to make unless combined with other
fruits rich in pectose like currants and apples.

PLUM CONSERVE.--Two baskets of blue plums, six large oranges. Use the
peeling of two. Two pounds of seeded raisins chopped. Use one half
pound of sugar to one pound of fruit. Boil one hour, stirring
constantly.--Mrs. Creaser.

CARROT MARMALADE.--Boil carrots with their skins on. When cooked remove
skins and put carrots through a sausage grinder. Take equal amounts by
weight of sugar and carrot pulp and boil again. Flavor with sliced
lemons and almond extract. Chopped nuts may also be added.--Mrs. H.
Hanson.

QUINCE HONEY.--Grate four large quinces in one quart of cold water. Add
two pounds granulated sugar and boil until thick as jam.--Mrs. W. C.
McGuiness.

QUINCE HONEY.--To five pounds granulated sugar, add sufficient water to
make a syrup, thick enough for pancake syrup. Pare six large quinces
and grate them. After the syrup has thoroughly boiled add the grated
quinces and boil all together until it becomes a reddish color, when it
is ready to be put into jars for use.--M. E. Cooper.

MRS. ALLEMAN'S PINEAPPLE CONSERVE.--Two pounds of pineapple, four
pounds of rhubarb, grind together and add twice as much sugar as you
have fruit. Boil slowly until thick then put in jelly glasses. Good
with game and cold meats.--Contributed.

GREEN TOMATO MARMALADE.--Peel and cut in small pieces six cups of green
tomatoes, add two lemons, use the outside yellow, but remove the inside
white skin and cut the pulp up in small pieces, add six cups of white
sugar and cook until thick.

GINGER PEARS.--Pare and core large juicy pears and cut in small
sections. To each quart of the fruit, use one pint of sugar, one piece
of ginger root, one stick of cinnamon and one half of a lemon cut in
small pieces. Cook very slowly until the pear is clear and the mixture
like marmalade.--Mrs. Schollander.

GOOSEBERRY MARMALADE.--One pound of ripe gooseberries, one half pound
of sugar, the shredded peel of one lemon or a stick of cinnamon. Weigh,
wash, drain and mash ripe gooseberries. Press through a sieve. Boil the
sugar with one half cupful of water and the spice to a syrup; add the
sifted gooseberry and cook to a thick marmalade, stirring almost
continually. Put up hot in air tight glasses.

ORANGE MARMALADE.--Remove the seeds from--but do not peel--twelve large
or fifteen small oranges and six lemons. Cut both into thin slices.
Pour three quarts of cold water over them and let stand for forty eight
hours. Put into a preserving kettle and cook slowly until tender. Add
six pounds of sugar; if desired very sweet, add more, and cook until
the consistency of ordinary marmalade.

ORANGE AND HONEY MARMALADE.--Peel the oranges, removing every particle
of white pith. Cut small; to one quart of this pulp and juice add one
pound of honey and one quarter pound of the thin yellow peel of the
orange. Cut the peel into tiny bits, cover with half a pint of water
and boil until tender; add to the pulp and honey, and cook together for
half an hour, stirring frequently. Pour into small glasses and when
perfectly cold, cover with paraffin.--Contributed.

ORANGE HONEY.--Remove the peel from oranges, and cut into small
pieces with a pair of scissors; wash and soak for twenty four hours,
then chop fine, and turn into a preserve kettle, using one cupful of
sugar, and one cupful of water for every cupful of peel. Boil all
together until it is a soft, thick mixture like honey, then bottle in
screw top jars. Serve on hot biscuits or rolls, or use like ordinary
honey.--Contributed.

BAR DE LUC CURRANTS.--Take selected red (or white) currants of large
size, one by one, carefully make an incision in the skin one fourth of
an inch in size, with tiny embroidery scissors. Through this slit, with
a sharp needle, remove the seeds, separately, preserving the shape of
the fruit. Take the weight of the currants in strained honey and, when
hot, add the currants. Let simmer a minute or two, then seal as jelly.
The currants retain their shape, are of a beautiful color and melt in
the mouth. Should the currant liquify the honey too much, carefully
skim them out, reduce the syrup at a gentle simmer to desired
consistency and store as before after adding the fruit.--Contributed.

SWEET PICKLE OF PINEAPPLE.--Peel a pineapple, removing the eyes. Tear
the fruit from the core with a silver fork. For six pounds of fruit
boil together a pint of vinegar and three pounds of sugar. Put into
the vinegar a bag containing two level teaspoons each of powdered
cinnamon and mace, half a teaspoon of cloves and a piece of green
ginger root about a half inch long. When scalding pour over the
fruit, which should be in a large crock or earthen dish. Let all
stand for twenty four hours, drain off the syrup, bring it to the
boiling point and pour over the fruit. Repeat for two more successive
days, then seal.--Contributed.

SUN PRESERVED STRAWBERRIES.--Select ripe, clean, perfect fruit. It
spoils the fruit to wash it; if, however, this is necessary, put about
one quart of berries in a wire basket or colander; put them carefully
down in a pan of cold water; move the basket gently just a moment; lift
and drain; then stem the berries. Weigh, and to each pound allow one
pound of sugar. Select large stoneware or granite platters; heat them
quite hot; cover with half an inch sugar, a layer of strawberries, and
the remaining sugar over the top of the berries. Stand the platters in
a "cold frame", or cover them with glass and stand them in the hot sun.
As soon as the sun becomes too cool bring them in; don't lift the
covers, but stand them aside until morning. Next morning put them out
in the hot sun again. By this time the berries should be soft and
transparent, but perfectly whole and of a brilliant color. Lift each
berry carefully with a fork; put it in the tumbler; fill all the
necessary tumblers and cover them for a moment with glass. Put the
syrup over the fire and boil rapidly until it is sufficiently reduced
just to cover the fruit; pour it over the fruit while it is hot;
protect the tumblers and stand them aside to cool. When cold put over
the top of each a tablespoonful of melted paraffin; cover the tops of
the tumblers with two thicknesses of tissue paper and fasten firmly
around the edge with library paste. When the paper is thoroughly dry
brush it with cold water. In drying the paper will tighten and form an
exceedingly good covering.--Contributed.

APPLE BUTTER.--Boil cider down to two thirds its original quantity, and
turn into this as many peeled and sliced apples as the liquid will
cover. Simmer, stirring often until soft and broken. Strain out the
cooked apples, add more fresh ones and cook in the same way. Do this
until the cider is absorbed. Set all aside in a stone crock for twelve
hours, then boil to a soft brown mass and pack in stone
jars.--Contributed.

CANNED WHOLE GOOSEBERRIES.--Take stem and blossom ends from large firm
gooseberries. Fill fruit can with them, cover with boiling water, let
stand until following day; drain, add boiling water again repeating for
three days in succession. Then fill with boiling water and seal. When
ready to use cook and sweeten. Fine for winter pies.

SUNNED CURRANTS.--Cover large red, stemmed currants with granulated
sugar; spread on a platter and stand over night. Cover with a pane of
glass and stand in the sun three days in succession. Seal in jelly
glasses. Use equal weights of sugar and fruit. Same recipe is nice with
red raspberries and with large, firm strawberries. The juice jellies
around the fruit which retains its shape and rich color.

CANNED GRAPE JUICE.--Stem, wash and drain concord grapes, cook until
soft; strain through jelly bag. Add a pint of sugar to each gallon of
juice. Cook only until sugar is dissolved and seal.

PEACH PRESERVES.--Use four cups of sugar to each quart of peeled
peaches. Make a thick syrup of the sugar and water. Pour hot over fruit
and stand over night. Drain syrup and boil thick again. Drop in peaches
and cook tender. Pack them in jars, covering with the syrup.

CHOKE CHERRY AND CRAB APPLE JELLY.--Cover choke cherries with water and
stew until soft. Strain through jelly bag. Prepare crab apples
likewise. Use twice as much apple juice as cherry. Mix and boil twenty
five minutes. Add one cup sugar to each cup juice and boil ten minutes
more.

SUN PRESERVED STRAWBERRIES.--Wash and stem berries. Take an equal
weight of sugar, add a very little water and dissolve. When boiling add
the berries. Let come to a boil and cook three minutes. Pour into
platters or shallow dishes and set in the sun until thick. Three days
will suffice if the weather is clear. If the dishes are covered with
glass the fruit cooks more quickly. When thick put in tumblers, cover
with paraffin and put in a dark place.

CONSERVES.--One quart of rhubarb (do not peel), one pint of red
raspberries, one pint red currants, one pound raisins, one pound
English walnuts, two oranges (sliced very thin), two lemons (sliced
very thin); a pound of sugar to a pound of fruit. Cook until thick as
jelly. Put in jelly glasses and cover with paraffin. (Delicious.)

APPLE BUTTER.--Fill a preserve kettle with peeled, cored and sliced
apples. Add a slight flavoring of cloves, allspice and cinnamon. Cover
with fresh, sweet cider and boil slowly, stirring frequently until the
whole becomes a dark brown jam with only juice enough to keep it soft
and buttery. Remove from fire and place in covered jars or seal. Do
not use for several weeks. Good spread for bread for children. Select
firm apples that cook to a soft, smooth apple sauce. Bell-flowers,
Greenings, Baldwin or Maiden Blush apples make good apple butter.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

CURRANT COMPOTE.--Pick nice large red currants from stems after washing
well. Put one half of them into a preserve kettle. Press juice out of
remaining half; add enough sugar to make a syrup, heat until sugar is
dissolved. Cool slightly and pour over the currants in preserve kettle.
Bring to a boil and seal in pint jars. The currants will be whole and
taste much like fresh fruit with jellied juice around them.--Mrs.
Whitehead.


Wines

    "A cup of wine sir?
    A cup of wine that's brisk and fine."--Shakespeare.

GRAPE WINE.--For five gallons of wine use twelve and one half pounds of
concord grapes, twelve and one half pounds of wild grapes, twelve and
one half pounds sugar. Wash the grapes then pick from stems and put in
stone jars and mash; let stand from seven to ten days, then press
through wine press or jelly bag. Add sugar and water enough to fill a
five gallon keg. Put in cool cellar; let bung hole remain open but
cover it with cheese cloth and let grapes ferment; change cloth
frequently and after six weeks cork the keg tightly and let lie until
March, then seal in bottles. May be made from bull berries or other
fruit by same process. Same recipe for choke cherries.--Mrs. J.
Bruegger.

RHUBARB WINE.--Take five pounds of rhubarb and cut into small pieces,
add one gallon of cold water and put in a crock for eight days,
stirring it well two or three times a day, then strain and to every
gallon add four pounds of white sugar, the juice and half the rind of
one lemon. Dissolve half an ounce of gelatine in a little of the liquid
and add. Cover it for a month, then strain through a muslin bag and
bottle.--Mrs. Schollander.

CHOKE CHERRY WINE.--To one gallon of fruit allow two gallons of water,
mash fruit to get the juice, let stand nine days, then press through a
fruit press. When the juice is all extracted strain through a cloth. To
each gallon of juice allow three pounds of granulated sugar, or loaf
sugar, let stand several days and when thoroughly mixed, the sugar all
dissolved, strain through flannel bag, into keg or jug, leaving it
uncorked, but should be covered with some perforated cover or cloth to
avoid dirt or flies, or anything to get into the keg. Let this ferment
until it stops, which takes several weeks and be sure to keep it full,
there is always loss when it bubbles over, therefore it is advisable to
reserve a quart of juice to fill up with (plain sugar water will answer
the same purpose). When it ceases to ferment cork tight, (air tight),
let alone until the month of March then draw into bottles, cork tight
and it will be ready for use.--Mrs. George Bruegger.


Salads

FRUIT SALADS.--There is a large variety of dressings considered
appropriate for fruit salads. Boiled frosting is perhaps one of the
most popular foundations with varying flavors of fruit, wine, etc.
Sugar and lemon juice, sugar and fruit juice, boiled custard, plain
whipped cream sweetened and flavored, are all used, as well as a cooked
dressing made in this way: Add to the yolks of four eggs well beaten,
two tablespoonfuls of sugar, one tablespoonful of butter, one half
teaspoonful of salt, a pinch of cayenne and four tablespoonfuls of
vinegar. Cook in a double boiler, stir constantly and cook rather
slowly to prevent curdling. Let this get thoroughly cold and just
before serving add one pint of whipped cream unsweetened. Mix well and
pour over the salad.--Contributed.

GOLDEN DRESSING.--Beat two eggs, and a quarter cupful of any light
colored fruit juice, quarter cupful lemon juice, and a quarter cupful
of sugar. Put in a double boiler, stir until thickened, cool and pour
over sliced fruit.--Contributed.

FRUIT SALAD.--For the salad itself all sorts of combinations are
possible. Malaga grapes cut in halves, seeded, and mixed with a third
of the same quantity of shelled pecans in one happy mixture.
Pineapples, oranges and bananas go well together, as also pitted ripe
sour cherries with nuts. Orange, lettuce, lemon, nuts and water cress
are congenial companions, while preserved fruit may be used with fresh
fruit. Prunes are delicious in a salad, stuffing them with nuts or
cheese, covering with mayonnaise. The prunes should be washed, soaked
over night, then cooked until tender before they are pitted. Apricots,
either fresh or canned, sliced ripe pears are two new favorites used
with nuts and served with a nice boiled salad dressing, and garnished
with shredded lettuce.--Contributed.

FROZEN SALAD.--Put into a bowl one cupful orange slices, one cupful
each bananas and pineapple, one cupful of mayonnaise, one cupful cream,
measured before whipping, and a teaspoonful gelatine that has been
softened in cold water, then dissolve over hot water, toss lightly,
place in a mould and freeze. When frozen, cut in slices and serve on
lettuce leaves.--Contributed.

PINEAPPLE SALAD.--Lay one thick slice of canned pineapple on a lettuce
leaf, spread with thick mayonnaise, cap with sweetened whipped cream
and sprinkle with ground pecans or English walnuts.--Mrs. Whitehead.

FRUIT SALAD.--One cup of diced apples, one cup diced pineapple, one cup
diced oranges, one and one half cups bananas, one cup white grapes,
(cut in half), seeds removed, one half cup walnut meats, one half cup
diced celery. Serve with a salad dressing or whipped cream.--Mrs. Aaron
J. Bessie.

MRS. ALLEMAN'S WALDORF SALAD.--One cup each of chopped apples, walnuts
and celery. Dress with following mayonnaise dressing: Mix one half
tablespoon salt, one half tablespoon mustard and three fourths of a
tablespoon of sugar, add one slightly beaten egg, two and one half
tablespoons of melted butter, three fourths of a cup of thin cream and
very slowly one fourth of a cup of vinegar. Cook in double boiler until
thick, then strain and cool.

FRUIT SALAD.--One pound of malaga grapes, washed, cut into halves and
seeded; six large slices of canned pineapple cut into small pieces;
four apples peeled, quartered and cut into small pieces; three bananas
sliced fine; one bunch of celery, cleaned and cut into small dice; one
cupful of chopped pecans or English walnuts. Mix all lightly together
and mix with mayonnaise salad dressing. As all people do not like olive
oil I usually make a boiled dressing as follows: Heat half a cupful of
vinegar with as much hot water and two large spoonfuls of butter. Beat
the yolks of four eggs very light with a scant half a cupful of sugar;
add one level teaspoonful of flour and stir well; add then one
tablespoonful of dry mustard, one teaspoonful of salt and one of celery
salt or celery seed; a dash of black and of red pepper, beat a little;
place over the fire and cook thick, beating well. Cook only a few
moments, then remove from the fire and beat until perfectly smooth.
When ready to use add one cupful of thick whipped cream. Mix with the
prepared fruit. A scant teaspoon of flour added to sugar and egg
mixture prevents curdling of the dressing and saves eggs at a season
when they are scarce while it assures a smooth dressing always. A dash
of sugar added to cream before whipping it will prevent its turning to
butter. Lemon juice sprinkled over the fruit will prevent discoloring
of apples and bananas.--Mrs. B. G. Whitehead.

BANANA SALAD.--Skin bananas and cut into halves. Roll each in chopped
peanuts. Lay on a lettuce leaf and serve with mayonnaise dressing
capped with whipped cream.--Contributed.




Serving Dinner

    "Truth seeks some broader meeting place
    For breed or clan or tribe or race
    For saint and sinner;
    But after all the noise and fuss
    The issue paramount with us
    Is--What for dinner?"--J. W. Foley.


SERVING A FORMAL DINNER.--In cities the usual hour for a dinner party
is seven o'clock; in country places it is frequently earlier in the
day. When the last guest has arrived, dinner is announced. The host
leads the way with the lady whom he wishes to honor and the hostess
comes last with the gentleman whom she wishes to honor. The giving of a
dinner is the most important of all the duties of a hostess. She must
not betray ignorance or show nervousness, for she alone is responsible
for its entire success. The serving maid should be trained to keep cool
and avoid accidents. The number invited and the outlay expended should
depend upon circumstances and one's means. The favorite form of serving
a formal dinner is called a la Russe. The articles of food are carved
by the servants at a side table or in the kitchen and brought to the
guests. This has one advantage; it allows the host and hostess more
time for social enjoyment with their guests. But it calls for well
trained servants to perform this duty satisfactorily. It requires about
one servant to every six guests; therefore, when dinner is served in
this fashion, where the help is inadequate, it is well to engage
outside assistance. For a home like, informal, dinner, where the host
does the carving, one servant can wait upon twelve persons and do it
well if properly trained. On a table or sideboard should be placed the
plates for the various courses, smaller spoons, finger-bowls, coffee
cups and saucers. As the plates from each course are removed, they
should be taken to the kitchen. The waiter should approach the guests
from the left except in serving water, coffee, or anything of a like
nature. The color and flavor of the various courses should be as
different from each other as possible, offering all the foods in their
respective seasons and of the finest quality.

COURSES FOR A FORMAL DINNER.--First course: Oysters, as a rule, should
be served at the beginning of a dinner, though they are used only in
those months of the year in which the letter "r" occurs. The balance of
the year little neck clams are used. The second course consists of a
soup, the clear soup being preferred, accompanied by crackers or bread.
Celery may be served also. The third course consists of fish, boiled or
fried, and should be accompanied by small boiled potatoes; if boiled or
cooked in any fancy manner, serve radishes. Fourth course: An entree is
next in order if desired; it should be made in a fancy way, so as to
avoid carving; bread should be the accompaniment. Relishes, such as
olives, salted almonds, etc., are served with this course. The fifth
course consists of roasts. These may be composed of beef, veal, mutton,
lamb, venison, turkey, duck, goose, or capon, accompanied by one or two
vegetables. Sixth course: Punch or sherbet may be dispensed with or
not, as fancy dictates. The seventh course consists of snipe, prairie
chicken, squabs, etc., but poultry, such as spring chicken, or duck,
may be served instead. Eighth course: Any appetizing salad with cheese
wafers. Ninth course: Hot and cold sweet dishes, consisting of
puddings, ice cream, cakes, etc. Tenth course: Turkish or black coffee
served demi-tasse. The above makes a pleasant menu, but it can be made
simpler or more elaborate as one chooses. Before serving the dessert
all the dishes should be removed, save the drinking: glasses, and all
crumbs should be lifted from the cloth by means of the crumb knife and
tray. A dessert plate and dessert spoon and knife provided they are
needed, should then be placed in front of each guest. Coffee (made
after the manner of after dinner coffee) should be passed last,
demi-tasse, and served clear. Sugar and cream should follow, in order
that those who prefer either or both, may help themselves as they
please.




Proper Vegetables and Sauces to Serve With Meats

    "The veal artist puts both heart and mind into every dish. It
    blends with the season, it is suited to the occasion and harmonizes
    with the general manner of living."--Sarah Tyson Rorer.


SOUPS.--Bread or bread sticks with clear soups. Cracker with oyster,
clam or lobster soups, grated cheese (Parmesan preferred) with macaroni
soup. Celery, radishes or olives with all meat soups. Croutons with
puree of vegetables of all kinds and with chowders or hard water
crackers with the latter.


Fish

RAW SHELL FISH.--Serve oysters and clam very cold or deep in their
shells pressed into a plate of cracked ice. Garnish with quarters of
lemon. Pass horse radish, tabasco sauce or tomato catsup and crackers
or wafers or brown bread and butter.

COOKED SHELL FISH.--Brown sauce and toast with boiled oysters. Cabbage
salad, French dressing, tomato relish or catsup with fried oysters.
Lettuce, French dressing, or tomatoes raw or chili sauce or catsup;
sauce tartare; with boiled lobster. Sauce tartare and bread with
deviled crabs or lobster. Sauce tartare and bread with lobster farce.
French rolls and lettuce salad with lobster.

PLANKED OR BAKED FISH.--Potato puff, cucumbers with French dressing or
cucumber sauce. Boiled fish; fried potato balls or French fried
potatoes and cucumbers. Boiled fish; sauce hallandaise, boiled potatoes
with parsley and cucumbers. Small fried fish; sauce tartare and crisp
bread. Fish croquettes or cutlets; potato roses and crisp rolls.
Halibut steaks; cucumbers, brown bread and butter. Creamed or deviled
fish; cucumber sauce and crisp bread. Salt cod fish; boiled potatoes,
parsnips, biscuits or brown bread. Salt mackeral; fried mush corn
bread, gooseberry sauce. Fish timbales; cream sauce or lobster, shrimp
oyster sauce, small potato balls. Sweets should not follow a fish
supper or luncheon.

ENTREES.--Timbales, with cream sauce and peas; mushrooms; pass crisp
bread. Croquettes with peas. Bondins with peas and delicate sauce.

ROASTS.--Serve with the meat course one starchy and one succulent
vegetable, unless a dinner salad is served which generally takes the
place of the succulent vegetable. Never serve two starchy vegetables
together and do not serve potatoes with meat if they were served with
the fish course.


Beef

    With roast ribs of beef serve a choice of the following.

STARCHY VEGETABLES.--Mashed potatoes, baked sweet potatoes, browned
roasted potatoes, baked squash, hominy, Yorkshire pudding, corn meal
dumplings.

SUCCULENT OR GREEN VEGETABLES.--String beans, new beets, lima beans,
green corn, scalloped or baked tomatoes, egg plant (stuffed), parsnips,
kale, cabbage and asparagus.

WITH SIRLOIN ROAST.--Stuffed white or sweet potatoes, hominy croquettes
or any of the foregoing starchy vegetables and any of the preceding
succulent vegetables or spinach, young carrots or brussels sprouts.
With a baked fillet of beef always serve mushroom sauce and potato
croquettes and peas. With boiled fillet, sauce Hallandaise and French
salad or asparagus salad. With boiled steak for dinner, stuffed
potatoes or potato croquettes, and peas or string beans, asparagus,
mushrooms or baked tomatoes. With boiled steak for lunch, French fried
or hashed brown potatoes and celery or lettuce. With rolled steak,
tomato sauce and baked potatoes and stewed turnips or carrots. With pot
roast, boiled potatoes, boiled turnips or baked squash, or cabbage.
With boiled corn beef serve cabbage, turnips, greens and boiled
potatoes and horse radish sauce. With brown stew, tomatoes and
dumplings. With boiled beef, boiled potatoes, string beans or browned
parsnips. With hamburger steak, brown or tomato sauce, or stewed
mushrooms or sweet peppers. With beef tongue, raisin sauce, carrots and
boiled rice. With hot salt boiled tongue, potato salad and rye bread.
With baked heart, potatoes, beans, carrots or parsnips. With creamed
dried beef, corn bread or mush.

VEAL.--With veal cutlets, tomato or brown sauce and rice balls. With
roasted veal, boiled rice, spinach, cauliflower or brussels sprouts.
With stewed veal, dumplings and cooked tomatoes. With veal loaf,
celery, apple or tomato salad. With calves liver, macedoine or
vegetables and brown sauce. Garnish with crisp bacon strips. With sweet
breads, baked; brown sauce and peas; stewed; mushrooms and cream sauce;
glazed; mushrooms and peas; broiled, peas and rolls.

MUTTON.--With boiled leg of mutton, caper sauce, boiled rice and
turnips. With roasted leg of mutton, brown sauce, rice croquettes,
turnips or cabbage. With saddle and mutton, plain baked macaroni, peas
or asparagus. With shoulder, boiled rice or turnips or boiled hominy
and parsnip fritters. With Irish stew, dumplings and onions. With
roasted loin, rice croquettes and tomatoes. With broiled chops, creamed
potatoes and peas. With breaded chops, tomato sauce and potato au
gratin. With spring lamb, mint sauce, boiled rice or new potatoes; peas
or asparagus or green beans.

PORK.--With hot boiled ham, potatoes, apple sauce or chili sauce and
cabbage. With baked ham, wine or cider sauce, sweet potatoes or pan
cake, squash and cabbage or spinach or beets. With boiled ham, browned
mashed potatoes, cold slaw and baked apples. With roasted fresh pork,
apple sauce, potatoes or baked squash, cold slaw or cabbage stewed.
With young pig, apple sauce, hominy croquettes, pan baked sweet
potatoes, young lima beans and cold slaw or kohl-rabi. With fat salt
pork, boiled; beans and boiled cabbage and apple sauce or mustard
sauce.

POULTRY.--Serve with turkey, rice either plain, boiled or in
croquettes, or sweet potato or chestnut croquettes and boiled onions or
stewed celery and cranberry sauce. Cream sauce or oyster sauce or pan
gravy. With roast chicken, chestnuts boiled or made into croquettes,
rice or sweet potatoes, mashed, and creamed or baked onions or stewed
celery and grape or crab apple jelly, pan cream gravy. With guinea
fowl, rolls of crisp bacon, hominy and stewed celery, currant jelly.
With capron, same as chicken. With boiled chicken, rice, baked onions
and egg sauce. With fricassee of chicken, dumplings or boiled and baked
onions. With panned chicken, brown sauce, baked dumplings, and corn
fritters or baked sweet potatoes and corn pudding, or plain boiled rice
and baked tomatoes. With boiled chicken, hominy bread, cream sauce and
peas; pasa gauva or crab apple jelly, or waffles and cream sauce. With
hot boned chicken, chestnuts (stewed) and sauce. Stuff tame duck with
walnut, potato or rice stuffing. Serve with it brown sauce and browned
turnips or parsnips or salsify fritters. If the duck is roasted
unstuffed, serve macaroni or spaghetti, browned sweet potatoes or
hominy croquettes and stewed celery, brussels sprouts or stuffed
tomatoes. Pass currant jelly or sour grape jelly. With goose, serve
potato or hominy croquettes and sauer kraut or carefully boiled cabbage
or stewed turnips. Pass apple sauce or barberry jelly.

RABBIT OR HARE.--With Belgian hare, roasted, serve hominy or rice,
stewed celery or cabbage. Pass quince or crab apple jelly. With panned
hare or rabbit, boiled rice, brown sauce and celery with French
dressing or mayonnaise. With fricassee of hare or rabbit dumplings,
chestnuts, or baked squash, and celery or lettuce with salad dressing.
With panned or fried rabbit, sweet potatoes and parsnips, or baked
squash and stewed turnips; currant jelly.

GAME.--With boiled partridge or small birds on toast, lettuce salad.
With wild duck, for main meat course at dinner, cranberry sauce,
macaroni or spaghetti and baked onions; or black currant jelly,
macaroni and brussels sprouts or cabbage, or baked or browned sweet
potatoes and lettuce salad. When served at a course dinner as a game
course only, serve lettuce salad with it. With venison steak, serve red
or black currant jelly, French fried sweet potatoes and celery salad.
With roast venison, baked or brown sweet potatoes, stewed celery and
currant jelly. With wood cock serve spaghetti and lettuce salad. With
partridges, quail and other similar birds on toast or squares of fried
hominy or corn meal mush, lettuce or celery salad. Broiled or fried
prairie chicken or pheasants are served with bread, horse radish sauce,
French fried sweet potatoes and celery or lettuce salad. Small birds
like reed and rail are served on toast in cases of onions or sweet
potatoes. Serve squabs with peas or asparagus tips. Pigeons with small
almond balls, rolls of crisp bacon and celery.

COLD MEATS.--With collard beef, cold, serve salad with French dressing.
With cold roast beef, cream horse radish sauce, aspic jelly, cress with
French dressing. With cold mutton serve sliced tomatoes with salad
dressing. With cold lamb, lettuce and chopped mint with French
dressing. With cold veal serve mayonnaise of celery on lettuce hearts.
With cold turkey, serve tomato jelly, salad dressing or mayonnaise of
celery; or cranberry jelly. With cold duck, serve turnips in jelly with
mayonnaise dressing; or cranberry jelly. With cold ham, cabbage salad
or tomato relish or salad dressing. With cold pork, apple sauce and
cole slaw.--(The above list is adopted from one given by a famous
cook.)




Chafing Dish Recipes


CREAMED OYSTERS ON TOAST.--One quart oysters, one quart milk, yolks of
three eggs, butter size of an egg, salt, pepper, and a dash of nutmeg.
Melt the butter and when slightly brown add the milk and seasoning.
When this is boiling hot add the oysters, chopped, and eggs beaten
well. Thicken with a little flour and water. Serve on hot buttered
toast.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

SPANISH OMELET.--One half can French peas, one half can tomatoes, one
tablespoon chopped onion, salt and pepper to suit taste, a dash of
paprika. Cook until the onion is soft. Make a plain omelet and serve on
a platter with the vegetables around it. Serve hot.--Mrs. Aaron J.
Bessie.

MUSHROOMS ON TOAST.--Drain the liquor from one can of French mushrooms,
melt one half cup butter until it begins to brown, then add the
mushrooms, salt, pepper, one tablespoon Worcestershire sauce and a
little parsley. Allow to cook for about five minutes. Serve on buttered
toast.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

SCRAMBLED EGGS WITH SALMON.--One small can salmon, free from bones and
skin, one cup bread crumbs, six eggs beaten light, salt and pepper to
suit taste, one tablespoon butter, melt butter and add salmon, eggs and
crumbs and seasoning. Brown nicely.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

HAM PATTIES.--Chop cold cooked ham and add one half amount of bread
crumbs, season to suit taste, use enough milk to form in patties, place
in pan and break on each an egg. Cook covered until eggs are
done.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.

WELSH RAREBIT.--One pound cheese grated, one large tablespoon butter,
one large tablespoon catsup, one quarter teaspoon salt, dash of red
pepper, one gill of beer. Cook until smooth, stirring all the time.
Serve hot on buttered toast.--Mrs. Aaron J. Bessie.




Kookery Kinks


Fish may be scaled more quickly if dipped in boiling water for a
moment.

Do not wash meats in water, wipe them with a wet cloth.

The whites of eggs will whip more readily if a pinch of salt is added
to them. If the eggs are placed in cold water for a time before being
broken, they will whip easily.

A small quantity of soda, stirred into milk or cream, will keep it from
souring in hot weather.

A few drops of lemon juice added to the water in which potatoes are
boiled will prevent the potatoes turning dark when cooked.

In mixing liquids with salads, add the liquid to the salad by degrees.
They will blend more readily.

To preserve the color of green vegetables put them on to cook in
boiling water with a pinch of soda; or, keep the cover off the kettle
while boiling them.

If you use too much salt by mistake add a trifle of sugar or a vinegar,
according to the dish. This will counteract the salty taste.


Measuring Hints

A cupful of liquid means all the cup will hold.

A spoonful of liquid is all the spoon will hold.

Salt, flour, seasoning spices, butter and all salads are measured
level.

To measure a level spoonful, dip the spoon into the dry material,
taking up a heaping spoonful, then level it off even with the edge of
the spoon with a knife.

To measure a part of a spoonful, cut lengthwise of the spoon for the
half and crosswise for the quarter.

A tablespoonful of butter should be measured before melting.

A tablespoonful of melted butter should be measured after being melted.

Measure a cupful of cream before it is whipped.

Measure a cupful of whipped cream after it is whipped.

Always sift flour, salt, baking powder, spices, powdered sugar and soda
before measuring. If measured in a solid state before sifting much more
than the quantity called for will be used.

When ice is not to be had, half fill a large flat bottomed bowl with
cold water. Set in this the vessels containing milk, butter, sauces,
etc. Cover with napkins which dip down into the water and set the whole
thing in a draft. Evaporation will keep everything sweet and cool.

Fruit cake recipes usually call for dried currants. These are hard and
lack flavor. Try using an equal measure of chopped prunes. They hold
moisture and impart a delicious flavor to the cake.

Use a large sponge for general house cleaning instead of a brush. It
gets a good grip on the dirt and is not so sloppy.

Silver may be cleaned by laying in a pan of sour milk for several hours
then washed and wiped dry.

Keep lemons in cold water. Change every few days.


Notes

A little sugar added to cream before whipping will prevent it from
turning to butter.

Use scant measure of sugar in custard pie and do not cook after the
custard is set sufficiently to cut with a silver knife, if you want a
smooth and palatable baked custard.

A small dish of water placed in the oven will prevent scorched or
burned food when the oven is hotter than it should be.

Save bread crusts and dry them in the warming closet of the kitchen
range, to roll fine for a coating for fried oysters, croquettes and
cutlets. Dried crumbs are better for dressing and puddings also.

Drop a few slices of raw potatoes in the hot lard used for frying
doughnuts to clarify the grease before putting it away for future use.




Laundry Work


In laundry work different methods must be used for different fabrics.
The texture and color of a garment must be considered before method of
laundering is decided on. As laundry is the heaviest part of house work
one should carefully consider all means by which strength may be saved.
A careful sorting of all clothes. Thorough soaking of all articles that
will not be injured thereby. A generous use of good soap and a well
equipped room for laundry purposes with plenty of good soft water will
to some extent lighten the labor. Chemicals judicially used have been
found helpful. A good solution for loosening dirt and may be used in
soaking the different kinds of clothes including prints and flannels is
given out and recommended by the Agricultural school of Minnesota. It
is made as follows: Procure 10 cents worth of salts of tartar, 10 cents
worth of crystal ammonia, one can of Lewis lye. Dissolve all in a
gallon of warm but not boiling water and cork tightly. When wanted for
use a teacupful of the mixture for from three to four pailsful warm
water will be the right amount to use when soaking clothes.


Laundry References

Use borax water to wash sateen. This method will restore the gloss to
the goods.

Use warm water to sprinkle your starched clothes.

Fine ginghams and percales dipped in sweet milk instead of starch,
gives them that dainty, glossy dressing they have when new.

Ink Stains--Soak in sour milk. If a dark stain remains, rinse in a weak
solution of chloride of lime.

Blood Stains--Soak in cold salt water then wash in warm water with
plenty of soap, afterward boil.

Grass Stains--Saturate the spot thoroughly with kerosene, then put them
in the washtub.

Iodine Stains--Wash with alcohol, then rinse in soapy water.

Hot Tea and Coffee Stains--Soak the stained fabric in cold water;
wring; spread out and pour a few drops of glycerine on each spot. Let
it stand several hours; then wash with cold water and soap.

Iron Rust--Soap the stain thoroughly with lemon juice; sprinkle with
salt and bleach for several hours in the sun.

Grease Spots--Hot water and soap generally remove these. If fixed by
long standing, use ether, chloroform or naptha. All three of these must
be used away from fire or artificial light.

Mildew--Soak in a weak solution of chloride of lime for several hours.
Rinse in cold water.

Sewing Machine Oil Stains--Rub with lard. Let stand for several hours,
then wash with cold water and soap.

Scorch Stains--Wet the scorched place, rub with soap and bleach in the
sun.

Fruit Stains--Stretch the fabric containing the stain over the mouth of
a basin and pour boiling water on the stain. In cold weather fruit
spots can frequently be removed by hanging the stained garments out of
doors over night. If the stain has been fixed by time soak the article
in a weak solution of oxalic acid or hold the spot over the fumes of
sulphur.

Here is an excellent cleansing fluid that will leave no rings or water
lines: One pint of benzine, an ounce of ether and an ounce of
chloroform. Shake well before using and keep tightly corked. An
absorbent pad (white blotting paper or thick towel) should be placed
beneath the material. Apply cleanser with a soft linen cloth and rub
stain lightly until it disappears. Beware of fire.

Cover the grass stains with common black molasses--the thickest you can
get--and rub it in with the finger until the fabric is saturated. Leave
it on for a day and wash out with clear water. A homely but an
effectual process.

For a rust stain, wet the spot and cover with oxalic acid, rub it in
well, and then wash off with clean, tepid water.

Soak the white articles in sour milk or in buttermilk all night. Rinse
in the morning and sun all day, wetting hourly with cream of tartar
water. Rinse again in the evening and repeat the soaking. If one trial
does not wholly remove the mildew, repeat the process.

REVIVING BLACK DRESSES.--Wash black cashmere, mohair, voile or other
black dress goods, in soap suds until clean, then rinse well. Put
bluing into water enough to cover the cloth well until it looks almost
black. Put in the cloth and rinse it about in the water, then be sure
it is all under water and leave it over night. Lift from this bluing
water directly to the line without wringing and let hang until almost
dry, then press on the wrong side on an entirely smooth ironing sheet.

TO LAUNDER A BLACK COTTON DRESS.--Black and white or all black muslin
dresses seldom look well when they come from the laundry and black
cotton does not appear to make a good "tub" dress. But if the following
method is tried it will give the cotton a clear look and stiffness like
new. Mix one half cup of flour with cold water to make smooth, then
turn on two quarts of boiling water and cook five minutes. Add this
starch, to enough warm water to wash the dress or waist in and wash the
garment without using a particle of soap. Rinse in two waters and hang
to dry. Just before ironing sprinkle on the wrong side.

REMEDY FOR PALLOR.--An excellent lotion in case of pallor is made from
one tablespoon of tincture of benzoin and three ounces of rose water.

EGGS PRESERVED IN WATER GLASS.--(Silicate of Sodine.) By this method
eggs may be kept fresh for eight months if rules are carefully
followed. Boil a quantity of water and allow it to cool. Use one gallon
of water and one quart of water glass and stir until thoroughly mixed.
Use a glazed stone jar and deposit the eggs into the solution and see
that the eggs are covered to the depth of at least an inch. The jar
must be covered and stored in a cold place. The eggs must be perfectly
fresh and best results are obtained if they are put in the solution as
gathered from the nests each day. The shells must also be perfectly
clean.--Mrs. Harry Hansen.

WASHING FLUID.--This fluid is guaranteed not to injure or take the
color out of any fabric and may be used in soaking white clothes,
prints and flannels. It is made and used as follows: Heat one gallon of
water. Add one can Lewis lye, ten cents worth of crystal ammonia and
ten cents worth of salts of tartar. Have water hot but not boiling and
cork solution in a gallon jug. A teacupful to three or four pails of
hot water is the amount needed in soaking soiled clothes.--Mrs. Harry
Hansen.




Home Remedies for Simple Ailments


LINSEED POULTICE.--Four ounces linseed meal and ten ounces of boiling
water. Mix gradually. Dip spoon in boiling water when you spread this
mixture on the poultice cloth. Bind on inflamed parts.

MUSTARD POULTICE.--Two ounces of dry mustard mixed with the whites of
two eggs to a paste. Spread on a cloth in a thick paste and apply while
it is fresh and wet.

COLDS.--For a cold in the head just appearing inhale spirits of
camphor. Put one or two drops of camphor on a small lump of sugar,
dissolve in a wine glass of water, (one gill) and take a teaspoonful
every half hour. Take a good cathartic or drink four or five glasses of
hot water at bed time and in half an hour follow with four more glasses
of hot water. Gargle sore throat with warm water and alcohol or warm
water and salt using one level teaspoon of salt to a pint of water. If
cold has made the throat or lungs sore, dip a cloth in cold water,
wring dry and spread it on throat or chest. Cover with three
thicknesses of dry flannel and bind it on securely. Take a hot foot
bath and go to bed. This treatment should cure your cold. If is doesn't
it will be a wise thing to call a physician in the morning before
alarming symptoms are developed. Bathe frequently, drink plenty of
water and keep the bowels in regular action and prevent colds.

TO REDUCE SWELLINGS.--Tincture of arnica or witch hazel applied to a
bump on the head or a bruise where the skin is not broken brings relief
from pain and often prevents inflammation and bad swellings.

CUTS AND SCRATCHES.--Apply peroxide to cuts, scratches and all bruises
where the skin is broken. This remedy often serves as a preventative to
blood poisoning.

WHEN A BUTTON IS SWALLOWED.--Children sometimes swallow buttons, fruit
stones, thimbles and pennies. When the mother is sure that the child
has swallowed a foreign substance the child should be encouraged and
even compelled to eat plentifully of mashed potatoes, thick mush and
coarse bread. Then follow with syrup of rhubarb or castor oil. Do not
give the cathartic immediately on finding out the accident but make
sure that much bulky food is taken. Give a child slippery elm to chew
when it swallows a penny or button or hard object. This forms a
slippery coating on the surface of the penny in the stomach which aids
it in passing easily through the intestine and prevents its lodging
there and was the remedy applied by a physician when called.--Mrs.
Whitehead.

CRAMPS IN THE LEG.--Sleep with hot water bag at the feet. A garter tied
tightly around the leg often effects a cure. Quick, hard rubbing is
best in sudden, painful attacks. Often it is essential to walk about
the room to bring the circulation of blood to the feet again.

INSECT BITES.--A teaspoonful of tincture of wild rosemary to a glass of
water. Apply this lotion frequently to the inflamed parts.

GOOD LINIMENT.--One ounce of camphor, four ounces olive oil. Dissolve
the gum in the oil and add one quarter of an ounce of chloroform. Shake
well and apply to affected parts. This is for external use only.

CURE FOR HICCOUGHS.--Lump of sugar saturated with vinegar will usually
cure hiccoughs in a child. Drink of water often brings immediate
relief. In prolonged cases of hiccoughing, weak, hot coffee with cream
and sugar given at frequent intervals has cured the patient.

NOSE BLEED.--Snuff powdered alum up the nose. This alum is also good
for checking hemorrhage, sometimes caused by extracting teeth. Fill the
cavity with the alum. Apply cold salt water to bleeding nose if you
haven't alum.

CORNS.--Bind bread soaked in vinegar on the corns day and night and
they will come out by the roots.

WARTS.--Prick with a needle (sterilized by boiling in clear water for
ten minutes) until the wart bleeds then apply soda.

BUNIONS.--Pulverize salt petre and sweet oil mixed well and applied to
the sore joints often brings relief. Bunions are usually caused by
wearing shoes too short.

SUMMER COMPLAINT OR DIARRHOEA.--In early stages unless alarming
symptoms appear, give the child or patient a generous dose of castor
oil and keep patient on a light diet for a day or two or refrain from
eating at all for twelve hours. If passages are green and full of
mucous membrane call a physician immediately as delay may be fatal.
Whites of two eggs mixed with a little water sipped frequently is often
healing also to stomach and bowels.

GOOD WAY TO GIVE CASTOR OIL.--Put a tablespoon of orange juice into a
small tumbler, pour in the required amount of oil, and more orange
juice on top. The oil forms a ball in the middle of the juice and is
swallowed without coming in contact with the tongue. Wine may be used
instead of orange juice.

BURNS.--Grated raw peeled potatoes spread on bandages and bound on a
badly burned arm, shoulder and hand brought immediate relief to one of
my children once when I was on a farm and could not get a doctor. I
kept the bandages moist by binding fresh new, wet ones over the old
ones until pain ceased but did not remove the dressing at all until
wound was healed. It healed perfectly without leaving any scar. Do not
know the merits of this remedy from a physician's standpoint but it was
used successfully in a bad hotel fire in a village where no physicians
resided and the patients all recovered from severe burns and there were
no scars left on their bodies.--Mrs. Whitehead.

LOCK UP POISONS.--All poisons should be labeled and kept in a
compartment by themselves. Such household remedies as laudenum,
chloroform, arsenic, aconite belladona, cough medicine, carbolic acid,
headache pellets or powders, linaments, opiates, fly poison, etc.,
should be kept in a locked box or in a covered can labeled "poison"
placed out of the reach of children. They should always be kept
separate from all other medicine. "An ounce of prevention is worth a
pound of cure." Many deaths are caused by carelessness in placing
poisonous remedies within the reach of children. Unless poison can be
kept in a safe place, it is wiser always to throw it in the fire or to
bury it--and buy a new supply when needed than to run the risk of
poisoning a member of the family. Always look at the label on a bottle
before taking any medicine.

TOOTH ACHE.--Chloroform and clove oil applied with a piece of absorbent
cotton to the cavity of an aching tooth brings immediate relief.

CROUP.--Lard or goose grease and turpentine applied freely to the
throat and chest. Hot steam inhaled from a sponge dipped in boiling
water makes breathing easier. In serious cases an antiseptic should be
given to produce vomiting immediately until the physician arrives. Give
castor oil to a child showing symptoms of a croupy cough.




General Index


Bread and Rolls                                          57

Biscuits, Jems, Pancakes and Fritters                    61

Beverages                                               159

Cakes                                                   101

Cookies, Drop Cakes and Doughnuts                       115
    Doughnuts                                           121

Cheese                                                  155

Candies                                                 173

Canned Fruit, Preserves, Jelly and Wines                177
    Wines                                               183

Chafing Dish Recipes                                    195

Eggs                                                    167

Fish, Oysters and Shell Fish                             21

Fancy Desserts                                          131

Game                                                     29

Germany Cookery                                          43

Home Remedies for Simple Ailments                       203

Ice Cream, Sherbets, Ices, and Frozen Dainties          139
    Cold Desserts                                       141
    Fruit, Ices and Sherbet                             141

Kookery Kinks                                           197
    Measuring Hints                                     197
    Notes                                               198

Left Overs                                              171
    Left Overs Roll Call Responses                      171

Laundry Work                                            199
    Laundry References                                  199

Meat                                                     39

Poultry                                                  33

Pickles, Condiments and Spiced Fruits                    91

Pastry, Pies and Tarts                                  123

Puddings and Pudding Sauces                             147

Proper Vegetables and Sauces to Serve with Meats        189
    Beef                                                190

Refreshing Beverages for Convalescents                  165

Soups                                                    15

Sauces for Meat, Fish, Fowl and Game                     51

Sandwiches                                               67

Salads                                                   75
    A Group of Salad Dressings                           75

Salads                                                  184

Serving Dinner                                          187

Vegetables                                               83


Williston Herald Print




The Sequel to This Book is found on page 10



The Mutual Life Insurance Co. of New York

By means of life insurance a man may buy from The Mutual Life of New
York on the instalment plan a fortune deliverable to his family at his
death, or to himself at the end of twenty years if he be then living.
He makes secure the prize for them, and leaves himself free to run the
race of life without the anxiety and care entailed by his fear for
their future. His mind is at rest, his capital is free, and a fortune
is practically secured for those he loves.

For information concerning these policies call and see

D. E. Scott, Dist. Mgr.,

Graphic Block

     *     *     *

E. B. LINK

Contractor and Builder

WILLISTON, N. D.

     *     *     *

KALIL BROS.

Meats and Groceries

PHONE 296

4th Ave. West




ELECTRIC COOKING UTENSILS and FLAT IRONS. : : : : :

[Illustration]

With the new power rates no one can afford to be without ELECTRIC
COOKING DISHES and the IRON.--We put any cooking utensil into your home
on trial FREE.

WILLISTON ELECTRIC CONSTRUCTION CO.




THE WILLISTON HERALD

The Paper That is Read by more people than any other paper in Williams
County and is as necessary in the home as good bread and pies.




The Difference In Sewing Machines

It is a mistaken idea that sewing machines are pretty much alike, when
as a matter of fact there is a vast difference.

There is but one machine that sews better than any other--and that one
is the Singer.

This is because the Singer idea is distinctive--every year shows
improvement in that idea.

This is because the Singer factories are not only equipped with tools
and machinery better calculated to make good sewing machines than any
other, but this equipment is unique and not to be found elsewhere.

This is because a half century has been devoted to training and
specializing men each to do one thing best in sewing machine
construction. The Singer's superiority--its lifetime-lasting
value--does not appear on the surface.

One machine does sew better than any other--and that one is the Singer.

Nick Held, Agent

16 West Broadway        Williston, N. D.




John Shikany

General Merchandise

WILLISTON,    N. DAK.

     *     *     *

Joe Buller

TAILOR

French Dry Cleaning and Repairing. First Class Work

     *     *     *

DO NOT BE ANNOYED BY FLIES

Screens of all Sizes can Be Secured At The

Bovey-Shute Lumber Yard

PHONE 95




Wild and Improved Farm Lands Irrigated Lands; Large or Small
Tracts--First Mortgage Farm Loans Negotiated--City Loans.

H. V. SMITH

Lands and Loans

Insurance

Fire, Tornado, Hail, Life, Accident.

Come where Big Crops Grow on Cheap Lands.

     *     *     *

The Paris Confectionery Store

ABE KASSIS, Prop.

Homemade Candies, Ice Cream, Fruit, Cigars and Tobaccos

Exclusive Confectionery

113 Main Street

Williston,         N. D.

     *     *     *

SWEDLUND Bros.

...Jewelers...

Everything in Solid Silver and Plated Ware for the Table.

     *     *     *

A. A. Bradley        J. P. Cutting

Williston Drug Company

Drugs, Stationery, Office Supplies, Books, Sporting Goods, Wall Paper.

Agents for Ansco Cameras

Williston, N. D.




"Where Everybody Goes"

The Star Theatre

Vaudeville and Motion Pictures

Two Shows Nightly

7:45 and 9 p.m.

     *     *     *

...The... Orpheum Theatre

THE WORLD'S BEST PHOTO PLAYS

Continuous Performance

7:30 to 10:30

     *     *     *

Eat at the Cafe with a Reputation----

Quantity, Quality and Service

"That's how we got it"

Everything Good to Eat can be found here

Great Northern Cafe

Wm. C. Lynch, Prop.

THE CAFE IS ANNEX TO THE GREAT NORTHERN HOTEL




RAWSON HARDWARE COMPANY

WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA

The best place to buy cooking utensils with which to prepare the
recipes found in this book.

Also a Full Line of General Hardware




Smoke Borden Cigars

Get your money's worth and encourage home industry

     *     *     *

E. VanAntwerp

Everything in Dependable Furniture from Parlor to Kitchen.

Oldest Furniture House in Williams county.

141 Main St., Williston, N. D.

     *     *     *

The Williston Art Store

Art Needle Work and Novelties, Stamped Linens, Pillow Tubing. We make a
specialty of hand embroideries, also embroidery thread.

137 Main Street

Williston, N. D.

     *     *     *

Millinery

Miss C. M. Taylor

125 Main Street

Williston, N. D.




KASSIS BROS.

GENERAL MERCHANDISE

25 East Broadway      Williston, N. D.

     *     *     *

Williston State Bank

WILLISTON, N. D.

General Banking

Farm Loans

INTEREST PAID ON TIME DEPOSITS

     *     *     *

A. N. Eidsness

Dealer in General Merchandise

Farm Produce Bought and Sold

Phone 140

Williston, N. D.




MODEL LAUNDRY

W. W. McAllister, Prop.

First Class Work

....Guaranteed....

19 East Broadway Phone 111 Williston, N. D.

     *     *     *

St. Paul, Minn., 1900    Special Diploma
St. Paul, Minn., 1901    Second Prize Badge
Wisconsin State Exhibit. 1903,    Special Diploma
Duluth, Minn., 1905,    Bronze Medal
World's Fair, St. Louis, 1904    (Cramer Exhibit) Gold Medal
Minneapolis, Minn., 1906,    Gold Medal
Minneapolis, Minn., 1908,    Gold Medal
Williams Co. Fair, 1911    Blue Ribbon
Minneapolis, 1912    Gold Medal, Grand Prize

J. E. PASONAULT

ARTIST PHOTOGRAPHER

Vice President N. W. P. A.

North Dakota 1903-4

WILLISTON, N. D.

     *     *     *

HAMRE Furniture Co.

New and Second hand Furniture

WILLISTON, N. D.




[Illustration]

Cook With Pots and Pans

bought here and you'll not have to be renewing your stock every little
while. It pays to buy good cooking utensils because they last so much
longer. Our hardware store contains a complete assortment of everything
used in a kitchen. As a good housekeeper you should not fail to visit
our house-furnishing department.

Stenehjem & Husebye

     *     *     *

[Illustration]

For Household Use

we carry a splendid line of knives and forks, spoons, carving sets,
etc. You couldn't find a finer assortment if you tried a month. And
even if you found as fine, you would have to pay a much higher price
than we ask. Moral: Buy here and save time, trouble and money.

Stenehjem & Husebye







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CIVIC LEAGUE COOK BOOK ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

