



ORTHODOX DAILY PRAYERS






St. Tikhon's Seminary Press
1982

Printed
with the blessings
of
His Grace,
the Right Reverend
HERMAN
Bishop of Philadelphia
and
Eastern Pennsylvania




TABLE OF CONTENTS


  Introduction                                                          1
  Morning Prayers                                                       5
  Commemoration of the Living and the Dead                             25
  Prayers at the Table                                                 33
  The Order of Compline                                                38
  Before Sleep                                                         68
  The Three Canons                                                     89
  Canon in Preparation for Holy Communion                             119
  Prayers in Preparation for Holy Communion                           130
  Prayers for Thanksgiving After Communion                            161




                              INTRODUCTION




                             THE PRAYERBOOK


The present Prayerbook contains the most basic daily prayers of the
Orthodox Christian as they have been transmitted to us essentially by the
Russian Church, although the other Orthodox Traditions in this matter are
very similar.

In this book, we will find the Psalms of the Holy Prophet King David, the
prayer which Our Lord Himself taught His holy disciples, prayers of the
desert fathers, prayers of the great hierarchs and teachers of the
Church, as well as the prayers of more recent fathers.

The publication of such prayers does not limit the free expression of the
Christian soul to the Creator, the Most-holy Theotokos and the Saints. On
the contrary, by reading these prayers we learn how to pray. They become
models for our own, personal prayers. Often, we would like to pray but,
distracted by the bustling world around us, or troubled by fear or
sorrow, we do not even know how to begin. We then begin with the
Prayerbook and find that not only much of what we wanted to say is
included in the prayers of the fathers, but that afterwards, we find
words of our own to continue the outpouring of our soul.

There is yet another gift in the Prayerbook. As Orthodox Christians we
are all members of the same Body. We express and partake of that oneness
in the services of the Church, especially in the Divine Liturgy. Through
the Prayerbook, this oneness is brought into our homes or any place that
an Orthodox Christian reads it. Our own prayers are carried to the Throne
of God on the wings of prayers that have been used by the People of God
for centuries. We no longer pray alone.




                           THE RULE OF PRAYER


Many rules of prayer have developed in the history of the Church. At no
place or time has there been a uniform rule. In 19th Century Russia, for
example, the rule varied considerably from one monastery to another,
though certain basic elements were found in all of them. Therefore, the
term "Rule of Prayer" should never be understood as a strait jacket,
regulating and limiting our communion with God.

What the Rules do teach us is the importance of regularity in our life of
prayer. It is better to say a few prayers every day without fail than to
say a great number of prayers on an irregular, impulsive basis. Those of
us who are fortunate enough to have a spiritual father should consult him
before establishing our own Rule. Those of us who do not, should begin
with a modest Rule, increasing it only when it has become a regular and
integral part of our lives.




                            THE TRANSLATION


We have attempted to use a contemporary but dignified form of the English
language throughout this present translation. Wherever possible, existing
translations of the Orthodox Church in America have been used. For
example, the Prayers in Preparation for Holy Communion are taken from the
official Divine Liturgy book (St. Tikhon's Seminary Press, 1977) with
very few changes. The Psalms, verses, troparia, and prayers not included
in that edition have now been translated and included to complete the
traditional order.

The Psalms are taken from the Revised Standard Version of the Bible with
changes made wherever significant differences with the Orthodox
liturgical Psalter (based on the Septuagint) made it necessary. The
numbering of the Psalms follows the Septuagint throughout the Prayerbook.
We are leaving to Biblical scholars the study of the merits of the
various texts of the Holy Scriptures. Our object here is to provide the
English-speaking Orthodox Christian with a Prayerbook as closely
equivalent as possible to the Prayerbooks that Orthodox Christians of
other nationalities have used for generations.




                            MORNING PRAYERS


_Having awakened, arise from your bed without laziness and, having
gathered your thoughts, make the Sign of the Cross, saying:_

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

_Afterwards, stand in silence for a few moments until all your senses are
calmed. At that point, make three prostrations, saying:_

Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner.

_Then, begin the Morning Prayers with these words:_

Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, through the prayers of Thy most pure
Mother and all the saints, have mercy on us. Amen.

Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee.

O Heavenly King, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth Who art everywhere
and fillest all things. Treasury of Blessings and Giver of Life: Come and
abide in us, and cleanse us from every impurity, and save our souls, O
Good One.

Holy God! Holy Mighty! Holy Immortal! Have mercy on us. _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Most Holy Trinity! Have mercy on us! Lord, cleanse us from our sins!
Master, pardon our transgressions! Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities for Thy name's sake.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come.
Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

_(If there is a priest, he adds the usual exclamation)_

Having arisen from sleep, we fall down before Thee, O Blessed One, and
sing to Thee, O Mighty One, the angelic hymn: Holy! Holy! Holy! art Thou,
O God; through the Theotokos, have mercy on us.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Having raised me from my bed and from sleep, O Lord, enlighten my mind
and heart, and open my lips that I may praise Thee, O Holy Trinity: Holy!
Holy! Holy! art Thou, O God; through the Theotokos, have mercy on us.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

The Judge will come suddenly and the acts of every man will be revealed;
but in the middle of the night we cry with fear: Holy! Holy! Holy! art
Thou, O God; through the Theotokos, have mercy on us.

Lord, have mercy! _(12 times)_

Having risen from sleep, I thank Thee, the Holy Trinity. In the abundance
of Thy kindness and long patience, Thou hast not been angry with me for
my laziness and sinfulness, nor hast Thou destroyed me in my lawlessness.
Instead, in Thy usual love for mankind, Thou hast raised me as I lay in
despair, that I might rise early and glorify Thy Reign. Enlighten now the
eyes of my mind and open my lips, that I might learn of Thy words,
understand Thy commandments, accomplish Thy will, hymn Thee in heart-felt
confession and praise Thine all-holy name, the Father and the Son, and
the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Come, let us worship God, our King!

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, our King and our God!

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ Himself, our King and
our God!




                                Psalm 50


  Have mercy on me, O God,
      according to Thy great mercy;
  according to the multitude of Thy tender mercies,
      blot out my transgressions.
  Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity,
      and cleanse me from my sin!

  For I know my transgressions,
      and my sin is ever before me.
  Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned,
      and done that which is evil in Thy sight,
  so that Thou art justified in Thy sentence
      and blameless in Thy judgment.
  Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity,
      and in sins did my mother conceive me.

  Behold, Thou desirest truth in the inward being;
      therefore teach me wisdom in my secret heart.
  Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean;
      wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
  Fill me with joy and gladness;
      let the bones which Thou hast broken rejoice.
  Hide Thy face from my sins,
      and blot out all my iniquities.
  Create in me a clean heart, O God,
      and put a new and right spirit within me.
  Cast me not away from Thy presence,
      and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
  Restore to me the joy of Thy salvation,
      and uphold me with a willing spirit.

  Then I will teach transgressors Thy ways,
      and sinners will return to Thee.
  Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God,
      Thou God of my salvation,
      and my tongue will sing aloud of Thy deliverance.

  O Lord, open Thou my lips,
      and my mouth shall show forth Thy praise.
  For Thou hast no delight in sacrifice;
      were I to give a burnt offering, Thou wouldst not be pleased.
  The sacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit;
      a broken and contrite heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise.

  Do good to Zion in Thy good pleasure;
      rebuild the walls of Jerusalem,
  Then wilt Thou delight in right sacrifices,
      in burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings;
      then bulls will be offered on Thy altar.




                          The Symbol of Faith


I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and
of all things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only-begotten, begotten
of the Father before all ages. Light of Light; true God of true God;
begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by Whom all things
were made; who for us men and for our salvation came down from Heaven,
and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man.
And He was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered, and was
buried. And the third day He arose again, according to the Scriptures,
and ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father; and
He shall come again with glory to judge the living and the dead; whose
Kingdom shall have no end.

And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of Life, Who proceeds from
the Father; Who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and
glorified; Who spoke by the prophets. In one Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins. I
look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.
Amen.


1st Prayer, by St. Macarius the Great.

O God, cleanse me a sinner, for I have done nothing good before Thee.
Deliver me from the evil one, and may Thy will be in me, that I might
open my unworthy lips without condemnation and praise Thy holy name,
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


2nd Prayer, by St. Macarius the Great.

Having risen from sleep, I offer Thee, O Savior, the midnight song.
Falling down, I cry to Thee: let me not fall asleep in the death of sin.
Be gracious to me, Thou Who wast willingly crucified. Raise me quickly as
I lie in laziness, and save me as I stand in prayer. After the night's
sleep, O Christ God, shine a sinless day on me and save me.


3rd Prayer, by St. Macarius the Great.

Having risen from sleep, I run to Thee, O Master, for Thou lovest
mankind, and I rush to accomplish Thy work. Help me, I pray Thee, at all
times and in all things. Deliver me from every evil thing of this world
and from works of the devil. Save me, and lead me into Thine eternal
Kingdom. Thou art my Maker, The Provider and Giver of everything good.
All my hope is in Thee and I glorify Thee, now and ever and unto ages of
ages. Amen.


4th Prayer, by St. Macarius the Great.

O Lord, through Thy abundant goodness and great generosity, Thou hast
allowed me, Thy servant, to pass through the hours of this night
untempted by any evil of the enemy. Grant also, O Master and Creator of
all, that I might accomplish Thy will in Thy true light and with an
illumined heart, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


5th Prayer, by St. Macarius the Great.

O Lord, the Almighty God, Who acceptest the thrice-holy hymn from Thy
heavenly hosts: accept this song of the night even from me, Thine
unworthy servant. Grant that at every year and hour of my life I might
glorify Thee, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and
unto ages of ages. Amen.


6th Prayer, by St. Basil the Great.

Almighty Lord, the God of hosts and of all flesh, Thou livest in the
heights, yet lookest down on the humble, proving the hearts and emotions,
clearly foreknowing the secrets of men. Thou art the Light without
beginning, in Whom there is no variation nor shadow of change. O Immortal
King, accept the prayers which we now offer Thee from defiled lips. Free
us from the sins we have committed in deed, word or thought, knowingly
and unknowingly. Cleanse us from all defilement of flesh and spirit.
Grant us to pass through the entire night of this present life with a
watchful heart and a sober mind, awaiting the coming of the bright and
manifest day of Thine only-begotten Son, our Lord, God and Savior Jesus
Christ, when the Judge of all will come with glory to reward each
according to his deeds. May we not be found fallen and lazy, but alert
and roused to action, prepared to enter into His joy and the divine
chamber of His glory, where the voice of those who feast is unceasing and
indescribable is the delight of those who behold the inexpressible beauty
of Thy countenance. For Thou art the true Light which enlightens and
sanctifies all, and all creation hymns Thee unto ages of ages. Amen.


7th Prayer, also by St. Basil.

We bless Thee, most high God and Lord of mercies, Who ever doest great
and unfathomable things for us--glorious and awesome things without
number. Thou givest us sleep for the repose of our frailty, relieving the
labors of our over-burdened flesh. We thank Thee for not destroying us in
our lawlessness. Instead, Thou hast shown Thy usual love for mankind, and
raised us, as we lay in despair, to glorify Thy Reign. Therefore, we
implore Thy boundless goodness: enlighten our thoughts and eyes, and
awaken our minds from the heavy sleep of laziness. Open our lips and fill
them with Thy praise, that we may unwaveringly hymn and confess Thee, the
God glorified in all and by all, Father without beginning, with Thine
only-begotten Son and Thine all-holy, and life-giving Spirit, now and
ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


8th Prayer. A Midnight Song to the Most Holy Theotokos.

  I hymn your Grace, O Lady,
      and pray that you grace my mind.
  Teach me to walk correctly
      on the path of Christ's commandments.
  Strengthen me to watch in song,
      dispelling the despair of sleep.
  I am bound by fetters of sin,
      free me by your prayers, O Bride of God!
  Keep me in the night and in the day,
      delivering me from warring enemies.
  As you bore the life-giving God,
      give life to me, who am wounded by passions.
  As you bore the unsetting Light,
      enlighten my blinded soul.
  O wondrous palace of the Master,
      make me a home of the divine Spirit.
  As you bore the Physician,
      heal my soul of its passion-filled years.
  I am tossed in the tempest of life:
      direct me to the path of repentance.
  Deliver me from the eternal flame,
      from the evil worm, and from hell.
  Make me not a joy for demons,
      though I am guilty of many sins.
  Make me new, most undefiled one,
      for I am aged by senseless sins.
  Estrange me from all torments,
      and pray for me to the Master of all.
  Grant that, with all the saints,
      I may inherit the joys of heaven.
  Hear, most holy Virgin,
      the voice of your useless servant.
  Grant me a torrent of tears, most pure one,
      to wash the filth of my soul.
  The groans of my heart I bring you unceasingly:
      open your heart, O Lady!
  Accept my prayerful service,
      and take it to the compassionate God.
  You who are far higher than the angels,
      raise me above this world's confusion.
  O light-bearing heavenly cloud,
      direct spiritual grace into me.
  I raise in praise, all-undefiled one,
      hands and lips defiled by sin.
  Deliver me from soul-corrupting harm,
      praying fervently to Christ,
  To Whom glory and worship are due,
      now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


9th Prayer, to Our Lord Jesus Christ.

My most merciful and all-merciful God, O Lord Jesus Christ! In Thy great
love, Thou didst come down and become flesh in order to save all. Again,
I pray Thee, save me by Grace! If Thou shouldst save me because of my
deeds, it would not be a gift, but merely a duty. Truly, Thou aboundest
in graciousness and art inexpressibly merciful! Thou hast said, O my
Christ: "He who believes in me shall live and never see death". If faith
in Thee saves the desperate, behold: I believe! Save me, for Thou art my
God and my Maker. May my faith replace my deeds, O my God, for Thou wilt
find no deeds to justify me. May my faith be sufficient for all. May it
answer for me; may it justify me; may it make me a partaker of Thine
eternal glory; and may Satan not seize me, O Word, and boast that He has
torn me from Thy hand and fold. O Christ my Savior: save me whether I
want it or not! Come quickly, hurry, for I perish! Thou art my God from
my mother's womb. Grant, O Lord, that I may now love Thee as once I loved
sin, and that I may labor for Thee without laziness as once I labored for
Satan the deceiver. Even more, I will labor for Thee, my Lord and God
Jesus Christ, all the days of my life, now and ever and unto ages of
ages. Amen.


10th Prayer, to the Angel, the guardian of human life.

O Holy Angel, who stand by my wretched soul and my passionate life: do
not abandon me, a sinner, neither depart from me because of my lack of
self-control. Leave no room for the evil demon to gain control of me
through the violence of this mortal body. Strengthen my weak and feeble
hand, and instruct me in the path of salvation. O holy Angel of God, the
guardian and protector of my wretched soul and body: forgive all the
sorrows I have caused you, every day of my life. If I have sinned in this
past night, protect me during this day. Keep me from every adverse
temptation, that I may not anger God by any sin. Pray to the Lord for me,
that He may establish me in His fear and make me, His servant, worthy of
His goodness. Amen.


11th Prayer, to the Most Holy Theotokos.

O Most Holy Theotokos, my Lady: through your holy and all-powerful
prayers, turn away from me, your humble and unworthy servant, despair,
forgetfulness, unreasonableness, indifference, and all unclean, evil and
blasphemous thoughts from my wretched heart and darkened mind. Extinguish
the flame of my passions, for I am poor and wretched. Deliver me from my
numerous and wicked memories and fantasies. Free me from all evil acts,
for you are blessed by all generations, and your most honorable name is
glorified unto ages of ages. Amen.

Rejoice, O Virgin Theotokos! Mary full of Grace, the Lord is with you.
Blessed are you among women and blessed is the fruit of your womb, for
you have borne the Savior of our souls!

Most glorious Ever-Virgin Mother of Christ our God, bear our prayer to
your Son and our God, that through you He may save our souls.

O heavenly hosts of holy Angels and Archangels, pray for us sinners.

O glorious Apostles, Prophets, Martyrs, and all Saints, pray for us
sinners.

Pray to God for me holy ________ (your Patron Saint), for with fervor I
run to you, swift helper and intercessor for my soul!

O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance. Grant victories to
the Orthodox Christians over their adversaries; and by virtue of Thy
Cross, preserve Thy habitation.

It is truly meet to bless you, O Theotokos, ever-blessed and most pure,
and the Mother of our God. More honorable than the Cherubim, and more
glorious beyond compare than the Seraphim: without defilement you gave
birth to God the Word: true Theotokos, we magnify you.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and to ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Lord Jesus Christ Son of God, for the sake of Thy most pure Mother, our
venerable and God-bearing fathers, and all the saints, save me, a sinner.
Amen.

_Some pious Christians use the following "Morning Prayer of the Last
Elders of Optina" with their morning prayers._

O Lord, grant that I may meet all that this coming day brings to me with
spiritual tranquility. Grant that I may fully surrender myself to Thy
holy Will.

At every hour of this day, direct and support me in all things.
Whatsoever news may reach me in the course of the day, teach me to accept
it with a calm soul and the firm conviction that all is subject to Thy
holy Will.

Direct my thoughts and feelings in all my words and actions. In all
unexpected occurrences, do not let me forget that all is sent down from
Thee.

Grant that I may deal straightforwardly and wisely with every member of
my family, neither embarrassing nor saddening anyone.

O Lord, grant me the strength to endure the fatigue of the coming day and
all the events that take place during it. Direct my will and teach me to
pray, to believe, to hope, to be patient, to forgive, and to love. Amen.




                COMMEMORATION OF THE LIVING AND THE DEAD


_To be read daily by every monastic and pious Christian at the end of his
rule of prayer._

Remember, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, Thine eternal mercies and
compassion, for whose sake Thou didst become man and willingly endured
crucifixion and death for the salvation of those who rightly believe in
Thee. Thou didst rise from the dead and ascend into Heaven and sittest at
the right hand of God the Father, looking down on the humble petitions of
those who call upon Thee with their whole heart. Bow down Thine ear and
hear the prayer which I, Thy useless servant, offer Thee for all Thy
people as a spiritual fragrance. First of all, remember Thy Holy,
Catholic, and Apostolic Church which Thou didst obtain through Thy
precious Blood. Establish, strengthen, broaden, and multiply her. Give
her peace and keep her eternally unassailable by the gates of hell. Calm
the quarrels of the churches, put out the arrogance of the heathen, and
swiftly destroy and uproot the rebellions of heresies, turning them into
nothing through the power of Thy Holy Spirit.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on the Holy Orthodox Patriarchs, our Lord, the
Most Blessed ________, Archbishop of Washington, Metropolitan of All
America and Canada; on our Lord, the Right Reverend ________, Bishop of
________; on priests, deacons and all the clergy whom Thou hast installed
to tend Thy reason endowed flock. Through their prayers, save me also, a
sinner, and have mercy on me.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on the President of our country, on all our
civil authorities and armed forces. Surround them with peace, and speak
peace and goodness into their hearts for Thy Holy Church and all Thy
people. In their calm may we live a calm and silent life in the True
Faith and in all piety and purity.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on our father (the name and title of the abbot
of your monastery or of your parish priest) with all our brethren in
Christ, and have mercy on me, who am wretched, through their prayers.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on my spiritual father ________, and forgive
my transgressions through his holy prayers.

_Prostration.
(In Monasteries)_

Save, Lord, and have mercy on all our brethren who labor in this holy
community--the laborers, the lay workers, and those who work the land for
this monastery, and all Christians.

_(In Parishes)_

Save, Lord, and have mercy on all our brethren who serve this holy
Church--the parish council, the choir, the teachers, the custodians and
cleaners, and all who work for our parish, and all Christians.

_Prostration._

_(Any inapplicable terms in the following petition are simply omitted.)_

Save, Lord, and have mercy on my parents ________(if they are still
living), my wife/husband ________, my children ________, my brothers and
sisters and all my relatives according to the flesh, those who are close
to my family, and my friends. Grant them Thy worldly and heavenly good
things.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on our fathers, brothers, and sisters who live
with patient faith in the monasteries of the Holy Mountain, Russia,
America, and any other place. Through their prayers, have mercy on me a
sinner.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy, according to the multitude of Thy
compassions, on all hieromonks, monks, and nuns, and on all who in
virginity, reverence, and fasting live in monasteries, in deserts and
caves, on mountains and pillars, in hermitages and cleft rocks, on
islands in the sea, and who live in the True Faith in every place of Thy
dominion, serving Thee piously and praying to Thee. Lighten their burden
and console them in sorrow. Grant them strength and resolution in their
struggles, and grant me remission of sins through their prayers.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on the old and the young, the poor, the
orphans and widows, and on those who are in sickness and in sadness, in
misfortunes and in sorrow, in war and in captivity, in prison and in
exile--especially those who, being Thy servants, are persecuted for Thy
sake and the Orthodox Faith by godless heathens, apostates, and heretics.
Remember, visit, strengthen, and comfort them, giving them early release,
freedom, and deliverance by Thy might.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on our benefactors who have mercy on us and
feed us, giving us alms and security, and ask us to pray for them,
despite our unworthiness. Be Thou merciful to them and grant their every
petition for salvation and the reward of eternal good things.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on all our fathers, brothers, and sisters and
all Orthodox Christians who are travelling in Thy service.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on those whom I have caused to stumble,
turning them away from the path of salvation and leading them to evil and
unseemly deeds. Return them to the path of salvation by Thy Divine
Providence.

_Prostration._

Save, Lord, and have mercy on those who hate and offend me, and do me
harm. Do not let them perish because of me, a sinner.

_Prostration._

Enlighten with the light of Thy knowledge those who have left the
Orthodox Faith and have been blinded by devastating heresies, reuniting
them to Thy Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church.

_Prostration._


                            For the Departed

Remember, Lord, all Orthodox Patriarchs and Metropolitans; archbishops
and bishops; priests and those who serve in holy orders; those who serve
Thee in monastic ranks and the blessed founder of our holy community (or
Church). Grant them rest with the saints in Thine eternal dwellings.

_Prostration._

Remember, Lord, the souls of Thy departed servants, my parents
________(if they are already dead), and all my relatives according to the
flesh. Forgive all their sins, both voluntary and involuntary. Grant them
participation in Thine eternal good things and the enjoyment of the
eternal and blessed life.

_Prostration._

Remember, Lord, all our departed fathers, brothers, and sisters, the
Orthodox Christians who lie here and everywhere in the hope of the
Resurrection and eternal life. Grant them to live with Thy saints under
the Light of Thy countenance. Have mercy on us also, for Thou art good
and lovest mankind. Amen.

_Prostration._

_The following is said three times, each with a prostration._

Grant remission of sins, Lord, to all our fathers, brothers, and sisters
who have departed before us in faith and the hope of the Resurrection,
and make their memory eternal.




                          PRAYERS AT THE TABLE


Before Breakfast

O Most Holy Trinity, have mercy on us! Lord, cleanse us from our sins!
Master, pardon our transgressions! Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities for Thy name's sake.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

O Christ God, bless the food and drink of Thy servants, for Thou art
holy, always, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


After Breakfast

More honorable than the Cherubim, and more glorious beyond compare than
the Seraphim: without defilement you gave birth to God the Word: true
Theotokos, we magnify you.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

God is with us, through His Grace and love for mankind, always now and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.


Before Lunch

Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come.
Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

O Christ God, bless the food and drink of Thy servants, for Thou art
holy, always, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


After Lunch

We thank Thee, Christ our God, for Thou hast satisfied us with Thine
earthly gifts. Deprive us not of Thy Heavenly Kingdom, but as Thou camest
among Thy disciples, O Savior, giving them peace, so come to us and save
us!

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Blessed is God, Who has had mercy on us and fed us from His rich gifts,
through His Grace and love for mankind, always, now and ever and unto
ages of ages. Amen.


Before Supper

The poor shall eat and be satisfied, and those who seek the Lord shall
praise Him; their hearts shall live forever!

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

O Christ God, bless the food and drink of Thy servants, for Thou art
Holy, always, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


After Supper

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Your womb became a Heavenly Table, bearing the Heavenly Bread--Christ our
God. Whoever eats of him shall not die, O Birth-giver of God, according
to the word of the Nourisher of all.

More honorable than the Cherubim, and more glorious beyond compare than
the Seraphim: without defilement you gave birth to God the Word: true
Theotokos, we magnify you!

Thou, O Lord, hast made us glad by Thy works; in the works of Thy hands
shall we rejoice. Lift up the Light of Thy countenance upon us, O Lord!
Thou hast put joy in my heart. With the fruit of wheat, wine and oil have
we been satisfied. In peace I will both lie down and sleep; for Thou
alone, O Lord, makest me to dwell in hope.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

God is with us through His Grace and love for mankind, always, now and
ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.




                        _The Order of Compline_


_The priest gives the blessing:_

Blessed is our God, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages!

_NOTE: In the absence of a priest, laymen begin with:_

Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us!

_The Reader continues:_

Amen! Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee!

O Heavenly King, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, who art everywhere
and fillest all things. Treasury of Blessings, and Giver of Life: Come
and abide in us, and cleanse us from every impurity, and save our souls,
O Good One.

Holy God! Holy Mighty! Holy Immortal! Have mercy on us! _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Most Holy Trinity have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our transgressions. Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities, for Thy name's sake.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father Who art in Heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done, on earth as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

_The priest exclaims:_

For Thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of
ages.

_The Reader continues:_

Amen! Lord, have mercy! _(12 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Come, let us worship God, our King!

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, our King and our God!

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ Himself, our King and
our God!




                                Psalm 50


  Have mercy on me, O God,
      according to Thy great mercy;
  according to the multitude of Thy tender mercies,
      blot out my transgressions.
  Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity,
      and cleanse me from my sin!

  For I know my transgressions,
      and my sin is ever before me.
  Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned,
      and done that which is evil in Thy sight,
  so that Thou art justified in Thy sentence
      and blameless in Thy judgment.
  Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity,
      and in sins did my mother conceive me.

  Behold, Thou desirest truth in the inward being;
      therefore teach me wisdom in my secret heart.
  Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean;
      wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
  Fill me with joy and gladness;
      let the bones which Thou hast broken rejoice.
  Hide Thy face from my sins,
      and blot out all my iniquities.
  Create in me a clean heart, O God,
      and put a new and right spirit within me.
  Cast me not away from Thy presence,
      and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.
  Restore to me the joy of Thy salvation,
      and uphold me with a willing spirit.

  Then I will teach transgressors Thy ways,
      and sinners will return to Thee.
  Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God,
      Thou God of my salvation,
      and my tongue will sing aloud of Thy deliverance.

  O Lord, open Thou my lips,
      and my mouth shall show forth Thy praise.
  For Thou hast no delight in sacrifice;
      were I to give a burnt offering, Thou wouldst not be pleased.
  The sacrifice acceptable to God is a broken spirit;
      a broken and contrite heart, O God,
      Thou wilt not despise.

  Do good to Zion in Thy good pleasure;
      rebuild the walls of Jerusalem,
  Then wilt Thou delight in right sacrifices,
      in burnt offerings and whole burnt offerings;
      then bulls will be offered on Thy altar.




                                Psalm 69


  O God, attend to helping me!
      O Lord, make haste to help me!
  Let them be put to shame and confusion
      who seek my life!
  Let them be turned back and brought to dishonor
      who desire my hurt!
  Let them be turned back in their shame
      who jeer saying: "Well done! Well done!"
  May all who seek Thee
      rejoice and be glad in Thee!
  May those who love Thy salvation
      say evermore, "God is great!"
  But I am poor and needy;
      hasten to me, O God!
  Thou art my help and my deliverer;
      O Lord, do not tarry!




                               Psalm 142


  Hear my prayer, O Lord;
      give ear to my supplications!
  In Thy faithfulness answer me,
      in Thy righteousness!
  Enter not into judgment with Thy servant;
      for no man living is righteous before Thee.
  For the enemy has pursued my soul;
      he has crushed my life to the ground;
      he has made me sit in darkness like those long dead.
  Therefore my spirit faints within me;
      my heart within me is appalled.
  I remember the days of old,
      I meditate on all Thou hast done;
      I muse on what Thy hands have wrought.
  I stretch out my hands to Thee;
      my soul thirsts for Thee like a parched land.
  Make haste to answer me, O Lord!
      My spirit fails!
  Hide not Thy face from me,
      lest I be like those who go down to the Pit.
  Let me hear in the morning of Thy steadfast love,
      for in Thee I put my trust.
  Teach me the way I should go,
      for to Thee I lift up my soul.
  Deliver me, O Lord, from my enemies!
      I have fled to Thee for refuge!
  Teach me to do Thy will,
      for Thou art my God!
  Let Thy Good Spirit lead me
      on a level path!
  For Thy name's sake, O Lord, give me life!
      in Thy righteousness bring my soul out of trouble!
  And in Thy steadfast love cut off my enemies
      and destroy all those who afflict my soul,
      for I am Thy servant.




                              The Doxology


  Glory to God in the Highest,
      and on earth peace,
      good will towards men.
  We praise Thee! We bless Thee! We worship Thee! We glorify Thee!
      We give thanks to Thee for Thy great glory!
  O Lord, heavenly King,
      God the Father Almighty!
  O Lord, the only-begotten Son Jesus Christ
      and the Holy Spirit!
  O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the Father,
      Who takest away the sins of the world,
      have mercy on us!
  Thou that takest away the sins of the world,
      receive our prayer.
  Thou that sittest at the right hand of God the Father
      have mercy on us!
  For Thou alone art holy, Thou only art Lord,
      Thou only, O Jesus Christ, art most high
      in the glory of God the Father. Amen!
  Every night will I give thanks to Thee
      and praise Thy name for ever and ever!
  Lord, Thou hast been our refuge
      from generation to generation!
  I said, Lord be merciful to me,
      heal my soul for I have sinned against Thee.
  Lord, I flee unto Thee.
      Teach me to do Thy will,
      for Thou art my God.
  For with Thee is the fountain of life,
      and in Thy light shall we see light.
  O continue forth Thy mercy
      upon those who know Thee!
  Grant, Lord, that we may be kept this night
      without sin!
  Blessed art Thou, Lord God of our fathers,
      and praised and glorified
      be Thy name forever. Amen!
  Let Thy mercy, Lord, be upon us,
      as we have set our hope on Thee.
  Blessed art Thou, Lord,
      teach me Thy statutes!
  Blessed art Thou, Master,
      make me to understand Thy commandments!
  Blessed art Thou, Holy One,
      enlighten me with Thy precepts!
  Thy mercy, Lord, endures forever!
      O despise not the works of Thy hands!
  To Thee belongs worship! To Thee belongs praise!
      To Thee belongs glory:
  To the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
      now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen!




                          The Symbol of Faith


I believe in one God, the Father almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and
of all things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only-begotten, begotten
of the Father before all ages. Light of Light; true God of true God;
begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by whom all things
were made; who for us men and for our salvation came down from heaven,
and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man.
And He was crucified for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered, and was
buried. And the third day He rose again, according to the Scriptures, and
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father; and He
shall come again with glory to judge the living and the dead; whose
Kingdom shall have no end.

And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of Life, who proceeds from
the Father; who with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and
glorified; who spoke by the prophets. In one Holy, Catholic, and
Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one baptism for the remission of sins. I
look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come.
Amen.

_NOTE: In churches, the appointed Compline Canon to the Theotokos is sung
from the Octoechos at this point._

_When Compline is read privately, one or more Canons and/or an Akathist
Hymn is sung instead._

_It is the tradition of the Russian Church that those preparing to
receive the Holy Mysteries (Communion) read at least three Canons and one
Akathist Hymn the evening before (See page 89). Some read the Canon of
Preparation at this point (See page 119)._

_Whenever a Canon is sung, the following is sung to the same melody as
the Irmos of the Canon. If there is no Canon, it is either read or sung
to the 8th Tone._

It is truly meet to bless you, O Theotokos, ever-blessed and most pure,
and the Mother of our God. More honorable than the Cherubim, and more
glorious beyond compare than the Seraphim: without defilement you gave
birth to God the Word: true Theotokos, we magnify you.

_The Reader continues:_

  Holy God! Holy Mighty! Holy Immortal! Have mercy on us! _(3 times)_
  Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
      now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.
  O Most Holy Trinity, have mercy on us!
  Lord, cleanse us from our sins! Master, pardon our transgressions! Holy
            One, visit and heal our infirmities, for Thy name's sake!
  Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_
  Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
      now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

_If there is a priest, he gives the usual exclamation._

_After saying AMEN!, the Reader reads the appropriate TROPARIA:_




                             Sunday Evening


We, the unworthy, ever pray to you, Supreme Commanders of the Heavenly
Hosts: shelter us, through your prayers, with the protective wings of
your glory. Keep us who fall down with fervor and cry: deliver us from
misfortunes, for you command the powers on high.

O God of our fathers, Who dealest ever with us according to Thy meekness:
take not Thy mercy from us, but direct our lives in peace through their
prayers.

Thy Church has been adorned with a robe of fine purple linen--the blood
of Thy Martyrs throughout the world, O Christ God. She therefore cries to
Thee: send Thy mercies upon Thy people, give peace to Thy community and
great mercy to our souls.

  Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

O Christ, give rest to the souls of Thy servants with the saints, where
there is no sickness, sorrow or sighing, but everlasting life.

  Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Grant us Thy peace, O Lord, through the prayers of all the saints and the
Theotokos. Have mercy on us, for Thou alone art compassionate.




                             Monday Evening


The just man is remembered with praises. For you, O Forerunner, the
witness of the Lord is sufficient. You truly showed yourself more
honorable than the prophets, for you were made worthy to baptize in the
streams the One Whom you proclaimed. Having gladly suffered for the
truth, you proclaimed to those in Hades the true God Who has revealed
Himself in the flesh, taken away the sin of the world and given us great
mercy.

O God of our Fathers ...

Thy Church has been adorned ...

  Glory to the Father ...

O Christ, give rest ...

  Now and ever ...

Grant us Thy peace, O Lord, ...




                            Tuesday Evening


O Lord, save Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance. Grant victories to
the Orthodox Christians over their adversaries; and by the virtue of Thy
Cross, preserve Thy habitation.

O God of our Fathers ...

Thy Church has been adorned ...

  Glory to the Father ...

O Christ, give rest ...

  Now and ever ...

Grant us Thy peace, O Lord, ...




                           Wednesday Evening


O holy Apostles, pray to our merciful God, that He grant remission of
sins to our souls.

The truth of things revealed you to your flock as a rule of faith, an
Icon of meekness and a teacher of abstinence. You thus reached the
heights through humility and wealth through poverty. O holy hierarch,
father Nicholas, pray to Christ God for the salvation of our souls.

O God of our Fathers ...

Thy Church has been adorned ...

  Glory to the Father ...

O Christ, give rest ...

  Now and ever ...

Grant us Thy peace, O Lord, ...




                            Thursday Evening


_The same as Tuesday evening._




                             Friday Evening


We pray to you, apostles, martyrs and prophets, hierarchs, venerable and
righteous ones, who have fought the good fight and kept the faith: having
boldness before the Savior, pray to Him Who is good for the salvation of
our souls.

  Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:
      now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

To Thee, Lord, the Planter of Creation, the universe offers the
God-bearing Martyrs as the first-fruits of nature. Through their prayers
and the Theotokos, Most Merciful One, keep Thy Church and Thy people in
profound peace.




                            Saturday Evening


_The Sunday Troparia and Kontakia are read, according to the Tone of the
week._


Tone 1

When the stone had been sealed by the Jews; while the soldiers were
guarding Thy most pure Body; Thou didst rise on the third day, O Savior,
granting life to the world. The powers of heaven therefore cried to Thee,
O Giver of Life: Glory to Thy resurrection, O Christ! Glory to Thy
Kingdom! Glory to Thy dispensation, O Thou who lovest mankind.

  Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
      now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

As God, Thou didst rise from the tomb in glory, raising the world with
Thyself. Human nature praises Thee as God, for death has vanished! Adam
exults, O Master! Eve rejoices, for she is freed from bondage, and cries
to Thee: Thou art the Giver of Resurrection to all, O Christ!


Tone 2

When Thou didst descend to death, O Life Immortal, Thou didst slay hell
with the splendor of Thy Godhead! And when from the depths Thou didst
raise the dead, all the powers of heaven cried out: O Giver of Life!
Christ our God! Glory to Thee!

  Glory to the Father.... Now and ever....

Hell became afraid, O Almighty Savior, seeing the miracle of Thy
resurrection from the tomb! The dead arose! Creation, with Adam, beheld
this and rejoiced with Thee! And the world, O my Savior, praises Thee
forever.


Tone 3

Let the heavens rejoice! Let the earth be glad! For the Lord has shown
strength with His arm! He has trampled down death by death! He has become
the firstborn of the dead! He has delivered us from the depths of hell,
and has granted the world great mercy!

  Glory to the Father.... Now and ever....

On this day Thou didst rise from the tomb, O Merciful One, leading us
from the gates of death. On this day Adam exults as Eve rejoices; with
the prophets and patriarchs they unceasingly praise the divine majesty of
Thy power!


Tone 4

When the women disciples of the Lord learned from the angel the joyous
message of Thy Resurrection; they cast away the ancestral curse and
elatedly told the apostles: Death is overthrown! Christ God is risen,
granting the world great mercy.

  Glory to the Father.... Now and ever....

My Savior and Redeemer as God rose from the tomb and delivered the
earthborn from their chains. He has shattered the gates of hell, and as
Master, He has risen on the third day!


Tone 5

Let us, the faithful, praise and worship the Word, coeternal with the
Father and the Spirit, born for our salvation from the Virgin; for He
willed to be lifted up on the Cross in the flesh, to endure death, and to
raise the dead by His glorious Resurrection.

  Glory to the Father.... Now and ever....

Thou didst descend into hell, O my Savior, shattering its gates as
Almighty; resurrecting the dead as Creator, and destroying the sting of
death. Thou hast delivered Adam from the curse, O Lover of Man, and we
all cry to Thee: O Lord, save us!


Tone 6

The angelic powers were at Thy tomb; the guards became as dead men. Mary
stood by Thy grave, seeking Thy most pure Body. Thou didst capture hell,
not being tempted by it. Thou didst come to the Virgin, granting life. O
Lord who didst rise from the dead: glory to Thee!

  Glory to the Father.... Now and ever....

When Christ God, the Giver of Life, raised all of the dead from the
valleys of misery with His mighty hand, He bestowed resurrection on the
human race. He is the Savior of all, the Resurrection, the Life, and the
God of all.


Tone 7

By Thy Cross, Thou didst destroy death! To the thief, Thou didst open
Paradise! For the myrrhbearers, Thou didst change weeping into joy! And
Thou didst command Thy disciples, O Christ God, to proclaim that Thou art
risen, granting the world great mercy!

  Glory to the Father.... Now and ever....

The dominion of death can no longer hold men captive, for Christ
descended, shattering and destroying its powers! Hell is bound, while the
prophets rejoice and cry: The Savior has come to those in faith! Enter,
you faithful, into the Resurrection!


Tone 8

Thou didst descend from on high, O Merciful One! Thou didst accept the
three-day burial to free us from our sufferings! O Lord, our Life and
Resurrection: glory to Thee!

  Glory to the Father.... Now and ever....

By rising from the tomb, Thou didst raise the dead and resurrect Adam.
Eve exults in Thy Resurrection, and the world celebrates Thy rising from
the dead, O greatly Merciful One!

_NOTE: On the eve of Great Feasts of the Lord or the Theotokos, the
Troparion and Kontakion of the Feast are read._

_After the Troparia, the Reader continues:_

Lord, have mercy! _(40 times)_




                    A Prayer of St. Basil the Great


O Christ God, Who art worshipped and glorified at every place and time;
Who art long-suffering, most merciful and compassionate; Who lovest the
righteous and art merciful to sinners; Who callest all to salvation with
the promise of good things to come: receive, Lord, the prayers we now
offer, and direct our lives in the way of Thy commandments. Sanctify our
souls, cleanse our bodies, correct our thoughts, purify our minds and
deliver us from all affliction, evil and illness. Surround us with Thy
holy angels, that guarded and instructed by their forces, we may reach
unity of faith and the understanding of Thine unapproachable glory: for
blessed art Thou unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

  Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit,
      now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

More honorable than the Cherubim, and more glorious beyond compare than
the Seraphim: without defilement you gave birth to God the Word: true
Theotokos, we magnify you!

_When a priest is serving, the Reader concludes:_

Bless, father, in the name of the Lord!

_The priest exclaims:_

O God, be gracious to us and bless us! Shine Thy countenance upon us, and
have mercy on us!

_In the absence of a priest, a layman says:_

"Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ, our God,
have mercy on us. Amen".

_In either case, the Reader, after saying_ "Amen", _continues with the
following:_

_NOTE: During Great Lent the Lenten Prayer of St. Ephraim is said at this
point of most services during the week (not on Saturday or Sunday). It is
also appropriate for Morning Prayers and the Prayers Before Sleep on the
same days._


Prayer of St. Ephraim

O Lord and Master of my life! Take from me the spirit of sloth, despair,
lust of power and idle talk. _(Prostration)_

But give rather the spirit of chastity, humility, patience, and love to
Thy servant. _(Prostration)_

Yea, O Lord and King! Grant me to see my own transgressions and not to
judge my brother, for blessed art Thou, unto ages of ages.
_(Prostration)_

O God, cleanse me a sinner. _(12 times)_

_(Then the entire Prayer of St. Ephraim is read and a single prostration
is made at the end.)_




                   Prayer to the Most Holy Theotokos
                            by the Monk Paul


O undefiled, immaculate, incorrupt and most pure Lady, the pure Virgin
Bride of God! Through your most glorious birth-giving, you united God the
Word to mankind and joined our fallen human nature to the heavenly. You
are the only hope of the hopeless, the aid of the embattled a ready help
to those who run to you and a refuge for all Christians. Do not turn away
from me who am sinful and vile, even though I have made myself totally
useless through defiled thoughts, words and deeds, and my mind has become
enslaved to the lazy pleasures of this life. As Mother of the God Who
loves mankind, have pity on me, a prodigal sinner, in that same love for
mankind. Receive the prayer I offer to you with defiled lips and pray to
your Son, our Master and Lord, with your maternal boldness. May He open
even to me the goodness of His deep love for mankind. May He overlook my
countless transgressions, turn me to repentance and make me an
experienced accomplisher of His commandments. Stand by me always in your
mercy, compassion and love of good. Be my fervent intercessor and help in
this life, driving off the assaults of enemies and guiding me to
salvation. Guard my wretched soul at the time of my death, driving away
the dark forms of the evil demons. Deliver me from eternal torments at
the Day of Judgment and reveal me an heir of the inexpressible glory of
your Son and our God. May I receive this, my Lady most glorious
Theotokos, through your help and intercession: through the Grace and love
for mankind of your only-begotten Son, our Lord, God and Savior Jesus
Christ, to Whom belong all glory, honor and worship, with His Father Who
is without beginning, and His most holy, good and life-creating Spirit,
now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.




                   A Prayer to Our Lord Jesus Christ
                         by the Monk Antiochus


As we prepare for sleep, Master, grant rest to our bodies and souls. Keep
us from the dark sleep of sin and from every dark and passionate pleasure
of the night. Still the impulses of passions and put out the flaming
arrows which the Evil One looses deceitfully against us. Still the
rebellions of the flesh and put to sleep our worldly and material
reasonings. O God, grant us an alert mind, chaste thoughts, a sober
heart, and a light sleep, free of every satanic dream. Raise us at the
time of prayer confirmed in Thy commandments--the memory of Thy judgments
firmly in us. Grant that we may glorify Thee throughout this night,
singing, blessing and glorifying Thy most honorable and majestic name:
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, now and ever, and unto ages of
ages. Amen.

_NOTE: In churches, Compline concludes at this point with brief prayers
and a Litany. (See the BOOK OF HOURS)_

_When read privately, Compline moves into PRAYERS BEFORE SLEEP, beginning
with the Troparia: "Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us...." (page
68)._




                              BEFORE SLEEP


Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, through the prayers of Thy most pure
Mother and all the saints, have mercy on us. Amen.

Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee!

O Heavenly King, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, Who art everywhere
and fillest all things. Treasury of blessings and Giver of life: come and
abide in us, and cleanse us from every impurity, and save our souls, O
Good One.

Holy God! Holy Mighty! Holy Immortal! Have mercy on us! _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Most Holy Trinity: have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our transgressions. Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities for Thy Name's sake.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

_(If there is a priest, he adds the usual exclamation)_

_After the AMEN, the following Troparia are sung (Tone 6) or read:_

Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us, for laying aside all excuse,
we sinners offer to Thee, as to our Master, this supplication: have mercy
on us.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

O Lord, have mercy on us, for in Thee have we put our trust. Do not be
angry with us, nor remember our iniquities, but look down on us even now,
since Thou art compassionate, and deliver us from our enemies; for Thou
art our God and we are Thy people; we are all the work of Thy hands, and
we call on Thy name.

Now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O blessed Theotokos, open the doors of compassion to us whose hope is in
you, that we may not perish but be delivered from adversity through you,
who are the salvation of the Christian people.

Lord, have mercy! _(12 times)_


1st Prayer, to God the Father,
by St. Macarius the Great

O Eternal God and King of all Creation, Who hast granted me to reach this
hour: forgive the sins I have committed this day in deed, word and
thought. Cleanse, O Lord, my humble soul from every defilement of flesh
and spirit. Grant, Lord, that I may pass through this night in peace.
When I rise from my humble bed, may I please Thy most holy Name all the
days of my life and trample under foot the physical and bodiless enemies
that wage war against me. Deliver me, Lord, from vain thoughts which
defile me and from evil lusts. For Thine is the Kingdom and the Power and
the Glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, now and
ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


2nd Prayer, to Our Lord Jesus Christ
by St. Antiochus

Almighty Word of the Father, Jesus Christ, Who art perfect: never abandon
me, Thy servant, for Thy great mercy's sake, but ever abide in me. O
Jesus, Good Shepherd of Thy sheep, do not deliver me to the serpent's
rebellion! Do not abandon me to Satan's will, for the seed of corruption
is within me! Instead, O Lord God the Adored, Holy King Jesus Christ,
keep me while I sleep by Thy unwavering Light, Thy Holy Spirit by Whom
Thou didst sanctify Thy disciples. O Lord, grant to me, Thine unworthy
servant, salvation on my bed. Enlighten my mind with the light of
understanding Thy Holy Gospel; my soul with the love of Thy Cross; my
heart with the purity of Thy Word; my body with Thy passionless Passion.
Keep my thoughts with Thy humility and raise me at the right time to
glorify Thee. For Thou art most glorified, with Thine unoriginate Father
and Thy most Holy Spirit forever. Amen.


3rd Prayer, to the Holy Spirit

O Lord, the Heavenly King, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth: have
compassion and mercy on me, Thy sinful servant! Absolve me, who am
unworthy. Forgive all the sins I have committed this day both in my
humanity and my inhumanity, behaving worse than beasts in sins voluntary
and involuntary, known and unknown, from my youth, from evil suggestions,
haste and despondency. If I have sworn by Thy name or blasphemed it in
thought; if I have reproached anyone or become angered by something; or
slandered or saddened anyone in my anger; or have lied, or slept
unnecessarily; or a beggar has come to me and I have despised him; or
have saddened my brother or quarrelled with him; or have judged someone;
or have allowed myself to become haughty, proud or angry; or, when
standing in prayer, my mind has been shaken by the wickedness of this
world; or have entertained depraved thoughts; or have over-eaten,
over-drunk or laughed mindlessly; or have had evil thoughts or seen the
beauty of someone and been wounded by it in my heart; or have spoken
inappropriately; or have laughed at my brother's sins when my own
transgressions are countless; or have been indifferent to prayer; or have
done any other evil that I can not remember--for I have done all this and
more: have mercy, O Master, my Creator, on me, Thy despondent and
unworthy servant! Absolve, remit and forgive me, in Thy goodness and love
for mankind, that I, who am prodigal, sinful and wretched, may lie down
in peace and find sleep and rest. May I worship, hymn and praise Thy most
honorable Name, with the Father and His only-begotten Son, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.


4th Prayer, of St. Macarius the Great

What can I bring Thee? With what can I repay Thee, O Immortal King, the
bestower of great gifts, O generous Lord, the Lover of mankind? Though I
have been lazy in pleasing Thee and have done no good, Thou hast brought
me to the end of this day, ordering the conversion and salvation of my
soul. Be merciful towards me, a sinner devoid of any good deeds. Raise up
my fallen soul, defiled by immeasurable sins. Remove from me every evil
thought of this visible life. Forgive, O only Sinless One, all the sins I
have committed against Thee this day, in knowledge or in ignorance, in
word, deed or thought or through any of my senses. Covering me Thyself,
protect me from every assault of the enemy through Thy divine Power,
inexpressible Love for mankind and Strength. Cleanse, O God, cleanse the
multitude of my sins. Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me from the snares
of the Evil One, and save my passionate soul. When Thou comest in glory,
illumine me with the light of Thy countenance. May I fall uncondemned
into a sleep free of apparitions. Keep the thoughts of Thy servant
untroubled, and keep far from me every satanic activity. Enlighten the
reason-endowed eyes of my heart, that I fall not into the sleep of death.
Send to me an angel of peace, the guide and guardian of my soul and body,
that he may deliver me from my enemies. Then, when I arise from my bed, I
shall offer Thee prayers of thanksgiving. Yea, Lord, hear me, Thy sinful
servant, impoverished in will and conscience. Grant that I may learn from
Thy words when I arise. Cause Thy Angels to drive demonic despondency far
from me. May I bless Thy holy Name and praise and glorify Mary, the most
pure Theotokos, whom Thou hast given to us sinners as an intercessor.
Receive her as she prays for us. We know that she imitates Thy love for
mankind and never ceases to pray. Through her intercessions, the Sign of
the Precious Cross and for the sake of all Thy saints, O Jesus Christ our
God, have mercy on my wretched soul, for Thou art Holy and most glorified
unto ages of ages. Amen.


5th Prayer

O Lord our God, forgive all the sins I have committed this day in word,
deed and thought, for Thou art good and lovest mankind. Grant me a
peaceful sleep, free of restlessness. Send Thy Guardian Angel to protect
and keep me from all harm. For Thou art the Guardian of our souls and
bodies, and to Thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


6th Prayer

O Lord our God, in Whom we believe and upon Whose Name we call more than
any other name: grant relief to our souls and bodies as we go to sleep.
Keep us from every fantasy and dark pleasure. Halt the rushing of
passions and quench the fiery arousals of the flesh. Grant us to live
chastely in word and deed. Having embraced a virtuous life, may we not
fall away from Thy promised blessings, for blessed art Thou for ever.
Amen.


7th Prayer, by St. John Chrysostom

_Prayers of Supplication, corresponding to the twenty-four hours of day
and night._


                              For the Day

  Lord, exclude me not from Thy heavenly blessings.
  Lord, deliver me from eternal torments.
  Lord, whether I have sinned in mind or thought, word or deed, forgive
            me.
  Lord, deliver me from all ignorance, forgetfulness, cowardice, and
            stone-like insensitivity.
  Lord, deliver me from every temptation.
  Lord, enlighten my heart which evil desires have darkened.
  Lord, as a man I have sinned: as a gracious God, have mercy on me,
            seeing the weakness of my soul.
  Lord, send Thy Grace to my aid, that I may glorify Thy holy name.
  Lord Jesus Christ, inscribe me, Thy servant, in the book of life, and
            grant me a good end.
  Lord, my God, even though I have done nothing good before Thee, grant
            by Thy Grace that I may make a good beginning.
  Lord, sprinkle the dew of Thy Grace into my heart.
  Lord of Heaven and earth, remember me, Thy sinful, shameful and impure
            servant, in Thy Kingdom. Amen.


                             For the Night

  Lord, accept me in penitence.
  Lord, abandon me not.
  Lord, lead me not into temptation.
  Lord, grant me good thoughts.
  Lord, grant me tears, the remembrance of death and compunction.
  Lord, grant me the thought of confessing my sins.
  Lord, grant me humility, chastity and obedience.
  Lord, grant me patience, courage and meekness.
  Lord, cause the root of good to dwell in me--Thy fear in my heart.
  Lord, grant that I may love Thee with all my soul and mind and to do
            Thy will in all things.
  Lord, protect me from certain people, demons and passions, and from any
            other unseemly thing.
  Lord, I know that Thou doest as Thou wilt: may Thy will be in me, a
            sinner, for blessed art Thou for ever. Amen.


8th Prayer, to our Lord Jesus Christ

O Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, for the sake of Thy most honorable
Mother, Thy bodiless Angels, Thy Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist, the
Divinely inspired Apostles, the bright and victorious Martyrs, the
venerable and God-bearing Fathers and all the Saints: deliver me from
this present assault of the devil. Yea, O Lord my Creator, Who desirest
not the death of the sinner, but that he should return to Thee and live:
grant repentance to me, wretched and unworthy. Snatch me from the jaws of
the consuming serpent, its mouth opened to devour me and take me down to
hell alive. Yea, my Lord and my Comfort, Who didst put on corruptible
flesh for my wretched sake: deliver me from wretchedness and bring
comfort to my wretched soul. Implant in my heart the accomplishment of
Thy precepts, the abandonment of evil deeds and the obtainment of Thy
blessings. In Thee, O Lord, have I trusted: save me!


9th Prayer, to the Most Holy Theotokos,
by Peter, the Studite monk

Before you, the Most Pure Mother of God, I who am wretched fall down and
pray: you know, O Queen that I sin constantly and anger your Son and my
God. No matter how often I repent, I appear a liar before God, and repent
with trembling. Can God shake me and I do those same things again an hour
later? Knowing this, my Mistress, O Lady Theotokos, I pray: have mercy on
me, strengthen me and grant that I may do good. You know, my Lady
Theotokos, that I abhor my evil deeds and love the Law of my God with all
my mind. But, most pure Lady, I do not know how I can love what I abhor
and turn away from what is good. Do not allow my will to be done, Most
Pure One, for it is not appropriate. May the will of your Son and my God
be done. May He save and enlighten me, and give me the Grace of His Holy
Spirit, in order that I might stop sinning from this time on and live the
remainder of my life in obedience to your Son, to Whom belongs all glory,
honor and majesty, with His Father Who is without beginning, and His Most
Holy, good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages.
Amen.


10th Prayer, to the Most Holy Theotokos

O Good Mother of the Good King, most pure and blessed Mary the Theotokos:
pour out the mercy of your Son and our God on my passionate soul. Direct
me towards good deeds through your prayers, that I may pass through the
remainder of my life without stain, and find Paradise through you, O
Virgin Theotokos who alone are pure and blessed.


11th Prayer, to the Holy Guardian Angel

Angel of Christ, my holy guardian, the protector of my soul and body:
forgive me for all the sins I have committed this day. Deliver me from
all the evil of my militant Enemy, that I may not anger my God by any
sin. Pray for me, your sinful and unworthy servant, that you may show me
worthy of the goodness and mercy of the All-Holy Trinity, the Mother of
my Lord Jesus Christ and all the Saints. Amen.


Then this Kontakion to the Theotokos

O victorious leader of triumphant hosts! We your servants, delivered from
evil, sing our grateful thanks to you, O Theotokos! As you possess
invincible might, set us free from every calamity so that we may sing:
Rejoice, O unwedded Bride!

Most glorious ever-Virgin Mother of Christ our God, bear our prayer to
your Son and our God, that through you He may save our souls!

All my hope I place in you, O Mother of God: keep me under your
protection!

Virgin Theotokos, do not despise me a sinner who craves your help and
intercession. My soul hopes in you, have mercy on me!


Also the Prayer of St. Ioannikios

My Hope is the Father; my Refuge is the Son; my Protection is the Holy
Spirit: O Holy Trinity, glory to Thee!

It is truly meet to bless you, O Theotokos, ever blessed and most pure,
and the Mother of our God. More honorable than the Cherubim, and more
glorious beyond compare than the Seraphim: without defilement you gave
birth to God the Word: true Theotokos, we magnify you!

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Lord, bless!

Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, for the sake of the prayers of Thy most
pure Mother, our venerable and God-bearing fathers and all the saints,
save me, a sinner. Amen.


A Prayer of St. John of Damascus,
said pointing at the bed

O Master Who lovest mankind, is this bed to be my coffin? Or wilt Thou
enlighten my wretched soul with another day? Behold: before me lies the
coffin, before me stands death! O Lord, I fear Thy judgment and the
endless torments, yet I cease not to do evil. I always anger Thee, my
Lord God, and Thy most pure Mother, all the heavenly hosts and my holy
Guardian Angel. I know, Lord, that I am unworthy of Thy love for mankind.
Indeed, I am worthy of every condemnation and torment. Yet, Lord, save me
whether I want it or not! When Thou savest the righteous, it is no great
thing. When Thou hast mercy on the pure, it causes no wonder, for they
are worthy of Thy mercy. Astound us with Thy mercy towards me, a sinner.
Reveal in this manner Thy love for mankind, that my wickedness may not
overcome Thine inexpressible goodness and mercy. As Thou wilt, order my
life!

_Wishing to lie down on your bed, say:_

Enlighten my eyes, Christ--God, that I fall not asleep to death and that
my enemy may not say of me: I have overcome him.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Be the Helper of my soul, O God, for I walk among many snares. Deliver me
from them, O Good One, and save me, for Thou lovest mankind.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Let us ever hymn the most glorious Mother of God, who is holier than the
Holy Angels. With heart and lips let us confess that she is the
Theotokos, for she truly bore God incarnate for us and prays ceaselessly
for our souls.

_Kiss your Cross. Then, make the Sign of the Cross over your bed, from
head to foot and either side, saying the Prayer to the Precious Cross:_

Let God arise and let His enemies be scattered! Let those who hate Him
flee from before His face! As smoke vanishes, so let them vanish. As wax
melts before the fire, so let sinners perish before the face of those who
love God and sign themselves with the Sign of the Cross and say joyfully:
rejoice, most precious and life-creating Cross of the Lord, which chases
demons away through the power of our Lord Jesus Christ Who was nailed to
you, descended into hell and, having trampled down the power of the
devil, gave to us His precious Cross for the routing of all enemies. Help
me for ever, most precious and life-creating Cross of the Lord, with the
Holy Lady Virgin Theotokos and all the Saints. Amen.

Remit, absolve and forgive, O God, all our voluntary and involuntary
sins, in word and in deed, in knowledge and in ignorance, in the day or
in the night, in mind and in thought! Forgive us everything, for Thou art
good and lovest mankind.

O Lord Who lovest mankind, forgive those who hate and wrong us. Do good
to those who do good. Grant to our brethren and relatives all petitions
for salvation and eternal life. Visit the afflicted and heal them. Guide
those at sea. Travel with travellers. Join the Orthodox Christians in
battle. Grant remission of sins to those who serve us and are kind to us.
Have mercy, according to Thy great mercy, on those who have asked us to
pray for them, unworthy though we be. Remember, Lord, our fathers and
brethren who have fallen asleep before us, and give them rest under the
light of Thy countenance. Remember, Lord, our captive brethren, and
deliver them from every misfortune. Remember, Lord, those who bear fruit
and do good works in Thy holy churches, and grant them all their
petitions for salvation and eternal life. Remember us also, Lord, Thy
humble, sinful, and unworthy servants. Enlighten our minds with the light
of Thy reason and direct us onto the path of Thy commandments, through
the prayers of our most Pure Lady, the Theotokos and ever-virgin Mary and
all Thy Saints, for blessed art Thou unto ages of ages. Amen.




                            THE THREE CANONS


_A tradition has developed in the Church of reading three (sometimes
four) Canons the evening before receiving Holy Communion. Many monastic
Rules of Prayer prescribe this reading daily. Many Canons have been
composed over the years, and certain Canons are prescribed for specific
days of the week. We have not attempted to publish a large selection of
Canons in the limited space of what is, essentially, a "pocket" Prayer
Book. We have provided three of the most commonly used Canons and printed
them in the order in which they are traditionally read. This order can
also serve as a model for combining other Canons. If these Canons are not
read during Compline (p. 37), they are preceded by the Opening Prayers
and Psalm 50 (pp. 37 to 41)._




                            THE THREE CANONS
                             ODE 1 (Tone 6)


Irmos: Treading over the floor of the sea as over dry land, and seeing
       their pursuer Pharaoh drown, Israel cried out: Let us sing to God
       a song of victory!




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Sinful and burdened, I now approach Thee, my Master and my God. I dare
not look up towards heaven, but simply pray, saying: grant me, Lord, the
sense to weep bitterly over my deeds.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

O woe is me, a sinner! I am the most wretched of men! There is no
repentance in me! Grant me tears, Lord, that I may weep bitterly over my
deeds.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

O senseless and wretched man, you are destroying your life in laziness!
Think about your life and turn to the Lord God, weeping bitterly over
your deeds.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

O most pure Mother of God, look on me, a sinner, and deliver me from the
snares of the devil. Direct me onto the path of repentance, that I may
weep bitterly over my deeds.




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Beset by many temptations, I run to you, seeking salvation. Save me from
burdens and evils, O Virgin Mother of the Word.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

The increase of passions troubles me, filling my soul with great
despondency. Still it, O Maiden, with the stillness of your Son and God,
O All-Undefiled One.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

I pray you, O Virgin who bore our Savior and God, deliver me from
terrors! I run to you now, laying before you my soul and my thoughts.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

O only Mother of God, grant me, who am afflicted in body and soul, divine
visitation and your own concern, for you are good and gave birth to the
Good One.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Lord Jesus Christ, my God, have mercy on me!

Grant, O Savior, that Thy servant may worthily hymn and praise the
bodiless Angel who is my instructor and guardian.

Holy Angel of the Lord, my guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

I lie alone in folly and laziness, O my instructor and Guardian. Do not
leave me to perish!

Glory to the Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Direct my mind, through your prayers, to accomplish the commandments of
God, that I may receive from God the remission of my sins. Teach me to
hate evil, I pray you.

Now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

With my Guardian Angel, O Virgin, pray to the Benefactor for your
servant. Teach me to accomplish the commandments of your Son and my
Creator.




                                 ODE 3


Irmos: None is holy as Thou, O Lord my God! Thou hast raised the strength
       of Thy faithful, O Good One, and made us stand firmly on the rock
       of Thy confession.




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

When the thrones will be set up for the dread Judgment, the deeds of all
men will be recalled. Alas for the sinners who will be sent to torment!
Knowing this, my soul, repent of your evil deeds!

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

The righteous shall rejoice, but sinners shall lament. No one will be
able to help us at that moment--our deeds will condemn us! Before the end
comes, repent of your evil deeds!

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Woe is me, a great sinner! I have defiled myself in deed and thought and
cannot even shed a single tear in my hard-heartedness. Free yourself from
the earth, my soul, and repent of your evil deeds.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Your Son calls, O Lady, and teaches us what is good. Yet I, a sinner,
always flee from good. Have mercy on me, nevertheless, O merciful one,
that I may repent of my evil deeds.




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

I hold you as the Intercessor and Protection of my life, O Virgin
Birth-Giver of God. Pilot me to your haven, O Cause of good things, O
only all-hymned Support of the faithful.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

I pray, O Virgin: dispel the storm of my sorrows and spiritual turmoil.
You are the Bride of God who bore the Origin of stillness and alone are
most pure.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Pour a wealth of generosity for all, O you who bore the Benefactor, the
Cause of all good. You can do anything, for God has blessed you, the
Bearer of Christ Who is mighty in strength.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Help me, O Virgin, for I am cruelly tried by severe illness and painful
afflictions. I know, Ever-Undefiled One, that you are an inexhaustible
and generous treasury of healings.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

I have laid all my thoughts and my soul before you, my Guardian. Deliver
me from every assault of the Enemy.

Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

The Enemy humiliates and oppresses me and teaches me always to do his
will. But you, my Instructor, leave me not to perish!

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Grant me with thanksgiving and fervor to sing a hymn to my Creator and
God and to you my good Guardian Angel. Free me from my oppressive
enemies, O my Deliverer.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Heal, Most Pure One, the most painful wounds of my soul and drive off the
enemies that are constantly warring against me.

Lord have mercy! (3 times)


Sessional Hymn, Tone 6

I think of the Dread Day and weep over my evil deeds. How shall I answer
the immortal King? Or how shall a prodigal like me dare to look up at the
judge? O compassionate Father, only-begotten Son, and Holy Spirit: have
mercy on me!

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:


Sessional Hymn, Tone 2

In fervent love I cry to you, O Guardian of my soul, my all-holy Angel:
protect me and keep me always from the entrapment of the evil one. Direct
me to the heavenly life, enlightening, illumining, and strengthening me.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


Kontakion, Tone 6

Steadfast protectress of Christians, constant advocate before the
Creator: do not despise the cry of us sinners, but in your goodness come
speedily to help us who call on you in faith. Hasten to hear our petition
and to intercede for us, O Theotokos, for you always protect those who
honor you.




                                 ODE 4


Irmos: "Christ is my strength, my God and my Lord"--the sacred Church
       reverently sings with a mighty voice, rejoicing in the Lord.




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Our present path is wide and conducive to pleasures, but bitter will the
Last Day be when the soul will part from the body. O man, beware of those
pleasures, for the sake of the Kingdom of God.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Why do you mistreat the poor? Why do you withhold the worker's pay? Why
do you not love your brother? Why do you pursue lust and pride? Abandon
all that, my soul, and repent for the sake of the Kingdom of God.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

O foolish man! How long will you bustle like a bee, gathering your
wealth? It will soon perish like dust and ashes. Seek rather the Kingdom
of God.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Have mercy on me a sinner, O Lady Theotokos, and strengthen me in
virtues. Protect me, so that insolent death may not seize me unprepared,
and bring me, O Virgin, to the Kingdom of God.




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

O Bride of God, who bore the Lord Pilot, still the tumult of my passions
and the storm of my transgressions.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Grant me the abyss of your kindness, upon which I call, O you who gave
birth to the Compassionate One, the Savior of those who hymn you.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Enjoying your gifts, O Pure One, we sing a hymn of thanksgiving to you
whom we know to be the Mother of God.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

As you love good, O Theotokos, the only ever-Virgin, help me as I lie on
my bed of illness and infirmity.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

We are delivered from every difficulty, O All-Hymned One, for we have you
as our hope, our confirmation, and immovable wall.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

Pray to God Who loves mankind, my Guardian, and do not abandon me! Keep
my life in peace and grant me invincible salvation.

Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

I received you from God, holy Angel, as a helper and guardian of my life.
Free me from all harm, I pray you!

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Cleanse my vileness with your holiness, my Guardian! May I be excluded
from the left side through your prayers and become a partaker of glory.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

I am bewildered by the evils that surround me, Most Pure One. Deliver me
from them quickly, for I run only to you.




                                 ODE 5


Irmos: I pray Thee, O Good One: Enlighten with Thy Divine Light the souls
       which look to Thee from early dawn, that they may know Thee, O
       Word of God, as the True God Who calls them out from the darkness
       of sin.




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Remember, wretched man, how you have been enslaved to lies, slander,
crime, infirmities, and wild beasts because of your sins. Is this what
you wanted, my sinful soul?

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

My members tremble, for I have been guilty through all of them: my eyes
by seeing, my ears by hearing, my tongue by speaking evil, surrendering
my whole self to Gehenna. Is this what you wanted, my sinful soul?

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Thou didst receive the Prodigal and the thief who repented, O Savior. I
alone have been weighed down by sinful laziness and submitted to evil
deeds. Is this what you wanted my sinful soul?

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

O Mother of God, the wondrous and swift helper of all mankind, help me,
the unworthy, for this is what my sinful soul wants!




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Fill my heart with joy, O Pure One who bore the Cause of Joy, by giving
us your incorruptible joy.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Deliver us from harm, Pure Theotokos who bore the Eternal Redemption and
the Peace which passes all understanding.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Lessen the gloom of my transgressions with the enlightenment of your
brightness, O Bride of God who bore the divine and eternal Light.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Heal the infirmity of my soul by granting me your visitation, O Pure One,
and grant me wholeness by your prayers.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

Since you have boldness before God, my holy Guardian, pray to Him for my
deliverance from the evils that harm me.

Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

Brightly illumine my soul, O bright Light, the Angel given to me by God,
my instructor and guardian.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Though I sleep in the evil weight of sin, protect me as one who keeps
vigil, O Angel of God, and rouse me to praise through your prayers.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Lady Mary, the unwedded Theotokos and hope of the faithful: Cast down
the arrogance of the Enemy and give joy to those who hymn you.




                                 ODE 6


Irmos: Beholding the Sea of Life raging with the storm of temptations, I
       have fled to Thy calm haven and cry to Thee: Deliver my life from
       destruction, O Most-merciful One!




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

I have lived my life on earth prodigally and committed my soul to
darkness. Now, O Merciful Master, I pray: free me from the Enemy's labor
and give me the intelligence to do Thy will.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Who does what I do? As a pig wallows in mud, so do I serve sin! Pull me
out of this mire, Lord, and give me the heart to accomplish Thy
commandments.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Lift yourself towards God, wretched man, recalling your transgressions!
Fall down before the Creator with tears and groans! Being merciful, He
will give you the mind to know His will.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Keep us from both visible and invisible harm, O Virgin Theotokos! Receive
my prayers, Most Pure One, and bear them to your Son, that He may give me
the mind to do His will.




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

My nature was captive of death and corruption, O Virgin, but your Son and
Lord saved it from both by surrendering Himself to death. Pray to Him for
my deliverance from the evil deeds of my enemies.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

I know that you are the Intercessor of my life, O Virgin, my firm
Protectress, healing the rebellions of temptations and dispelling the
wiles of demons. I pray constantly that you will deliver me from my
destructive passions.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

We have obtained you, O Maiden, as a wall of refuge and a most thorough
salvation of souls. The multitude of human sorrows is not too great for
you, and we ever rejoice in your illumination. Save us now, O Lady, from
passions and misfortunes.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

I am lying on a bed of infirmity and there is no cure for my flesh. But I
pray to you, the Good One who bore the God and Savior of the world: raise
me from the destruction of illnesses.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

I pray to you, holy Angel whom God has give to me as my good guardian:
free me from every temptation!

Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

Shine light on my mind, O good one, and enlighten me! I pray you, holy
Angel: teach me always to have wholesome thoughts.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Deliver my heart from this present noise, O my Guardian, and strengthen
me to keep a good vigil, wondrously instructing me towards life-giving
stillness.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

The Word of God dwelt in you, O Theotokos, and showed you to mankind as a
Ladder to Heaven. Through you, He Who is on high came down to us.

Lord, have mercy! (3 times)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
unto ages of ages. Amen.


Kontakion, Tone 6

O my soul, why do you enrich yourself with sins? Why do you do the
Devil's will? In what have you put your hope? Cease all this and turn to
God, weeping and crying: O compassionate Lord, have mercy on me, a
sinner!


Ikos

Contemplate, my soul, the bitter hour of death and the dread judgment of
your Creator and God. Threatening angels will seize you, my soul, and
lead you to eternal flames. Repent before your death, therefore, crying:
O Lord, have mercy on me, a sinner!




                                 ODE 7


Irmos: The Angel made the furnace a source of dew for the pious youths,
       and the Will of God, which burned the Chaldeans, made the
       persecutor call out: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Put not your hope in corruptible wealth, my soul, nor in things unjustly
gathered. You do not know to whom you will leave it all. Instead, cry
out: O Christ God, have mercy on me, the unworthy!

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Remember, my soul, both the eternal life and the Heavenly Kingdom
prepared for the saints and the outer darkness and divine wrath prepared
for the wicked. Then cry out: O Christ God, have mercy on me, the
unworthy!

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

Do not count on physical health, my soul, nor on fleeting beauty. You see
how both the strong and the young die. Instead, cry out: O Christ God,
have mercy on me, the unworthy!

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Fall down before the Mother of God, my soul, and pray to her, for she is
the swift helper of penitents. She will entreat her Son, Christ God, and
He will have mercy on me, the unworthy!




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Desiring to establish our salvation, O Savior, Thou didst enter the
Virgin's womb, showing her as the Intercessor for the world. Blessed art
Thou, O God of our Fathers!

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Pray to Him Who is mercifully disposed and Whom you bore, O Pure Mother,
that we may be delivered from transgressions and defilement of soul, who
cry out with faith: Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Thou didst show her who gave birth to Thee as a source of healing, a
strong pillar, and a gate of repentance for those who cry out: Blessed
art Thou, O God of our fathers!

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Grant healing from physical weakness and spiritual infirmities to those
who draw near to your Protection with love, O Virgin Birthgiver of God,
who bore Christ the Savior for us.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

Have pity on me, Angel of the Lord, and pray to God for me, for He has
given you to me forever as a helper, instructor, and guardian throughout
my life.

Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

God entrusted my wretched soul to you undefiled, Holy Angel. Do not let
it be killed by thieves on its journey, but direct it rather to the path
of repentance.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

I bring my soul, completely shamed by my evil thoughts and deeds. Hasten
to me, my Instructor, and grant me the healing of good thoughts which
lead me forever on the right path.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

For the sake of the Theotokos, O Personal Wisdom of the Most High, fill
with wisdom and divine strength those who cry out: Blessed art Thou, O
God of our fathers!




                                 ODE 8


Irmos: Thou didst cause dew to pour from the flames over the pious
       youths, and didst burn the sacrifice of a righteous man with
       water--for Thou doest all things, O Christ, by Thy Will alone. We
       exalt Thee throughout all ages.




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

How can I not weep when I think of death? I have seen my brother lying in
the tomb without glory and without form. What can I expect? What can I
hope? Only grant me, Lord, repentance before the end. _(twice)_

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

I believe that Thou wilt come to judge the living and the dead, and that
everyone will stand in his rank: the old and the young; masters and
princes; virgins and priests. Where will I find myself? Therefore, I cry
out: grant me, Lord, repentance before the end.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Receive my unworthy prayer, Most Pure Theotokos. Keep me from sudden
death, and grant me repentance before the end.




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

O Virgin, do not disdain those who need your help, hymning and exalting
you forever.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

You heal the infirmities of my soul and the illnesses of my body, O
Virgin, that I may glorify you, O Pure One, forever.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

You pour an abundance of healing, O Virgin, on those who hymn you with
faith and exalt your inexpressible birth-giving.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

You chase away the wiles of temptation and the onsets of passions, O
Virgin. We therefore hymn you forever.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

Most good Angel, sent from God: strengthen my life and never abandon me.

Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

I hymn you forever, most blessed and good Angel, the Instructor and
Guardian of my soul.

We bless the Father, and the Son and the Holy Spirit, the Lord:

Be my protection and rampart on the day when all mankind will be tried
and all deeds will be tested, both the good and the bad.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Be the help and stillness of your servant, Ever-Virgin Theotokos, and
never release me from your service.




                                 ODE 9


Irmos: No man can see God, upon Whom the Angelic ranks dare not gaze. But
       through you, O Pure One, the Incarnate Word was revealed to
       mankind. Magnifying Him with the heavenly hosts, we call you
       blessed.




                          Canon of Repentance


Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

I now turn to you, angels, archangels, and all the heavenly host who
stand by the throne of God: pray to your Creator that He deliver my soul
from eternal torments.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

I now weep before you, holy patriarchs, kings and prophets, apostles and
hierarchs, and all the elect of Christ: help me at the Judgment, that my
soul be saved from the strength of the Enemy.

Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me!

I now lift up my hands to you, holy martyrs, desert-dwellers, virgins,
righteous ones, and all saints who pray to the Lord for the whole world:
may He have mercy on me at the hour of my death.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Help me, Mother of God, for I have great hope in you! Pray to your Son,
that when He sits to judge the living and the dead, He may place me at
His right hand, even though I am unworthy.




                         Canon to the Theotokos


Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

O Virgin who bore Christ and wipes away every tear from every face: turn
not away from my flowing tears.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

O Virgin who received the fullness of joy which destroyed the sorrow of
sin: fill my heart with joy!

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Be a haven and intercession, an indestructible wall, a refuge, protection
and rejoicing for those who run to you, O Virgin.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Enlighten with the rays of your light those who in the True Faith confess
you to be the Theotokos, O Virgin, dispelling the darkness of ignorance.

Most Holy Theotokos, save us!

Heal me, O Virgin, as I lie humbled on the place of misfortune, bringing
me from illness to health.




                      Canon to the Guardian Angel


Lord Jesus Christ, my God, have mercy on me!

Have mercy on me, my only Savior, since Thou art merciful and
compassionate, and join me to the choir of the Just.

Holy Angel of the Lord, my Guardian, pray to God for me, a sinner!

Grant that I may always think and do what is good and useful, O Angel of
the Lord, and show me to be strong and spotless in weakness.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

Since you are bold before the Heavenly King, pray to Him with all the
bodiless powers, that He may have mercy on me, a wretch.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

You have great boldness before the One Who took flesh from you, O Virgin.
Remove me from my fetters and grant me freedom and salvation through your
prayers.




                CANON IN PREPARATION FOR HOLY COMMUNION




                             ODE 1 (Tone 2)


Irmos: Come, O People, let us sing a hymn to Christ God, Who divided the
       sea and guided the people Whom He led out of the bondage of Egypt,
       for He has glorified Himself.

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

May Thy Holy Body and Precious Blood, O Lord, be my Bread of everlasting
life, healing me of various afflictions.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

Make me worthy to partake of Thy most pure Body and Divine Blood, O
Christ, for I am unworthy and accursed, defiled by unseemly deeds.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

You are the good soil, blessed Bride of God, which bore the ear of grain,
the Savior of the world, which sprang from your untilled field. Grant
that I may be saved by eating it.




                                 ODE 3


Irmos: Having established me on the rock of faith, Thou hast strengthened
       me against my enemies. My spirit rejoices when I sing: There is
       none holy as our God, and none more righteous than Thou, O Lord!

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

Give me tears, O Christ, to cleanse the filth from my heart. Then,
cleansed and with a good conscience, may I come with fear and faith to
partake of Thy Divine Gifts, O Master.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

O Lover of mankind, may Thy most pure Body and Divine Blood be for the
remission of my sins, the communion of the Holy Spirit, life everlasting,
and estrangement from passions and sorrows.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Most holy Table of the Heavenly Bread which mercifully came down from on
high, giving new life to the world; grant that I, who am unworthy, may
now taste of Him in fear and live!




                                 ODE 4


Irmos: Thou didst not come as an emissary or an angel, Lord, but from a
       Virgin, taking flesh and saving the fulness of my humanity. I
       therefore call out to Thee: Glory to Thy power, O Lord!

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

Because of human sins, Thou didst will to be slaughtered like a lamb,
Most Merciful One Who wast incarnate for us. I pray, therefore: cleanse
my sins as well.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

Heal the wounds of my soul, Lord, and fully sanctify me. Grant, Master,
that I, who am wretched, may partake of Thy Divine Mystical Supper.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Incline towards me, O Lady, the One Who came from your womb. Keep me,
your servant, undefiled and spotless, that I may be sanctified by
receiving the spiritual pearl.




                                 ODE 5


Irmos: Guide us in the light of Thy commandments, O Lord, the Giver of
       Light and Creator of the Universe. For we know no other God than
       Thee.

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

As Thou didst foretell, O Christ, so may it be with Thine inadequate
servant, and abide in me according to Thy promise: for behold, I eat Thy
Flesh and drink Thy Blood.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

May the burning coal of Thy Body, O God and Word of God, be a light in my
darkness, and may Thy Blood be the cleansing of my defiled soul.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Mary, Mother of God, precious Tabernacle of the divine Fragrance: make
me a chosen vessel, by your prayers, that I may partake of the
consecrated elements of your Son.




                                 ODE 6


Irmos: Sunk in the depths of sin, I call on the unfathomable abyss of Thy
       compassion: Deliver me from destruction, O God!

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

Sanctify my mind, soul, heart, and body, O Savior! Grant, Master, that I
may draw near, uncondemned, to the dread Mysteries.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

By partaking of Thy Holy Mysteries, O Christ, may I be estranged from
passions, joined to Thy Grace, and confirmed in life.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Through the prayers of Thy holy Mother, O God, the Holy Word of God,
sanctify me wholly as I come to Thy divine Mysteries.

Lord, have mercy! (3 times)

Glory to the Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.


Kontakion, Tone 2:

Do not judge me unworthy to receive Thy Body and Divine Blood at this
time. May the communion of Thy most pure and dread Mysteries not be to my
condemnation, though I am wretched. Be it rather for eternal and
everlasting life.




                                 ODE 7


Irmos: The most wise youths would not serve the golden idol, but walked
       into the flames themselves, scorning the pagan gods. They sang
       amid the flames and an Angel bedewed them with the words: The
       prayer of your lips has been heard.

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

May this communion of Thine immortal Mysteries, the fountain of good, O
Christ, be my light, my life, and my dispassion. May it lead to progress
and the increase of divine virtues, only Good One, that I may glorify
Thee.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

As I draw near to Thine immortal and divine Mysteries with love and
trembling, may I be delivered from passions, enemies, want, and every
sorrow. Grant that I may sing to Thee: blessed art Thou, Lord God of our
fathers.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

To you who are full of the Grace of God and bore Christ the Savior beyond
understanding, I your servant pray--the impure praying to the Pure One:
cleanse me, who now wish to draw near to the most pure Mysteries, from
all defilement of flesh and spirit.




                                 ODE 8


Irmos: God came down upon the Hebrew youths in the fiery furnace and
       changed the flames into dew. Praise the acts of the Lord, and
       exalt Him throughout all ages!

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

O God, my Savior, allow me in my present despair to be a partaker of Thy
heavenly, awesome, and holy Mysteries and of Thy divine and mystical
supper, O Christ.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

Having run to Thy kindness, O Good One, I cry out to Thee in fear: be in
me and I in Thee, as Thou didst say, O Savior! Behold: emboldened by Thy
mercy, I eat Thy Flesh and drink Thy Blood.

Let us bless the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, the Lord; now
and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

I tremble when I partake of fire, for fear that I might burn like wax or
grass. O the awesome Mysteries! O the kind-heartedness of God! How can I,
who am clay, commune of the Divine Body and Blood and become
incorruptible?




                                 ODE 9


Irmos: Our God and Lord, the Son of the Eternal Father, revealed Himself
       to us. He was incarnate of a Virgin that He might enlighten those
       in darkness and gather those who were scattered. We therefore
       magnify the all-hymned Theotokos.

Create in me a clean heart, O God, and put a new and right spirit within
me.

Taste and see that this is Christ, the Lord Who of old became like us for
us and Who, having once offered Himself as an offering to His Father, is
forever immolated, sanctifying communicants.

Cast me not away from Thy presence, and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.

May I be sanctified in soul and body, Master! May I be enlightened! May I
be saved! May I become Thy dwelling through communion of the Sacred
Mysteries, having Thee living in me with the Father and the Spirit, O
Most Merciful Benefactor!

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

May Thy Body and Most Pure Blood, my Savior, be to me as fire and light.
May they set flame to my sinful matter, burning the thorns of passions
and fully enlightening me to worship Thy Divinity.

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

God took flesh of your pure blood. Every race therefore hymns you, O
Theotokos, and the intelligent multitudes glorify you, for through you we
beheld the Ruler of all becoming substance in humanity.




               PRAYERS IN PREPARATION FOR HOLY COMMUNION


Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, through the prayers of Thy most pure
Mother and all the saints, have mercy on us. Amen.

_A priest uses the following:_

Blessed is our God, always, now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Glory to Thee, our God, glory to Thee.

O Heavenly King, the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth Who art everywhere
and fillest all things. Treasury of Blessings and Giver of Life: Come and
abide in us, and cleanse us from every impurity, and save our souls, O
Good One.

Holy God! Holy Mighty! Holy Immortal! Have mercy on us. _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O Most Holy Trinity, have mercy on us! Lord, cleanse us from our sins!
Master, pardon our transgressions! Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities for Thy name's sake.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy Name. Thy Kingdom come.
Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

_(If there is a priest, he adds the usual exclamation)_

Lord, have mercy! _(12 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

_NOTE: When the Prayers in Preparation for Holy Communion are read
immediately after Morning Prayers, we begin the former at this point._

Come, let us worship God our King!

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, our King and our God!

Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ Himself, our King and
our God!




                                Psalm 22


  The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want;
      He makes me lie down in green pastures.
  He leads me beside still waters;
      He restores my soul.
  He leads me in paths of righteousness
      for His name's sake.
  Even though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death
      I fear no evil;
  for Thou art with me;
      Thy rod and Thy staff,
      they comfort me.
  Thou preparest a Table before me
      in the presence of my enemies;
  Thou anointest my head with oil,
      and most excellent is Thy Cup
      which brings me joy!
  Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me
      all the days of my life;
  and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord
      for ever.




                                Psalm 23


  The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof,
      the world and those who dwell therein;
  for He has founded it upon the seas,
      and established it upon the rivers.
  Who shall ascend the hill of the Lord?
      And who shall stand in His holy place?
  He who has clean hands and a pure heart,
      who does not lift up his soul to what is false,
      and does not swear deceitfully.
  He will receive blessing from the Lord,
      and vindication from the God of his salvation.
  Such is the generation of those who seek Him,
      who seek the face of the God of Jacob.
  Lift up your heads, O gates!
      and be lifted up, O ancient doors!
      that the King of glory may come in.
  Who is the King of glory?
      The Lord, strong and mighty,
      the Lord, mighty in battle!
  Lift up your heads, O gates!
      and be lifted up, O ancient doors!
      that the King of glory may come in.
  Who is this King of glory?
      The Lord of hosts,
      He is the King of glory!




                               Psalm 115


  I kept my faith, even when I said,
      "I am greatly afflicted";
  I said in my consternation,
      "Every man is a liar."
  What shall I render to the Lord
      for all His bounty to me?
  I will lift up the Cup of Salvation
      and call on the name of the Lord,
  I will pay my vows to the Lord
      in the presence of all His people.
  Precious in the sight of the Lord
      is the death of His saints.
  O Lord, I am Thy servant;
      I am Thy servant, the son of Thy handmaid.
      Thou hast loosed my bonds.
  I will offer to Thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving
      and call on the name of the Lord.
  I will pay my vows to the Lord
      in the presence of all His people,
  in the courts of the house of the Lord,
      in your midst, O Jerusalem.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and
ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Alleluia! Alleluia! Alleluia! Glory to Thee, O God! _(3 times)_

_And the following TROPARIA, TONE 8:_

Disregard my iniquities, O Lord Who wast born of a Virgin! Cleanse my
heart and make it a temple of Thy most pure Body and Blood. Turn me not
away from Thy countenance, for Thy great mercy is immeasurable.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

How dare I partake of Thy Holiness in my unworthiness? Even if I dare to
approach Thee with the worthy, my garment accuses me, for it is not a
wedding-garment, and I secure the condemnation of my most sinful soul.
Cleanse, O Lord, the defilement of my soul and save me, for Thou lovest
mankind.

Now and ever, and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Great is the multitude of my sins, O Theotokos! I come to you, O Pure
One, in need of salvation. Visit my ailing soul, O You who alone are
blessed, and pray to your Son and our God that He absolve the evil I have
done.

_NOTE: On Great and Holy Thursday, the following TROPARION is used, in
TONE 8:_

When the glorious disciples were enlightened at the washing of their feet
before the supper, then the impious Judas was darkened, ailing with
avarice, and to the lawless judges he betrayed Thee, the Righteous Judge.
Behold, O lover of money, this man who because of money hanged himself.
Flee from the greedy soul which dared such things against the Master. O
Lord Who art good towards all men, glory to Thee!

_If the Canon of Preparation for Holy Communion has not been read the
preceding evening, it may be read here._

  Lord, have mercy! _(40 times, with as many prostrations as desired)_

_Then, we read the following Verses of Instruction:_

  When you intend, O man, to eat the Master's Body,
      Approach with fear, lest you be burned--for It is fire!
  Before drinking the Divine Blood in Communion,
      Make peace with those who have grieved you.
  Only then may you dare
      To eat the Mystical Food.

_We also add the following verses:_

  Before partaking of the Dread Sacrifice,
      The life-giving Body of the Master,
  Pray, trembling, in this manner:


1st Prayer, of Saint Basil the Great.

O Lord and Master, Jesus Christ our God, the Fountain of life and
immortality, the Creator of everything visible and invisible, the eternal
and everlasting Son of the eternal Father: Thou hast come in these latter
days because of the abundance of Thy goodness. Thou hast put on our human
flesh and wast crucified and buried for us thankless and graceless men,
and through Thine own blood Thou hast renewed our human nature which is
corrupted by sin. And now, O Immortal King, accept the repentance of me a
sinner, and incline Thine ear to me and listen to my words:

I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned before heaven and before Thy face,
and I am not worthy to look upon the height of Thy Glory.

I have provoked Thy goodness, I have transgressed Thy commandments, I
have not obeyed Thy statutes.

But, O Lord, since Thou dost not remember evil, but art long-suffering
and of great mercy, Thou hast not given me over to destruction for my
lawlessness, but hast ever awaited my conversion.

O Lover of mankind, Thou hast said by Thy prophets: "I have no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live."

For Thou dost not wish, O Master, that the work of Thy hands should
perish, neither dost Thou take pleasure in the destruction of men, but
Thou desirest that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth.

Therefore, although I am unworthy both of heaven and of earth and of this
passing life, having wholly yielded myself to sin and defiled Thine
image, yet being Thy creature and of Thy making, I do not despair of my
salvation in my wickedness. But made bold by Thine infinite compassion, I
draw near.

Receive me, O Christ Who lovest mankind, as Thou didst receive the
prostitute, the thief, the tax-collector and the prodigal. Take away the
heavy burden of my sins, for Thou takest away the sins of the world, Thou
healest the infirmities of mankind, Thou callest to Thyself and givest
rest to those who labor and are heavy laden.

Thou hast not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
Cleanse me from every stain of flesh and spirit. Teach me to fulfill
holiness in fear of Thee, that having the testimony of my own conscience
clean, and having communion of Thy holy things, I may be united with Thy
Body and Blood and may have Thee to dwell and abide in me, with the
Father and Thy Holy Spirit.

O Lord Jesus Christ my God, may the communion of Thy most pure and
life-creating mysteries not bring me into judgment, nor may I become weak
in soul and body by partaking in an unworthy manner, but grant me to
receive communion of Thy holy things without condemnation even to my very
last breath, and by them to receive communion of the Holy Spirit,
provision for the journey of eternal life, and an acceptable answer at
Thy dread judgment seat; that I, together with all Thy chosen ones, may
also be a partaker of the incorruptible blessings which Thou hast
prepared for those who love thee, O Lord, in whom Thou art glorified
forever. Amen.


2nd Prayer, of St. John Chrysostom

O Lord my God, I know that I am not worthy nor sufficiently pleasing that
Thou shouldst come under the roof of the house of my soul for it is
entirely desolate and fallen in ruin, and Thou wilt not find in me a
place worthy to lay Thy head. But as Thou didst humble Thyself from on
high for our sake, so now humble Thyself to my lowliness.

As Thou didst deign to lie in a cavern, in a manger of dumb beasts, so
now deign to enter into the manger of my beastly soul, and into my soiled
body.

As Thou didst not disdain to enter and to eat with sinners in the house
of Simon the leper, so now be pleased to enter into the house of my soul,
humble and leprous and sinful.

As Thou didst not cast away the sinful woman who came to touch Thee, so
have compassion on me a sinner who comes to touch Thee.

As Thou didst not abhor the kiss of her sin-stained and unclean mouth, do
not abhor my mouth, worse stained and more unclean than hers, nor my
stained and shamed and unclean lips, nor my still more impure tongue.

But let the fiery coal of Thy most pure Body and Thy most precious Blood
bring me sanctification, enlightenment and strengthening of my lowly soul
and body, relief from the burden of my many transgressions, protection
against every action of the devil, repulsion and victory over my wicked
and evil habits, mortification of my passions, accomplishment of Thy
commandments, increase of Thy divine grace, and inheritance of Thy
Kingdom.

For I do not come to Thee in presumption, O Christ my God, but made bold
by Thine inexpressible goodness, lest I stray far away from Thy flock, O
Master, and become caught by the wolf of souls.

Therefore, I pray Thee, O Master, for Thou alone art holy: sanctify my
soul and body, my mind and heart, my muscles and bones. Renew me
entirely. Implant Thy fear in my fleshly members and let Thy
sanctification never be removed from me.

Be my helper and defender, guide my life in peace and make me worthy to
stand at Thy right hand with all Thy saints.

By the prayers and supplications of Thy most pure Mother, of Thy
spiritual servants, the most pure angelic powers, and of all the saints
who have been well-pleasing to Thee. Amen.


3rd Prayer, of St. Simeon Metaphrastes

O only pure and incorruptible Lord! Because of the inexpressible mercy of
Thy love for mankind, Thou didst take to Thyself our entire human
composition from the pure blood of the Virgin who gave birth to Thee
beyond nature, by the descent of the Holy Spirit and the good-will of the
ever-existing Father.

O Christ Jesus, Wisdom of God and Peace and Power, through the human
nature which Thou didst take to Thyself, Thou didst suffer the
life-creating and saving passion: the Cross, the nails, the spear--death
itself. Put to death in me the soul-destroying passions of the body.

Through Thy burial Thou didst capture the kingdom of death. Bury in me
the evil devices of the devil with good thoughts, and destroy the spirits
of evil.

Through Thy life-bringing Resurrection Thou didst raise up the first
father who had fallen. Raise me up who am sunk down in sin and give me
the image of repentance.

Through Thy glorious Ascension Thou didst deify the flesh which Thou
didst assume, and placed it on the throne at the Father's right hand.
Grant me to receive a place at the right hand with the saved through
communion of Thy holy mysteries.

Through the coming of Thy Spirit, the Comforter, Thou didst make Thy
consecrated disciples to be honorable vessels. Show me also to be the
receptacle of His coming.

Thou hast promised to come again to judge the world in righteousness.
Grant that I may go to meet Thee in the clouds, my Judge and Creator,
with all Thy saints; that I may glorify and praise Thee without end,
together with Thy Father Who is without beginning, and Thy most holy and
good and life-creating Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


4th Prayer, of St. John of Damascus

O Lord and Master Jesus Christ our God, Who alone hast power to absolve
men from their sins, for Thou art good and lovest mankind: forgive all my
transgressions done in knowledge or in ignorance, and make me worthy
without condemnation to have communion of Thy divine and glorious and
pure and life-creating mysteries. Let them not be for my punishment, or
for the increase of my sins. But let them be for my purification and
sanctification, as a promise of the life and Kingdom to come, a defense
and a help and a repulsion of every attacker and the removal of my many
transgressions. For Thou art a God of mercy and generosity and love for
mankind, and to Thee we ascribe glory, with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


5th Prayer, of St. Basil the Great

I know, O Lord, that I have communion unworthily of Thy most pure Body
and Thy most precious Blood, and that I am guilty and drink condemnation
to myself not discerning Thy Body and Blood, O my Christ and God. But
daring upon Thy generous loving-kindness I come to Thee Who hast said:
"He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me and I in him." Be
merciful, therefore, O Lord, and do not rebuke me, a sinner, but deal
with me according to Thy mercy, and let Thy holy things be for my
purification and healing, for enlightenment and protection, for the
repulsion of every tempting thought and action of the devil which works
spiritually in my fleshly members. Let them be for boldness and love for
Thee, for the correction and grounding of my life, for the increase of
virtue and perfection, for the fulfillment of Thy commandments, for the
communion of the Holy Spirit, for the journey of eternal life, for a good
and acceptable answer at Thy dread judgment, but not for judgment or
condemnation. Amen.


6th Prayer, of St. Simeon the New Theologian

  From lips defiled
  and a vile heart,
  from an impure tongue
  and a soul defiled,
  receive my prayer, O my Christ,
  and do not despise
  my words, my appearance,
  nor my shamelessness.
  Grant me the boldness, my Christ,
  to say what I desire
  Even more--teach me
  what to do and say.
  I have sinned more than the harlot
  who, on learning where Thou wast,
  bought myrrh and came boldly
  to anoint thy feet, my God,
  my Master and my Christ.
  As Thou didst not turn her away
  when she came with her heart,
  so, O Word, turn me not away,
  but give me Thy feet
  to hold, to kiss,
  and to anoint boldly
  with a stream of tears
  as a precious ointment.
  Wash me with my tears, O Word,
  and cleanse me with them!
  Remit my transgressions
  and grant me forgiveness.
  Thou knowest the multitude of my evil:
  Thou knowest also my wounds!
  Thou seest my scars:
  Thou knowest also my faith!
  Thou seest my intentions
  and hearest my sighs.
  Nothing is hidden from Thee,
  my God, my Maker, my Redeemer--
  not even a tear-drop
  or part of that drop.
  Thine eyes have seen
  that which I have not yet done.
  Thou hast inscribed in Thy book
  things yet to happen.
  See my humility!
  See each of my labors and all of my sins!
  Absolve me, O God of all,
  that with a pure heart,
  trembling thoughts
  and a contrite soul
  I may partake of Thine undefiled
  and most holy Mysteries
  which enliven and deify
  all who partake of them
  with a pure heart.
  Thou hast said, O Master:
  "Whoever eats my Body
  and drinks my Blood
  abides in me
  and I in him!"
  True is every word
  of my Master and God!
  When I partake of Thy divine
  and deifying Grace,
  I am no longer alone--
  I am with Thee, my Christ,
  the Light of the Triple Sun
  which enlightens the world.
  May I not remain alone--
  without Thee, O Life-Giver,
  My Breath, my Life and my Joy,
  the salvation of the world.
  I approach Thee, therefore,
  with tears, as Thou seest,
  and a contrite soul.
  I beg to receive
  deliverance from my sins.
  May I partake uncondemned
  of Thy life-giving
  and spotless Mysteries,
  that Thou mayest abide,
  as Thou hast said,
  with me, the thrice-wretched.
  May the Tempter not find me
  without Thy Grace
  and seize me deceitfully
  and lead me, deceived,
  from Thy deifying words.
  Therefore, I fall down before Thee
  and fervently cry:
  as Thou didst receive the Prodigal
  and the harlot who came to Thee,
  O Gracious One, receive me,
  prodigal and defiled.
  With a contrite soul
  I approach Thee now:
  I know, O Savior, that no-one has sinned
  against Thee as I have,
  nor done the deeds
  that I have done.
  But I also know
  that neither the greatness of my
  transgressions
  nor the multitude of my sins
  surpass the great patience of my God
  and His extreme love for mankind.
  Through Thy merciful compassion
  Thou dost cleanse and brighten
  those who repent with fervor,
  making them partakers of Light
  and full communicants
  of Thy Divinity.
  To the astonishment of angels
  and human minds,
  Thou dost converse with them often
  as with Thy true friends.
  This makes me bold, my Christ,
  this gives me wings!
  Emboldened by the wealth
  of Thy generosity towards us,
  with both joy and trepidation,
  I who am grass
  partake of fire.
  O strange wonder!
  I am sprinkled with dew
  and am not burned,
  as the bush burned of old
  without being consumed.
  With grateful thoughts
  and a grateful heart,
  with my grateful members,
  my soul and my body,
  I now fall down and worship
  and glorify Thee, my God,
  for blessed art Thou,
  now and for ever.


7th Prayer, of St. John Chrysostom

O God, absolve, remit and pardon me my transgressions--as many sins as I
have committed by word or action or thought, willingly or unwillingly,
consciously or unconsciously; forgive me everything since Thou art good
and lovest mankind. And by the prayers of Thy most pure Mother, of Thy
spiritual servants, the holy angelic powers and all the saints, who from
all ages have been well-pleasing to Thee, be pleased to allow me to
receive Thy most pure Body and Thy most precious Blood for the healing of
my soul and body, and the purification of my evil thoughts. For Thine is
the Kingdom and the power and the glory with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


8th Prayer, of St. John Chrysostom

I am not worthy, Master and Lord, that Thou shouldst enter under the roof
of my soul; yet inasmuch as Thou desirest to live in me as the Lover of
mankind, I approach with boldness. Thou hast commanded: Let the doors be
opened which Thou alone hast made and Thou shalt enter with Thy love for
mankind just as Thou art. Thou shalt enter and enlighten my darkened
reasoning. I believe that Thou wilt do this. For Thou didst not cast away
the prostitute who came to Thee with tears, neither didst Thou turn away
the tax-collector who repented, nor didst Thou reject the thief who
acknowledged Thy Kingdom, nor didst Thou forsake the repentant
persecutor, the Apostle Paul, even as he was. But all who came to Thee in
repentance Thou didst unite to the ranks of Thy friends, Who alone art
blessed forever, now and unto the endless ages. Amen.


9th Prayer, of St. John Chrysostom

O Lord Jesus Christ my God, absolve, loose, cleanse and forgive me Thy
sinful and useless and unworthy servant my errors, transgressions and
sinful failing as many as I have committed from my youth up to this
present day and hour, consciously and unconsciously, in words or actions
or reasonings, thoughts, pursuits and in all my senses. By the prayers of
Thy Mother the most pure and ever-virgin Mary who gave birth to Thee
without human seed, my only hope which will not put me to shame, my
intercessor and salvation, grant me to have communion without
condemnation of Thy most pure, immortal, life-creating and awesome
mysteries; for the remission of sins and unto life everlasting; for
sanctification, enlightenment, strength, healing and health of soul and
body; for the most perfect removal and destruction of my evil thoughts
and reasonings and intentions, fantasies by night, brought by dark and
evil spirits; for Thine is the Kingdom and the power and the glory and
the honor and the worship with the Father and Thy Holy Spirit, now and
ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.


10th Prayer, of St. John of Damascus

I stand before the doors of Thy temple, and I do not forsake my wicked
thoughts. But, O Christ my God, as Thou hast justified the tax-collector,
and hast had mercy on the woman of Canaan and hast opened the gates of
paradise to the thief, open to me the interior depths of Thy love for
mankind and receive me as I come and repent before Thee. Receive me as
Thou didst receive the sinful woman and the woman with the flow of blood.
For the first embraced Thy most pure feet and received the forgiveness of
her sins, and the second just touched the hem of Thy garment and received
healing. But I who am lost, daring to receive Thy whole Body, may I not
be burned; but receive me as Thou hast received them, and enlighten my
spiritual senses, burning up my spiritual faults by the prayers of her
who gave birth to Thee without human seed, and of the heavenly angelic
powers, for Thou art blessed unto ages of ages. Amen.


Another Prayer of St. John Chrysostom

I believe, O Lord, and I confess that Thou art truly the Christ, the Son
of the living God Who camest into the world to save sinners, of whom I
am first. I believe also that this is truly Thine own most pure Body, and
that this is truly Thine own precious Blood. Therefore, I pray Thee: have
mercy upon me and forgive my transgressions both voluntary and
involuntary, of word and of deed, committed in knowledge or in ignorance.
And make me worthy to partake without condemnation of Thy most pure
Mysteries, for the remission of my sins, and unto life everlasting. Amen.

_As you approach to partake, say silently the following verses of
Metaphrastes:_

  Behold: I draw near to the Divine Communion.
      Burn me not as I partake, O Creator,
  For Thou art a Fire which burns the unworthy.
      Rather, cleanse me of all defilement.

_Then say:_

Of Thy Mystical Supper, O Son of God, accept me this day as a
communicant; for I will not speak of Thy Mystery to Thine enemies,
neither like Judas will I give Thee a kiss; but like the thief will I
confess Thee: Remember me, O Lord, in Thy Kingdom.

_And the following verses:_

  Be awed, O man, when you see the deifying Blood!
      It is a fire which burns the unworthy!
  The Divine Body both deifies and nourishes me.
      It deifies the spirit and wondrously nourishes the mind.

_Then, the following Troparia:_

With love hast Thou drawn me, O Christ, and with Thy divine love hast
Thou changed me. Burn away my sins with a spiritual fire and satisfy me
with joy in Thee, that I may joyfully magnify Thy two comings, O Good
One.

How shall I, who am unworthy, enter into the radiance of Thy saints? If I
dare to enter the bridal-chamber, my garment accuses me, for it is not a
wedding garment, and the angels will bind me and cast me out. Cleanse, O
Lord, the filth of my soul and save me, for Thou lovest mankind.

_And this prayer:_

O Master Who lovest mankind! O Lord Jesus Christ my God! May these holy
things not be to my condemnation, though I am unworthy of them. May they
be for the cleansing and sanctification of my soul and body and a pledge
of the life and Kingdom that are to come.

It is good for me to cleave to God and to place in the Lord the hope of
my salvation

_Then repeat:_

Of Thy Mystical Supper, O Son of God, accept me this day as a
communicant; for I will not speak of Thy Mystery to Thine enemies,
neither like Judas will I give Thee a kiss; but like the thief will I
confess Thee: remember me, O Lord, in Thy Kingdom.




                PRAYERS OF THANKSGIVING AFTER COMMUNION


Glory to Thee, O God! Glory to Thee, O God! Glory to Thee, O God!

I thank Thee, O Lord my God, for Thou hast not rejected me, a sinner, but
hast made me worthy to be a partaker of Thy holy things. I thank Thee,
for Thou hast permitted me, the unworthy, to commune of Thy most pure and
heavenly Gifts. But, O Master, Who lovest mankind, Who for our sakes
didst die and rise again, and gavest us these awesome and life-creating
Mysteries for the good and sanctification of our souls and bodies; let
them be for the healing of soul and body, the repelling of every
adversary, the illumining of the eyes of my heart, the peace of my
spiritual powers, a faith unashamed, a love unfeigned, the fulfilling of
wisdom, the observing of Thy commandments, the receiving of Thy Divine
Grace, and the attaining of Thy Kingdom. Preserved by them in Thy
holiness, may I always remember Thy Grace and live not for myself alone,
but for Thee, our Master and Benefactor. May I pass from this life in the
hope of eternal life, and so attain to the everlasting rest, where the
voice of those who feast is unceasing, and the gladness of those who
behold the goodness of Thy countenance is unending. For Thou art the true
desire and the ineffable joy of those who love Thee, O Christ our God,
and all creation sings of Thy praise forever. Amen.


A Prayer of Saint Basil the Great

O Master Christ our God, King of the Ages, Maker of all things: I thank
Thee for all the good things Thou hast given me, especially for the
communion with Thy most pure and life-creating Mysteries. I pray Thee, O
gracious Lover of Man: preserve me under Thy protection, beneath the
shadow of Thy wings. Enable me even to my last breath, to partake
worthily and with a pure conscience of Thy holy things, for the remission
of sins and unto life eternal. For Thou art the Bread of Life, the
Fountain of Holiness, the Giver of all Good; to Thee we ascribe glory,
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and ever and unto ages of ages.
Amen.


A Prayer by Saint Simeon Metaphrastes

Freely Thou hast given me Thy Body for my food, O Thou Who art a fire
consuming the unworthy. Consume me not, O my Creator, but instead enter
into my members, my veins, my heart. Consume the thorns of my
transgressions. Cleanse my soul and sanctify my reasonings. Make firm my
knees and body. Illumine my five senses. Nail me to the fear of Thee.
Always protect, guard, and keep me from soul-destroying words and deeds.
Cleanse me, purify me, and adorn me. Give me understanding and
illumination. Show me to be a temple of Thy One Spirit and not the home
of many sins. May every evil thing, every carnal passion flee from me as
from a fire as I become Thy tabernacle through communion. I offer Thee as
intercessors all the saints: the leaders of the bodiless hosts, Thy
Forerunner, the wise apostles, and Thy pure and blameless Mother. Accept
their prayers in Thy love, O my Christ, and make me, Thy servant, a child
of light. For Thou art the only Sanctification and Light of our souls, O
Good One, and to Thee, our Master and God, we ascribe glory day by day.


Another Prayer

O Lord Jesus Christ our God: let Thy holy Body be my eternal life; Thy
precious Blood, my remission of sins. Let this Eucharist be my joy,
health, and gladness. Make me, a sinner, worthy to stand on the right
hand of Thy glory at Thine awesome second Coming, through the prayers of
Thy most pure Mother and of all the saints.


A Prayer to the Theotokos

O most holy Lady Theotokos, the light of my darkened soul, my hope, my
protection, my refuge, my rest, and my joy: I thank you, for you have
permitted me, the unworthy, to be a partaker of the most pure Body and
precious Blood of your Son. Give the light of understanding to the eyes
of my heart, you that gave birth to the True Light. Enliven me who am
deadened by sin, you that gave birth to the Fountain of Immortality. Have
mercy on me, O loving Mother of the merciful God. Grant me compunction
and contrition of heart, humility in my thoughts, and a release from the
slavery of my own reasonings. And enable me, even to my last breath, to
receive the sanctification of the most pure Mysteries, for the healing of
soul and body. Grant me tears of repentance and confession, that I may
glorify you all the days of my life, for you are blessed and greatly
glorified forever. Amen.

Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy
word. For mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast prepared
before the face of all people: a light to enlighten the Gentiles and to
be the glory of Thy people, Israel.

Holy God! Holy Mighty! Holy Immortal! Have mercy on us. _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

O most-holy Trinity, have mercy on us! O Lord, cleanse us from our sins!
O Master, pardon our transgressions! O Holy One, visit and heal our
infirmities, for Thy name's sake.

Lord, have mercy! _(3 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Our Father, Who art in heaven, hallowed be Thy name, Thy Kingdom come.
Thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread; and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
against us; and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

_(If there is a priest, he adds the usual exclamation.)_


At the Liturgy of Saint John Chrysostom

Grace shining forth from your lips like a beacon has enlightened the
universe. It has shown to the world the riches of poverty. It has
revealed to us the heights of humility. Teaching us by your words, O
Father John Chrysostom, intercede before the Word, Christ our God, to
save our souls.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

You received Divine Grace from Heaven, all blessed and venerable John
Chrysostom, and taught all by your mouth to worship one God in the
Trinity. We praise you worthily, for you are an instructor who reveals
things divine.

                            * * * * * * * *


At the Liturgy of Saint Basil the Great

Your proclamation has gone out into all the earth, for it was divinely
taught by hearing your voice. You expounded the nature of creatures and
ennobled the manners of men. O holy father of royal priesthood, entreat
Christ God that our souls may be saved.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit:

You were revealed as the sure foundation of the Church, granting all men
a lord-ship which cannot be taken away, sealing it with your precepts, O
venerable and heavenly father.

                            * * * * * * * *


At the Liturgy of the Presanctified Gifts
Troparion of Saint Gregory the Dialogist

The truth of things revealed you to your flock as a rule of faith, an
Icon of meekness, and a teacher of abstinence. You thus reached the
heights through humility and wealth through poverty. O holy hierarch,
father Gregory, pray to Christ God for the salvation of our souls.

                            * * * * * * * *

Now and ever and unto ages of ages. Amen.

Steadfast protectress of Christians, constant advocate before the
Creator: do not despise the cry of us sinners, but in your goodness come
speedily to help us who call on you in faith. Hasten to hear our petition
and to intercede for us, O Theotokos, for you always protect those who
honor you.

Lord, have mercy! _(12 times)_

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and ever
and unto ages of ages. Amen.

More honorable than the Cherubim, and more glorious beyond compare than
the Seraphim: without defilement you gave birth to God the Word. True
Theotokos, we magnify you.

_The priest pronounces the dismissal._


ST. TIKHON'S SEMINARY PRESS
1982



