Proofreading Canada Team (http://www.pgdpcanada.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 34045-h.htm or 34045-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34045/34045-h/34045-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/34045/34045-h.zip)





A CHRISTMAS CHILD

A Sketch of a Boy-Life

by

MRS. MOLESWORTH

Author of
'Carrots,' 'Cuckoo Clock,' Etc.


Illustration:
"The Story of Sunny."--_Frontispiece_.


Illustration:
Skating Scene


Illustrated by Walter Crane


 'O Christmas, merry Christmas!
    Is it really come again?
  With its memories and greetings,
    With its joy and with its pain.'







London
Macmillan And Co.
1880




  TO
 _The Two Friends_
  WHO WILL BEST UNDERSTAND THIS
  SIMPLE LITTLE STORY
  I DEDICATE IT
  WITH MUCH AFFECTION

Paris, _May_ 1880.




  CONTENTS.


  CHAPTER I.
  BABY TED                                  1

  CHAPTER II.
  IN THE GARDEN                            18

  CHAPTER III.
  WISHES AND FEARS                         37

  CHAPTER IV.
  THE STORY OF SUNNY                       58

  CHAPTER V.
  THE STORY OF SUNNY (_Concluded_)         76

  CHAPTER VI.
  LITTLE NARCISSA                          94

  CHAPTER VII.
  GETTING BIG                             116

  CHAPTER VIII.
  "STATISTICS"                            137

  CHAPTER IX.
  A PEACOCK'S FEATHER AND A KISS          161

  CHAPTER X.
  SOME RAINY ADVENTURES                   179

  CHAPTER XI.
  "IT'S ONLY I, MOTHER"                   200

  CHAPTER XII.
  THE WHITE CROSS                         216




  LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  "THE STORY OF SUNNY"                          _Frontispiece_

  "I WISH THOO'D LET ME HELP THOO TO CUT THE
  GRASS"                                    _To face page_ 32

  "SHE HUNTED ABOUT AMONG THE LEAVES AND
  BRANCHES TILL SHE FOUND A LITTLE SILVER KNOB"       "    83

  "BABY SHOWED, OR TED _THOUGHT_ SHE DID, A QUITE
  EXTRAORDINARY LOVE FOR THE BOUQUETS HER LITTLE
  BROTHER ARRANGED FOR HER"                           "    98

  "OH DEAR, OH DEAR!" CRIES BEAUTY, JUMPING
  UP IN A FRIGHT, "HE'S COMING TO EAT ME"             "   133

  "THEY WERE NEATLY TACKED ON TO THE FEATHER
  CARD, WHICH HAD A VERY FINE EFFECT ON THE
  WALL OF THE MUSEUM"                                 "   170

  "MASTER TED, VERY WET INDEED, MADE HIS APPEARANCE
  WITH ROSY CHEEKS AND A GENERAL LOOK OF
  SELF-SATISFACTION"                                  "   194




CHAPTER I.

BABY TED.

   "Where did you get those eyes so blue?"
   "Out of the sky as I came through."


Christmas week a good many years ago. Not an "old-fashioned" Christmas
this year, for there was no snow or ice; the sky was clear and the air
pure, but yet without the sharp, bracing clearness and purity that
Master Jack Frost brings when he comes to see us in one of his nice,
bright, sunny humours. For he has humours as well as other people--not
only is he fickle in the extreme, but even _black_ sometimes, and he is
then, I can assure you, a most disagreeable visitor. But this Christmas
time he had taken it into his head not to come at all, and the world
looked rather reproachful and disconcerted. The poor, bare December
world--it misses its snow garment, so graciously hiding all imperfections
revealed by the absence of green grass and fluttering leaves; it
misses, too, its winter jewels of icicles and hoar frost. Poor old
world! What a great many Decembers you have jogged through; no wonder
you begin to feel that you need a little dressing up and adorning, like
a beauty no longer as young as she has been. Yet ever-young world, too!
Who, that gazes at March's daffodils and sweet April's primroses, can
believe that the world is growing old? Sometimes one could almost wish
that it would leave off being so exquisitely, so heartlessly young. For
the daffodils nod their golden heads, the primroses smile up through
their leafy nests--year after year, they never fail us. But the
children that loved them so; the little feet that trotted so eagerly
down the lanes, the tiny hands that gathered the flower-treasures with
such delight--where are they all? Men and women, some in far-off
lands, perhaps; or too wearied by cares and sorrows to look for the
spring flowers of long ago. And some--the sweetest of all, _these_
seem--farther away still, and yet surely nearer? in the happier land,
whose flowers our fancy tries in vain to picture.

But I am forgetting a little, I think, that I am going to tell about a
child to children, and that my "tellings" begin, not in March or April,
but at Christmas-time. Christmas-time, fortunately, does not depend on
Jack Frost for _all_ its pleasures. Christmas-boxes are just as welcome
without as with his presence. And never was a Christmas-box more welcome
than one that came to a certain house by the sea one twenty-sixth of
December, now a good many years ago.

Yet it was not a very big present, nor a very uncommon present. But it
was very precious, and, to _my_ thinking, very, very pretty; for it was
a wee baby boy. Such a dear wee baby, I think you would have called it;
so neat and tiny, and with such nice baby-blue eyes. Its hands and feet,
especially, were very delightful. "_Almost_ as pretty as newly-hatched
ducklings, aren't they?" a little girl I know once said of some baby
feet that she was admiring, and I really think she was right. No wonder
was it, that the happy people in the house by the sea were very proud of
their Christmas-box, that the baby's mother, especially, thought there
never was, never could be, anything so sweet as her baby Ted.

But poor baby Ted had not long to wait for his share of the troubles
which we are told come to all, though it does seem as if some people,
and children too, had more than others. He was a very delicate little
baby. His mother did not notice it at first because, you see, he was
the first baby she had ever had of her very own, and she was too pleased
to think him anything but perfect. And indeed he _was_ perfect of his
kind, only there was so little of him! He was like one of those very,
very tiny little white flowers that one has to hunt under the hedges
for, and which surprise you by their daintiness when you look at them
closely. Only such fragile daintiness needs tender handling, and these
little half-opened buds sometimes shrink from the touch of even the
kindest of mothers and nurses, and gently fade out of their sight to
bloom in a sunnier and softer clime than ours. And knowing this, a cold
chill crept round the heart of little Ted's mother when his nurse, who
was older and wiser than she, shook her head sadly as she owned that he
was about the tiniest baby she had ever seen. But the cold chill did not
stay there. Ted, who was scarcely a month old, gave a sudden smile of
baby pleasure as she was anxiously looking at him. He had caught sight
of some bright flowers on the wall, and his blue eyes had told him that
the proper thing to do was to smile at them. And his smile was to his
mother like the sun breaking through a cloud.

"I will not be afraid for my darling," said she. "God knows what is
best for him, but I think, I do _think_, he will live to grow a healthy,
happy boy. How could a Christmas child be anything else?"

And she was right. Day after day, week by week, month after month,
the wee man grew bigger and stronger. It was not all smooth sailing,
however. He had to fight pretty hard for his little share of the world
and of life sometimes. And many a sad fit of baby-crying made his
mother's heart ache as she asked herself if after all it might not be
better for her poor little boy to give up the battle which seemed so
trying to him. But no--that was not Master Ted's opinion at all. He
cried, and he would not go to sleep, and he cried again. But all
through the crying and the restlessness he was growing stronger and
bigger.

"The world strikes me as not half a bad place. I mean to look about me
in it and see all that there is to be seen," I could fancy his baby mind
thinking to itself, when he was held at his nursery window, and his
bright eyes gazed out unweariedly at the beautiful sights to be seen
from it--the mountains in the distance lifting their grand old heads to
the glorious sky, which Ted looked as if he knew a good deal about if he
chose to tell; the sea near at hand with its ever-changing charm and the
white sails scudding along in the sunlight. Ah yes, little Ted was in
the right--the world _is_ a very pretty place, and a baby boy whose
special corner of it is where his was, is a very lucky little person,
notwithstanding the pains and grievances of babyhood.

And before long Ted's fits of crying became so completely a thing of the
past that it was really difficult to believe in them. All his grumbling
and complaining and tears were got over in these first few months. For
"once he had got a start," as his nurse called it, never was there a
happier little fellow. Everything came right to him, and the few clouds
that now and then floated over his skies but made the sunshine seem the
brighter.

And day by day the world grew prettier and pleasanter to him. It had
been very pleasant to be carried out in his nurse's arms or wheeled
along in his little carriage, but when it came to toddling on the nice
firm sands on his own sturdy legs, and sometimes--when nurse would let
him--going "kite kite close" to the playful waves, and then jumping back
again when they "pertended," as he said, to wet his little feet--ah,
that was too delightful! And almost more delightful still was it to pick
up nice smooth stones on the beach and try how far he could throw them
into the sea. The sea was _so_ pretty and kind, he thought. It was for a
long time very difficult for him to believe that it could ever be angry
and raging and wild, as he used to hear said, for of course on wet or
stormy days little Ted never went down to the shore, but stayed at home
in his own warm nursery.

There were pretty shells and stones and seaweed to be found on this
delightful sea-shore. Ted was too little to care much for such quiet
business as gathering stones and shells, but one day when he was walking
with his mother she stopped so often to pick up and examine any that
took her fancy, that at last Ted's curiosity was awakened.

"What is thoo doing?" he said gravely, as if not quite sure that his
mother was behaving correctly, for _nurse_ always told him to "walk on
straight, there's a good boy, Master Ted," and it was a little puzzling
to understand that mammas might do what little boys must not. It was one
of the puzzles which Ted found there were a good many of in the world,
and which he had to think over a good deal in his own mind before it
grew clear to him. "What is thoo doing?" he asked.

"I am looking for pretty stones to take home and keep," replied his
mother.

"Pitty 'tones," repeated Ted, and then he said no more, but some new
ideas had wakened in his baby mind.

Nurse noticed that he was quieter than usual that afternoon, for already
Ted was a good deal of a chatterbox. But his eyes looked bright, and
plainly he had some pleasant thought in his head. The next day was fine,
and he went off with nurse for his walk. He looked a little anxious as
they got to the turn of the road, or rather to the joining of two roads,
one of which led to the sea, the other into country lanes.

"Thoo is doing to the sea?" he inquired.

"Yes, dear," nurse replied, and Ted's face cleared. When they got to the
shore he trotted on quietly, but his eyes were very busy, busier even
than usual. They looked about them in all directions, till at last they
spied what they wanted, and for half a minute or so nurse did not notice
that her little charge had left her side and was lagging behind.

"What are you about, Master Ted?" she said hastily, as glancing round
she saw him stooping down--not that he had very far to stoop, poor
little man--and struggling to lift some object at his feet.

"A 'tone," he cried, "a beauty big 'tone for Ted's muzzer," lifting in
his arms a big round stone--one of the kind that as children we used
to say had dropped from the moon--which by its nice round shape and
speckledness had caught his eye. "Ted will cally it hisself."

And with a very red face, he lugged it manfully along.

"Let me help you with it, dear," said nurse.

But "No, zank thoo," he replied firmly each time that the offer was
repeated. "Ted must cally it his own self."

And "cally" it he did, all the way. Nurse could only succeed in getting
him to put it down now and then to rest a bit, as she said, for the
stone was really so big a one that she was afraid of it seriously tiring
his arms. More than once she pointed out prettier and smaller stones,
and tried to suggest that his mother might like them quite as well, or
better; but no. The bigness, the heaviness even, was its charm; to do
something that cost him an effort for mother he felt vaguely was his
wish; the "lamp of sacrifice," of _self_-sacrifice, had been lighted in
his baby heart, never again to be extinguished.

And, oh, the happiness in that little heart when at last he reached his
mother's room, still lugging the heavy stone, and laid it at her feet!

"Ted broughtened it for thoo," he exclaimed triumphantly. And mother was
_so_ pleased! The stone took up its place at once on the mantelpiece as
an ornament, and the wearied little man climbed up on to his mother's
knee, with a look of such delight and satisfaction as is sweet to be
seen on a childish face.

So Ted's education began. He was growing beyond the birds and the
flowers already, though only a tiny man of three; and every day he
found new things to wonder at, and admire, and ask questions about, and,
unlike some small people of his age, he always listened to the answers.

After a while he found prettier presents to bring home to his mother
than big stones. With the spring days the flowers came back, and Ted,
who last year had been too little to notice them much, grew to like the
other turning of the road almost better than that which led to the sea.
For down the lanes, hiding in among the hedges, or more boldly smiling
up at him in the fields, he learnt to know the old friends that all
happy children love so dearly.

One day he found some flowers that seemed to him prettier than any he
had ever seen, and full of delight he trudged home with a baby bouquet
of them in his little hot hands. It was getting past spring into summer
now, and Ted felt a little tired by the time he and his nurse had
reached the house, and he ran in as usual to find his mother and relate
his adventures.

"Ted has broughtened some most beauty flowers," he eagerly cried, and
his mother stooped down to kiss and thank him, even though she was busy
talking to some ladies who had come to see her, and whom Ted in his
hurry had hardly noticed. He glanced round at them now with curiosity
and interest. He rather liked ladies to come to see his mother, only he
would have liked it still better if they would have just let him stay
quietly beside her, looking at them and listening to what they said,
without noticing him. But that way of behaving would not have seemed
kind, and as Ted grew older he understood this, and learnt that it was
right to feel pleased at being spoken to and even kissed.

"How well Ted is looking," said one of the ladies to his mother. "He is
growing quite a big, strong boy. And what pretty flowers he has brought
you. Are you very fond of flowers, my little man?"

"Ses," said Ted, looking up in the lady's face.

"The wild flowers about here are very pretty," said another of the
ladies.

"Very pretty," said his mother; "but it is curious, is it not, that
there are no cowslips in this country? They are such favourites of mine.
I have such pleasant remembrances of them as a child."

She turned, for Ted was tugging gently at her sleeve. "What is
towslips?" he asked.

"Pretty little yellow flowers, something like primroses," said his
mother.

"Oh!" said Ted. Then nurse knocked at the door, and told him his tea was
ready, and so he trotted off.

"Mother loves towslips," he said to himself two or three times over,
till his nurse asked him what he was talking about.

"But there's no cowslips here," said nurse, when he had repeated it.

"No," said Ted; "but p'raps Ted could find some. Ted will go and look
to-morrow with nursey."

"To-morrow's Sunday, Master Ted," said nurse; "I'll be going to church."

"What's church?" he asked.

"Church is everybody praying to God, all together in a big house. Don't
you remember, Master Ted?"

"Oh ses, Ted 'members," he replied. "What's praying to 'Dod, nurse?"

"Why, I am sure you know that, Master Ted. You must have forgotten. Ask
your mamma again."

Ted took her advice. Later in the evening he went downstairs to say
good-night. His mother was outside, walking about the garden, for it was
a beautiful summer evening. Ted ran to her; but on his way something
caught his eye, which sent a pang to his little heart. It was the bunch
of flowers he had gathered for her, lying withered already, poor little
things, on a bench just by the door, where she had laid them when saying
good-bye to her visitors. Ted stopped short; his face grew very red,
and big tears rose slowly to his eyes. He was carefully collecting
them together in his little hand when his mother called to him.

"Come, Ted, dear," she said; "what are you about?"

More slowly than his wont Ted trotted towards her. "Muzzer doesn't care
for zem," he said, holding out his neglected offering. "Poor f'owers
dies when they's leaved out of water."

"My darling," said his mother with real sorrow in her voice, "I am so
sorry, so very sorry, dear little Ted," and she stooped to kiss him.
"Give them to me now, and I will _always_ keep them."

Ted was quickly consoled.

"Zem's not towslips," he said regretfully. "Ted would like towslips for
muzzer." And then with a quick change of thought he went on, "What is
praying to 'Dod?" he said, looking up eagerly with his bright blue eyes.

"Praying to God means asking Him anything we want, and then He answers
us. Just as you ask me something, and I answer you. And if what we ask
is good for us, He gives it us. That is one way of answering our
prayers, but there are many ways. You will understand better when you
are bigger, dear little Ted."

Ted asked no more, but a bright pleased look came into his face. He was
fond of asking questions, but he did not ask silly ones, nor tease and
tease as some children do, and, as I said, when he got an answer he
thought it well over in his little head till he got to understand, or
thought he understood. Till now his mother had thought him too little to
teach him to say his prayers, but now in her own mind she began to feel
he was getting old enough to say some simple prayer night and morning,
and she resolved to teach him some day soon.

So now she kissed him and bade him good-night.

"God bless my little boy," she said, as she patted his head with its
soft fair hair which hung in pretty careless curls, and was cut across
the forehead in front like one of Sir Joshua Reynolds' cherubs. "God
bless my little boy," she said, and Ted trotted off again, still with
the bright look on his face.

He let nurse put him to bed very "goodly," though bed-time never came
very welcomely to the active little man.

"Now go to sleep, Master Ted, dear," said nurse as she covered him up
and then left the room, as she was busy about some work that evening.

Ted's room was next to his mother's. Indeed, if the doors were left
open, it was quite easy to talk one to the other. This evening his
mother happened to go upstairs not long after he had been tucked into
bed. She was arranging some things in her own room, moving about quietly
not to waken him, if, as she hoped, he had fallen asleep, for falling
asleep did not come so easily to Ted as to some children. He was too
busy in his mind, he had too many things to think about and wonder about
for his brain to settle itself quietly all in a minute. And if he had a
strong wish, I think it was that going-to-bed time should never come at
all!

For a minute or two no sound reached Ted's mother.

"I do hope he is asleep," she said to herself, but just then she stopped
short to listen. Ted was speaking to himself softly, but clearly and
distinctly. What could he be saying? His mother listened with a smile
on her face, but the smile grew into a sort of sweet gravity as she
distinguished the words. Little Ted was _praying_. He had not waited
for her to teach him--his baby-spirit had found out the simple way for
itself--he was just asking God for what he wanted.

"Please, dear 'Dod," he said, "tell me why thoo won't make towslips grow
in this countly. Muzzer loves zem so."

Then came a perfect silence. Ted seemed to be holding his breath in
expectation, and somehow his mother too stood as still as could be. And
after a minute or two the little voice began again.

"Please, dear 'Dod, _please_ do tell me," and then the silence returned
as before. It did not last so long, however, this time--not more than a
minute at most had passed when a sound of faint crying broke upon Ted's
mother's hearing--the little fellow had burst into tears.

Then his mother could stay away no longer.

"What is the matter, my boy?" she said; anxious, baby though he was, not
to make him feel ashamed of his innocent prayers by finding that she had
overheard what he had said when he thought himself alone.

"What is my Ted crying about?"

The tears, which had stopped for an instant, came back again.

"Muzzer," he said, "'Dod _won't_ 'peak to Ted. Ted p'ayed and p'ayed,
and Ted was kite kite kiet, but 'Dod didn't 'amswer.' Is 'Dod a'leep,
muzzer?"

"No, my boy, but what was it that Ted wanted so much?"

"Ted wanted towslips for muzzer, but 'Dod _won't_ amswer," he repeated
piteously.

A shower of kisses was mother's answer, and gently and patiently she
tried to make him understand the _seeming_ silence which had caused his
innocent tears. And, as was Ted's "way," he listened and believed. But
"some day," he said to his mother, "some day," would she not take him to
"a countly where towslips _did_ grow?"




CHAPTER II.

IN THE GARDEN.

  "Heigh ho! daisies and buttercups,
   Sweet wagging cowslips, they bend and they bow."
                                    SONGS OF SEVEN.


Down below the garden of Ted's pretty home flowed, or danced rather,
with a constant merry babble, a tiny stream. A busy, fussy stream it
was, on its way to the beautiful little river that, in its turn, came
rushing down through a mountain-gorge to the sea. I must tell you about
this mountain-gorge some time, or, if you like, we shall visit it with
Ted and his faithful companion, whom you have not yet heard about--his
father's great big Scotch collie dog, Cheviott.

You don't know what a dear dog he was, so brave, but so gentle and
considerate. He came of a brave and patient race, for you know "collies"
are the famous Scotch sheep-dogs, who to their shepherd masters are more
useful than any _two_-legged servant could be. And though I am not sure
that "Chevie" himself had ever had to do with "the keeping of sheep,"
like gentle Abel of old, yet, no doubt, as a baby doggie in his northern
home, he must have heard a good deal about it--no doubt, if his tongue
had had the power of speaking, he could have told his little master some
strange stories of adventures and narrow escapes which had happened to
members of his family. For up in the Border mountains where he was born,
the storms sometimes come on so suddenly that shepherd and flock are all
but lost, and but for their faithful collies, might never find their way
home again. Often, too, in the early spring-time, the poor little lambs
go astray, or meet with some accident, such as being caught in the
bushes and being unable to escape. What, then, would become of them but
for their four-footed guardian, who summons aid before it is too late,
and guides the gentle, silly lambkins and their mothers along the right
paths? I think Ted's father and mother did well when they chose for
their boy a collie like Cheviott for his companion.

Across the stream, just at the foot of the garden path which sloped down
from the house, a couple of planks were placed as a bridge. A narrow
bridge, and not a very firm one, it must be confessed, and perhaps
for that very reason--because there was something a little risky and
dangerous about it--Ted, true boy that he was, was particularly fond of
crossing it. He liked to stand on it for a minute or two on the way,
"jigging" up and down to feel the shaking and trembling of the planks,
but that, of course, was only a kind of playing with danger. I don't
think he _would_ have much liked a sudden tumble into the mischievous
little brook's cold waters, very cold it would have felt, though it
looked so browny bright and tempting. And many a bath in the brook Ted
would have had, had Chevie been as much carried away by his spirits as
his little master. For no sooner did the two set off running from the
top of the sloping garden path, than Ted would call out, "A race,
Chevie, a race! Who'll be at the bridge first?" And on he would run as
fast as his sturdy wee legs could carry him, Cheviott bounding beside
him with a great show of also doing _his_ best. But--and wasn't this
clever of Chevie?--just a little way on this side of the bridge he
would--not stop short, for that might have disappointed Ted and made
him feel as if they weren't having a _real_ race, but go gradually
more slowly, as if he felt he had no chance of gaining, so that little
Ted always reached the bridge first, and stood shouting with glee
and triumph. The first time or two that Ted's mother saw this little
performance she had been frightened, for if the dog had gone on at full
speed, or even only at luggage-train speed, beside the boy, he could not
have avoided tumbling him into the brook. But for anything of this kind
Cheviott was far too much of a gentleman, and after watching them once
or twice, Ted's mother felt perfectly satisfied that the little man
could not be better taken care of than by his four-footed friend.

There was another friend, too, who could very well be trusted to take
care of Ted, for though he had, of course, a very kind, good nurse in
the house, nurses are not able to be the whole day long in the garden,
nor are they always very fond of being much there. So, even though Ted
was still quite a little boy, it was very nice for him to have two such
good out-door friends as Cheviott and David the gardener, the other one
I am going to tell you of.

It was a beautiful spring day. Ted woke up early, and thought to himself
how nice and bright and sunny it was going to be in the garden. He was
rather in a hurry to be dressed, for there were several things he was
in a hurry to do, and the days, in summer time especially, never seemed
long enough for all he had before him. Just now these summer days seemed
really brimming over with nice things, for his big cousin Percy--at
least he was what _Ted_ counted a "big" cousin, and he was a good many
years older than Ted--was with him for the holidays, and though Percy
had some lessons to do, still they had a good deal of time together.

"Ted wonders if Percy is 'decked' yet," said Ted to his nurse. "Decked"
was the word he always used for "dressed," and he was often made fun of
for using it. His mind was very full of Percy this morning, for he had
only arrived the evening before, and besides the pleasure of having him
with him, which was _always_ a pleasure, there was the nice newness of
it,--the things he had to show Percy, the tricks Chevie had learnt, big
dog though he was, the letters and little words Ted had himself mastered
since Percy was last there.

"I don't know that Master Percy will be ready quite so early this
morning," said nurse. "He may be a little tired with travelling
yesterday."

"Ted doesn't _zink_ Percy will be tired," said Ted. "Percy wants to see
the garden. Percy is so big, isn't he, nurse? Percy can throw sticks up
in the sky _so_ high. Percy throwed one up in the sky up to heaven, so
high that it _never_ comed down again."

"Indeed," said nurse; "are you quite sure of that, Master Ted? Perhaps
it did come down again, but you didn't see it."

Nurse was a sensible person, you see. She did not all at once begin
saying to Ted that he was talking nonsense, or worse still that he was
telling stories. For very little children often "romance" in a sweet
innocent way which has nothing whatever to do with story-telling--I mean
_untruth_-telling, for it is better not to call untruths "stories," is
it not? The world and the people in it, and the things they see and
hear, are all new and strange to the little creatures so lately started
on their puzzling journey. What wonder that real and fancy are mixed up
together sometimes--that it is difficult to understand that the pretty
blue-bells do not sometimes tinkle in the moonlight, or that there are
no longer bears in the woods or fairies hidden among the grass? Perhaps
it would be better for us if we were _more_ ready to believe even such
passed-by fancies, than to be so quick as we sometimes are to accuse
others of wishing to deceive.

Ted looked at nurse thoughtfully.

"P'raps it did," he said. "P'raps it might have comed down again after
Ted was a'leep."

"I daresay it caught in a tree or something of that kind," said nurse,
as she finished brushing Ted's soft curls and lifted him off the chair
on which he had been standing, just as Percy put his head in at the door
to ask if Ted might have a run in the garden with him before breakfast.

"They're not down yet," said Percy, nodding his bright curly head in
the direction of Ted's father's and mother's room; "they're not ready.
Nurse, do let Ted come out with me for a bit before breakfast," and Ted
trotted off, his hand in Percy's, in utmost content.

Was there ever so clever and kind and wonderful a big boy as Percy
before? Was there ever one who knew so much about _everything_--cricket
and croquet and football; skating and fishing and climbing trees--things
on earth and things in water--what was there he didn't know? These
were the thoughts that were busy in Ted's little brain as he followed
kind Percy about the garden, that bright summer morning, chattering
incessantly, and yet ready enough to be silent when Percy took it
into his head to relate to his tiny adorer some of his school
experiences.

"Ted will go to school some day, Percy," he said half questioningly.

"Of course you will. I hope you'll come to my school if I've not left
by then. I could look after you, you know, and see that they didn't
bully you."

"What's 'bully'?" asked Ted.

"Oh, teasing, you know. Setting you down because you're a little chap,
and all that. Knocking you about if you don't look sharp. All those
kinds of things that big fellows do to small ones."

Ted opened his eyes. It was not very clear to him what Percy meant--it
was a new idea, and would have distressed him greatly had he quite taken
it in that big boys could be anything but good to little ones.

"Thoo doesn't knock Ted about, and thoo is big, Percy," he said,
remonstratingly.

"No, of course I don't, but that's different. You're like my brother,
you know."

"And bruvvers _couldn't_ knock theirselves about," said Ted with an air
of satisfaction.

"N-no, I suppose not," said Percy. Boy as he was, he felt somehow that
he could not bear to destroy little Ted's beautiful faith. "But never
mind about that just now," he added; "let's run down the bank and see
how the cabbages and cauliflowers are getting on. They were just put
in when I was here last;" and for some time both boys were intensely
interested in examining the state of the vegetable beds.

"Ted likes f'owers best," said the child, after a few moments' silence.
"When Ted----"

"Why don't you say 'I' and 'I like,' Teddy?" said Percy. "You're getting
such a big boy--four years old."

"Ted _means_ I," persisted the small man. "_I_ sall have all f'owers in
Ted's garden, when me is big."

Percy was obliged to leave off what he was about--hunting for the slugs
and caterpillars among the cabbages--in order that he might stand still
and laugh.

"I'm afraid you wouldn't get the prize for grammar at our school, Ted,"
he said. But Ted only laughed too.

"I haven't learnt grammar," he said slowly and distinctly. "But please,
Percy, Ted doesn't like cabbages. Come and see the f'owers. There was
lots of c'ocodiles at that side. Ted likes zem best of all, but zem's
done now."

"_Crocodiles_," said Percy. "What can crocodiles be?"

"Little f'owers with pointy leaves," said Ted. "P'raps it isn't
c'ocodiles but somesing like coc--coco----"

"Crocuses perhaps," said Percy, as they made their way up to the house.
"Yes, they're very pretty, but they're soon done."

"When I'm big I'll have a garden where they'll _never_ be done," said
Ted. "I'll have c'ocodiles and towslips for muzzer and--and----"

"Come in to breakfast, my man," called out his father from the
dining-room. "What have you been about this morning?"

"We'se been in the garden," said Ted, "and Percy's been 'samining the
cabbages. He's caught slugs upon slugs, worms upon worms, earwigs upon
earwigs."

"My dear little boy," said Ted's father, though he couldn't help
laughing, "you mustn't learn to exaggerate."

"What's 'saggerate?" began Ted, but looking round another idea caught
him. "Where's muzzer?" he said suddenly.

"Mother is rather tired this morning," said his father. "Eat your
breakfast, dear," and then he turned to talk to Percy and ask him
questions as to how he was getting on at school.

For a minute or two neither of them noticed Ted. He sat quietly at his
place, his bowl of bread and milk before him, but he made no attempt to
eat it. Then Percy happened to see him.

"Aren't you hungry, Ted?" he said.

Ted looked up with his two blue eyes full of tears.

"Ses," he said, "Ted's hungry. But if muzzer doesn't come down Ted can't
eat. Ted won't eat nothing all day, and he'll die."

"Not quite so bad as that," said his father quietly, for he did not
want Ted to see that it was difficult not to smile at his funny way of
speaking, "for see here is mother coming."

Ted danced off his seat with pleasure.

"It's dedful when thoo's not here," he said feelingly, and now the bread
and milk was quickly despatched. "When I'm big," he continued, in the
intervals of the spoonfuls, "I'll have a house as big--as big as a
mountain," his eyes glancing out of the window, "and all the little boys
in the world shall live there with all their favers and muzzers, and
Percies, and everybodies, and nobody shall never go away, not to school
or bidness, or nothing, so that they'll all be togever always."

Ted looked round for approval, and then took another spoonful.

"What a nice place you'll make of the world, my boy, when you're big,"
said his father.

"Ses," said Ted with satisfaction.

"But as that time hasn't come yet, I'm afraid I _must_ go to my
'bidness,'" his father went on. For he had to go several times a week a
good way into the country, to see that his men were all doing their work
properly. "And Percy must go with me to-day," he went on, "for he needs
some new clothes, and I shall be driving through A----," which was the
nearest town to which they lived.

Percy's face looked very pleased, but Ted's grew rather sad.

"Never mind, Teddy," whispered Percy. "We'll have lots of days. You must
have a good game with Chevie to keep up your spirits."

"And David is going to cut the grass to-day," said his father, "so you
will have plenty of fun."

"But Ted must be careful," said his mother; "don't touch David's sharp
tools, Ted. I was quite frightened the other day," she added; "Ted was
trying to open and shut those great big shears for clipping the
borders."

"Zem was sticked fast," said Ted. "Zem opens kite easy sometimes."

"Well, don't you touch them any way," said his mother, laughing. But
though Ted said "No," I don't feel sure that he really heard what
his mother was saying. His wits were already off, I don't know where
to--running after Cheviott perhaps, or farther away still, up among the
little clouds that were scudding across the blue sky that he caught
sight of out of the window.

And then his father and Percy set off, and his mother went away about
her housekeeping, sending Ted up to the nursery, and telling him that he
might ask nurse to put his big blouse on, so that he might play about
the garden without risk of soiling his clothes.

Ted felt, for him, a very little sad as he trotted out into the garden.
He had hoped for such a nice merry day with Percy. But low spirits never
troubled him long. Off he set with Cheviott for the race down to the
little bridge, always the first bit of Ted's programme, and careful
Chevie as usual pulled up in plenty of time to avoid any risk of
toppling his master into the brook. Arrived on the bridge, Ted stood
still and "jigged" a little as usual. Then he peered down at the shiny
water with the bright brown pebbles sparkling up through it, and
wondered what it would feel like to be a little fish.

"Little fisses," he said to himself, "always has each other to play
with. They don't go to school, and they hasn't no bidness, nor no cooks
that they must be such a long time ordering the dinners with, nor--nor
beds to make and stockings to mend. I wish nurse would 'tum out this
morning. Ted doesn't like being all alone. Ted would like somebody
littler to play with, 'cos then they wouldn't go to school or out d'ives
with papa."

But just as he was thinking this, he caught sight of some one coming
across the garden, and his ideas took another turn at once.

"David, old David," he cried, "is thoo going to cut the grass? Do let me
come and help thoo, David."

And he ran back across the bridge again and made his way to David as
fast as he could.

"Good morning, Master Ted," said the gardener. "Is it beautiful day,
Master Ted, to be sure. Yes indeed."

"Ses," agreed Ted. "Good morning, old David. I'm going to stay out in
the garden a long time, a tevible long time, 'cos it's such a sprendid
lovely day. What is thoo going to do, David? Can't Ted help thoo?"

"I am going to cut the grass, Master Ted, but I not be very long--no;
for it is only the middle that's be cut. All the rest stand for hay, to
be sure. Ay, indeed."

"And when will the hay be cuttened?" inquired Ted.

"That's be as Master order, and not as Master can choose neither--no,"
said David. "He not able to make for the sun to shine; no, indeed; nor
the rain neither,--no."

"'_Dod_ sends rain and sun," said Ted, reverently, but yet looking at
David with a sort of curiosity.

"Well, indeed you are right, Master Ted. Yes, yes. But I must get on
with my work. God gives us work to do, too; ay, indeed; and them as not
work never expect to eat, no, never; they not care for their victual
anyhow if they not work for it. No."

Ted looked rather puzzled. "Ted eats," he said,--"not victuals--Ted
doesn't know that meat--but bread and butter, and tea, and potatoes,
and rice pudding, and meat, and _sometimes_ 'tawberry jam and apple pie
and--and--lots of things. And Ted likes zem very much, but him doesn't
work."

"I not know for that, Master Ted," said David, "is it all kinds of work;
ay, indeed; and I see you very near always busy--dear me, yes; working
very good, Master Ted--ay."

  Illustration:
  "I wish thoo'd let me help thoo to cut the grass."--P. 32.

"I _like_ to be busy. I wish thoo'd let me help thoo to cut the grass,"
said Ted, eyeing David wistfully, as he started his big scythe, for the
old gardener knew nothing of mowing machines, and would most likely
have looked upon them with great contempt. But he stopped short a moment
to look down at wee Ted, staring up at him and wishing to be in his
place.

"No, indeed, Master Ted _bach_!" he said; "you soon have your cliver
little legs and arms cut to pieces, if you use with my scythe, Master
Ted--ay, indeed, d'rectly. It look easy, to be sure, but it not so easy
even for a cliver man like you, Master Ted--no, indeed. But I tell you
what you shall do. You shall help to make the grass to a heaps, and then
I put it in a barrow and wheel it off. Ay, indeed; that be the best."

This proposal was very much to Ted's taste. Chevie and he, at a safe
distance from David's scythe, thought it great fun to toss about the
soft fine grass and imagine they were helping David tremendously. And
after a while, when Chevie began to think he had had enough of it, and
with a sort of condescending growl by way of explanation, stretched
himself out in the sunshine for a little forenoon sleep, David left off
cutting, and, with Ted's help of course, filled the barrow and wheeled
it off to the corner where the grass was to lie to be out of the way. It
was beginning to be rather hot, though still quite early, and Ted's face
grew somewhat red with his exertions as he ran beside David.

"You better ride now; jump in, Master Ted," said the gardener, when his
barrow was empty. So he lifted him in and wheeled him back to the lawn,
which was _quite_ after Ted's own heart.

"Isn't thoo going to cut with thoo's big scissors?" said Ted after a
while.

"It is want oiling," said David, "and I forget to do them. I shall leave
the borders till after dinner,--ay, sure," and he was going on with his
scything when suddenly a voice was heard from the house calling him.

"David, David, you're wanted," said the voice, and then the cook made
her appearance at the side of the house. "There's a note to take
to----."

They could not hear to where, but David had to go. He glanced round him,
and, afraid of Ted's experiments, shouldered his scythe and walked off
with it for fear of accidents.

"Are you going in, Master Ted?" he asked.

"Nurse is going to call me when she's ready," said Ted composedly, and
knowing that the little fellow often played about by himself for a
while, good David left him without any more anxiety. He had got his
scythe safe, he never thought of the big pair of shears he had left
lying in the grass!

Now these gigantic "scissors" as he called them had always had a
wonderful attraction for Ted. He used to think how funny they would look
beside the very tiny fine pair his mother worked with--the pretty
scissors that lay in her little case lined with velvet and satin. Ted
had not, in those days, heard of Gulliver and his strange adventures,
but if he had, one might have imagined that to his fancy the two pairs
of scissors were like a Brobdignag and a Lilliputian. And no sooner had
David disappeared than unfortunately the great scissors caught his eyes.

"Zem's still sticked fast," he said to himself. "David says zem needs
oil. Wiss I had some oil. P'raps the fissy oil to make Ted grow big
would do. But the scissors is big enough. Ted wonders if the fissy oil
would make zem bigger. Zem _couldn't_ be much bigger."

Ted laughed a little to himself at the funny fancy. Then he sat and
stared at the scissors. What did they remind him of? Ah yes, they were
like the shears of "the great, long, red-legged scissor man," in the
wonderful story of "Conrad Suck-a-thumb," in his German picture-book.
Almost, as he gazed at them, it seemed to Ted that the figure of the
scissors man would suddenly dart out from among the bushes and seize
his property.

"But him wouldn't cut _Ted's_ fumbs," thought the little man to himself,
"'cos Ted _never_ sucks zem. What a pity the scissors is sticked fast!
Poor David can't cut with zem. P'raps Ted could oilen zem for poor
David! Ted will go and get some fissy oil."

No sooner thought than done. Up jumped Ted, and was starting off to
the house when a growl from Cheviott made him stop. The dog had just
awakened, and seeing his little master setting off somewhere thought it
his business to inquire where to and why. He lifted his head and gave it
a sort of sleepy shake, then growled again, but gently of course.

"What did thoo say, Chevie?" said Ted. "Did thoo want to know where I
was going? Stay here, Chevie. Ted will be back in a minute--him's on'y
going to get some fissy oil to oilen poor David's scissors."

And off he set, though a third growl from Cheviott followed him as he
ran.

"What does Chevie mean?" thought Ted. "P'raps him's thinking muzzer said
Ted mustn't touch zem big scissors. But muzzer on'y meant Ted wasn't to
cutten with zem. Muzzer would _like_ Ted to help poor David," and, his
conscience quite at rest, he trotted on contentedly.




CHAPTER III.

WISHES AND FEARS.

  _Children._ "Here are the nails, and may we help?
    _Jessie._ You shall if I should want help.
  _Children._ Will you want it then?
              Please want it--we like helping."


There was no one in the nursery, fortunately for Ted's plans.
_Un_fortunately rather, we should perhaps say, for if nurse had been
there, she would have asked for what he wanted the little bottle which
had held the cod-liver oil, that he had lately left off taking, but of
which a few drops still remained.

Ted climbed on to a chair and reached the shelf where it stood, and
in two minutes he was off again, bottle in hand, in triumph. He found
Cheviott lying still, where he had left him; he looked up and yawned
as Ted appeared, and then growled with an air of satisfaction. It was
sometimes a little difficult for Chevie to decide exactly how _much_
care he was to take of Ted. After all, a little two-legged boy that
could talk was not _quite_ the same as a lamb, or even a sheep. He
could not run round him barking, to prevent his trotting where he
wished--there were plainly some things Ted had to do with and understood
which Chevie's dog-experience did not reach to.

So Cheviott lay there and blinked his honest eyes in the sunshine, and
stared at Ted and wondered what he was after now! For Ted was in a very
tip-top state of delight! He sat down cross-legged on the grass, drew
the delicious big shears to him--they were heavy for him even to
pull--and uncorking the bottle of "fissy" oil, began operations.

"Zem _is_ sticked fast, to be soore," he said to himself, adopting
David's favourite expression, as he tugged and tugged in vain. "If thoo
could hold one side and Ted the other, they would soon come loosened,"
he observed to Cheviott. But Cheviott only growled faintly and blinked
at his master sleepily, and after a good deal more tugging Ted did
manage to open the shears, which indeed at last flew apart so sharply
that the boy toppled over with the shock, and rolled for a moment or two
on the grass, though happily not on the shears, before he recovered his
balance.

Laughing merrily, he pulled himself up again. Luckily the bottle had not
been overturned. Ted poured a drop or two carefully on to his fingers,
quite regardless of the fishy smell, and proceeded to anoint the
scissors. This he repeated several times, polishing them all over till
they shone, but not understanding that _the_ place where the oil was
needed was the hinge, he directed the best of his attention to the
general shininess.

Then he sat and looked at them admiringly.

"_Won't_ David be p'eased?" he said. "Zem's oilened all over now. Ted
must see if they don't sticken fast now."

With nearly as much difficulty as he had had to open them, Ted now
managed to shut them.

"Zem's better," thought the busy little man, "but Ted must see how they
cut."

He laid them flat on the grass, at a place where the blades had not been
completely sheared by the scythe. Tug number one--the oil had really
done some good, they opened more easily--tug number two, behold them
gaping--tug number three, they bite the grass, and Ted is just going to
shout in triumph when a quick shock of pain stabs through him. He had
been kneeling almost _on_ the shears, and their cruel jaws had snipped,
with the grass, the tender fleshy part of his poor little leg!

It was not the pain that frightened him so much as the feeling held fast
by the now dreadful scissors.

"David, David," he cried, "oh, please come. Nurse, please come. Ted has
cuttened hisself."

His little voice sounded clear and shrill in the summer quiet of the
peaceful garden, and nurse, who had been hastening to come out to him,
heard it from the open window. David too was on his way back, and poor
Ted was soon released. But it was a bad cut--he had to be carried
into the house to have it bathed and sponged and tenderly bound up
by mother's fingers. He left off crying when he saw how sorry mother
looked.

"Ted is _so_ sorry to t'ouble thoo," he said.

"And mother is sorry for Ted," she replied. "But, my dear little boy,"
she went on, when the poor leg was comfortable and its owner forgetting
its pain on mother's knee, "don't you remember that mother told you not
to touch David's tools?"

"Oh ses," he replied. "Ted wouldn't touch zem for hisself, but it was to
_help David_," and the innocent confidence with which he looked up in
her face went to his mother's heart.

"But _still_, dear Ted, you must try to understand that what mother
says, you must do exactly. Mother likes you to be kind and helping to
people, but still mother knows better than you, and that is why, when
she tells you things, you must remember to do what she says."

Ted looked grave and a little puzzled, and seeing this his mother
thought it best to say no more just then. The lesson of obedience was
one that Ted found rather puzzling, you see, but what his mother had
said had made a mark in his mind. He thought about it often, and as he
grew bigger other things happened, as you will hear, to make him think
of it still more.

It was rather a trial to Ted not to be able to run about as usual that
afternoon, for had he done so, the cut might have begun to bleed again,
so he had to sit still in the nursery, looking out at the window and
hoping and hoping that Percy would soon come back. Once David and his
barrow passed underneath, and the gardener called up to know if Master
Ted's leg was better. Ted shook his head rather dolefully.

"Him's better," he said, "but Ted can't run about. Ted's so sad, David.
Muzzer's got letters to write and Percy's out."

A kind thought struck David. He went round to the drawing-room window
and tapped at it gently. Ted's mother was writing there. Might he
wheel Master Ted in his barrow to the part of the garden where he was
working?--he would take good care of him--"the little gentleman never
cut himself if I with him--no, indeed; I make him safe enough."

And Ted's mother consented gladly. So in a few minutes he was
comfortably installed on a nice heap of dry grass, with Cheviott close
beside him and David near at hand.

"You never touch my tools again, Master Ted, for a bit; no, to be sure;
do you now?" said David.

"No," said Ted. "Muzzer says I mustn't. But wasn't the big scissors
nicely oilened, David?"

"Oh, fust rate--ay," said David. "Though I not say it is a cliver
smell--no. I not like the smell, Master Ted."

"Never mind," replied Ted reassuringly. "Ted will ask muzzer for some
cock-alone for thoo. Thoo can put some on the scissors."

"What's that, Master Ted?" inquired David, who was not at all above
getting information out of his little master.

"Cock-alone," repeated Ted. "Oh, it's somesing that smells very nice. I
don't know what it is. I thing it must be skeesed out of f'owers. I'll
run and get thoo some now, David, this minute," and he was on the point
of clambering to his feet when the stiff feeling of his bandaged leg
stopped him. "Oh, I forgot," he exclaimed regretfully.

"Yes indeed, Master Ted. You not walk a great deal to-day, to be
sure--no, indeed--for a bit; ay."

Ted lay still for a minute or two. He was gazing up at the sky, which
that afternoon was very pure and beautiful.

"Who paints the sky, David?" he said suddenly.

"Well indeed, Master Ted, I not think you ask me such a foolis'
question, Master Ted _bach_!" said David. "Who's make a sky and a sea
and everything so?"

"'Dod," said Ted. "Oh, I know that. But I thoughtened p'raps 'Dod
put somebody up there to paint it. It was _so_ pitty last night,
David--_all_ tolours--Ted tan't say zem all. Why isn't there many
tolours now, David?"

"I not know for sure," said David, stopping a moment in his work and
looking up at the sky.

"Ted _thought_," continued the little fellow slowly, "Ted _thought_
p'raps 'Dod's paints was getting done. Could that be why?"

David was rather matter-of-fact, and I don't know that that made him
any the worse a companion for Ted, whose brain was already quite full
enough of fancies. So he did not smile at Ted's idea, but answered quite
gravely,

"No indeed, Master Ted, I not think that untall."

"If on'y Ted could fly," the child continued in a minute or two, as just
then a flock of birds made their graceful way between his gazing eyes
and the clear blue vault above. "How pittily birds flies, don't they,
David? If Ted could fly he'd soon find out all about the sky and
everysing. And it wouldn't matter then that him had hurt his leg.
_Couldn't_ Ted learn to fly, David?"

Ted was soaring too far above poor David's head already for him to know
what to answer. What could he say but "No indeed, Master Ted," again? He
had never heard tell of any one that could fly except the angels. For
David was fond of going to church, or chapel rather, and though he could
not read Ted's Bible, he could read his own very well.

"Angels," said Ted. The word started his busy fancy off in a fresh
direction. He lay looking up still, watching now the lovely little
feathery clouds that began to rise as the sun declined, and fancying
they were angels with wings softly floating hither and thither in the
balmy air. He watched one little group, which seemed to him like three
angels with their arms twined together, so long, that at last his eyes
grew rather tired of watching and their little white blinds closed over
them softly. Little Ted had fallen asleep.

"So, so; dear me, he tired," said old David, as, surprised at the
unusual silence, he turned to see what Ted was about. "Bless him, he
tired very bad with his cliver talk and the pain; ay--but, indeed, he
not one to make fuss--no. He a brave little gentleman, Master Ted--ay,
indeed," and the kind old man lifted the boy's head so that he should
lie more comfortably, and turned his wheelbarrow up on one side to shade
him from the sun.

Ted smiled in his sleep as David looked at him. Shall I tell you what
made him smile? In his sleep he had got his wish. He dreamt that he was
flying. This was the dream that came to him.

He fancied he was running down the garden path with Chevie, when all at
once Chevie seemed to disappear, and where he had been there stood a
pretty snow-white lamb. With an eager cry Ted darted forward to catch
it, and laid his hand on its soft woolly coat, when--it was no lamb but
a little cloud he was trying to grasp. And wonderful to say, the little
cloud seemed to float towards him and settle itself on his shoulders,
and then all of himself Ted seemed to find out that it had turned into
wings!

"Ted can fly, Ted can fly!" he cried with delight, or _thought_ he
cried. In reality it was just then that David lifted his head, and
feeling himself moving, Ted fancied it was the wings lifting him upward,
and gave the pleased smile which David noticed. Fly! I should think so.
He mounted and mounted, higher and higher, the white wings waving him
upwards in the most wonderful way, till at last he found himself right
up in the blue sky where he had so wished to be. And ever so many--lots
and lots of other little white things were floating or flying about,
and, looking closely at them, Ted saw that they were not little clouds
as they seemed at first, but wings--all pairs of beautiful white wings,
and dear little faces were peeping out from between them. They were all
little children like himself.

"Come and play, Ted, come and play. Ted, _Ted_, TED!" they cried so
loud, that Ted opened his eyes--his real waking eyes, not his dream
ones--sharply, and there he was, lying on the soft grass heap, not up
in the sky among the cloud-children at all!

At first he was rather disappointed. But as he was thinking to himself
whether it was worth while to try to go to sleep again and go on with
his dream, he heard himself called as before, "Ted, _Ted_, TED."

And looking up he forgot all about everything else when he saw, running
down the sloping banks as fast as his legs would carry him, Percy, his
dear Percy!

Ted jumped up--even his wounded leg couldn't keep him still now.

"Was it thoo calling me, Percy?" he said. "I was d'eaming, do thoo
know--_such_ a funny d'eam? But I'm so glad thoo's come back, Percy.
Oh, Ted _is_ so glad."

Then all the day's adventures had to be related--the accident with the
scissors and the drive in the wheelbarrow, and the funny dream. And in
his turn Percy had to tell of all he had seen and done and heard--the
shops he had been at in the little town, and what he had had for
luncheon and--and--the numberless trifles that make up the interest
of a child's day.

"Does thoo think there's any shop where we could get _wings_, Percy?"
asked Ted. He had the vaguest ideas as to what "shops" were, but Percy
had been telling him of the beautiful little boats he had seen at a
toy-shop in the market-place, "boats with white sails and all rigged
just like real ones;" and if boats with white sails were to be got, why
not white wings?

"Wings!" exclaimed Percy. "What sort of wings do you mean, Teddy?"

"Wings for little boys," Ted explained. "Like what I was d'eaming about.
It would be so nice to fly, Percy."

"Beautiful, wouldn't it?" agreed Percy. "But nobody can fly, Ted. Nobody
_could_ make wings that would be any use for people. People can't fly."

"But little boys, Percy," persisted Ted. "Little boys isn't so very
much bigger than birds. Oh, you don't know how _lovely_ it feels to fly.
Percy, _do_ let us try to make some wings."

But Percy's greater experience was less hopeful.

"I'm afraid it would be no use," he said. "People have often tried. I've
heard stories of it. They only tumbled down."

"Did they hurt themselves?" asked Ted.

"I expect so," Percy replied.

Just then David, who was passing by, stopped to tell the boys that some
one was calling them in from the house.

"Is it your papa, Master Ted; yes, I think," he said.

Ted's leg was feeling less stiff and painful now. He could walk almost
as well as usual. When they got to the house-door his father was waiting
for him. He had heard of Ted's misfortune, and there was rather a comical
smile on his face as he stooped to kiss his little boy.

"I want you to come in to see Mr. Brand," he said. "He says he hasn't
seen you for a long time, little Ted."

Ted raised his blue eyes to his father's face with a rather puzzled
expression.

"Whom's Mr. Brand?" he asked.

"Why, don't you remember him, Teddy?" said Percy. "That great big
gentleman--so awfully tall."

Ted did not reply, but he seemed much impressed.

"Is him a diant?" he asked, gravely.

"Very nearly, I should say," said Percy, laughing, and then, as he had
already seen Mr. Brand, who had met Ted's father on his way back from
A----, Percy ran off in another direction, and Ted followed his father
into the drawing-room.

Mr. Brand was sitting talking to Ted's mother, but just as the door
opened, he rose from his seat and came forward.

"I was just going to ask you if--ah! here's your little boy," he said
to Ted's father. Then, sitting down again, he drew Ted between his knees
and looked kindly at the small innocent face. He was very fond of
children, but he did not know much about them, and Ted, looking and
feeling rather overawed, stood more silently than usual, staring
seriously at the visitor.

He was very tall and very big. Whether he quite came up to Ted's idea of
a "diant" I cannot tell. But queer fancies began to chase each other
round the boy's brain. There had been a good deal to excite and upset
the little fellow--at no time a strong child--that day, and his dream
when lying asleep on the grass had added to it all. And now, as he stood
looking up at big Mr. Brand, a strange confusion of ideas filled his
mind--of giants tall enough to reach the sky, to catch and bring down
some of the cloud-wings Ted wished so for, interspersed with wondering
if it was "fissy oil" that had made this big man so very big. If he,
Ted, were to take a great, great lot of fissy oil, would _he_ grow as
big and strong? Would he be able to cut the grass like David perhaps, to
run faster than Percy--to--to I don't know what--for at this moment Mr.
Brand's voice brought him back from his fancies.

"What an absent-minded little fellow he is," Mr. Brand was saying, for
he had been speaking to Ted two or three times without the child's
paying any attention.

"Not generally," said Ted's mother. "He is usually very wide-awake to
all that is going on. What are you thinking of, Ted, dear?"

"Yes," said Mr. Brand. "Tell us what you've got in your head. Are you
thinking that I'm a very tiny little man--the tiniest little man you
ever saw?"

"No," said Ted solemnly, without the least smile, at which his mother
was rather surprised. For, young though he was, Ted was usually very
quick at seeing a joke. But he just said "No," and stared again at Mr.
Brand, without another word.

"Then what were you thinking--that I'm the very _biggest_ man you ever
did see?"

"Ses," said Ted, gravely still, but with a certain light in his eyes
which encouraged Mr. Brand to continue his questions.

"And what more? Were you wishing you were as big as I am?"

Ted hesitated.

"I'd _rather_ fly," he said. "But Percy says nobody can fly. I'd like
to be big if I could get up very high."

"How high?" said Mr. Brand. "Up to the top of the mountain out there?"

"Is the mountain as high as the clouds?" asked Ted.

"Yes," said Mr. Brand; "when you're up at the very top, you can look
down on the clouds."

Ted looked rather puzzled.

"I'll tell you what," the gentleman went on, amused by the expression of
the child's face, "I'll tell you what--as I'm so big, supposing I take
you to the top of the mountain--we'll go this very afternoon. I'll take
a jug of cold water and a loaf of bread, and leave it with you there so
that you'll have something to eat, and then you can stay there quite
comfortable by yourself and find out all you want to know. You'd like
that, wouldn't you? to be all by yourself on the top of the mountain?"

He looked at Ted in a rather queer way as he said it. The truth was that
Mr. Brand, who though so big was not very old, was carried away by the
fun (to _him_) of watching the puzzled look on the child's face, and
forgot that what to him was a mere passing joke might be very different
to the tender little four-years-old boy.

Ted's face grew rather white, he edged away a little from this strange
gentleman, whom he could not make out, but who was so big that Ted felt
it impossible to doubt his being able to do anything he wished.

"You'd like that, wouldn't you?" he repeated, quite gravely, and
glancing at Ted with slightly knitted brows which made the boy suddenly
think of some of the "ogre" stories he had heard.

"No," said Ted bluntly. But he was afraid to say more. Ogres didn't
like to be contradicted, and perhaps--_perhaps_ this strange man really
thought he _would_ like it, and really meant to please him. Any way, it
would never do to answer rudely, though Ted's face grew still paler,
when his glance fell on the mountain peak clearly to be seen out of the
window from where he stood, and a little shiver ran through him when he
thought that perhaps he would have to go, whether he liked it or not. He
edged away still farther, but it was no use. Mr. Brand had put his arm
round him, and there was no getting away, when suddenly a noise outside
the window caught the gentleman's attention and he started up. It was
his dog barking loudly, and Mr. Brand, fearing he might have got into
some mischief, stepped out through the glass door to see. Ted was on
the alert, and before any one in the room had noticed him he was off.

Where should he go to? He dared not hide in the garden, for there he
might be seen, especially as Mr. Brand was running about after his dog;
he would not go up to the nursery, for nurse would ask him why he had
not stayed downstairs; he did not even wish to find Percy, for though he
could not have explained why, he felt that it would be impossible for
him to tell _any one_ of the strange terror that Mr. Brand's joke had
awakened. He felt ashamed of it, afraid too that if, as he vaguely
thought might be the case, the offer had been made in real earnest and
with a wish to please him, his dislike to it would be ungrateful and
unkind. Indeed poor Ted was more troubled than he ever remembered to
have been in his whole little life--he could think of nothing for it but
to hide till all danger was past.

A brilliant idea struck him--he would go and pay a visit to cook! It was
not very often he went into the kitchen, and no one would look for him
there. And cook was kind, very kind when not very busy. So with a slight
shudder as, running past the open front-door, he caught sight of the
well-known mountain peak, frowning at him, as it seemed now, for the
first time in his life, Ted made his way to cook's quarters.

She was not in the kitchen, but hearing some one coming, she called out
from the back kitchen where she was. That was better still, every step
the farther from the drawing-room, or from Mr. Brand rather, was a gain.
So Ted trotted into the back kitchen, and to prevent cook's thinking
there was anything the matter asked her if he might play with the cat.
He found a piece of string, to which cook tied a cork, and as pussy was
really more of a kitten than a cat, he amused himself for some time by
making her run after it, whistling now and then to keep up his heart,
though had cook looked at him closely she could have seen how white he
was, and how every now and then he threw frightened glances over his
shoulder.

"Your leg's better, Master Ted?" said cook.

"Oh ses, zank thoo," said Ted. "Him's much better."

"You'll have to take care never to touch sharp tools again, won't you?"
she went on, as she bustled about with her work.

"Ses," he said again. But he did not speak with his usual heartiness,
and cook, who, like all the servants, loved the bright, gentle little
fellow, looked at him rather anxiously. Suddenly a sound was
heard--wheels on the gravel drive.

"What's that, cook?" said Ted, starting.

"Only the gentleman's dog-cart--the gentleman that's been to see your
papa. He's going away," said cook composedly.

Ted hurried into the kitchen. From the window the drive could be seen by
big people, though not by him.

"Lift me up on the table, please, cook," he said, and when cook
good-naturedly did so, and he saw the giant really, actually driving
away, Ted could almost have cried with pleasure. But his fears and his
relief he kept in his own little heart.

"Zank thoo, cook," he said gravely, but with the pretty courtesy he
never forgot. "Zank thoo, and please lift me down again."

"He's a funny little fellow," said cook to herself, as she watched Ted
trot off. "I wonder what he'd got in his mind, bless him."

Ted reappeared in the drawing-room.

"Where have you been, dear?" said his mother. "We were looking about for
you to say good-bye to Mr. Brand. Where did you go to?"

"Ted were in the kitchen, 'peaking to cook," he replied.

"But why did you go away, dear, while Mr. Brand was here?" asked his
mother. "Were you frightened of his dog?"

"No," said Ted, "Ted's never frightened of dogs."

"No, dear, I know you're not," said his mother. But she did not feel
satisfied. Her little boy did not look the same as usual somehow. Still
she felt it was better to ask no more--after a while Ted would perhaps
tell her of himself. And she did well, for it would have been almost
impossible for him to tell his mingled feelings.

"Muzzer likes that big man," he was thinking to himself. "Muzzer thinks
he's kind. It's naughty and unkind of Ted to be frightened," and so the
loyal little man kept silence.

And it was not for a long time--not till Ted himself had learnt to
"understand" a little better, that even his mother understood the
whole.




CHAPTER IV.

THE STORY OF SUNNY.

  "Of course he was the giant,
   With beard as white as snow."


But whenever Mr. Brand, poor man, came to call, Ted was sure in some
mysterious way to disappear. After a while his mother began to notice
it, though, as Mr. Brand did not come very often, she did not do so all
at once. She noticed, however, another thing which she was sorry for.
Ted took a dislike to the big mountain. It was a great pity, for before
that he had been so fond of it--so fond of watching the different
expressions, "looks" Ted called them, that it wore according to the time
of day, or the time of year, or the weather. And his father and mother
had been pleased to see him so "noticing," for such a little boy; they
thought it showed, as indeed it did, that he was likely to grow into a
happy-minded and happy-hearted man.

But now it was quite different. When he sat on his mother's knee in the
drawing-room he would turn his little face to the side away from the
window so that he should not see the towering mountain-head. He would
never laugh at his old friend's putting on his nightcap of mist, as he
used to do, and all his pretty fancies about being able to reach the
dear little stars if he were up on the top peak of all, were spoilt.

"Something has frightened Ted," said his mother to his father one day.
"I wonder what it can be. I know _you_ wouldn't frighten him, dear," she
added, turning to Percy who was in the room, though of course _Ted_ was
not there, otherwise his mother would not have said it, "but still, has
there been anything in your play that could have done so? Have you been
talking about mountains, or telling stories about them?"

"No," said Percy, thoughtfully; "I'm sure there has been nothing. Shall
I ask Ted about it? Perhaps he wouldn't mind telling me, not even as
much as----" Percy stopped and grew a little red. He was a boy of nice
feelings, not rough and knock-about in his ways like many schoolboys.

"Not even as much as telling _me_, you were going to say," said Ted's
mother, smiling. "Never mind, dear. I daresay it _would_ be easier for
him to tell you, and I am very glad my little boy has such a kind Percy
to talk to. But I think perhaps it is better to say nothing to him. We
may find it out by degrees, and if it is only a sort of fancy--he may
have seen the mountain looking gloomy some evening--it may fade away of
itself more quickly if we don't notice it."

That day was a very bright and lovely one. Ted's mother thought to
herself she would like to do something to make Ted, and Percy too,
"extra" happy, for the weeks had been running on fast--it would soon
be time for Percy, not being a little fish, to go back to school. And
Percy's big sister was with them too just then. She was even bigger than
Percy, so of course Ted thought her _quite_ grown up, though in reality
she was a good many years off being so. She was very nice any way, with
a gentle pretty face and kind eyes, and though she was not very old she
was very clever at telling stories, which is a most delightful thing in
a big sister or cousin--is it not? And she was also able to sing very
prettily, another delightful thing, or at least so Ted thought, for he
_was_ so fond of singing. This big girl's name was Mabel.

And after thinking a while and talking about it to Mabel, Ted's mother
thought the nicest thing would be to have tea in a lonely little nesty
place in the gorge between the mountains that I have told you of. We
were to go there with Ted and Cheviott some day, by the by, were we not?
Well, never mind, Cheviott shall be--that is to say he _was_--of the
gipsy tea-party, so that will come to the same thing, will it not?

They all set off--Ted's father and mother, another gentleman and lady
who were staying for the summer in a cottage not far off, that they
might be near their friends, their daughter who was _really_ grown up,
and Mabel and Percy and Ted. You can fancy the bread and butter there
was to cut, the home-made cake, the tea and sugar and cream that must
not be forgotten. And when all the baskets were ready and everybody was
helping and planning how to carry them, who do you think got hold of the
biggest of all and was trying to lug it along? Who but our
four-years-old Ted?

"My boy, my boy," cried his mother, laughing, for he did look
comical--the basket being really very nearly as big as himself and his
little face already quite red with the exertion, "you cannot possibly
take that basket. Why, _I_ could scarcely carry it."

"But boys is stronger than muzzers," said Ted gravely, and it was really
with difficulty that they could persuade him to give it up, and only
then by letting him carry another which _looked_ nearly as important but
was in reality much lighter, as it only held the tablecloth and the
teapot and teaspoons.

I have not told you about the gorge--not told you, I mean, how lovely
it was. Nor if I talked about it for hours could I half describe its
beauty. In spring time perhaps it was the prettiest of all, for then it
was rich in the early blossoms and flowers that are so quickly over, and
that seem to us doubly precious after the flower famine of the winter.
But not even in the early spring time, with all the beauty of primroses
and violets, could the gorge look lovelier than it did this summer
afternoon. For the ferns and bracken never seemed dusty and withered
in this favoured place--the grass and moss too, kept their freshness
through all the hot days as if tended by fairy fingers. It was thanks to
the river you see--the merry beautiful little river that came dancing
down the centre of this mountain-pass, at one part turning itself into a
waterfall, then, as if tired, for a little flowing along more quietly
through a short space of less precipitous road. But always beautiful,
always kindly and generous to the happy dwellers on its banks, keeping
them cool in the hottest days, tossing here and there its spray of
pearly drops as if in pretty fun.

On each side of the water ran a little footpath, and here and there
roughly-made rustic bridges across it tempted you to see if the other
side was as pretty as this, though when you had stood still to consider
about it you found it impossible to say! The paths were here and there
almost completely hidden, for they were so little trodden that the moss
had it all its own way with them, and sometimes too it took a scramble
and a climb to fight one's way through the tangled knots and fallen
fragments of rock which encumbered them. But now and then there came a
bit of level ground where the gorge widened slightly, and then the path
stopped for a while in a sort of glade from which again it emerged on
the other side. It was in one of these glades that Ted's mother arranged
the gipsy tea. Can you imagine a prettier place for a summer day's
treat? Overhead the bluest of blue skies and sunshine, tempered by the
leafy screen-work of the thickly growing trees; at one side the soft
rush of the silvery river, whose song was here low and gentle, though
one could hear in the distance the boom of the noisy waterfall; at the
other side the mountain slope, whose short brown slippery turf seemed to
tempt one to a climb. And close at hand the wealth of ferns and bracken
and flowers that I have told you of--a little higher up strange gleaming
balls of many kinds of fungus, yellow and orange, and even scarlet,
flamed out as if to rival the softer tints of the trailing honeysuckle
and delicate convolvulus and pink foxglove below. It was a lovely dream
of fairyland, and the knowing that not far away the waves of the broad
blue sea were gently lapping the sandy shore seemed somehow to make it
feel all the lovelier.

The tea of course was a great success--when was a gipsy tea, unless
people are _very_ cross-tempered and fidgety and difficult to please,
anything else? The kettle did its duty well, for the water boiled in it
beautifully on the fire of dry sticks and leaves which Percy and Mabel,
and busy Ted _of course_, had collected. The tea tasted very good--"not
'moky at all," said Ted; the slices of bread and butter and cake
disappeared in a wonderful way, till at last everybody said "No,
thank you, not any more," when the boys handed round the few
disconsolate-looking pieces that remained.

And after this there was the fun of washing up and packing away, in
which Ted greatly distinguished himself. He would not leave the least
shred of paper or even crumbs about, for the fairies would be angry, he
said, if their pretty house wasn't left "kite tidy." And Percy and Mabel
were amused at his fancy, and naturally enough it set them talking about
fairies and such like. For the children were by themselves now--the
ladies had gone on a little farther to a place where Ted's mother wanted
to sketch, and the gentlemen had set off to climb to the nearest peak,
from whence there was a beautiful view of the sea. It would have been
too much for Ted, and indeed when his father had asked him if he would
like to go part of the way with them, both his mother and Percy noticed
that a troubled look came over his happy face, as he said he would
rather stay where he was, which was strange for him, for though such a
little boy, he was always eager for a climb and anxious to do whatever
he saw any one else doing. So kind Percy, mindful of Ted's mother's
words, said he would not go either, and stayed with the others, helping
them to tidy up the fairies' house.

"Now," said Ted at last, sitting down on the grass at Mabel's feet, "now
I _sink_ the fairies will be p'eased. It's all kite tidy. Fairies is
always angry if peoples is untidy."

"I thought fairies were always in a good humour," said Percy. "I didn't
know they were ever angry."

"Oh, I think Ted's right," said Mabel. "They are angry with people who
are dirty or untidy. Don't you remember a story about them coming to
work in a house where the kitchen was always left tidy at night? And
they never would come to the next house because it was always in a
mess."

"P'ease tell me that story, Mabel," said Ted.

"I'm afraid I don't remember it very well," she replied.

"Do you remember," said Percy, who was lying on the ground staring up at
the sky and the bit of brown mountain peak that could be seen from where
he was, "do you remember, Mab, the story of a little boy that fell
asleep on the top of a mountain, and the fairies spirited him away, and
took him down to their country, down inside the mountain? And he thought
he had only been away--when he came home again, I mean, for they had to
let him out again after a while--he thought he had only been away a day
or two, and, fancy, it had been twenty years! All the children had grown
big, and the young people middle-aged, and the middle-aged people quite
old, and none of them knew him again. He had lost all his childhood.
Wasn't it sad?"

"Yes, _very_" said Mabel; "I remember the story."

"I think it's dedful," said Ted. "I don't like mountains, and I don't
like diants. I'll never go up a mountain, never."

"But it wasn't the mountain's fault, Ted," said Percy. "And it wasn't
giants, it was fairies."

"I sink p'raps it was diants," persisted Ted. "I don't like zem. Mr.
Brand is a diant," he added mysteriously, in a low voice.

Percy had been thinking of what Ted's mother had said. Now he felt sure
that it was something to do with Mr. Brand that had frightened the
little fellow. But Mabel did not know about it.

"I like mountains," she said. "Indeed I love them. I am always so glad
to live where I can see their high peaks reaching up into the sky."

"But it wouldn't be nice to be alone, kite alone, on the top of one of
zem, would it?" said Ted.

"No, it wouldn't be nice to be alone in any far-off place like that,"
said Percy, "but of course nobody would ever stay up on the top of a
mountain alone."

"But if zem was _made_ to," said Ted doubtfully. "I wouldn't mind so
much if I had Chevie," he added, putting his arm round the dear doggie's
neck and leaning his little fair head on him, for of course Chevie was
of the party.

"Poor Ted," said Percy, laughing. "No one would ever make _you_ live
up all alone on the top of a mountain. Mabel, I wish you'd tell us a
story," he said to his sister. "It's so nice here. I shall go to sleep
if somebody doesn't do something to keep me awake."

He was lying at full length on the soft mossy grass, in the same place
still, and gazing up at the blue sky and brown mountain peak. "Tell us a
story, Mab," he repeated lazily.

"I haven't got any very nice ones just now," said Mabel. "I have been so
busy with my lessons, you know, Percy, that I haven't had time for any
stories."

"Can't you make them up yourself?" said Percy.

"Sometimes I do, a little," she replied. "But I can't make them all
quite myself. Sometimes in our German reading-books there are funny
little bits of stories, and I add on to them. There was one--oh yes,
I'll tell you one about a giant who lived on the top of a mountain."

Ted drew nearer to Mabel, and nestled in to her side.

"A diant on the top of a mountain," he repeated. "Is it very
f'ightening, Mabel?"

"Oh no. Listen and I'll tell you. Once, a long time ago, there was, a
long way off, a strange country. There were lots and lots of forests in
it, and at the side of the biggest forest of all there rose a chain of
high mountains. The people who lived in this forest were poor, simple
sort of people--they hadn't much time for anything but work, for it was
difficult to gain enough to live on. Most of them were charcoal-burners,
and there were not very many of them altogether. Of course in a forest
there wouldn't be much room for cottages and houses, would there? And
their cottages were none of them near together. Each family had its own
hut, quite separated from the others, and unless you belonged to the
forest you could hardly find your way from one part of it to the other.
The poor people, too, were so busy that they had not much time for going
to see each other, or for amusing themselves in any way. They all had a
pale sad look, something like the look that I have heard papa say the
poor people in some parts of England have--the people in those parts
where they work so awfully hard in dark smoky towns and never see the
sun, or the green fields, or anything fresh and pretty. Of course the
forest people were not as badly off as _that_--for their work any way
was in the open air, and the forest was clean--not like dirty factories,
even though it was so dark. It was the want of sunshine that was their
worst trouble, and that gave them that white, dull, half-frightened
look. The forest was too thick and dense for the sun to get really into
it, even in winter, and then, of course, the rays are so thin and pale
that they aren't much good if they do come. And the mountains at the
side came so close down to the edge of the forest that there was no
getting any sunshine there either, for it was the north side there, the
side that the sunshine couldn't get to. So for these reasons the place
had come to be called 'the sunless country.'"

"What was there at the other side of the forest?" said Percy; "couldn't
they have got into the sunshine at that side?"

"No," said Mabel. "I think there was a river or something. Or else it
was that the forest was so very, very big that it would have been quite
a journey to get out at any other side. I think that was it. Any way
they couldn't. And they just had to live on without sunshine as well as
they could. Their fathers had done so before them, and there was no help
for it, they thought. They were too poor and too hard-worked to move
away to another country, or to do anything but just go through each day
as it came in a dull sad way, seldom speaking even to each other.

"But do you know, it had _not_ always been so in the sunless forest,
though the better times were so long ago that hardly any of the poor
people knew it had ever been different. There had, once upon a time,
been a way into the sunshine on the other side of the mountain, and this
way lay right through the great hill itself. But the mountain belonged
to a great and very powerful giant"--at this Ted edged still closer to
Mabel--"who lived in it quite alone. Sometimes he used to come out at
a hole in the top, which was his door, and stay up there for a while
looking about him, staring at the black forest down at his feet, and
smiling grimly to himself at the thought of how dark and dull it must be
for the people who lived in it. For he was not a kind giant at all. It
was he that had shut up the passage through which the poor forest people
used to pass to their bright cottages on the other side, for in those
days they didn't _live_ in the forest, they only went there for their
work, and on Sundays and holidays they were all happy and merry
together, and the little children grew up rosy and bright, quite
different from the poor little wan-faced creatures that now hung sadly
about at the hut doors in the forest, looking as if they didn't know how
to laugh or play."

"Why did the naughty diant shut up the way?" asked Ted.

"Because he had a quarrel with the forest people. He wanted them to let
their little boys and girls, or some of them, come to him to be his
servants, but they wouldn't, and so he was so angry that he shut up the
door. But that was so long ago now that the people had almost forgotten
about it--the children that the giant had wanted to be his servants were
old grandfathers and grandmothers now, and some of them were dead, I
daresay, so that the real history of their troubles was forgotten by
them but not by the giant, for whenever he came out at the top of the
mountain to take some air, he used to look down at the forest and think
how dull and miserable they must be there."

"Nasty diant," said Ted.

"Yes, he was very unkind, but still I think you would have been rather
sorry for him too. He was old and all alone, and of course nobody loved
him. The people in the forest hardly ever spoke of him. They knew he
was there, or that he used to be there, and now and then some of the
children who had heard about him used to feel afraid of him and whisper
to each other that he would eat them up if he could catch them, but that
was about all the notice they took of him. They seemed to have forgotten
that he was the cause of their sad, gloomy lives, and indeed I am not
sure that any except some very old people really knew. Among these very
old people there were a man and his wife who were almost the poorest of
all in the forest. They were so poor because they were almost past work,
and they had no children to work for them. All that they had was a
little granddaughter, who lived with them because her father and mother
were dead. And it was a queer thing that she was quite different from
the other poor children in the forest. They were all pale and sad and
crushed-looking like their parents. This little girl was bright-haired
and bright-eyed and rosy-cheeked. She was the one merry happy creature
in the forest, and all the poor people used to stand and look at her as
she flitted about, and wish that their children were the same. I don't
know what her real name was; the story didn't tell, but the name she
got to have among the forest people was Sunshine--at least it was
Sunshine in German, but I think 'Sunny' is a nicer name, don't you?"

"Yes," said Percy; and

"Ses," said Ted, "'Sunny' is nicest."

"Well, we'll call her 'Sunny.' The reason that she was so different was
partly that she hadn't been born in the forest. Her father, who was the
son of these old people, had gone away, as some few of the forest people
did, to another country, and there he had married a bright-haired,
pretty girl. But she had died, and he himself got very ill, and he had
only strength to bring his baby girl back to the forest to his parents
when he too died. So Sunny's history had been rather sad, you see, but
still it hadn't made _her_ sad--it seemed as if the sunshine was _in_
her somehow, and that nothing could send it away."

Mabel stopped. Voices and steps were heard coming near.

"They're coming back," she said. "I'll have to finish the story another
time. I didn't think it would take so long to tell."

"Oh _do_ go on now, dear, dear Mabel, oh _do_!" cried Ted beseechingly.

But Mabel's fair face grew red.

"I couldn't, Ted, dear," she said, "not before big people," and Percy
sympathised with her.

"We'll hear the rest in the garden at home," he said.

"Thoo won't tell it without me, not without Ted, p'ease," asked the
little fellow.

"No, no, of course not, darling," said Mabel as she kissed his eager
face.

Just then a ray of bright evening sunshine fell on Ted's brown hair,
lighting it up and deepening it to gold, and as the little fellow caught
it in his eyes, he looked up laughing.

"There's Sunny kissing Ted too," he said merrily.




CHAPTER V.

THE STORY OF SUNNY (_Concluded_).

  "A child of light, a radiant lass,
     And cheerful as the morning air."


They were all three laughing at Ted's wit when his mother and the other
ladies came upon them.

"You seem very happy, children," said she.

"Oh ses," said Ted. "Mabel has been telling us such a lovely story. It's
not finnied yet. She's going to tell the rest in the garden at home. Oh,
I _am_ so happy. It's been such a sprendid day."

He began half humming to himself in the excess of his delight.

"Ted wishes somebody would sing a song," he said.

His mother glanced at Mabel. Poor Mabel's face grew very red again. It
would be worse than telling a story.

"If we all sang together," she said timidly, "I wouldn't mind trying to
begin."

So in a minute or two her clear young voice sang out--like a lark's it
seemed to mount higher and still higher, gathering strength and courage
as it grew, and then softly dropping again as if to fetch the others,
who joined her in the old familiar chorus of the simple song she had
chosen--"Home, sweet home."

Ted listened entranced, and his little voice here and there could be
distinguished. But suddenly, as Mabel stopped and a momentary silence
fell on them all, he turned to his mother, and throwing himself into her
arms, burst into tears.

"Muzzer," he said, "I can't bear it. It's _too_ pitty," and though his
mother and Mabel soothed the excited little fellow with gentle words and
caresses, there were tears in more eyes than Ted's as they all thanked
Mabel for her singing.

It was the next day that they had the rest of the story. The children
were all in the garden together, not far from Ted's favourite "bridge."
They could hear the babble of the little brook as it chattered past in
the sunshine, and now and then the distant cry of a sea-bird would sound
through the clear air, making Cheviott prick up his ears and look very
wide-awake all of a sudden, though in reality, being no longer in the
first bloom of youth, he was apt to get rather drowsy on a hot
afternoon.

"We'se all ready, Mabel," said Ted, settling himself down comfortably in
his favourite rest at her side. "Now go on p'ease. I can see the top of
the mountain kite nice from here, and zen I can sink I'll see the old
diant poking his head out," evidently the child's fear of the mountain
was fast becoming a thing of the past, and Percy felt quite pleased.

"Well," began Mabel, "I was telling you that Sunny had lived with her
old grandfather and grandmother since she was quite little. They were
very kind to her, but they were very poor, almost the poorest of all in
the forest. And yet their cottage never seemed quite so dull and sad as
the others. How could it, when there was always Sunny's bright head
flitting about, and her merry voice sounding like a bird's?

"The old people looked at her half with pleasure and half sadly.

"'It can't last,' the old man said one day, when the little girl was
running and jumping about in her usual happy way.

"The old woman knew what he meant without his explaining, and she nodded
her head sadly, and just then Sunny came flying into the cottage to
show them some flowers she had actually found in the forest, which, you
see, was the greatest wonder possible, for there were almost _never_ any
flowers to be seen. And Sunny told them how she had found them in a
little corner where the trees did not grow quite so thick, so that more
light could get in. And when she saw how surprised the old people were,
she looked at them rather strangely, and some new thoughts seemed to be
awaking in her mind, and she said, 'Grandfather, why aren't there more
flowers in the forest, and why am I the only little girl that laughs and
sings? Why does everybody look sad here? I can remember a little, just a
little, about the other country I lived in before I came here. People
used to laugh and smile there, and my mother had bright hair like mine,
and father too was not sad till after mother had gone away and we came
to this dark land. Why is it so dark, and why do you all look so sad?'

"The old man told her it was all for want of the sun, 'the blessed sun,'
he called it, and Sunny thought about his words a great deal. And bit
by bit she got the whole story from him, for he was one of the few
remaining old people who knew the reason of their misfortunes. And Sunny
thought and thought it over so much that she began to leave off dancing
and laughing and singing as she used, so that her poor grandfather and
grandmother began to be afraid that the sadness of the forest was at
last spoiling her happy nature, and for a while they were very sorry
about her. But one day she told them what she had in her mind. This was
what she said to them--

"'Dear grandfather and grandmother, I cannot bear to see the sadness of
the poor people here, and I have been thinking if nothing can be done.
And a few nights ago I had a strange dream. I dreamt that a beautiful
lady stood beside me and said, 'Go, Sunny, and have no fear. The giant
will not harm you.' And since then it has come into my mind that I might
win back the sunshine for our poor neighbours, and for you too, dear
grandfather and grandmother, for you are not so very old yet, if you
will let me go to see if I can melt the giant's hard heart.'

"Sunny was standing in front of the old couple, and as she spoke, to
their amazement, a sudden ray of sunshine crept in through the little
rough window of the cottage and fell softly on her bright head. Her
grandfather looked at her grandmother, and her grandmother looked at
her grandfather. They didn't know how to speak--they were so surprised.
Never, since they were quite, quite little children had they seen such
a thing. And they whispered to each other that it must be a magic sign,
they must let the child go. I think it was very good and kind of them to
let her go, the only thing they had to cheer them. The tears rolled down
their poor old faces as they said good-bye to her, not knowing if they
would live to see her return. But they said to each other, 'We have not
very many years to live. It would be very wrong of us to lose the chance
of life and happiness for all the poor forest people just to keep _our_
bit of sunshine to ourselves.' And so they let her go, for they were
good old people."

"Ses," said Ted, "zem was very kind. But how dedful for Sunny to have to
go to the diant. Did her go all alone, Mabel?"

"Yes, all alone. But she wasn't frightened. And somehow her grandfather
and grandmother weren't frightened for her either. They had a feeling
that she _had_ to go, and so she did. She set off the very next morning.
Her grandfather explained the way to her, for old as he was he had never
forgotten the days when the passage through the giant's mountain was
left free and open, so that there was no need for the forest people to
spend all their lives in the gloom and shade.

"Sunny walked quietly along the dark paths among the trees. She didn't
dance and skip as usual, for she felt as if all of a sudden she had
grown almost into a woman, with the thought of what she had to do for
her poor neighbours. And as she looked about her, she felt as if she had
never before quite noticed how dark and chill and gloomy it was. She had
a good way to walk, for since the closing of the passage the people had
moved farther and farther into the forest. They had grown afraid of the
giant, and were glad to get as far from him as they could, for there
was no good to be got by staying near him. So Sunny walked on, past the
cottages she knew, where she nodded to the people she saw, but without
speaking to them, which was so unlike her usual merry way that they all
looked after her in surprise and wondered what had come over the little
girl. And one or two of them shook their heads and said sadly that she
was getting to be like the rest of them. But Sunny walked on, farther
and farther, now and then smiling quietly to herself, and her bright
little head shining in the darkness almost as if the sun was lighting
it up. She went a good way, but there was nothing new or different. It
was always the dark forest and the gloomy trees. But at last she saw,
close to her, behind the trees, the dark sides of the great mountain,
and she knew that she must be near the closed-up door."

  Illustration:
  "She hunted about among the leaves and branches till she found a
  little silver knob."--P. 83.

"Oh!" said Ted, "wasn't her afraid of bears?"

"No," said Mabel, "she wasn't afraid of anything. She went quietly up to
the door and stood before it. It was barred and barred with iron, and it
was so long since it had been opened that the ivy and those sorts of
plants had grown all over it, creeping round the iron bars. It looked as
if it hadn't been opened for a hundred years, and I daresay it hadn't
been. But Sunny knew what to do. She hunted about among the leaves and
branches till she found a little silver knob--her grandfather had told
her about it; and the queer thing was that though the iron bars were
quite rusted over so that you wouldn't have known what they were, the
little silver knob was still bright and shining as if it had been
cleaned every day always."

"Wif plate-powder," said Ted, who was very learned about such matters,
as he was very fond of watching the servants at their work.

"Yes," said Mabel, "just as if it had been cleaned with plate-powder.
Well, Sunny pressed this little knob, and a minute or two after she
heard a clear tinkling bell. That was just what her grandfather had
told her she would hear, so she stood quite still and waited. In a
little while she seemed to hear a sound as of something coming along
the passage, and suddenly the top part of the door--at least it was
more like a window cut in the door--opened, and a voice, though she
could not see anybody, called out, 'Have you come to stay?' This too was
what her grandfather had told her she would hear, so she knew what to
say, and she answered 'Yes.' Then the voice said again, 'At what price?'
and Sunny answered, 'Sunshine for the forest.' But her heart began to
beat faster when the door slowly opened and she saw that she must enter
the dark passage. There was no one to be seen, even though the voice
had sounded quite near, so Sunny just walked on, looking about her,
for gradually as she went farther, either her eyes grew used to the
darkness, or a slight light began to come, and in a few minutes she saw
before her a very, very high staircase. It went straight up, without
turnings or landings, and the steps were quite white, so she saw them
plainly though the light was dim, and as there was nowhere else to go,
she just went straight on. I can't tell you what a long time she seemed
to keep going upstairs, but at last the steps stopped, and before her
she saw another door. It wasn't a door like the one down below, it was
more like a gate, for it was a sort of a grating that you could see
through. Sunny pressed her face against it and peeped in. She saw a
large dark room, with a rounded roof something like a church, and in
one corner a very old, grim-looking man was sitting. He had a very long
beard, but he didn't look so awfully big as Sunny had expected, for she
knew he must be the giant. He was sitting quite still, and it seemed to
Sunny that he was shivering. Any way he looked very old and very lonely
and sad, and instead of feeling frightened of him the little girl felt
very sorry for him. She stood there quite still, but though she didn't
make the least noise he found out she was there. He waved his hand, and
the barred door opened and Sunny walked in. She walked right up to the
giant and made him a curtsey. Rather to her surprise he made her a bow,
then he waved his hands about and moved his lips as if he were speaking,
but no sound came, and Sunny stared at him in surprise. She began to
wonder if he was deaf and dumb, and if so how could she explain to him
what she had come for?

"'I can't understand what you are saying, sir,' she said very politely,
and then, to her still greater surprise, the waving of his hands and
the moving of his lips seemed to succeed, for in a very queer deep voice
he answered her.

"'What do you want?' he said. 'I sent my voice downstairs to speak to
you, and he has been loitering on the way, lazy fellow, all this time.
There are no good servants to be had nowadays, none. I've not had one
worth his salt since I sent my old ones back to Ogreland when they got
past work. What do you want?'

"'Sunshine for the forest people.'

"That was all Sunny said, and she looked at the grim old giant straight
in the face. He looked at her, and went on shivering and rubbing his
hands. Then he said, with a frown,

"'Why should they have sunshine? I can't get it myself, since I'm too
old to get up to the top there. Sunshine indeed!' and then he suddenly
stretched out his hand to her and made a grab at her hair, screaming
out, 'Why, you've got sunshine! Come here, and let me warm my hands.
Ugh! that's the first time I've felt a little less chilly these hundred
years,' and Sunny stood patiently beside him and let him stroke her
golden hair up and down, and in a minute or two she said quietly,

"'Will you unfasten the door, good Mr. Giant, and let the poor people
through to the other side?'

"The giant still kept hold of her hair. 'It would be no good cutting
it off--the sunshine would go out of it,' Sunny heard him saying to
himself. So she just said again quietly, 'Will you unfasten the door,
good Mr. Giant?'

"And at last he said, 'I'll consider about it. Your hair's getting cold.
Go upstairs,' and he nodded his head towards a door in the corner of the
room, 'go upstairs and fetch some sunshine for me, and come down again.'

"But Sunny wouldn't stir till she had got something out of him. And she
said for the third time,

"'Will you unfasten the door, good Mr. Giant, if I go upstairs to please
you?'

"And the giant gave her a push, and said to her, 'Get off with you, you
tiresome child. Yes, I'll open the door if you'll go and bathe your hair
well, and then come down to warm my hands.'

"So Sunny went upstairs. This stair wasn't like the other. It was a
turny, screwy stair that went round and round itself, for you see it
was near the top of the mountain and there wasn't so much room as down
below. Sunny felt rather giddy when she got to the top, but she got all
right again in a minute when she pushed open the little door she found
there and came out into the sunlight. It was _so_ lovely, and remember,
she hadn't seen sunshine, even though some of the brightness had stayed
with her, since she was a very little girl. You have no idea how pretty
it was up there, not gloomy at all, and with the beautiful warm sunshine
pouring down all round. Sunny was very pleased to warm herself in it,
and then when she looked down over the side of the mountain and saw the
dark tops of the forest trees, she was still more pleased to think that
soon her poor friends would have a chance of enjoying it too. And when
she thought that her hair had caught enough sunshine to please the giant
she called down through the screwy staircase, 'Have you opened the door,
Mr. Giant?' And when the giant said, 'Come down and I'll tell you,' she
answered, 'No, Mr. Giant, I can't come till you've opened the door.'
And then she heard him grumbling to himself, and in a minute she heard
a rattling noise, and she knew the door was opened, and then she came
down. She had settled with her grandfather that if she didn't come
straight back, he would send some of the people to watch for the door
being opened, so she knew it would be all right, for once the giant had
agreed to open it, he couldn't shut it again--that was settled somehow,
some magic way I suppose, the story didn't say how. So then Sunny,
came downstairs again, and the giant stroked her hair up and down
till his poor old hands were quite warm, and he grew quite pleased and
good-natured. But he wouldn't let Sunny go away, and she had to stay,
you see, because the top-door, the one like a gate, was still shut up.
And any way she didn't want to be unkind to the giant. She promised him
that she would come back to see him every day if he liked if only he
would let her go, but he wouldn't, so she had to stay. I don't know how
long she stayed. It was a long time, for the story said she grew thin
and white with being shut up in the giant's cave and having no running
about. It was worse than the forest. The only thing that kept her alive
was the sunshine she got every morning, for there was _always_ sunshine
at the top of the mountain, and then, too, the comfort of knowing that
the poor people were enjoying it too, for when she was up on the top she
could hear their voices down below, as they came to the door. Day by day
she heard their voices grow merrier and brighter, and after a while she
could even hear the little children laughing and shouting with glee.
And Sunny felt that she didn't mind for herself, she was _so_ glad to
think that she had done some good to her poor friends. But she got paler
and thinner and weaker--it was so very tiring to stand such a long time
every day while the giant stroked the sunshine out of her golden hair to
warm his withered old hands, and it was so terribly dark and dull and
cold in the gloomy cavern. She would hardly have known how the days
went or when was day and when was night, but for the giant sending her
upstairs every morning. But one morning came when she could not go; she
got up a few steps, and then her strength went away and she seemed to
get half asleep, and she said to herself that she was going to die, and
she did not know anything more. She seemed to be dreaming. She fancied
the giant came to look for her, and that his old face grew sad and sorry
when he saw her. And then she thought she heard him say, 'Poor little
girl, I did not mean to hurt her. I have done harm enough. Sunny,
forgive me. The giant will do you and your people no more harm. His day
is over.' Then she really did sleep, for a long time I fancy, for when
she woke up she could not think where she was. She thought at first
she was on the top of the mountain, it seemed so beautifully bright
and warm. She sat up a little and looked about her, and she _couldn't_
think where she was, for on one side close to her, she saw the dark
trees of the forest that she knew so well, and on the other, smiling
green fields and orchards and cottages with gardens filled with flowers,
just the sort of country her grandfather had told her he remembered when
he was a child on the other side of the great hill. It was just as if
the mountain had melted away. And, just fancy, that _was_ what had
happened! For in a little while Sunny heard voices coming near her, all
talking eagerly. It was the people of the forest who had found out what
had come to pass, and they were all hurrying to look for Sunny, for they
were terribly afraid that the giant had taken her away to Ogreland with
the mountain. But he hadn't, you see! And Sunny and all the forest
people lived all their lives as happy as could be--they were happier
even than in the old days the grandfather and grandmother remembered,
for not only were they free to leave the dark forest and enjoy the
sunlight as often as they liked, but the sunshine now found its way by
all the chinks and crannies among the branches into the very forest
itself."

"And did they never hear anything more of the giant?" asked Percy.

"No," said Mabel, "only in hot summer days sometimes, when the sun was
beating down too much on the fields and gardens, the people of that
country used to notice a large soft gray cloud that often came between
them and the sunshine, and would stay there till the great heat grew
less. This cloud seemed always the same shape, and somehow, Sunny,
remembering her vision of the giant, thought to herself that the cloud
was perhaps he, and that he wanted to make up for his long cruelty. And
the children of the forest having heard her story used to laugh when
they saw the cloud, and say to each other, 'See, there is the giant
warming his hands.' But Sunny would say softly in a whisper, 'Thank
you, Mr. Giant.'

"And though it is a very, very long time since all that happened, it has
never been quite forgotten, and the people of that country are noted for
their healthy happy faces, and the little children for their rosy cheeks
and golden hair."

Mabel stopped.

"It is a very pretty story," said Percy. "Are there more like it in the
book where you read it?"

Mabel was just going to answer, when her attention was caught by Ted.

"I do believe he's asleep," she said softly, for Ted had curled himself
up like a dormouse in his little nest at her side. But just then the
two-legged dormouse gave a funny chuckle, which showed that whether he
_had_ been asleep or not, he certainly was so no longer.

"What are you laughing at, Teddy?" said Percy.

"I were just sinking," said Ted, "what a silly boy Ted were to be afraid
of mountains----Ted would like to go up to the very, very top," he went
on valorously. "Ted wouldn't mind a bit--not," with a prudent reservation,
"not if thoo and Mabel was wif me."




CHAPTER VI.

LITTLE NARCISSA.

  "But, I think, of all new-comers
    Little children are the best."


From this time, I think, Ted lost his fear of mountains and giants. It
was not till a long time afterwards that he explained to his mother
exactly how it had been, and by that time he was of course quite big
enough to understand that Mr. Brand had only been joking. But still
he did not much care about seeing that gentleman again. He generally
managed to be out of the way when he saw the dog-cart with the gray
horse driving in at the gate, and just once, when he would not have had
time to run off without actual rudeness, which little Ted _never_ was
guilty of, he only waited to shake hands and say "Quite well, thank
thoo," before he disappeared in so unaccountable a manner that he could
not be found as long as Mr. Brand's visit lasted.

It was a good deal thanks to Mabel's story that he grew to like his
old friend the mountain again. But partly too, I daresay, he forgot
his fears on account of several very interesting things that happened
about this time. It was a great sorrow to him when Percy had to go back
to school--that was one of little Ted's lasting or rather returning
sorrows, all through his childhood. Only, like many things in our lives,
if we learn to look at them in the right way, it was certainly a trouble
with a bright side to it, a cloud with a silver lining--a silver lining
which shone indeed all the brighter for the gray outside--for was there
not the delight, the _delicious_ delight, of the coming back again, the
showing all the changes in the garden since Percy was last there, the
new toys and other little presents that Ted had received, and listening
to Percy's thrilling accounts of school-life, the relating his own
adventures?

Still there were times, especially now that Ted was really growing very
sensible, that he wished for some other companion in his simple daily
life, some one who, like the little fishes, did not have to go to
school. And now and then, when, in his rare expeditions to the sea-side
town not far off, he saw little groups of brothers and sisters trotting
along together, or when in the stories his mother read to him he heard
of happy nursery parties, Ted used to wish _he_ had a little "bruvver
or sister, even a baby one would be very nice." For deep down in his
loving heart there was already the true manly spirit, the longing to have
something to take care of and protect; something tinier and more tender
even than wee Ted himself.

And to make his child-life complete this pretty thing came to him. With
the autumn days, just when Ted was beginning to feel a little sad at the
summer brightness going away, and his garden work had come to be chiefly
helping old David to sweep up the fast-falling leaves, there came to Ted
a dear little baby sister. She was the dearest little thing--bright-eyed
and merry, and looking as if she was ready for all sorts of fun. She was
stronger than Ted had been, and to tell the truth I think I must say
prettier. For sweet and fair and dear as was Ted's face both in baby- and
boy-hood, he was not what one would call pretty. Not the sort of child
whose proud nurse comes home with wonderful stories of ladies stopping
her in the street to ask whose beautiful baby he was--not a splendidly
vigorous, stalwart little man like a small eight-years-old of my
acquaintance whose mother was lately afraid to walk about the streets
of Berlin with him lest the old Emperor, as he sometimes does, should
want to have him to make an officer of! No; Ted, though lithe and active
as a squirrel, merry as a cricket, was not a "showy" child. He was just
our own dear little Ted, our happy-hearted Christmas child.

But I suppose there never was in this world any one so happy but that it
was _possible_ for him to be happier. And this "more happiness" came to
Ted in the shape of his baby sister, Narcissa. Boys who despise sisters,
"girls" in any shape, big or little, don't know what a great deal they
lose. Ted was still a good way off the "big boy" stage, and indeed I
don't think anything could have made it possible for him to look at
things as too many big boys do. By the time he reached schoolboy-hood,
Narcissa was a dainty maiden of five or six, and quite able to stand
up for herself in a little queenly way, even had her brother been less
tender and devoted. And of the years between, though I would like to
tell you something, I cannot tell you half nor a quarter. They were
happy sunny years, though not _quite_ without clouds of course. And
the first summer of little Cissy's life was a sort of bright opening
to them.

It was again a very beautiful summer. The children almost lived
out-of-doors. Poor nurse found it difficult to get the work in the house
that fell to her share finished in the morning before Ted was tugging at
her to "tum out into the garden, baby does _so_ want to tum;" and baby
soon learnt to clap her hands and chuckle with glee when her little hat
was tied on and she was carried downstairs to her perambulator waiting
at the door. And there was new interest for Ted in hunting for the
loveliest wild flowers he could find, as baby showed, or Ted _thought_
she did, a quite extraordinary love for the bouquets her little brother
arranged for her.

"Her knows _kite_ well which is the prettiest ones, doesn't her, nurse?"
he said one day when they were all three--all four rather, for of course
Chevie was one of the group--established in their favourite place under
the shade of a great tree, whose waving branches little Cissy loved so
much that she would cry when nurse wheeled her away from it. "I think
baby knows _lots_, though she can't speak;" and baby, pleased at his
evidently talking of _her_, burst into a funny crowing laugh, which
seemed exactly as if she knew and approved of what he was saying.

"Baby's a darling," said nurse.

"How soon will her learn to speak?" Ted inquired gravely.

  Illustration:
  "Baby showed, or Ted _thought_ she did, a quite extraordinary love
  for the bouquets her little brother arranged for her."--P. 98.

"Not just yet. She hasn't got any teeth. Nobody can speak without
teeth," said nurse.

"I hope," said Ted, more gravely still, "I hope Dod hasn't forgotten
them."

Nurse turned away to hide a smile.

"No fear, Master Ted," she said in a minute. "She'll have nice little
teeth by and by, you'll see. They'll be wee tiny white specks at first,
and then they'll grow quite big and strong enough to bite with. That's
how your teeth came. Not all of a sudden, you see."

"Ses," said Ted. "Nothing comes all in one sudden. The f'owers is weeny,
weeny buds at first, and then they gets big. Nurse, I'm going to take my
cart to get a _lot_ of daisies down by the brook for baby. She likes to
roll zem in her hands," and off he set with his little blue cart and
white horse, his best beloved possession, and which had done good
service in its time, to fill it with flowers for Cissy.

A few minutes later, as he was manfully dragging the cart up the path
again, gee-upping and gee-whoing at the horse, which was supposed to
find the daisy heads a heavy load uphill, his mother came out to the
garden.

"Ted, dear," she said, "your father is going to drive me to A----. It
is a long time since you were there, and I should like to have my little
boy to go about with me while your papa is busy. I have a good deal of
shopping to do. Would you like to go with me?"

Ted gave a shout of pleasure. Then suddenly his glance fell on the
little sister still in her perambulator under the big tree, and his eyes
filled with tears.

"I would like dedfully to go," he said, "but poor Cissy. I _is_ so
afraid Cissy will cry if I go."

He lifted his wistful little face to his mother's with an expression
that went to her heart.

"Dear Ted," she said; "you are a good, kind, little boy. But don't make
yourself unhappy about Cissy. She is too little to cry for your going
away, though she will laugh to see you come back."

Ted's face cleared, but suddenly a rosy colour spread over it.

"Muzzer," he said, in a low voice, tugging gently at her dress to make
her stoop down, "muzzer, I _sink_ I were going to cry not all for poor
baby being sorry, but part 'cos I did so want to go."

Mother understood his simple confession.

"Yes, dear," she said, "I daresay you did, and it is right of you to
tell me. My good little Ted," she could not resist adding again, and
again little Ted's face grew red, but this time with pleasure at
mother's praise.

Baby bore the announcement, which he considered it his duty to make to
her with great formality, very philosophically. Less philosophically did
she take nurse's wheeling her away from under her beloved tree with its
fluttering branches, towards the house, where nurse had to go to prepare
Ted for his expedition. In fact, I am sorry to say that so little did
the young lady realise what was expected of her, that she burst into a
loud roar, which was quite too much for Ted's feelings.

"Dear baby, sweet baby," he cried, "thoo mustn't be tooked away from
thoo's tree. I'll ask muzzer to deck me, nurse," he went on eagerly, for
his mother had returned to the house, "or I can nearly kite well deck
myself. I'll call thoo if I can't find my things. I'll run and ask
muzzer," and off he went, so eager to give no trouble, so ready and
helpful that nurse thought it best to let him have his way, and to
devote her attention to the discomposed Miss Baby.

Ted did not find his mother quite so quickly as he expected, though he
peeped into the drawing-room and called her by name as he passed her own
room upstairs, on his way to the nursery. The fact was that mother was
in the kitchen consulting with cook as to the groceries required to be
ordered, and it never came into Ted's head to look for her there at this
time of day. So he went straight on to the nursery, and managing with a
good deal of tugging and pulling and coaxing to open _his_ drawer in the
chest, he got out his best little coat and hat and prepared to don them.
But first he looked at his hands, which were none the whiter for their
recent ravages among the daisies.

"Zem's very dirty," he said to himself; "zem must be washed."

There was water in the jug, but Ted's ambition was aroused, and great
things were to be expected of a little boy who was big enough to "deck
himself," as he would have described the process.

"Ses, zem's _very_ dirty," he repeated, contemplating the two sunburnt
little paws in question. "Zem should have hot water. Hot water makes zem
ze most clean."

He glanced round, the hot water was not far to seek, for, though it was
June, the weather was not very warm, and nurse generally kept a small
fire burning in the day-nursery. And beside the fire, temptingly beside
the fire, stood the kettle, into which Ted peeping, satisfied himself
that there was water enough for his purpose. He would hardly have had
patience to fetch it had it not been there, so eager was he for the
delights of putting it on to boil. And, wonderful to say, he managed it;
he got the kettle, heavy for him to lift, as you can imagine, safely on
to the fire, and then, with immense satisfaction, sat down in front of
it to watch the result. There was very little water in the kettle, but,
though Ted did not think about that, it was all the less trying for his
patience. And I hardly think either, that the water could have been
quite cold in the first place, or else the fairies came down the chimney
and blew up the fire with their invisible bellows to help little Ted,
for certainly the kettle began to boil amazingly soon--first it simmered
gently and then it began to sing more loudly, and at last what Ted
called "moke" began to come out of the spout, and he knew that the
kettle was boiling.

Ted was so used to hear nurse talking about the kettle "boiling" for
tea, that it never came into his head that it was not necessary to have
"boiling" water to wash his poor little hands. I don't indeed know what
might not have happened to the whole of his poor little body had not
his mother at that moment come into the room. A queer sight met her
eyes--there was Ted, more than half undressed, barefooted and red-faced,
in the act of lifting off the steaming kettle, round the handle of
which, with wonderful precaution, he had wrapped his pocket-handkerchief.

Ted's mother kept her presence of mind. She did not speak till the
kettle was safely landed on the floor, and Ted, with a sigh of relief,
looked up and saw her at the door.

"I is decking myself, muzzer," he said with a pleased smile, and a
charming air of importance, "Poor baby cried, so I told nurse I would
deck myself, and nurse didn't mind."

"_Didn't_ she?" said his mother, rather surprised.

"Oh, she thoughtened p'raps I'd find thoo, I amember," Ted continued,
correcting himself.

"But did nurse know you were going to boil water?" said his mother.

"Oh no," said Ted, "it were only that my hands is _so_ dirty. Zem needs
hot water to make zem clean."

"Hot water, but not _boiling_," said his mother; "my dear little boy, do
you know you might have scalded yourself dreadfully?"

"I put my hankerwick not to burn my hands," said Ted, rather
disconsolately.

"Yes, dear. I know you meant it for the best, but just think if you had
dropped the kettle and burnt yourself. And nurse has always told you not
to play with fire or hot water."

"Ses," said Ted, "but I weren't _playing_. I were going to wash my hands
to be nice to go out wif thoo," and his blue eyes filled with tears. But
they were soon wiped away, and when his mother had with the help of
_some_ of the hot water made face and hands as clean as could be, and
smoothed the tangled curls and fastened the best little coat, Ted looked
very "nice" indeed, I can assure you, for his drive to A----.

It was a very happy drive. Perched safely between his father and mother,
Ted was as proud as a king. It was all so pretty, the driving through
the shady lanes, where the honeysuckle and wild-roses were just beginning
to show some tints of colour, the peeps now and then of the sea below in
its blue beauty, the glancing up sometimes at the mountain top, Ted's
old friend, along whose sides they were actually travelling--it was all
delightful. And when they drew near the little town, and the houses
began to stand closer, till at last they came in rows and streets, and
the old mare's hoofs clattered over the stones of the market-place so
that the people in the sleepy little place came out to see who was
coming, Ted's excitement knew no bounds. He had almost forgotten A----,
it was so long since he had been there--the sights of the shops and what
appeared to him their wonderful contents, the sight even of so many
people and children walking about, was almost too much for the little
country child; it seemed to take his breath away.

He recovered his composure, however, when he found himself trotting
about the streets with his mother. She had several shops to go to, each,
to Ted, more interesting than the other. There was the ironmonger's to
visit, for cook had begged for a new preserving pan and the nursery
tea-pot handle was broken; there were various milk jugs and plates to
replace at the china shop; brown holland to get at the draper's for
Ted's summer blouses. At two or three of the shops his mother, being
a regular customer and having an account with them, did not pay, and
among these was the grocer's, where she had rather a long list of things
needed for the store-closet, and while she was explaining about them all
to the white-aproned young man behind the counter, Ted marched about
the shop on a voyage of discovery on his own account. There were so many
interesting things--barrels of sugar, white, brown, and darker brown
still, neat piles of raisins and currants, closely fastened bottles
of French plums, and rows of paper-covered tin boxes which Ted knew
contained biscuits.

"What a kind man," he said to himself, "to give muzzer all she wants,"
as one after another of his mother's requests was attended to. "Why, he
lets muzzer take whatever her likes!" he added, as having brought his
wanderings to a close for a minute, he stood beside her and saw her
lifting a little square of honey soap out of a box which the grocer
presented to her for examination, and, greatly impressed, Ted set off
again on another ramble. Doubtless he too might take whatever he liked,
and as the thought occurred to him he pulled up before another barrel
filled with lumps, little and big, of half clear, whitey-looking stuff,
something like very coarse lump sugar, only not so white, and more
transparent. Ted knew what it was. It was soda, _washing_ soda I believe
it is usually called. Ted was, as I have said, very wide-awake about all
household matters, for he always used his eyes, and very often--indeed
rather oftener than was sometimes pleasant for the people about him if
they wanted to be quiet--his tongue too, for he was great at asking
questions.

"Soda's very useful," Ted reflected; "nurse says it makes things come
cleaner."

Just then his mother called him.

"Ted, dear," she said, "I'm going."

Ted started and ran after her, but just as he did so, he stretched out
his hand and took a lump of soda out of the barrel. He did it quite
openly, he didn't mind in the very least if the shopman saw him--like
the daisies in the field, so he thought, the soda and the sugar and the
French plums and everything were there for him or for any one to help
themselves to as they liked. But Ted was not greedy--he was far better
pleased to get something "useful" for mother than anything for himself.
He would have asked her what he had better take, if he had had time--he
would have stopped to say "Thank you" to the grocer had he not been in
such a hurry to run after his mother.

They walked quickly down the street. Ted's mother was a little
absent-minded for the moment--she was thinking of what she had ordered,
and hoping she had forgotten nothing. And holding her little boy by the
one hand she did not notice the queer thing he was holding in the
other. Suddenly she stopped before a boot and shoe shop.

"I must get baby a pair of shoes," she said. "She is such a little
kicker, she has the toes of her cloth ones out in no time. We must get
her a pair of leather ones I think, Ted."

"Ses, I sink so," said Ted.

So his mother went into the shop and asked the man to show her some
little leather shoes. Ted looked on with great interest, but when the
shoes were spread out on the counter and he saw that they were all
_black_, he seemed rather disappointed.

"Muzzer," he said in a low voice, tugging at his mother's skirts, "I saw
such bootly boo boots in the man's winder."

His mother smiled.

"Yes, dear," she replied, "they're very pretty, but they wouldn't last
so long, and I suspect they cost much more."

Ted looked puzzled.

"What does thoo mean?" he said, but before his mother had time to
explain, the active shopman had reached down the "bootly" boots and held
them forward temptingly.

"They're certainly very pretty," said baby's mother, who, to tell the
truth, was nearly as much inclined for the blue boots as Ted himself.
"What is the price of them?"

"Three and sixpence, ma'am," replied the man.

"And the black ones, the little black shoes, I mean?"

"Two and six," replied the man.

"A shilling difference, you see, Ted," said his mother. But Ted only
looked puzzled, and his mother, occupied with the boots, did not
particularly notice him.

"I think," she said at last, "I think I will take both. But as the blue
boots will be best ones for a good while, give me them half a size
larger than the little black shoes."

The shopman proceeded to wrap them up in paper and handed them to Ted's
mother, who took out her purse and paid the money. The man thanked her,
and, followed by her little boy, Ted's mother left the shop.

Ted walked on silently, a very unusual state of things. He was trying to
find out how to express what he wanted to ask, and the ideas in his head
were so new and strange that he could not fit them with words all at
once. His mother turned round to him.

"Would you like to carry the parcel of baby's shoes for her?" she said.

"Oh ses," said Ted, holding out his left hand. But as his mother was
giving him the parcel she noticed that his right hand was already
engaged.

"Why, what have you got there?" she asked, "a stone? Where did you get
it? No, it's not a stone--why, can it be a lump of soda?"

"Ses," returned Ted with the greatest composure, "it are a lump of soda.
I thought it would be very suseful for thoo, so I took it out of that
nice man's shop."

"My dear little boy!" exclaimed his mother, looking I don't know how.
She was rather startled, but she could not help being amused too, only
she thought it better not to show Ted that she was amused. "My dear
little boy," she said again, "do you not understand? The things in the
shop belong to the man--they are his, not ours."

"Ses," said Ted. "I know. But he lets thoo take them. Thoo took soap and
somesing else, and he said he'd send them home for thoo."

"Yes, dear, so he did," said his mother. "But I _pay_ him for them. You
didn't see me paying him, because I don't pay him every time. He puts
down all I get in a book, and then he counts up how much it is every
month, and then I send him the money. In some shops I pay as soon as I
get the things. You saw me pay the shoemaker for little Cissy's boots
and shoes."

"Ses," said Ted, "I saw thoo take money out of thoo's purse, but I
didn't understand. I thought all those kind men kept nice things for us
to get whenever we wanted."

"But what did you think money was for, little Ted? You have often seen
money, shillings and sixpences and pennies? What did you think was the
use of it?"

"I thought," said Ted innocently, "I thought moneys was for giving to
poor peoples."

His mother could hardly resist stooping down in the street to kiss him.
But she knew it was better not. Ted must be made to understand that in
his innocence he had done a wrong thing, and the lesson of to-day must
be made a plain and lasting one.

"What would poor people do with money if they could get all the things
they wanted out of the shops for nothing?" she said quietly.

Ted considered a moment. Then he looked up brightly.

"In course!" he said. "I never thought of that."

"And don't you see, dear Ted, that it would be wrong to take things
out of a shop without paying for them? They _belong_ to the man of the
shop--it would be just like some one coming to our house and taking away
your father's coat or my bonnet, or your little blue cart that you like
so much, or----"

"Or Cissy's bootly boo boots," suggested Ted, clutching hold more
tightly of the parcel, as if he thought the imaginary thief might be
at hand.

"Yes," said his mother, "or Cissy's new boots, which are mine _now_
because I paid money for them to the man."

"Ses," said Ted. Then a very thoughtful expression came into his face.
"Muzzer," he said, "this soda was that man's--sall I take it back to him
and tell him I didn't understand?"

"Yes," said his mother. "I do think it is the best thing to do. Shall we
go at once? It is only just round the corner to his shop."

She said this thinking that little Ted would find it easier to do it
at once, for she was sorry for her little boy having to explain to a
stranger the queer mistake he had made, though she felt it was right
that it should be done. "Shall we go at once?" she repeated, looking
rather anxiously at the small figure beside her.

"Ses," said Ted, and rather to her surprise his tone was quite bright
and cheery. So they turned back and walked down the street till they
came to the corner near which was the grocer's shop.

Ted's mother had taken the parcel of the little boots from him and held
him by the hand, to give him courage as it were. But he marched on quite
steadily without the least flinching or dragging back, and when they
reached the shop it was he who went in first. He walked straight up to
the counter and held out the lump of soda to the shopman.

"Please, man," he said, "I didn't know I should pay money for this. I
didn't understand till muzzer told me, and so I've brought it back."

The grocer looked at him in surprise, but with a smile on his face, for
he was a kind man, with little boys and girls of his own. But before he
said anything, Ted's mother came forward to explain that it was almost
the first time her little boy had been in a shop; he had not before
understood what buying and selling meant, but now that she had explained
it to him, she thought it right for him himself to bring back the lump
of soda.

"And indeed it was his own wish to do so," she added.

The grocer thanked her. It was not of the least consequence to him of
course he said, but still he was a sensible man and he respected Ted's
mother for what she had done. And then, half afraid that her little
boy's self-control would not last much longer, she took him by the hand,
and bidding the shopman good-day they left the shop. As they came out
into the street again she looked down at Ted. To her surprise his little
face was quite bright and happy.

"He were a kind man," said Ted; "he wasn't vexed with Ted. He knew I
didn't understand."

"Yes, dear," said his mother, pleased to see the simple straightforward
way in which Ted had taken the lesson; "but _now_, Ted, you do understand,
and you would never again touch anything in a shop, would you?"

"Oh no, muzzer, in course not," said Ted, his face flushing a little.
"Ted would _never_ take nothing that wasn't his--_never_; thoo knows
that, muzzer?" he added anxiously.

"Yes, my dear little boy," and this time his mother _did_ stoop down and
kiss him in the street.




CHAPTER VII.

GETTING BIG.

  "The children think they'll climb a tree."


It was a very happy little Ted that trotted upstairs to the nursery with
the "bootly boo boots" and the more modest little black shoes for tiny
Narcissa.

"See what Ted has brought thoo," he said, kissing his baby sister with
the pretty tenderness he always showed her, "and see what muzzer has
gave _me_," he went on, turning to nurse with another parcel. In his
excitement he didn't know which to unfasten first, and baby had got
hold of one of the black shoes, fortunately not the blue ones, and was
sucking it vigorously before Ted and nurse saw what she was doing.

"_Isn't_ she pleased?" said Ted, delightedly. Baby must be very pleased
with her new possessions, to try to _eat_ them, he thought. And then
he had time to examine and admire his own present. It was a delightful
one--a book, a nice old-fashioned fat book of all the old nursery
rhymes, and filled with pictures too. And Ted's pride was great when
here and there he could make out a word or two. Thanks to the pictures,
to his own good memory, and the patience of all the big people about
him, it was not long before he could say nearly all of them. And so a
new pleasure was added to these happy summer days, and to many a winter
evening to come.

That night when Ted was going to bed he said his prayers as usual at his
mother's knee.

"Make me a good little boy," he said, and then when he had ended he
jumped up for his good-night kiss, with a beaming face.

"I sink God _has_ made me good, muzzer?" he said.

"Do you, dear? I hope He is _making_ you so," she answered. "But what
makes you say so?"

"'Cos I _feel_ so happy and so good," said Ted, "and thoo said I was
good to-day when thoo kissed me. And oh, _may_ I take my sprendid
hymn-book to bed wif me?"

And with the ancient legends of Jack and Jill and Little Boy Blue, and
Margery Daw, safely under his pillow, happy Ted fell asleep. I wonder if
he dreamt of them! What a pity that so much of the pretty fancies and
visions of little childhood are lost to us! What quaint pictures they
would make. What a heavy burden _should_ lie on the consciences of
those who, by careless words or unconsidered tone, destroy the lovely
tenderness of little children's dreams and conceits, rub off the bloom
of baby poetry!

I could tell you, dear little friends, many pretty stories of Ted and
his tiny sister during the first sunny year of little Narcissa's life,
but I daresay it may be more interesting to you to hear more of these
children as they grow older. The day-by-day life of simple happy little
people is, I trust, familiar to you all, and as I want you to _know_ my
boy Ted, to think of him through your own childhood as a friend and
companion, I must not take up too much of the little book, so quickly
filled, with the first years only of his life. And these had now come to
an end--a change, to Ted a great and wonderful change, happened about
this time. Before little Cissy had learnt to run alone, before Ted had
mastered the longest words in his precious "hymn-book," these little
people had to leave their beautiful mountain home. One day when the
world was looking pensive and sad in its autumn dress, the good-byes had
to be said--good-bye to the garden and Ted's shaky bridge; good-bye to
old David; and alas! good-bye to Cheviott's grave, all that was left
of the faithful old collie to say good-bye to; good-bye to the far-off
murmur of the sea and the silent mountain that little Ted had once been
so afraid of; good-bye to all of the dear old home, where Ted's blue
cart was left forgotten under a tree, where the birds went on singing
and chirping as if there were no such things as good-byes in the
world--and Ted and Cissy were driven away to a new home, and the
oft-told stories of their first one were all that was left of it to
their childish minds.

A good many hours' journey from the mountains and the sea near which
these children had spent their first happy years, in quite another
corner of England, there is to be found a beautiful, quiet old town. It
is beautiful from its position, for it stands on rising ground; a fine
old river flows round the feet of its castle rock, and on the other
side are to be seen high cliffs with pleasant winding paths, sometimes
descending close to the water's edge, and it is beautiful in itself. For
the castle is such a castle as is not to be met with many times in one's
life. It has taken centuries of repose after the stormy scenes it lived
through in the long-ago days to make it what it now is--a venerable old
giant among its fellows, grim and solemn yet with a dreamy peacefulness
about it, that has a wonderful charm. As you cross the unused drawbridge
and your footsteps sink in the mossy grass of the great courtyard, it
would not be difficult to fancy you were about to enter the castle of
the sleeping-beauty of the dear old fairy-tale--so still and dream-like
it seems, so strange it is to picture to one's fancy the now grass-grown
keep with the din and clang of horsemen and men-at-arms that it must
once have known. And near by is a grand old church, solemn and silent
too, but differently so from its twin-brother the castle. The one is
like a warrior resting after his battles, thinking sadly of the wild
scenes he has seen and taken part in; the other like a holy man of
old, silent and solemn too, but with the weight of human sorrows and
anxieties that have been confided to him, yet ever ready to sympathise
and to point upwards with a hope that never fails.

These at least were the feelings that the sight of the old church and
the old castle gave _me_, children dear. I don't suppose Ted thought of
them in this way when he first made their acquaintance, and yet I don't
know. He might not have been able to say much of what he felt, he was
such a little fellow. But he _did_ feel, and in a way that was strange
and new, and nearly took his breath away the first time he entered the
beautiful old church, walking quietly up the aisle behind his father,
his little hat in his hand, gazing up with his earnest eyes at the
mysterious stretch of the lofty roof. "O mother," he said, when he went
home, "when I am big I will always like the _high_ church best." And
when the clear ringing chimes burst forth, as they did with ever-fresh
beauty four times a day, sounding to the baby fancy as if they came
straight down from heaven, it was all Ted could do not to burst into
tears, as he had done that summer day when Mabel had sung "Home, sweet
home" in the mountain-gorge.

For it was in this old town, with its church and castle and quaint
streets, where some of the houses are still painted black and white, and
others lean forward in the top stories as if they wanted to kiss each
other; where the front doors mostly open right on to the street, and you
come upon the dear old gardens as a sort of delicious surprise at the
back; where each turn as you walk about these same old streets gives you
a new peep, more delightful than the last, of the river or the cliffs or
the far distant hills with their tender lights and shadows; where, on
market days the country people come trooping in with their poultry and
butter and eggs, with here and there a scarlet cloak among them, the
coming and going giving the old High Street the look almost of a foreign
town;--here in this dear old place little Ted took root again, and
learned to love his new home so much that he forgot to pine for the
mountains and the sea. And, here, some years after we said good-bye to
them as they drove away from the pretty house in the garden, we find
them again--Ted, a big boy of nine or ten, Cissy looking perhaps older
than she really was, so bright and hearty and capable a little maiden
had she become.

They are in the garden, the dear garden that was as delightful a playing
place as children could have, though quite, quite different from the
first one you saw Ted in. There it was all ups and downs, lying as it
did on the side of a hill; here the paths are on flat ground, though
some are zigzaggy of course, as the little paths in an interesting
garden always should be; while besides these, some fine broad ones run
straight from one end to another, making splendid highroads for drives
in wheelbarrows or toy-carts. And in this garden too the trees are high
and well grown, and plenty of them. It was just the place for hide and
seek or "I spy."

Ted and Cissy have been working at their gardens.

"Oh dear," said the little girl, throwing down her tiny rake and hoe,
"Cissy _is_ so tired. And the f'owers won't grow if they isn't planted
kick. Cissy is so fond of f'owers."

"So am I," said Ted, "but girls are so quickly tired. It's no good their
trying to garden."

Cissy looked rather disconsolate.

"Boys shouldn't have all the f'owers," she said. "Zoo's not a summer
child, Ted, zoo's a Kismas child. Zoo should have snow, and Cissy should
have f'owers."

She looked at her brother rather mischievously as she said this.

"As it happens, Miss Cissy," said Ted, "there wasn't any snow the
Christmas I was born. Mother told me so. And any way, if you liked
snowballs I'd let you have them, so I don't see why I shouldn't have
flowers."

Cissy threw her arms round Ted's neck and kissed him. "Poor Ted," she
said, "zoo shall have f'owers. But Cissy won't have any in her garden if
zey isn't planted kick."

"Well, never mind. I'll help you," said Ted; "as soon as I've done my
lessons this evening, I'll work in your garden."

"Zank zoo, _dear_ Ted," said Cissy rapturously, and a new hugging
ensued, which Ted submitted to with a good grace, though lately it had
dawned on him that he was getting rather too big for kissing.

The children's "gardens" were just under the wall that skirted their
father's real garden. On the other side of this wall ran the highroad,
and the lively sights and sounds to be heard and seen from the top of
this same wall made the position of their own bit of ground greatly to
their liking. Only the getting on to the wall! There was the difficulty.
For Ted it was not so tremendous. _He_ could clamber up by the help of
niches which he had managed to make for his feet here and there between
the stones, and the consequent destruction to trousers and stockings had
never as yet occurred to his boyish mind. But Cissy--poor Cissy! it was
quite impossible to get _her_ up on to the wall, and for some time an
ambitious project had been taking shape in Ted's brain.

"Cissy," he said, when he was released, "it's no good beginning working
at your garden now. We have to go in in ten minutes. I'm going up on the
wall for a few minutes. You stay there, and I'll call down to you all I
see."

"O Ted," said Cissy, "I _wiss_ I could climb up the wall too."

"I know you do," said Ted. "I've been thinking about that. Wait till I
get up, and I'll tell you about it."

Full of faith in Ted's wisdom, little Cissy sat down by the roots of a
great elm-tree which stood in her brother's domain. "My tree" Ted had
always called it, and it was one of the charms of his property. _It_ was
not difficult to climb, even Cissy could be hoisted some way up--to the
level of top of the wall indeed, without difficulty, but unfortunately
between the tree and the wall there was a space, too wide to cross. And
even when the right level was reached, it was too far back to see on to
the road.

"If only the tree grew close to the wall," Ted had often said to
himself; and now as Cissy sat down below wondering what Ted was going to
do, his quick eyes were examining all about to see if a plan that had
struck him would be possible.

"Cissy," he cried suddenly, and Cissy started to her feet. "Oh what,
Ted?" she cried.

"I see how it could be done. If I had a plank of wood I could fasten it
to the tree on one side, and--and--I could find _some_ way if I tried,
of fastening it to the wall on the other, and then I could pull the
branches down a little--they're nearly down far enough, to make a sort
of back to the seat, and oh, Cissy, it would be such a lovely place! We
could both sit on it, and see all that passed. I'll tell you what I'm
seeing now. There's a man with a wheelbarrow just passing, and such a
queer little dog running beside, and farther off there's a boy with a
basket, and two girls, and one of them's carrying a baby, and--yes
there's a cart and horse coming--awfully fast. I do believe the horse
is running away. No, he's pulled it up, and----"

"O Ted," said Cissy, clasping her hands, "how _lovely_ it must be! O
Ted, do come down and be kick about making the place for me, for Cissy."

Just then the dinner-bell rang. Ted began his descent, Cissy eagerly
awaiting him. She took his hand and trotted along beside him.

"_Do_ zoo think zoo can do it, Ted?" she said.

"I must see about the wood first," said Ted, not without a little
importance in his tone; "I think there's some pieces in the coach-house
that would do."

At luncheon the big people, of whom there were several, for some uncles
and aunts had been staying with the children's father and mother lately,
noticed that Ted and Cissy looked very eager about something.

"What have you been doing with yourselves, you little people, this
morning?" said one of the aunties kindly.

Cissy was about to answer, but a glance from Ted made her shut tight
her little mouth again. There must be some reason for it--perhaps this
delightful plan was to be a secret, for her faith in Ted was unbounded.

"We've been in the garden, in _our_ gardens," Ted replied.

"Digging up the plants to see if they were growing--eh?" said an uncle
who liked to tease a little sometimes.

Ted didn't mind teasing. He only laughed. Cissy looked a little, a very
little offended. She did _not_ like teasing, and she specially disliked
any one teasing her dear Ted. Her face grew a little red.

"Ted knows about f'owers bootilly," she said; "Ted knows lots of
things."

"_Cissy!_" said Ted, whose turn it was now to grow a little red, but
Cissy maintained her ground.

"Ses," she said. "Ted does."

"Ted's to grow up a very clever man, isn't he, Cissy?" said her father
encouragingly--"as clever as _Uncle_ Ted here."

"Oh no," the little fellow replied, blushing still more, for Ted never
put himself forward so as to be noticed; "I never could be that. Uncle
Ted writes books with lots of counting and stick-sticks in them and----"

"Lots of _what_?" asked his uncle.

"Stick-sticks," said Ted simply. "I don't know what it means, but mother
told me it was a sort of counting--like how many days in a year were
fine and how many rainy."

"Or how many old women with baskets, and how many without, passed down
the road this morning--eh, Ted?" said his other uncle, laughing
heartily.

"Yes, I suppose so," said Ted. "Are stick-sticks any good?" he inquired,
consideringly.

"It's to be hoped so," said Uncle Ted.

A bright idea struck the little fellow. He must talk it over with Cissy.
If only that delightful seat between the tree and the wall was arranged
_they_ might make "stick-sticks"! What fun, and how pleased Uncle Ted
would be! Already Ted's active brain began to plan it all. They should
have a nice big ruled sheet of paper and divide it into rows, as for
columns of sums: one row should be for horses alone, and one for horses
with carts, and one for people, and one for children, and another for
dogs, and another for wheelbarrows perhaps. And then sometimes donkeys
passed, and now and then pigs even, on their way to market--yes, a lot
of rows would be needed. And at the top of the paper he would write in
nice big letters "stick"--no, mother would tell him how to write it
nicely, he knew that wasn't quite the real word, mother would spell it
for him: "St--something--of what passed the tree." It would be almost
like writing a book.

He was so eager about it that he could hardly finish his dinner. For a
great deal was involved in his plan, as you shall hear.

In the first place, it became evident to him after an examination of the
bits of wood in the unused coach-house, that there was nothing there
that would do. He could get a nice little plank, a plank that would not
scratch poor Cissy's legs or tear her frocks, from the carpenter, but
then it would cost money, for Ted had gained some worldly wisdom since
the days when he thought the kind shopkeepers spread out their wares for
everybody to help themselves as they liked. And Ted was rather short of
money, and Ted was of rather an independent spirit. He would much prefer
not asking mother for any. The seat in the tree would be twice as nice
if he could manage it all his own self, as Cissy would say.

Ted thought it all over a great deal, and talked about it to Cissy. It
was a good thing, they agreed, that it was holiday-time just now, even
though Ted had every day _some_ lessons to do. And though Cissy was very
little, it was, after all, she who thought of a plan for gaining some
money, as you shall hear.

Some few times in their lives Ted and Cissy had seen Punch and Judy, and
most delightful they thought it. Perhaps I am wrong in saying Cissy had
seen it more than once, but _Ted_ had, and he used to amuse Cissy by
acting it over to please her. And I think it was from this that her idea
came.

"Appose, Ted," she said the next day when they were out in the garden
having a great consultation--"appose we make a show, and all the big
people would give us pennies."

Ted considered for a minute. They were standing, Cissy and he, by the
railing which at one side of their father's pretty garden divided it
from some lovely fields, where sheep, with their dear little lambs
skipping about beside them, were feeding. Far in the distance rose the
soft blue outlines of a lofty hill, "our precious hill" Ted's mother
used to call it, and indeed it was almost worthy of the name of
mountain, and for this she valued it still more, as it seemed to her
like a reminder of the mountain home she had loved so dearly. Ted's
glance fell on it, and it carried back his thoughts to the mountain of
his babyhood and the ogre stories mixed up with it in his mind. And then
his thoughts went wandering away to his old "hymn book," still in a
place of honour in his bookshelves, and to the fairy stories at the end
of it--Cinderella and the others. He turned to Cissy with a beaming
face.

"I'll tell you what we'll do, Cis," he said; "we'll have a show of
Beauty and the Beast. What a good idea it was of yours, Cis, to have a
show."

Cissy was _greatly_ flattered. Only she didn't quite like the idea of
her dear Ted being the Beast. But when Ted reminded her that the Beast
was _really_ so good and kind, she grew satisfied.

"And how awfully pleased Percy will be when he comes to see the seat,
_won't_ he?" said Ted. And this thought reconciled him to what hitherto
had been rather a grief to him--that Percy's holidays were shorter and
fell later in the season than his.

You can imagine, children, better than I could tell what a bustle and
fuss Ted and Cissy were in all that day. They looked so important,
Ted's eyes were so bright, and Cissy's little mouth shut close in such
a dignified way, that the big people must have been _very_ stupid big
people not to suspect something out of the common. But as they were very
kind big people, and as they understood children and children's ways,
they took care not to seem as if they did notice, and Mabel and her
sister, who were also of the home party, even helped Cissy to stitch
up an old muslin window curtain in a wonderful way for Beauty's dress,
without making any indiscreet remarks. At which little Cissy greatly
rejoiced. "_Wasn't_ I clever not to let zoo find out?" she said
afterwards, with immense satisfaction.

Late that evening--late for the children that is to say--about seven
o'clock, for Cissy had got leave to sit up an hour longer, there came a
ring at the hall bell, and a very funny-looking letter was handed in,
which a boy in a muffled voice told the servant was for the ladies and
gentlemen, and that she was to tell them the "act" would begin in five
minutes "in the theatre hall of the day nursery." The parlour maid, who
(of course!) had not the least idea in the world that the messenger was
Master Ted, gravely handed the letter to Miss Mabel, who was the first
person she saw, and Mabel hastened to explain to the others that its
contents, quarters of old calling-cards with numbers marked on them,
were evidently meant to be tickets for the performance. The big people
were all much amused, but all of course were quite ready to "assist"
at the "act." They thought it better to wait a little more than five
minutes before going upstairs to the theatre hall, to give Ted time to
get ready before the spectators arrived, not understanding, you see,
that all he had to do was to pin his father's rough brown railway rug
on, to imitate the Beast. So when they at last all marched upstairs the
actors were both ready awaiting them.

  Illustration:
  "Oh dear, oh dear!" cries Beauty, jumping up in a fright, "he's
  coming to eat me."--P. 133.

There was a row of chairs arranged at one side of the nursery for the
visitors, and the hearth-rug, pulled out of its place, with a couple
of footstools at each side, served for the stage. Scene first was Miss
Beauty sitting in a corner crying, after her father had left her in the
Beast's garden.

"He'll eat me up! oh, he'll eat me up!" she sobs out; and then a low
growl is heard, and from a corner behind a table where no one had
noticed him, a very remarkable-looking shapeless sort of dark brown lump
rolls or waddles along the floor.

"Oh dear, oh dear!" cries Beauty, jumping up in a fright, "he's coming
to eat me."

"No, I'm not going to eat you, dear Beauty," the growly voice replies;
"I'm not going to hurt you, dear Beauty. I've brought you something nice
to eat for your tea. I'm sure you must be hungry;" and from somewhere
or other the Beast produces a plate with some biscuits, which he humbly
lays at her feet and then waddles off again. Beauty nibbles at the
biscuits, then murmuring to herself, "He's a very kind Beast," she moves
away, her window curtain train sweeping gracefully after her, behind the
screen, which is supposed to represent the inside of the Beast's Castle,
and where he himself has already disappeared. And this is the end of the
first scene, the "act" being divided into two scenes.

The audience all clap their hands in applause.

"Capital!" and "Bravo!" they call out, so that Ted and Cissy feel their
cheeks quite red, even behind the screen.

"Let's get it done quick, Cissy," said Ted; "it makes me feel so silly
when they call out like that."

And the last scene is hurried on. It is not a very long one. Beauty
has been away. She has gone, as everybody knows, on a visit to her old
home, and on her return poor Beast is nowhere to be found. At last she
discovers him lying quite still in a corner of the garden.

"Oh, poor Beast!" she exclaims, "Cis--Booty, I mean, is so sorry. Oh,
poor Beast! I is afraid you is kite deaded, and I do love zoo, poor
Beast," at which up jumps poor Beast, Beast no longer, for his rough
skin rolls off as if by magic, and lo and behold there is Ted, got up
ever so fine, with a scarlet scarf round his waist and an elegant old
velvet smoking-cap with a long tassel on his head, and goodness knows
what more.

"Oh, you bootiful P'ince," cries Beauty, and then they take hands
and bow most politely to the audience, and then in a sudden fit of
shamefacedness and shyness, they both scurry off behind the screen, Ted
toppling over Cissy's long train on the way, at which there is renewed
applause, and great laughter from the actors themselves. But the manager
is quite up to his business. "That's all," calls out a little voice from
behind the screen; "zoo may all go now, and _pay at the door_." And sure
enough as the big people make their way out, there is Ted in his usual
attire standing at the door, with a little basket in his hand,
gracefully held out for contributions.

"Why, how did you get here already?" asks his father.

"I slipped round by the other side of the screen while you were all
laughing and clapping," says Ted, looking up with a beaming face. And
the pennies and sixpennies that find their way into the basket are
several. When the actors count up their gains before they go to bed,
they are the happy possessors of two shillings and sevenpence. Far more
than enough to pay for the wood for the seat in the tree!




CHAPTER VIII.

"STATISTICS."

  "Are they not busy?--the creatures!
    Wanting to go to their beds?--not they!"


How delightful it was to wake the next morning and to see sparkling in
the early sunshine the neat little silver coins, and the big copper
ones, laid out in a row on his table! Ted jumped out of bed, not quite
so early as he had intended, for he had been up rather later than usual
the night before, and by the time he had had his nice cold bath and was
dressed, he heard the prayer bell ring, and was only ready to take his
seat as usual on a little chair in a corner of the room not far from
where his dear old nurse and the other servants were placed. He liked
better to sit there, for it gave him somehow a little uncomfortable
feeling to see the servants quite by themselves, as it were, so
separated from the family, and he had got into the way of sitting
between the two sets of seats, and though little Narcissa from her
perch on her mother's knee would sometimes smile and nod and beckon to
him to come nearer, Ted always kept to his own place. This morning many
thoughts were dancing about his brain, and it was a little difficult for
him to listen with his usual attention, even though it was one of the
chapters he was very fond of, especially when his father read it in his
nice clear voice. It was that one about the boy Jesus, staying behind
His father and mother to talk with the learned doctors in the temple,
and though some part of it puzzled Ted rather, yet he liked to listen
and think about it. How frightened that father and mother must have
been! How was it that Jesus knew that it was right for Him to stay
behind--even though it was without His father's and mother's leave? For
other little boys it would have been wrong, but then,--oh yes, of
course, Jesus was not like other little boys. If only they, if only he,
Ted, could learn to be more like _Him_, the one perfect Christmas child!
And even the puzzling part of it grew clearer as this unconscious prayer
rose out of the innocent heart. For Ted's own father and mother, even
if they were frightened for a little, would not be _vexed_ if he did
something without their leave that was good and right. Only it was
difficult to tell, very difficult--on the whole Ted felt that he
understood what his mother told him about being obedient, better than he
used. That was what God had given little boys fathers and mothers for,
for they, when they were good and wise, could not but know best. When
they were _not_ good and wise, like the fathers and mothers of some of
the poor London street boys he had heard of--oh, how fearful that must
be! And then as his own father's voice went on, it all came before Ted
like a picture--he had once seen a picture of it, he thought--the first
setting-out of old Joseph and the sweet-faced mother, the distress and
fear, the delight of finding the Child again, and then the long walk
home all together to the carpenter's shop in the narrow Eastern street.
And, child-like, Ted's fancy turned again with the association to what
was before him this morning. _He_ was to go to the carpenter's to choose
the wood for the seat in the tree, and oh, how delightful it would be to
see it arranged, and how surprised Percy would be, and what beautiful
rows of stick-sticks Cissy and he would be able to make to help Uncle
Ted. All kinds of pleasant hopes and fancies were racing round Ted's
brain again as he knelt down with the others to listen to the prayer
that followed the reading. It was not till the murmured chorus of "Our
Father," repeated all together at the end, caught his ear, that with a
sudden start Ted realised that he had not been listening.

He did feel sorry and ashamed, but he was so happy that morning, the
world outside was so bright and sunny, and the people inside so kind
and cheerful, as they all sat round the breakfast table, that Ted's
self-reproach did not last. And as soon as he had finished the short
morning lessons he had to do in the holidays, he got leave from mother
to go off to order the plank for the seat.

It turned out a little dearer than he had expected. Two and sevenpence
were the funds in hand.

"I could give you a piece of wood for much less of course, sir," said
the good-natured carpenter, who was a great ally of Ted's, "but as you
explain it to me it needs something more than a bit of wood, else it
wouldn't be safe for you and the young lady to sit on;" and then he
showed the boy how it should be done, with a small iron bolt driven into
the wall and another of a different kind fixed to the tree. "Then," said
he, "it will be as safe as safe, and I'll plane you a neat little seat
with no splinters or sharp edges to tear Missy's frocks."

Ted was delighted. His quick eye caught at once the carpenter's plan,
and he saw how much more satisfactory and complete it would be than the
rough idea he had had at first. But the price? Ted felt much afraid that
here was to be the difficulty.

"How much will it cost, Mr. Newton?" he inquired anxiously.

The carpenter reflected a moment.

"Wood, so much; bolts, so much; nails; time;" Ted heard him half
whispering to himself. Then he looked up.

"A matter of three shilling or so, sir," he replied. "I'll try that it
shan't be more. But you see the bolts I have to buy, they're not things
as we use every day. And for the time, sir, I'm not thinking much of
that. The evenings are light now. I'll try and see to it myself after
work's over."

"Thank you very much, Mr. Newton," said Ted. "I think it'll be all
right. But I'd like first to tell my mother how much it will cost, and
then I'll run back and settle about it."

"All right, sir," the carpenter replied; and after pausing a moment at
the door to pat the great big gentle dog, that was lying there blinking
in the sunshine, and thinking to himself that its eyes somehow reminded
him of long ago Cheviott whom Ted still remembered, though Newton's dog
wasn't at all the same kind, the boy ran off again, whistling as he
went, with light dancing steps down the in-and-out zigzag streets of the
old town, stopping a moment, eager as he was, to admire the peeps of
lovely view he came upon now and then as he turned a corner, or crossed
the open market-place.

He was in great spirits. Fivepence short he felt sure could easily be
made up.

"Either mother will give it me," he thought, "or she'll find some way of
my earning it. I'm sure she'd like it properly done, and there'll be no
fear of Cissy or me hurting ourselves."

On he danced again, for now he was in more open ground, running along
the country highroad where was his home. A few cottages stood not far
from where he was passing--cottages of respectable people, with several
of whom sociable Ted was on friendly terms, and just as he was nearing
the first of these, a boy about his own age came out, a basket on his
arm and in his hands something tied up in a cloth which he was carrying
carefully. But boys will be boys!

"Good morning, Jamie," said Ted as they met, for he recognised the boy
as the son of a man living farther down the road, who had sometimes
worked for his father; "where have you been, and what's that you've
got?" and in pure fun Ted tapped with a switch he was carrying on the
mysterious bundle.

Jamie looked up laughingly.

"O Master Ted," he was just beginning, but somehow--_how_ I cannot tell,
and I feel pretty sure that neither Ted nor Jamie could have told
either--Ted's friendly tap had either distracted his attention so that
he trod on a stone and lost his balance, or else it had destroyed the
equilibrium of the bundle itself, so that almost before he had time even
to say "O Master Ted," the mischief was done. Down plumped the bundle,
with a crash of broken crockery, and a brown liquid at once oozed out
through the cloth, making a melancholy puddle on the road. Jamie's
half-spoken words changed into a cry of despair. It was the Sunday's
dinner which had come to grief, the pie which his poor mother had
prepared so carefully, and which he was taking home from his
grandmother's, in whose oven it had been baking.

"Oh dear, oh dear, what ever _shall_ I do?" cried the poor little boy.
"What will mother say? Oh dear, oh dear!--O Master Ted, what shall I
do?"

Jamie's tears and sobs were pitiful. Ted, with a pale concerned face
stood beside him, speechless.

"It was all my fault, Jamie," he said at last. "It's me your mother must
scold, not you. I must go home with you, and tell her it wasn't your
fault."

"Oh but it were," sobbed the child. "Mother always tells me to look
neither to right nor to left when I'm carrying anything like this here.
Oh deary me, what ever shall I do?"

He stooped down and untied the knots of the large checked handkerchief
in which the unfortunate pie had been enveloped. The dish was all in
pieces, the gravy fast disappearing. Jamie gathered together, using the
largest bit of the broken stoneware as a plate, some of the pieces of
meat which might still be eaten, and Ted, stooping down too, helped him
to the best of his ability. But it was very little that could be saved
from the shipwreck. And then the two boys turned in the direction of
Jamie's home, Jamie sobbing all the way, and Ted himself too appalled to
know what to say to comfort him.

Jamie's mother was a busy, hard-working woman. She was kind to her
children, but that is not to say that they never had a sharp word from
her. And there were so many of them--more than enough to try the patience
of a mother less worried by other cares. So poor Jamie had some reason
to cry, and he did not attempt to prevent Ted's going home with
him--alone he would hardly have dared to face the expected scolding.

She was at the door, or just inside it, as the boys made their
appearance, with a big tub before her in which she was washing up some
odds and ends, without which her numerous family could not have made
their usual tidy appearance at church and Sunday school the next day.
For it was Saturday, often a rather trying day to heads of households in
every class. But Jim's mother was in pretty good spirits. She had got on
with her work, Sunday's pie had been made early and sent on to granny's,
and Jamie, who was a very careful messenger, would be back with it
immediately, all ready to be eaten cold with hot potatoes the next
day. So Sunday's dinner was off the good woman's mind, when suddenly a
startling vision met her gaze. There was Jamie, red-eyed and tearful,
coming down the road, and beside him the little Master from the Lawn
House. What could be the matter? Jamie had not hurt _himself_, thus
much was evident, but what was the small and shapeless bundle he was
carrying in the handkerchief she had given him to cover the pie, and
what had come over the nice clean handkerchief itself? The poor woman's
heart gave a great throb of vexation.

"What ever have ye done with the pie, Jamie?" she exclaimed first in her
anxiety, though she then turned in haste to bid the little master "good
morning."

"O mother," Jamie began, his sobs bursting out afresh, but Ted put him
gently aside.

"Let me tell," he said. "I came on purpose. If--if you please," he went
on eagerly, though his fair face flushed a little, "it was all my fault.
I gave Jim a little poke with my stick, quite in fun, and somehow it
made him drop the pie. But it isn't his fault. You won't scold _him_,
please, will you?"

Vexed as she was, Jamie's mother could not but feel softened. Ted's
friendly ways were well known to his poorer neighbours, who with one
voice pronounced him "a perfect little gentleman wherever he goes."

"It's not much use scolding," she said gently enough, but still with
real distress in her tone which went to Ted's heart. "No use crying over
spilt milk, as my master says. But still I do think Jamie might have
been more careful. However, it can't be helped, but they'll have to do
without a pie for dinner to-morrow. And thank you, Master Ted, for
coming along of Jim for to tell me."

"But it wasn't Jim's fault. It was _all_ mine," repeated Ted sadly. And
then he bade the poor woman good-bye, and nodding to Jim, who was still
wiping his eyes, though looking a good deal less frightened, the boy set
off towards home again.

But how different everything looked--the sun was as bright, the air as
pleasant as ten minutes before, but Ted's heart was heavy, and when at
the garden gate he met his mother, who greeted him with her kind smile
and asked him if he had settled with Newton about the seat, it was all
poor Ted could do not to burst into tears. He was running past his
mother into the house, with a hasty "Yes, thank you, mother, I'll tell
you about it afterwards," for he had not yet made up his mind what he
should say or do; it was his own fault, and he must suffer for it, that
was his first idea, but his mother stopped him. The momentary glance at
his face had been sufficient to show her that something was the matter.

"What is it, Ted, dear?" she said kindly and anxiously.

Ted's answer was a question, and a very queer question.

"Mother," he said, "how much do pies cost?"

"Pies," repeated his mother, "what kind of pies do you mean? Big ones,
little ones, meat ones, or what?"

"Big ones, mother, at least _a_ big one, and all made of meat, with
crust at the top. And oh!" he exclaimed, "there was the dish! I daresay
that cost a good deal," and his face grew sadder and sadder.

But his mother told him he really must explain, and so he did. "I didn't
mean to tell you about it, mother," he said, "for it was my own fault,
and telling you seems almost like asking for the money," and here poor
Ted's face grew red again. "I thought the only thing to do was to take
the _act_ money, the two shillings and sevenpence, you know, mother, and
give it to Jamie's mother, and just give up having the seat," and here
Ted's repressed feelings were too much for him. He turned away his face
and fairly burst into tears. Give up the seat! Think of all that meant
to him, poor boy. The pleasure for Cissy as well as his own, the
delightful surprise to Percy, the rows of stick-sticks for his uncle. I
don't think it was wonderful that Ted burst into tears.

"My poor boy," said his mother, and then she thought it over to herself
for a little. She did not begin talking to Ted about how careless he had
been, and that it must be a lesson to him, and so on, as many even very
kind mothers are sometimes tempted to do, when, as _does_ happen now and
then in this rather contrary world, very small wrongdoings have very big
results,--she could not feel that Ted had been much to blame, and she
was quite sure it _would_ be "a lesson to him," without her saying any
more about it. So she just thought it over quietly, and then said,

"No, Ted. I don't quite think that would be right. Your giving
up the seat would be punishing others as well as yourself--Cissy
particularly--and that would not be right. I will see that Jamie and his
brothers and sisters have something for their dinner to-morrow that will
please them as much as the pie, and you must tell Newton to go on with
the seat, and----"

"But, mother," interrupted Ted, "I won't be happy unless I pay it
myself, the dinner I mean. It wouldn't be _fair_, if I didn't--would
it, mother?" and he looked up with his honest, anxious blue eyes in his
mother's face, so that she felt the same wish to stoop down and kiss him
that had made her do so long ago in the street of the little country
town near their old home.

"I was going on to speak about that," said his mother. "It will take all
your money and a little more to pay Newton, you see, and you haven't any
more."

"No, mother, but if I was to give up my library pennies?"--for Ted
subscribed a penny a week to a children's library in the town, as he had
long ago exhausted the home stores.

"That would take a _very_ long time, and it would be a pity for you to
lose your reading," said his mother. "But I'll tell you what--I will
count the dinner as owing from you to me, and you will pay it as best
you can, little by little. For every summer you get presents from your
uncles or cousins when they are with us. I will count it two shillings
and sixpence--the sixpence for the dish, and I know you will not forget
to pay me."

"No indeed, mother, and thank you _so_ much," said Ted, with a now
really lightened heart. "Shall I tell Jamie about the dinner? I could go
that way when I go back to Newton's. He will be so pleased. His mother
didn't scold him, but yet I couldn't help being _very_ sorry for him.
His face did look so unhappy."

And when, after dinner, Ted ran off again, I think the pleasure of the
good news in store for poor Jamie was quite as much in his mind as his
own errand to Newton's.

The seat was a great success. Newton came that very evening to measure
it exactly, and Ted had the satisfaction of making some suggestions
which the carpenter thought very good ones, as to the best way of
fastening it firmly. And on Monday evening the work was accomplished.
Never, surely, were two birds in a nest more happy than Ted and Cissy,
when, for the first time, they mounted up on to their airy throne. Their
mother, busy among her flowers, was surprised by a sound of soft singing
over her head, coming from at first she could not tell where. She stood
still to listen--she had, for the moment, forgotten about the perch in
the tree. But the words and the tune soon told her who it was. It was
Ted at his old favourite, "Home, sweet home." Sweetly and softly his
boyish voice rang out. The tears came into his mother's eyes, but she
moved away silently. She did not want the children to know she was
there. It seemed to take away the simplicity of his pretty singing for
him to know that _any one_, even his mother, had been listening.

"He is very fond of music," she said to herself, "no doubt he has great
taste for it," and the thought gave her pleasure. She pictured to
herself happy future days when Ted and Cissy would be able to play and
sing together--when as "big people," the brother and sister would
continue the tender friendship that she liked so much to see.

Monday evening was too late to begin the important paper for Uncle Ted.
But on Tuesday the children were up with the lark, armed with a long
ruled sheet, divided by lines across the other way, into what Ted called
several "compartments," a pencil or two, for though Cissy could not make
figures, she could make little strokes, each of which stood for a one
_something_. The words at the head of the "compartments" comprised
everything which, with the slightest probability, _could_ be expected
to journey along the highroad. Men, women, boys, girls, babies in
perambulators, babies in nurses' arms; old women with baskets were
considered a separate genus, and had a row to themselves; carts with one
horse, waggons with two, donkeys, dogs, pigs, cats, wheelbarrows. And
at one side Ted carefully marked the hour at which began and ended the
"observations." For, alas! the children could not be _all_ day at their
post, though they did gravely purpose that they should take it in turn
to go in to dinner, so that no passers-by should be unrecorded. But
that mother could not agree to. Dinner must be eaten, and with as much
deliberation and propriety as usual, or else what was an interest and a
pleasure would have to be discouraged. And after all it was rather nice
to have the paper exhibited and commented upon as they all sat round the
luncheon-table, though Cissy looked as if she were not _quite_ sure that
she should not take offence for Ted, when one of the big people inquired
why there wasn't a row for elephants and another for dancing-bears.

The long summer afternoon was spent in the same way. Never surely had
such a delightful occupation for two small people brimming over with
life and energy, been discovered. Two birds busied with arranging their
nest could not have been more completely content.

"If this goes on," said the children's mother, laughing, when they did
condescend to come in to tea, "I think we had better send a mattress and
a pillow up to your seat, and let you stay there all night."

Ted and Cissy smiled, and in their hearts I rather think they were of
opinion that what their mother proposed would be very nice. But, eager
as they were, they were both very hungry, and it was evident that living
in a tree did not destroy their appetite, for the quantity of slices
of bread and butter which disappeared would have alarmed any one
unaccustomed to the feats of little people in that way.

And tea over, off they set again. It was almost as if they were away on
a visit somewhere, the house seemed so quiet, and the garden, so often
at that time of day the scene of tremendous romps in which even nurse
herself was coaxed to join, quite deserted. _Unless_--that is to
say--you had passed under a certain tree and stood still to listen to
the clatter going on overhead, though, thanks to the leafy branches,
there was nothing to be _seen_.

"Can there be magpies up in that tree?" would, I think, have been your
first idea. And then, listening a little more attentively, you would
have come to think that whether human or feathered they were very funny
magpies indeed.

"Fifteen, _sixteen_, that makes. Hurrah, sixteen dogs since ten o'clock
this morning. And, let's see, seven old women with baskets, and----"

"Them wasn't all _old_," corrects the small voice of magpie number two;
"Jessie wif the eggs isn't old."

"Never mind; if they've got baskets they _should_ be old," replies
Ted. "An old woman with a basket _sounds_ right. Then there's five
p'rambulators, oh, it _is_ a long word to spell--it goes right out of
its place into the other rows. I wish I'd just put 'babies in p'rams.'
And then there's three pigs and horses, oh dear I can't count how many.
It's getting too dark to see the strokes on the paper. I say, Cissy,
just you get down and run in and ask for two or three dips. We can stick
them up on the wall and have a beautiful lighting up, and then we can
see everybody that passes."

Down clambered obedient Cissy--she was growing very alert by this time
at making her way up and down--off she set to the house with her
message.

"Dips, dips," she repeated to herself. "Ted says I'm to ask for two or
three dips. I wonder what dips is."

She had not the slightest idea, but it never occurred to her to do
otherwise than exactly what her brother had said. It was a funny little
figure that presented itself to the children's mother, in the twilight,
just as she was putting away her work and thinking it was really time
for Ted and Cissy to come in, a shawl wrapped round and tied behind over
her white pinafore, of which the part that could be seen was by no means
as clean as it might have been, any more than the eager flushed little
face, with its bright dark eyes and wavy hair tumbling over the
forehead.

"My dear Cissy, what a _very_ dirty little girl you are," said her
mother, laughing. "You really look more like a gipsy than anything
else."

"Does dipsies live up trees?" inquired Cissy gravely. "Trees _is_ rather
dirty. But oh, mother, Ted wants me to ask you for two or three dips.
_P'ease_ give me zem."

"_Dips_," repeated her mother, "what in the world does he want dips
for?"

"Cissy doesn't know," replied the little girl. "Cissy doesn't know what
dips is. Cissy finks Ted said he would 'tick zem up on ze wall, to make
it look pitty."

Her mother was very much amused.

"Dips are candles," she said. "I suppose Ted wants to light up the
tree."

Her words made a light break over Cissy's face in the first place.

"Oh ses," said the little maiden, "it is getting so dark. Oh _do_ give
Ted some dips, _dear_ mother--do, _do_."

But not any number of "do's" would have made mother agree to so
dangerous a proceeding.

"My dear little girl, you would certainly set yourselves on fire, and
the tree too," she replied. "But never mind," she went on, seeing
the corners of Cissy's mouth going down with the thought of Ted's
disappointment, "I will go out with you and explain to Ted."

Mother put a shawl over her shoulders and went out with her little girl.
Some way off, Ted heard them coming.

"O Cis, have you got the dips?" he cried. "I forgot to tell you to bring
some matches too. I've had such hard work to see, and a lot of people
passed. I _think_ there was a woman and two boys. I'll have to mark them
down, when----"

"I've come with Cissy, Ted," replied his mother's voice, to his
surprise, "to tell you that it would really be too much of a good thing
to go on with your observations all night. And, in the first place, you
would certainly set yourself and Cissy and the tree on fire, if I let
you have candles up there. Come down now, that's a good boy, and show me
your paper, and we'll pack it up to send to your uncle by post."

"Very well, mother," said Ted, with his usual cheery good-nature. "I'm
coming. Here goes," and in another minute he was beside her. "You don't
know what a beautiful long paperful I've got. I don't want you to pack
it up _yet_, mother. Cissy and I are going to keep it on ever so much
longer, aren't we, Cis?"

And chattering merrily the children went in with their mother. But as
she said to their father, it really is to be doubted if they would not
have stayed in the tree all night, if Ted had got his wish and arranged
a "dip" illumination on the top of the wall.

After all, that day in the tree was the last of their "stick-sticks."
The weather changed, and there was nearly a week of rain, and by the
time it was over, children-like, Ted and Cissy had grown tired of the
rows of strokes representing old women and donkeys and horses, and all
the rest of them; the "observations" had lost their attraction for them.
Still the pleasure was not quite over, for there was the packing of the
big paper to send to Uncle Ted by post, and his letter of thanks in
return. And Percy came home for the holidays, and greatly approved of
the nest in the tree. And what the children did _not_ do up there--what
games they played, how they were by turns Robinson Crusoe hiding from
the savages, King Charles in the oak at Boscobel, or, quainter still,
how they all sometimes suddenly turned into squirrels and manufactured
for themselves the most wonderful tails of old brush handles, and
goodness only knows what, which stuck straight up behind and made the
climbing to the nest by no means an easy matter--yes indeed, what they
did _not_ do up in the tree would be difficult to tell.

But it comes into my mind just now that I have never told you anything
of Ted's indoor life. Hitherto it has seemed all summer days and
gardens, has it not? And no doubt the boy's _greatest_ happiness was
in outdoor interests and employments. But of course it was not always
summer and sunshine for Ted, any more than for any one else--and,
Christmas child though he was, there were wintry days when even _he_ had
to stay in the house and find work and pleasures indoors. For winter
does not mean nothing but bright frosty skies overhead, and crisp clean
snow underfoot. There are dreary days of rain and mist and mud, when
children are much better at home, and when mothers and nurses are more
thankful than any one _not_ a mother or nurse can imagine, to have to
do with cheerful contented little people, who are "good at amusing
themselves," and unselfish enough not to worry every one about them
because it is a rainy day.




CHAPTER IX.

A PEACOCK'S FEATHER AND A KISS.

  "We tried to quarrel yesterday.
   Ah!... kiss the memory away."


In Ted's pleasant home there was a queer little room used for nothing in
particular. It was a very little room, hardly worthy indeed of the name,
but it had, like some small men who have very big minds, a large window
with a most charming view. I think it was partly this which made Ted
take such a fancy to this queer little room in the first place--he used
to stand at the window when they first came to the house and gaze out at
the stretch of sloping fields, with peeps here and there of the blue
river fringed with splendid trees, and farther off still the distant
hills fading away into the mysterious cloudiness, the sight of which
always gave him a strange feeling as if he would like to cry--Ted used
to gaze out of this window for ever so long at a time, till somehow the
little room came to be associated with him, and the rest of the family
got into the way of speaking of it as his. And gradually an idea took
shape in his mind which he consulted his mother about, and which she was
quite pleased to agree to. Might he have this little room for his
museum? That was Ted's idea, and oh how eagerly his blue eyes looked up
into his mother's face for her reply, and how the light danced in them
with pleasure when she said "yes."

There were shelves in the little room--shelves not too high up, some of
them at least, for Ted to arrange his curiosities on, without having to
climb on to a chair, and even Cissy, when she was trusted as a great
treat to dust some of the treasures, could manage nicely with just a
footstool. It would be impossible to tell you half the pleasure Ted got
out of his museum. It was to him a sort of visible history of his simple
happy life, for nowhere did he go without bringing back with him some
curious stone or shell, or bird's feather, or uncommon leaf even, to be
placed in his collection, both as a remembrance of his visit and as a
thing of interest in itself.

There were specimens of cotton in its different stages, of wool too,
from a soft bit of fluff which Ted had picked off a Welsh bramble, to a
square inch of an exquisitely knitted Shetland shawl, fine as a cobweb,
which Ted had begged from Mabel when she was giving the remains of the
shawl to Cissy for her doll. There were bits of different kinds of coal;
there was "Blue John" from a Derbyshire cavern, and a tiny china doll
which, much charred and disfigured, had yet survived the great fire of
Chicago, where one of the children's uncles had passed by not long
after; there was a bit of black bread from the siege of Paris; there
were all manner of things, all ticketed and numbered, and their
description neatly entered in a catalogue which lay on a little table
by the door, on which was also to be seen another book, in which Ted
requested all visitors to the museum to write their names, and all the
big people of the family so well understood the boy's pride and pleasure
in his museum, that no one ever thought of making his way into his
little room without his invitation.

Ted had begun his museum some months before the great excitement of the
nest in the tree, but the delights of the long summer days out of doors
had a little put it out of his head. But the latter part, as well as the
beginning of these holidays, happened to be very rainy, and the last
fortnight was spent mostly by Percy and Ted in the tiny museum room,
where Percy helped Ted to finish the ticketing and numbering that he had
not long before begun. And Cissy, of course, was as busy as anybody,
flopping about with an old pocket-handkerchief which she called her
duster, and reproving the boys with great dignity for unsettling any of
the trays she had made so "bootily clean."

"You must try to get some more feathers, Ted," said Percy. "They make
such a pretty collection. There's a fellow at our school that has an
awful lot. He fastens them on to cards--he's got a bird-of-Paradise
plume, an awful beauty. Indeed he's got two, for he offered to sell me
one for half-a-crown. Wouldn't you like it?"

"I should think I would," said Ted, "but I can't buy anything this half.
You know my money's owing to mother for that that I told you about."

He gave a little sigh; the bird of Paradise was a tempting idea.

"_Poor_ Ted," said Cissy, clambering down from her stool to give him a
hug.

Ted accepted the hug, but not the pity.

"No, Cissy. I'm not poor Ted for that," he said merrily. "It was ever
so kind of mother to put it all right, and ever so much kinder of
her to do it that way. I shouldn't have liked not to pay it myself."

"I'll see if I can't get that fellow to swop his bird of Paradise for
some of my stamps, when I go back to school," said Percy.

"Oh, thank you, Percy," said Ted, his eyes shining.

"Anyway you might have some peacocks'," Percy went on. "They're not so
hard to get, and they look so pretty."

"Mother's got some screens made of them on the drawing-room mantelpiece,"
said Ted, "and one of them's got a lot of loose feathers sticking out at
the back that are no use. Perhaps she'd give me one or two. Then I could
make a nice cardful, with the peacocks' at the corners and the little
ones in a sort of a wreath in the middle."

He looked at the sheet of white paper on to which, at present, his
feathers were fastened. "Yes, it would be very pretty," he repeated. But
just then the tea-bell rang, and the children left the museum for that
day.

The boys were in it the next morning, when Ted's mother appeared with a
rather graver face than usual. She did not come in, she knew that Ted
was putting all in perfect order, and that he did not want her to see it
till complete, so she only slightly opened the door and called him out.

"Ted," she said quietly, but Ted saw that she was sorry, "Ted, do you
know anything of this?"

She held up as she spoke a pretty and valuable little china ornament
which always stood on the drawing-room mantelpiece. It was broken--quite
spoilt--it could never be the same again.

"Oh dear," exclaimed Ted, "what a pity! Your dear little flower-basket.
I am so sorry. How could it have got broken?"

"I don't know," said his mother. "I found it lying on the floor. It
seemed as if some one had knocked it over without knowing. You are sure
you were not trying to reach anything off the mantelpiece yesterday
evening?"

"Sure," said Ted, looking sorry and puzzled.

"It stood just in front of my screen of peacock feathers," his mother
went on. She did not in the very very least doubt his assurance, but his
manner gave her the feeling that if she helped his memory a little, he
might be able to throw some light on the mystery.

"In front of the peacock-feather fan," he repeated absently.

"Yes," said his mother, "but do not say anything about it, Ted. We may
find out how it happened, but I do not like questioning every one about
it. It gives the servants a feeling that I don't trust them, for they
always tell me if they break anything. So don't say anything more about
it to _any one_."

"No," said Ted. His tone and manner were still a little puzzled, as if
something was in his mind which he could not make clear to himself, and
his mother, knowing that he sometimes was inclined to take things of the
kind too much to heart, made up her mind to think no more about her poor
little vase, and to treat its breakage as one of the accidents we have
all to learn to bear philosophically in daily life. But though no more
was said, Ted did not forget about it: it worried and puzzled him behind
other thoughts, as it were, all day, and little did he or his mother
think who was really the innocent culprit.

Late that night, just before going to bed herself, Ted's mother glanced
into his room, as she often did, to see that the boy was sleeping
peacefully. The light that she carried she shaded carefully, but a very
wide-awake voice greeted her at once.

"Mother," it said, "I'm not asleep. Mother, I do so want to speak to
you. I've not been able to go to sleep for thinking about the little
broken vase."

"O Ted, dear," said his mother, "don't mind about it. It is no use
vexing oneself so much about things when they are done and can't be put
right."

"But, mother," he persisted, "it isn't quite that. Of course I'm _very_
sorry for it to be broken, however it happened. But what makes me so
uncomfortable is that I've begun to wonder so if perhaps I _did_ do it.
I know we were all talking about your peacock-feather screens yesterday.
I said to Percy and Cissy there were some loose ones in one of them, and
perhaps you'd give me some for my card of feathers, and I've got a sort
of wondering feeling whether perhaps I _did_ touch the screen and
knocked down the china flower-basket without knowing, and it's making me
so unhappy, but I _didn't_ mean to hide it from you if I did do it."

He looked up so wistfully that his mother's heart felt quite sore. She
considered a minute before she replied, for she was afraid of seeming to
make light of his trouble or of checking his perfect honesty, and yet,
on the other hand, she was wise, and knew that even conscientiousness
may be exaggerated and grow into a weakness, trying to others as well
as hurtful to oneself.

"I am sure you did not mean to hide anything from me, dear Ted," she
replied, "and I don't think it is the least likely that you did break
the vase. But even if you did, it is better to think no more about it.
You answered me sincerely at the time, and that was all you could do.
We are only human beings, you know, dear Ted, always likely to make
mistakes, even to say what is not true at the very moment we are most
anxious to be truthful. We can only do our best, and ask God to help us.
So don't trouble any more, even if we never find out how it happened."

Then she stooped and gave Ted an extra good-night kiss, and in five
minutes his loving anxious little spirit was asleep.

But the very next day the mystery was explained.

"Ted's _new_seum is bootly neat," Cissy announced at breakfast-time,
"but he wants some more fevvers. I tried to get down muzzer's screen off
the mantelpiece to see if there was some loose ones, but I couldn't
reach it. Muzzer, _won't_ you give Ted some loose ones?"

Mother looked at Ted, and Ted looked at mother.

"So _you_ were the mouse that knocked over my little vase, Miss Cissy!"
said mother. "Do you know, dear, that it was broken? You should not try
to reach things down yourself. You will be having an accident, like
'Darling' in the picture-book, some day, if you don't take care."

The corners of Cissy's mouth went down, and her eyes filled with tears.

"I didn't know," she said in a very melancholy voice. "I only wanted to
find some loose fevvers for Ted."

"I know that, dear," said her mother. "Only if you had asked me you
would have got the feathers without breaking my vase. Come with me now,
and you'll show me what you want."

There proved to be two or three loose feathers as Ted had said--beautiful
rainbow eyes, which would not be missed from the screen with the careful
way in which Ted's mother cut them out, and the children carried them
off in delight. They were neatly tacked on to the feather card, which
had a very fine effect on the wall of the museum. And for both Ted and
Cissy there was a little lesson, though the two were of different kinds,
fastened up with the feathers on the card.

  Illustration:
  "They were neatly tacked on to the feather card, which had a very
  fine effect on the wall of the museum".--P. 170.

Before long the holidays were over. Percy went back to school, and
poor Ted hid himself for a few hours, as he always did on these sad
occasions, that his red eyes might not be seen. Then he came out again,
looking paler than usual, but quite cheerful and bright. Still he missed
Percy so much that he was not at all sorry that his own holidays were
over. For Ted now went early every morning to a regular big school--a
school at which there were so many boys that some little fellows of his
age might have felt frightened and depressed. But not so Ted. He went on
his own cheery way without misgiving. The world to his thinking was a
nice and happy place--not _all_ sunshine of course, but very good of
its kind. And school-life, though it too had its shadows, was full of
interest and satisfaction. Ted loved his fellows, and never doubted, in
his simple taking-for-granted of things being as they should be, but
that he was loved by them; and how this way of looking out on the world
helped him through its difficulties, how it saved him from unreasonable
fears and exaggerated anxieties such as take the bloom off many a
child-life, it would be difficult for me to describe. I can only try to
put you in the way of imagining this bright young life for yourselves.

The boy whom, of course only _next_ to his dear Percy, Ted loved best in
the world was, to use his own words, "a fellow" of about his own age,
whose name was Rex. That is to say, his short name; for his real one
was Reginald, just as Ted's was Edmond. They had been together at the
big school from the first of Ted's going, being about equal in their
standing as to classes, though Rex was rather the elder, and had been
longer at school. At Ted's school, as at all others, there were quarrels
and fights sometimes; and many a day he came home with traces of war, in
the shapes of bumps and bruises and scratches. Not that the battles were
all _quarrels_,--there were plenty of good-tempered scrimmages, as well
as, occasionally, more serious affrays, for boys will be boys all the
world over. And, worse than that, in all schools there are to be found
boys of mean and tyrannical spirit, who love to bully and tease, and who
need to be put down now and then. And in all schools, too, there are
boys of good and kindly feelings, but of hasty and uncontrolled temper,
and they too have to be taught to give and take, to bear and forbear.
And then, too, as the best of boys are _but_ boys after all, we are
still a long way off having any reason to expect that the best of
schools even can be like dovecots.

I don't know that Ted's school was worse than others in these respects,
and Ted himself was not of a quarrelsome nature, but still in some ways
he was not very patient. And then, slight and rather delicate though he
was, he assuredly had a spirit of his own. He couldn't stand bullying,
either of himself or others, and without any calculation as to the odds
for or against him, he would plunge himself into the thick of the fray;
and but for Rex, who was always ready to back up Ted, I daresay he would
often have come off worse than he did. As it was, many were the wounds
that fell to his share, and yet he managed, by his quickness and
nimbleness, to escape more serious damage.

"What have you been doing with yourself, my boy?" his mother said one
day not long after the grand doing-up of the museum, when Ted appeared
in her room on his return from school, to beg for some sticking-plaister
and arnica lotion. He really looked rather an object, and he could not
help laughing as he caught sight of his face in the glass; for one eye
was very much swollen, and a long scratch down his nose did not add to
his beauty.

"I _am_ a fright," he said. "But there's not much the matter, mother. It
was only a scrimmage--we were all quite good friends."

"But really, Ted," said his mother, "I think you must curb your warlike
tastes a little. Some day you may really get hurt badly."

"No fear, mother," he said. "Besides, after all, a boy wouldn't be worth
much who couldn't fight sometimes, would he?"

"_Sometimes_," said his mother. "Where was Rex to-day--wasn't he beside
you?"

Ted's face clouded a little.

"Rex was in a bad humour to-day. He wouldn't play," Ted replied.

"Rex in a bad humour!" repeated his mother. "Surely that's very
uncommon."

Ted did not reply, and his mother did not ask him any more, but she
noticed that the cloud had not entirely disappeared, and the next
morning it was not quite with his usual springing steps that the boy set
off to school. Rex's house was on the same road; most days the boys met
each other at the gate and went on together, but this time no Rex was to
be seen. Either he had taken it into his head to go very early, or he
was not yet ready. Ted cast a glance towards the path, down which he
was used to see his friend running, satchel over his shoulders, to join
him--then he walked on slowly.

"I'm not going to wait for him if he doesn't care to come," he said to
himself; and when he got to school he was glad he had not done so, for
there was Rex already in the schoolroom, and at his desk busy writing,
though it wanted some minutes to school-time.

"Good morning, Rex," said Ted.

"Good morning," replied Rex; but that was all. Whether or not he had
been in a bad humour the day before, he was certainly not in a pleasant
frame of mind towards Ted _to-day_. The morning passed much less
cheerfully than usual, for when all was happy between the boys, though
they could not speak to each other in school hours, there were many
pleasant little ways in which they could make each other feel that his
friend was next door. Ted's lessons suffered from his preoccupation,
and, altogether, things seemed to go the wrong way. But Ted did not seem
able to care. "What was the matter with Rex?" That was the one question
always in his mind.

School over, the boys could not help meeting. Their roads lay together,
and both had too much self-respect to wish to make an exhibition of the
want of good feeling between them to the other boys. So they set off as
if nothing were the matter, and walked some little way in silence. At
last Ted could stand it no longer.

"What's the matter with you, old fellow?" he said. "Why wouldn't you
play with me yesterday?"

Rex looked up.

"I couldn't," he said. "I had got my French exercise all blotted, and I
wanted to copy it over without telling any one; that was why I wouldn't
come out. So _now_ you see if it was true what you said of me to
Hatchard."

"What did I say of you to Hatchard?" cried Ted.

"_What?_ Why, what he told me you said--that I was a mean sneak, and
that I wouldn't play because I wasn't as good at it as you."

"I never said so, and you know I never did," retorted Ted, his cheeks
flaming.

"Do you mean to say that I'm telling a lie?" cried Rex in his turn.

"Yes I do, if you said I said that," exclaimed Ted. And then--how it
happened I don't think either of the boys could have told--their anger
grew from words into deeds. Rex hit Ted, and Ted hit at him again! But
one blow--one on each side--and they came to their senses. Ted first,
when he saw the ugly mark his clenched fist had left on his friend's
face, when he felt the hot glow on his own.

"O Rex," he cried, "O Rex! How can we be like that to each other? It's
like Cain and Abel. O Rex, I'm so sorry!"

And Rex was quick to follow.

"O Ted, I didn't mean it. Let's forget we ever did it. I _do_ believe
you never said that. Hatchard's a mean sneak himself. I only didn't want
to tell you that it was you who blotted my exercise by mistake when you
passed my desk. I thought you'd be so sorry. But it would have been
better to tell you than to go on like this."

Rex's explanation was too much for Ted. Ten years old though he was,
the tears rushed to his eyes, and he felt as if he could never forgive
himself.

He told his mother all about it that evening. He could not feel happy
till he did so, and even before he had said anything she knew that the
little tug to her sleeve and the whispered "Mother, I want to speak to
you," was coming. And even when he had told her all about the quarrel
and reconciliation, he hung on, looking as if there were something more
to tell.

"What is it, my boy?" said his mother; "have you anything more to say?"

Ted's face flushed.

"Yes, mother," he said. "I wanted to ask you this. When Rex and I had
settled it all right again, we still felt rather unhappy. It did seem so
horrid to have hit each other like that, it seemed to leave a mark. So,
mother, we wanted to take it quite away, and we _kissed_ each other. And
we felt quite happy, only--was it a very babyish thing to do? Was it
_unmanly_, mother?"

His mother drew him towards her and looked lovingly into his anxious
face.

"Unmanly, my boy? No indeed," she said, "it was kind and good, and
kindness and goodness can never be unmanly."

And Ted, quite at rest now, went off to bed.




CHAPTER X.

SOME RAINY ADVENTURES.

  "Wildly the winds of heaven began to blow,
     .      .      .      .     .     .
   Whilst from the jealous, unrelenting skies
   The inevitable July down-pour came."


Another winter came and went. Ted had another birthday, which made
him eleven years old. Another happy Christmas time--this year of the
old-fashioned snowy kind, for even in November there was skating, and
Ted skated like a Dutchman; and the child-life in the pleasant home went
on its peaceful way, with much of sunshine and but few clouds. Narcissa,
too, was growing a big girl. She could say all her words clearly now,
without lisping or funny mistakes, though, as she was the youngest bird
in the nest, I am not sure but that some of the big people thought this
rather a pity! And then when the frost and the snow were done with,
the ever new spring time came round again, gradually growing into the
brilliant summer; and this year the children's hearts rejoiced even
more than usual, for a great pleasure was before them. This year they
were to spend the holidays with their parents in a quite, _quite_
country place, and many were the delightful fancies and dreams that
they made about it, even while it was some distance off.

"I do love summer," said Cissy one day. They were standing at the
window one May morning, waiting for their father and mother to come to
breakfast. It was a Sunday morning, so there was no hurrying off to
school. "Don't you _love_ summer, Ted?"

"Yes, summer's awfully jolly," he replied. "But so's winter. Just think
of the snowballing and the skating. I do hope next winter will be a
regular good one, for I shall be ever so much bigger I expect, and I'll
try my best to beat them all at skating."

His face and eyes beamed with pleasure. Just then his mother came in;
she had heard his last words.

"Next winter!" she said. "That's a long time off. Who knows what may
happen before then?"

She gave a little sigh; Ted and Cissy looked at each other. They knew
what mother was thinking of. Since _last_ winter a great grief had come
to her. She had lost one who had been to her what Ted was to Cissy, and
the sorrow was still fresh. Ted and Cissy drew near to their mother. Ted
stroked her hand, and Cissy held up her rosy mouth for a kiss.

"Dear mother," they said both together, and then a little silence fell
over them all. Cissy's thoughts were sad as she looked at Ted and
pictured to herself how terrible it would be to lose a brother as dear
as he, and Ted was gazing up at the blue sky and _wondering_--wondering
about the great mystery which had lately, for the first time in his
life, seemed to come near him. What _was_ dying? Why, if it meant, as
his father and mother told him, a better, and fuller, and nobler life
than this, which he found so good and happy a thing, why, if it meant
living nearer to God, understanding Him better, why should people dread
it so, why speak of it as so sad?

"I don't think," thought little Ted to himself, "I don't _think_ I
should be afraid of dying. God is so kind, I couldn't fancy being afraid
of Him; and heaven must be so beautiful," for the sunny brightness of
the May morning seemed to surround everything. But his glance fell on
his mother and sister, and other thoughts rose in his mind; the leaving
them--ah yes, _that_ was what made death so sad a thing; and he had to
turn his head away to hide the tears which rose to his eyes.

There was, as his mother had said, a long time to next winter--there
seemed even, to the children, a long time to next summer, which
they were hoping for so eagerly. And an interruption came to Ted's
school-work, for quite unexpectedly he and Cissy went away to London for
a few weeks with their parents, and when they came back there was only a
short time to wait for the holidays. If I had space I would like to tell
you about this visit to London, and some of the interesting things that
happened there--how the children had rather a distressing adventure the
first evening of their arrival, for their father and mother had to go
off with their aunt in a hurry to see a sick friend, and, quite by
mistake, their nurse, not knowing the children would be alone, went out
with a message about a missing parcel, and poor Cissy, tired with the
journey and frightened by the dark, rather gloomy house and the strange
servants, had a terrible fit of crying, and clung to Ted as her only
protector in a manner piteous to see. And Ted soothed and comforted
her as no one else could have done. It was a pretty sight (though it
grieved their mother too, to find that poor Cissy had been frightened)
to see the little girl in Ted's arms, where she had fallen asleep, the
tears still undried on her cheeks; and the next morning, when she woke
up fresh and bright as usual, she told her mother that Ted had been, oh
so kind, she never could be frightened again if Ted was there.

There were many things to surprise and interest the children, Ted
especially, in the great world of London, of which now he had this
little peep. But as I have promised to tell you about the summer I must
not linger.

When they went back from town there were still eight or nine weeks
to pass before the holidays, and Ted worked hard, really very hard,
at school to gain the prize he had been almost sure of before the
interruption of going away. He did not say much about it, but his heart
_did_ beat a good deal faster than usual when at last the examinations
were over and the prize-giving day came round; and when all the
successful names were read out and his was not among them, I could not
take upon myself to say that there was not a tear to wink away, even
though there was the consolation of hearing that he stood second-best in
his class. And Ted's good feeling and common sense made him look quite
bright and cheerful when his mother met him with rather an anxious face.

"You're not disappointed I hope, Ted, dear, are you?" she said. "You
have not taken quite as good a place as usual, and I did think you might
have had a prize. But you know I am quite pleased, and so is your
father, for we are satisfied you have done your best, so you must not be
disappointed."

"I'm not, mother," said Ted cheerily,--"I'm not really, for you know I
am _second_, and that's not bad, is it? Considering I was away and all
that."

And his mother felt pleased at the boy's good sense and fair judgment of
himself--for there had sometimes seemed a danger of Ted's entire want of
vanity making him too timid about himself.

What a happy day it was for Ted and Cissy when the real packing began
for the summer expedition! It's an ill wind that blows nobody any good,
and I suppose it is by this old saying explained how it is that packing,
the horror of mothers and aunts and big sisters, not to speak of nurses
and maids, should be to all small people the source of such delight.

"See, Ted," said Cissy, "do let's carry down some of these boxes.
There's the one with the sheets and towels in, _quite_ ready," and the
children's mother coming along the passage and finding them both tugging
with all their might at really a very heavy trunk, was reminded of the
day--long ago now--in the mountain home, when, setting off for the
picnic, wee Ted wanted so much to load himself with the heaviest basket
of all!

And at last, thanks no doubt to these energetic efforts in great part,
the packing was all done; the last evening, then the last night came,
and the excited children went to sleep to wake ever so much earlier than
usual to the delights of thinking _the_ day had come!

It was a long and rather tiring railway journey, and when it came to an
end there was a very long drive in an open carriage, and by degrees all
houses and what Ted's father called "traces of civilisation,"--which
puzzled Cissy a good deal--were left behind.

"We must be getting close to the moors," said he, at which the children
were delighted, for it was on the edge of these great moors that stood
the lonely farm-house that was to be their home for some months. But
just as their father said this, the carriage stopped, and they were told
they must all get down--they were at the entrance to a wood through
which there was no cart or carriage road, only a footpath, and the
farm-house stood in a glen some little way on the other side of this
wood. It was nearly dark outside the wood, inside it was of course still
more so, so dark indeed that it took some care and management to find
one's way at all. The children walked on quietly, Ted really enjoying
the queerness and the mystery of this adventure, but little Narcissa,
though she said nothing, pressed closer to her mother, feeling rather
"eerie," and some weeks after she said one day, "I don't want ever to go
home again because of passing through that dark wood."

But once arrived, the pleasant look of everything at the farm-house, and
the hearty welcome they received from their host and hostess, the farmer
and his wife, made every one feel it had all been worth the journey and
the trouble. And the next morning, when the children woke to a sunny
summer day in the quaint old house, and looked out on all sides on the
lovely meadows and leafy trees, with here and there a peep of the
gleaming river a little farther down the glen, and when, near at hand,
they heard the clucking of the hens and the mooing of the calves
and the barking of the dogs, and all the delightful sounds of real
farm-life, I think, children, you will not need me to try to tell
you how happy _our_ children felt. The next few days were a sort of
bewilderment of interests and pleasures and surprises--everything was so
nice and new--even the funny old-fashioned stoneware plates and dishes
seemed to Ted and Cissy to make the dinners and teas taste better than
anything they had ever eaten before. And very soon they were as much at
home in and about the farm-house as if they had lived there all their
lives,--feeding the calves and pigs, hunting for eggs, carrying in wood
for Mrs. Crosby to help her little niece Polly, a small person not much
older than Cissy, but already very useful in house and farm work. One
day, when they were busy at this wood-carrying, a brilliant idea struck
them.

"Wouldn't it be fun," said Ted, "to go to the wood--just the beginning
of it, you know--and gather a lot of these nice little dry branches;
they are so beautiful for lighting fires with?"

Cissy agreed that it would be great fun, and Polly, who was with them at
the time, thought, too, that it would be very nice indeed; and then a
still better idea struck Ted. "Suppose," he said, "that we were to go
to-morrow morning, and take our luncheon with us. Wouldn't _that_ be
nice? We could pack it in a basket and take it on the little truck that
we get the wood in, and then we could bring back the little truck full
of the dry branches."

The proposal was thought charming, and mother was consulted; and the
next morning Mrs. Crosby was busy betimes, hunting up what she could
give to her "honeys" for their picnic, and soon the three set off,
pulling the truck behind them, and on the truck a basket carefully
packed with a large bottle of fresh milk, a good provision of bread
and butter, a fine cut of home-made cake, and three splendid apple
turnovers. Could anything be nicer? The sun was shining, as it was right
he should shine on so happy a little party, as they made their way up
the sloping field, through a little white gate opening on to a narrow
path skirting the foot of the hill, where the bracken grew in wild
luxuriance, and the tall trees overhead made a pleasant shade down to
the little beck, whose chatter could be faintly heard. And so peaceful
and sheltered was the place, that, as the children passed along,
bright-eyed rabbits stopped to peep at them ere they scudded away, and
the birds hopped fearlessly across the path, nay, the squirrels even,
sitting comfortably among the branches, glanced down at the three little
figures without disturbing themselves, and an old owl blinked at them
patronisingly from his hole in an ancient tree-trunk. And by and by as
the path grew more rugged, Polly was deputed to carry the basket, for
fear of accidents, for Cissy pulling in front and Ted pushing and
guiding behind, found it as much as they could do to get the truck
along. How they meant to bring it back when loaded with branches I don't
know, and as things turned out, the question did not arise. The truck
and the basket and the children reached their destination safely; they
chose a nice little grassy corner under a tree very near the entrance
to the big wood, and after a _very_ short interval of rest from the
fatigues of their journey, it was suggested by one and agreed to by all
that even if it were rather too early for real luncheon or dinner time,
there was no reason why, if they felt hungry, they should not unpack the
basket and eat! No sooner said than done.

"We shall work at gathering wood all the better after we've had some
refreshment," observed Ted sagely, and the little girls were quite of
his opinion. And the rabbits and the owls and the squirrels must, I
think, have been much amused at the quaint little party, the spice cake
and apple-turnover collation that took place under the old tree, and at
the merry words and ringing laughter that echoed through the forest.

An hour or so later, the children's mother, with an after-thought of
possible risk to them from the damp ground, made her way along the path
and soon discovered the little group. She had brought with her a large
waterproof cloak big enough for them all to sit on together, but it was
too late, for the refection was over; the basket, containing only the
three plates and the three tin mugs, propped up between Ted and Cissy,
toppled over with the start the children gave at the sound of their
mother's voice, and a regular "Jack and Jill" clatter down the slope was
the result. The children screamed with delight and excitement as they
raced after the truant mugs and plates, and their mother, thinking that
her staying longer might cause a little constraint in the merriment,
turned to go, just saying cheerfully, "Children, I have brought my big
waterproof cloak for you to sit on, but as your feast is over I suppose
you won't need it. What are you going to do next?"

"O mother, we're just going to set to work," Ted's voice replied; "we're
having such fun."

"Well, good-bye then. I am going a walk with your father, but in case of
a change of weather, though it certainly doesn't look like it, I'll
leave the cloak."

She turned and left them. An hour or two later, when she came home to
the farm-house and stood for a moment looking up at the sky, it seemed
to her as if her remark about the weather had been a shadow of coming
events. For the bright blue sky had clouded over, a slight chilly breeze
ruffled the leaves as if in friendly warning to the birds and the
butterflies to get under shelter, and before many moments had passed
large heavy drops began to fall, which soon grew into a regular
downpour. What a changed world!

"What will the children do?" was the mother's first thought as she
watched it. "It is too heavy to last, and fortunately there is no sign
of thunder about. I don't see that there is anything to be done but to
wait a little; they are certain to be under shelter in the wood, and any
one going for them would be drenched in two minutes."

So she did her best to wait patiently and not to feel uneasy, though
several times in the course of the next half-hour she went to the window
to see if there were no sign of the rain abating. Alas, no! As heavily
as ever, and even more steadily, it fell. Something must be done she
decided, and she was just thinking of going to the kitchen to consult
Mrs. Crosby, when as she turned from the window a curious object rolling
or slowly hobbling down the hill-side caught her view. That was the way
the children would come--what could that queer thing be? It was not too
high, but far too broad to be a child, and its way of moving was a sort
of jerky waddle through the bracken, very remarkable to see. Whatever it
was, dwarf or goblin, it found its way difficult to steer, poor thing,
for there, with a sudden fly, over it went altogether and lay for a
moment or two struggling and twisting, till at last it managed to get up
again and painfully strove to pursue its way.

The children's mother called their nurse.

"Esther," she said, "I cannot imagine what that creature is coming down
the road. But it is in trouble evidently. Run off and see if you can
help." Off ran kind-hearted Esther, and soon she was rewarded for her
trouble. For as she got near to the queer-shaped bundle, she saw two
pairs of eyes peering out at her, from the two arm-holes of the
waterproof cloak, and in a moment the mystery was explained. Ted, in his
anxiety for the two girls, had wrapped them up _together_ in the cloak
which his mother had left, and literally "bundled" them off, with the
advice to get home as quickly as possible, while he followed with his
loaded truck, the wood covered as well as he could manage with leafy
branches which he tore down.

But "possible" was not quickly at all in the case of poor Cissy and her
companion. Polly was of a calm and placid nature, with something of the
resignation to evils that one sees in the peasant class all over the
world; but Narcissa, impulsive and sensitive, with her dainty dislike
to mud, and her unaccustomedness to such adventures, could not long
restrain her tears, and under the waterproof cloak she cried sadly,
feeling frightened too at the angry gusts of rain and wind which sounded
to her like the voices of ogres waiting to seize them and carry them off
to some dreadful cavern.

The summit of their misfortunes seemed reached when they toppled over
and lay for a moment or two helplessly struggling on the wet ground. But
oh, what delight to hear Esther's kind voice, and how Cissy clung to her
and sobbed out her woes! She was more than half comforted again by the
time they reached the farm-house, and just as mother was considering
whether it would not be better to undress them in the kitchen before the
fire and bring down their dry clothes, Master Ted, "very wet, yes very
wet, oh very wet indeed," made his appearance, with rosy cheeks and a
general look of self-satisfaction.

"Did they get home all right?" he said, cheerily. "It _was_ a good thing
you brought the cloak, mother. And the wood isn't so wet after all."

  Illustration:
  "Master Ted, very wet indeed, made his appearance with rosy cheeks
  and a general look of self-satisfaction."--P. 194.

And an hour or two later, dried and consoled and sitting round the
kitchen table for an extra good tea to which Mrs. Crosby had invited
them, all the children agreed that after all the expedition had not
turned out badly.

But the weather had changed there was no doubt; for the time at least
the sunny days were over. The party in the farm-house had grown smaller
too, for the uncles had had to leave, and even the children's father had
been summoned away unexpectedly to London. And a day or two after the
children's picnic their mother stood at the window rather anxiously
looking out at the ever-falling rain.

"It really looks like as if it would _never_ leave off," she said,
and there was some reason for her feeling distressed. She had hoped for
a letter from the children's father that day, and very probably it was
lying at the two-miles-and-a-half-off post-office, waiting for some one
to fetch it. For it was not one of the postman's days for coming round
by the farm-house; that only happened twice a week, but hitherto this
had been of little consequence to the farm-house visitors. Their letters
perhaps had not been of such importance as to be watched for with much
anxiety, and in the fine weather it was quite a pleasant little walk to
the post-office by the fields and the stepping-stones across the river.
But all this rain had so swollen the river that now the stepping-stones
were useless; there was nothing for it but to take the long round by the
road; and this added to the difficulty in another way, for it was not
by any means every day that Mr. Crosby or his son were going in that
direction, or that they could, at this busy season, spare a man so long
off work. So the children's mother could not see how she was to get her
letter if this rain continued--at least not for several days, for the
old postman had called yesterday--he would not take the round of the
Skensdale farm for another three or four days at least, and even then,
the post-office people were now so accustomed to some of the "gentry"
calling for their letters themselves, that it was doubtful, not certain
at least, if they would think of giving them to the regular carrier. And
with some anxiety, for her husband had gone to London on business of
importance, Ted's mother went to bed.

Early next morning she was awakened by a tap at the door, a gentle
little tap. She almost fancied she had heard it before in her sleep
without being really aroused.

"Come in," she said, and a very business-like figure, which at the first
glance she hardly recognised, made its appearance. It was Ted; dressed
in waterproof from head to foot, cloak, leggings, and all, he really
looked ready to defy the weather--a sort of miniature diver, for he had
an oilskin cap on his head too, out of which gleamed his bright blue
eyes, full of eagerness and excitement.

"Mother," he said, "I hope I haven't wakened you too soon. I got up
early on purpose to see about your letters. It's still raining as
hard as ever, and even if it left off, there'd be no crossing the
stepping-stones for two or three days, Farmer Crosby says. And he can't
spare any one to-day to go to the post. I'm the only one that _can_, so
I've got ready, and don't you think I'd better go at once?"

Ted's mother looked out of the window. Oh, how it was pouring! She
thought of the long walk--the two miles and a half through the dripping
grass of the meadows, along the muddy, dreary road, and all the way back
again; and then the possibility of the swollen river having escaped its
bounds where the road lay low, came into her mind and frightened her.
For Ted was a little fellow still--only eleven and a half, and slight
and delicate for his age. And then she looked at him and saw the eager
readiness in his eyes, and remembered that he was quick-witted and
careful, and she reflected also that he must learn, sooner or later, to
face risks and difficulties for himself.

"Ted, my boy," she said, "it's very nice of you to have thought of it,
and I know it would be a great disappointment if I didn't let you go.
But you'll promise me to be very careful--to do nothing rash or unwise;
if the river is over the road, for instance, or there is the least
danger, you'll turn back?"

"Yes, mother, I'll be very careful, really," said Ted. "I'll do nothing
silly. Good-bye, mother; thank you so much for letting me go. I've got
my stick, but there's no use taking an umbrella."

And off he set; his mother watching him from the window as far as she
could see him, trudging bravely along--a quaint little figure--through
the pouring rain. For more than a mile she could see him making his way
along the meadow path, gradually lessening as the distance increased,
till a little black speck was all she could distinguish, and then it too
disappeared round the corner.

And an hour or so later, there were warm, dry boots and stockings before
the fire, which even in August the continued rain made necessary, and a
"beautiful" breakfast of hot coffee, and a regular north-country rasher
of bacon, and Mrs. Crosby's home-made bread and butter, all waiting on
the table. And Ted's mother took up her post again to watch for the
reappearance of the tiny black speck, which was gradually to grow into
her boy. It did not tarry. As soon as was possible it came in sight.

"How quick he has been--my dear, clever, good little Ted!" his mother
said to herself. And you may be sure that she, and Cissy too, were both
at the door to meet the little human water-rat, dripping, dripping all
over, like "Johnny Head-in-air" in old "Struwelpeter," but with eyes as
bright as any water-rat's, and cheeks rosy with cold and exercise and
pleasure all mixed together, who, before he said a word, held out the
precious letter.

"Here it is, mother--from father, just as you expected. I do hope it's
got good news."

How could it bring other? Mother felt before she opened it that it could
not contain any but good news, nor did it. Then she just gave her brave
little boy one good kiss and one hearty "Thank you, Ted." For she did
not want to spoil him by overpraise, or to take the bloom off what he
evidently thought nothing out of the common, by exaggerating it.

And Ted enjoyed his breakfast uncommonly, I can assure you. He was only
eleven and a half. I think our Ted showed that he had a sweet and brave
spirit of his own;--don't you, children?




CHAPTER XI.

"IT'S ONLY I, MOTHER."

  "How well my own heart knew
   That voice so clear and true."


The summer in the wolds, so long looked forward to, was over. It had
been very happy, in spite of the rain having given the visitors at the
Skensdale farm-house rather more of his company than they had bargained
for, and it left many happy memories behind it.

And the coming home again was happy too. The days were beginning to
"draw in" as people say, and "home," with its coal-fires--which, though
not so picturesque, are ever so much _warmer_ than wood ones, I assure
you--its well-closing doors and shutters, its nice carpets and curtains,
was after all a better place for chilly days and evenings than even the
most interesting of farm-houses. And Ted had his school-work to think of
too; he was anxious to take a very good place at the next examinations,
for he was getting on for twelve, and "some day" he knew that he would
have to go out into the world as it were, on his own account--to go
away, that is to say, to a big boarding-school, as Percy had done before
him.

He did work well, and he was rewarded, and this Christmas was a _very_
happy one. There was plenty of skating, and Ted got on famously. Indeed,
he learnt to be so clever at it, that Cissy used to feel quite proud,
when people admired him for it, to think that he was her brother, though
Ted himself took it quite simply. Skating was to him the greatest
pleasure he knew. To feel oneself skimming along by one's own will, and
yet with a power beyond oneself, was delightful past words.

"I do think," thought Ted to himself, one clear bright frosty day, when
the sky was as blue, _almost_, as in summer, "I do think it's as nice as
flying."

And then looking up, as he skimmed along, at the beautiful sky which
winter or summer he loved so much, there came over him that same strange
sweet _wonder_--the questioning he could not have put into words, as to
whether the Heaven he often thought of in his dreamy childish way, was
really up there, and what it was like, and what they did there. It must
be happy and bright--happier and brighter even than down here, because
_there_, in some way that Ted knew that neither he nor the wisest of
mankind could explain, one would be nearer God. But yet it was difficult
to understand how it could be much brighter and happier than this happy
life down below. There was no good trying to understand, Ted decided.
_God_ understood, and that was enough. And as He had made us so happy
here, He might be trusted to know what was best for us there. Only--yes,
that _was_ the greatest puzzle of all, far more puzzling than anything
else--_everybody_ was not happy here--alas! no, Ted knew enough to know
that--many, many were not happy; many, many were not good, and had never
even had a chance of becoming so. Ah, that _was_ a puzzle!

"When I'm a man," thought Ted--and it was a thought that came to him
often--"I'll try to do something for those poor boys in London."

For nothing had made more impression on Ted, during his stay in London,
than the sight of the so-called "City Arabs," and all he had heard about
them. He had even written a story on the subject, taking for his hero a
certain "Tom," whose adventures and misadventures were most thrilling;
ending, for Ted liked stories that ended well, with his happy adoption
into a kind-hearted family, such as it is to be wished there were more
of to be found in real life! I should have liked to tell you this story,
and some day perhaps I shall do so, but not, I fear, in this little
book, for there are even a great many things about Ted himself which I
shall not have room for.

There were other pleasures besides skating this Christmas time. Among
these there was a very delightful entertainment given by some of Ted's
father's and mother's friends to a very large party, both old and young.
It was a regular Christmas gathering--so large that the great big
old-fashioned ball-room at the "Red Lion" was engaged for the purpose.

Dear me, what a great many scenes this old ball-room had witnessed!
Election contests without end, during three-quarters of a century and
more; balls of the old-world type, when the gentlemen had powdered wigs
and ribbon-tied "queues;" which, no doubt, you irreverent little people
of the nineteenth century would call "pig-tails;" and my Lady Grizzle
from the hall once actually stuck in the doorway, so ponderous was her
head-gear, though by dint of good management her hoop and furbelows
had been got through. And farther back still, in the Roundhead days,
when--so ran the legend--a party of rollicking cavaliers, and a company
commanded by one Captain Holdfast Armstrong, passed two succeeding
nights in the Red Lion's ball-room, neither--so cleverly did the
cautious landlord manage--having the least idea of the other's near
neighbourhood.

But never had the old ball-room seen happier faces or heard merrier
laughter than at this Christmas party; and among the happy faces none
was brighter than our Ted's. He really did enjoy himself, though one of
the youngest of the guests, for Cissy had been pronounced _too_ young,
but had reconciled herself to going to bed at her usual hour, by Ted's
promise to tell her all about it the next day. And besides his boy
friends--Percy, of course, who was home for the holidays, and Rex, and
several others--Ted had another companion this evening whom he was very
fond of. This was a little girl about his own age, named Gertrude, the
daughter of a friend of his father's. I have not told you about her
before, because, I suppose, I have had so many things to tell, that I
have felt rather puzzled how to put them all in nicely, especially as
they are all simple, everyday things, with nothing the least wonderful
or remarkable about them. Gertrude was a very dear little girl; she
almost seemed to Ted like another kind of sister. He had Mabel, and
Christine her sister, as big ones, and Cissy as his own particular
little one, and Gertrude seemed to come in as a sort of companion
sister, between the big ones and the little one. Ted was very rich in
friends, you see, friends of all kinds. He used often to count them up
and say so to himself.

Well, this evening of the big Christmas party was, as I said, one of the
happiest he had ever known. All his friends were there--all looking as
happy as happy could be.

"When I'm a man," thought Ted to himself, "I'd like to give parties like
this every Christmas," and as he looked round the room his eyes gleamed
with pleasure. Gertrude was standing beside him--they were going to be
partners in a country-dance, which was a favourite of Ted's. Just then
his mother came up to where they were standing.

"Ted, my boy," she said, "I am going home now. It is very late for you
already--half-past twelve. The others, however, are staying later, but
I think it is quite time for you and me to be going, don't you?"

Ted's face clouded--a most unusual thing to happen.

"Gertrude isn't going yet," he said, "and Rex and his brothers; they're
staying later. O mother, _must_ I come now?"

His mother hesitated. She was always reluctant to disappoint the
children if it could be helped, yet, on the other hand, she was even
more anxious not to _spoil_ them. But the sight of Ted's eager face
carried the day.

"Ah well," she said, smiling, "I suppose I must be indulgent for once
and go home without you. So good-night, Ted--you will come with the
others--I hope it won't be _very_ late."

As she turned away, it struck her that Ted's face did not look
_altogether_ delighted.

"Poor Ted," she said to herself, "he doesn't like to see me go away
alone." But hoping he would enjoy himself, and that he would not be
_too_ tired "to-morrow morning," she went home without any misgiving,
and she was not sorry to go. She found the Christmas holidays and all
they entailed more fatiguing than did the children, for whom all these
pleasant things "grew" without preparation.

It was a rather dark night--so thought Ted's mother to herself as she
glanced out of her window for a moment before drawing the curtains close
and going to bed--all the house was shut up, and all those who had
stayed at home fast asleep by this time, and it had been arranged that
the others should let themselves in with a latch-key. Ted's mother felt,
therefore, rather surprised and a little startled when she heard a bell
ring; at first she could hardly believe that she was not mistaken, and
to be quite sure she opened the window and called out "Is there any one
there?" There was half a moment's silence, then some one came out a
little from under the porch, where he had been standing since ringing
the bell, and a well-known voice replied--how clearly and brightly its
young tones rose up through the frosty air--

"It is only I, mother. I thought I'd rather come home after all."

"You, Ted," she replied;--"you, and alone?"

"Yes, mother. I thought somehow you'd like better to have me, so I just
ran home."

"And weren't you frightened, Ted?" she said a little anxiously, but with
a glad feeling at her heart; "weren't you afraid to come through the
lonely streets, and the road, more lonely still, outside the town? For
it is very dark, and everything shut up--weren't you afraid?"

"Oh no, mother--not a bit," he replied, "only just when I had left all
the houses I did walk a _little_ faster, I think. But I'm so glad I
came, if you're pleased, mother."

And when his mother had opened the door and let him in and given him a
good-night kiss even more loving than usual, Ted went to bed and to
sleep with a light happy heart, and his mother, as she too fell asleep,
thanked God for her boy.

       *       *       *       *       *

I must now, I think, children, ask you to pass over with me nearly a
whole year of Ted's life. These holidays ended, came, by slow degrees
that year, the always welcome spring; then sunny summer again, a bright
and happy summer this, though spent at my little friends' own home
instead of at the Skensdale farm-house; then autumn with its shortening
days and lengthening evenings, gradually shortening and lengthening into
winter again; till at last Christmas itself, like the familiar figure of
an old friend, whom, just turning the corner of the road where we live,
we descry coming to visit us, was to be seen not so far off.

Many things had happened during this year, which, though all such simple
things, I should like to tell you of but for the old restrictions of
time and space. And indeed I have to thank you for having listened to
me so long, for I blame myself a little for not having told you more
plainly at the beginning that it was _not_ a regular "story" I had to
tell you in the "carrots" coloured book this year, but just some parts,
simple and real, of a child-life that I love to think of. And I would
have liked to leave it here--for some reasons that is to say--or I would
have liked to tell how Ted grew up into such a man as his boyhood
promised--honest-hearted, loving, and unselfish, and as happy as a true
Christmas child could not but be. But, dears, I _cannot_ tell you this,
for it was not to be so. Yet I am so anxious that the little book I have
tried to write in such a way that his happy life and nature should be
loved by other children--I am so anxious that the ending of this little
book should not seem to you a _sad_ one, at Christmas-time too of all
times, that I find it a little difficult to say what has to be said. For
in the truest sense the close of my book is _not_ sad. I will just tell
it simply as it really was, trusting that you will know I love you all
too well to wish to throw any cloud over your bright faces and
thoughts.

Well, as I said, this year had brought many little events, some troubles
of course, and much good, to our Ted. He had grown a good deal taller,
and thinner too, and he never, even as a tiny toddler, could have been
called fat! But he was well and strong, and had made good progress at
school and good progress too in other ways. He was getting on famously
at cricket and football, and was a first-rate croquet-player, for
croquet was then in fashion. And the museum had not been neglected; it
had really grown into a very respectable and interesting museum, so that
not only Ted's own people and near friends were pleased to see it, but
even his parents' friends, and sometimes others, again, who happened to
be visiting them, would ask the little collector to admit them. I really
think it would be a good thing if more boys took to having museums; it
would be a good thing for them, for nothing can be more amusing and
interesting too, and a very good thing for their friends, especially in
bad weather or in holiday-time, when now and then the hours hang heavily
on these young people's hands, and one is inclined to wish that some
fancy work for _boys_ could be invented. Ted's museum had grown very
much, and was always a great resource for him and for Cissy too, for, to
tell the truth, her tastes were _rather_ boyish.

His library had grown too. I cannot tell you how many nice books he had,
and still less could I tell you how he treasured them. When, through
much service, some of them grew weak in the back, he would, though
reluctantly, consent to have them re-bound; and he had a pretty, and to
my mind a touching, way of showing his affection for these old friends,
which I never heard of in any other child. Before a book of his went to
be bound he would carefully--tenderly I might almost say--cut off the
old cover and lay it aside; and among the many sweet traces left by our
boy--but I did not mean to say that, only as it came naturally of itself
I will leave it--few went more to his mother's heart than to find in one
of his drawers the packet carefully tied up of his dear books' old
coats.

Nothing gave Ted so much pleasure as a present of a book. This Christmas
he had set his heart on one, and Christmas was really coming so near
that he had begun to think of presents, and to write out, as was his
habit, a list of all the people in the house, putting opposite the name
of each the present he had reason to think would be most acceptable. The
list ended in a modest-looking "self," and opposite "self" was written
"a book." But all the other presents would have to be thought over and
consulted about with mother--all except hers of course, which in its
turn would have to be discussed with his father or Mabel perhaps--ever
so many times, before it came to the actual buying.

One Sunday--it was about three weeks to Christmas by this time--the head
master of Ted's school, who was also a clergyman, mentioned after the
usual service that he wished to have a special thanksgiving service this
year for the good health that had been enjoyed by the boys this "half."
It had been almost exceptionally good, he said; and he himself, for one,
and he was sure every one connected with the school would feel the same,
_was_ very thankful for it.

Ted's mother and Mabel, who were both, as it happened, at the
school chapel service that afternoon, glanced at their boy when this
announcement was made. They knew well that, despite his merry heart,
Ted was sensitive to things that do not affect all children, and they
were not surprised to see his cheeks grow a little paler. There was
something in the thought of this solemn Thanksgiving, in which he was
to take part, that gave him a little of the same feeling as he had had
long ago in the grand old church, when he looked up to the lofty roof,
shrouded in a mystery of dim light his childish eyes could not pierce,
and the sudden carillon broke out as if sung by the angels in heaven.

And a little chill struck to his mother's heart; she knew the service
was a good and fitting acknowledgment of God's care, and yet a strange
feeling went through her, for which she blamed herself, almost like
that of the poor Irishwomen, who, when any one remarks on the beauty and
healthiness of their children, hasten to cross themselves and to murmur
softly "In a good hour be it spoken." For human nature, above all
_mother_ nature, is the same all the world over!

But on their way home she and Mabel talked it over, and decided that it
was better to say nothing about it to Ted.

"It would only deepen the impression and _make_ him nervous," said Mabel
wisely.

A day or two later--a damp, rainy day it had been, there were a good
many such about this time--Ted's mother, entering the drawing-room in
the evening, heard some one softly singing to himself, gently touching
the piano at the same time. It was already dusk, and she went in very
quietly. The little musician did not hear her, and she sat down in
silence for a moment to listen, for it was Ted, and the song in his
sweet, clear tones--tones with a strange touch of sadness in them like
the church bells, was "Home, sweet home."

It brought the tears to her eyes.

"Ted," she said at last.

"O mother," he said, "I didn't know you were there."

"But you don't mind _me_," she said.

Ted hesitated.

"I don't know how it is, mother," he said, frankly. "It isn't as if I
_could_ sing, you know. But I can't even try to do it when anybody's
there. Is it silly, mother?"

"It's very natural," she said, kindly. "But if it gives me pleasure to
hear you?"

"Yes," he said, gently.

"And when you're a man I hope and think you may have a nice voice."

"Yes," he said again, rather absently.

Something in his tone struck his mother; it sounded _tired_.

"You're quite well, Ted, aren't you?" she said.

"Oh yes, mother--just a very little tired. It's been such a rainy day;
it isn't like Christmas coming so soon, is it? There's no snow and no
skating."

"No, dear."

"There was no snow the Christmas I was born, was there, mother?"

"No, dear," said his mother again.

Ted gave a little sigh.

"You're going to Rex's to-night; it is his party, isn't it?" she asked.

"Yes," he replied, "but I don't seem to care much to go."

"But you're quite well, I think," said his mother cheerfully. "It would
be unkind not to go when they are all expecting you."

"Yes," said Ted. "It would be."

So he went off to get ready; and his mother felt pleased, thinking the
dull weather had, for a wonder, affected his spirits, and that the merry
evening with his friends would do him good.




CHAPTER XII.

THE WHITE CROSS.

   "It is not growing like a tree
    In bulk, doth make man better be,
    Or standing long an oak, three hundred year,
    To fall a log at last, dry, bald, and sere.
           The lily of a day
           Is fairer far in May,
    Although it fade and die that night
    It was the plant and flower of light;
    In small proportions we just beauties see,
    And in short measures life may perfect be."
                          "Early Ripe."--BEN JONSON.


It seemed as if she had been right. Ted came home with bright eyes and
glowing cheeks, and said they had had an "awfully" merry evening. And
his mother went to bed with an easy mind.

But the next morning she felt less happy again, for Ted was evidently
not well. He was not very ill, but just not very well, and he hung
about in an uninterested, unsettled way, quite unlike his usual busy
briskness.

"He excites himself too much when he goes out, I think," said his
father; "we really shall have to leave off ever letting him go out in
the evening unless we are there ourselves;" and he looked a little
anxiously at Ted as he spoke, though the boy had not heard what he said.

But again this slight anxiety passed by. Then came a change in the
weather, and a sudden frost set in. Ted seemed to revive at once, and
when he heard that there was to be a whole holiday for skating, no one
was more eager about it than he. And, a little against her own feelings,
his mother let him go.

"You must be careful, Ted," she said; "you are not yet looking as well
as usual. And the ice cannot be very firm. Indeed, I almost doubt its
bearing at all. A bath in icy water would not do you any good just now."

But Ted promised to be careful, and his mother knew she could trust him.
Besides, several big boys were to be there, who would, she knew, look
after him. So Ted went, and came home saying it had been as usual
"awfully jolly;" but he did look tired, and owned himself rather so,
even though well enough to go out again in the evening with the others,
and to be one of the merriest at what the children called "a penny
reading" together, at which each in turn of the little party of friends
read or repeated or acted some story or piece of poetry for the
amusement of the others. And once again, but this was the last time
she could do so, Ted's mother felt able to throw off the slight vague
anxiety which had kept coming and going for the last few days about her
little boy, and to go to sleep with an easy mind.

But the next morning, to his own and her disappointment, he woke "tired"
again. Only tired--he complained of nothing else, but he said he wished
he need not go to school. And that was _so_ unlike Ted.

"Need I go, mother?" he asked gently.

She looked at him doubtfully.

"It seems such a pity, dear--so near the examinations too. And
sometimes, you know, when you haven't felt quite well in the morning you
have come back quite right again."

"Very well," said Ted, and he went off cheerfully enough.

But when he came back he was not all right as his mother had hoped; the
"tiredness" was greater, and he seemed to have caught cold, and the
next morning, after a restless night, there was no longer any doubt
that Ted was ill. Our dear little Ted--how quickly illness does its
work--above all with children! Almost before one has realised its
presence the rosy cheeks are pale and the bright eyes dimmed; the sturdy
legs grow weak and trembling, and the merry chatter ceases. Ah dear!
what a sad, strange hush comes over a house where "one of the children"
is ill.

The hush and the sadness came but gradually. Still, for a day or two,
they hoped it was nothing very serious. On this first afternoon of Ted's
really owning himself ill, two girl friends of Mabel's came, as had been
arranged, to see the famous museum, usually such a pleasure to its owner
to exhibit. But already how different all seemed!

"Mother, dear," he said, as if half reproaching himself for selfishness,
"it sometimes almost seems a bother to have to show my museum;" but as
it was considered better not to let him yield to the depression coming
over him, he bravely roused himself and went through the little exhibition
with his usual gentle courtesy. But this was the last effort of the kind
possible for him.

Sunday and Monday found him weaker, and the doctor's kind face grew
graver. Still he was not _very_ ill; only it began to seem as if he had
not strength to resist what had not, at first, threatened seriously. And
one day he made his mother's heart seem, for an instant, to stop beating,
when, looking up wistfully, he said to her,

"Mother, I don't _think_ I shall ever get better."

And the sad days and sadder nights went slowly on. Now and then there
seemed a little sparkle of hope. Once Ted began to talk about meeting
his dear Percy at the station, when he came home for the holidays, which
made those about him hope he was feeling stronger; then, at another
time, he said what a pity it would be not to be well by Christmas and by
his birthday, and he smiled when his father told him, as was the case,
that the doctor quite hoped he would be well by then; and one day when
the post brought him his great wish--a beautiful book of travels--his
face lighted up with pleasure, and, though not able to read it, the
welcome present lay on his bed where he could see it and smile to
himself to think it was there. There were happy times through his
illness, weak and wearied though he grew, and now and then he seemed
so bright that it was difficult, for a little, not to think him much
better. But the illness which Ted had is a very deceitful one--it
invisibly saps away the strength even when the worst sharp suffering is
over--and slowly, slowly it came to be seen that his own feeling had
been true; our Ted was not to get better.

One day a travelling merchant brought to the door a case of pretty
Parian ornaments. White and pure they shone in the winter sunshine, and
some one had the thought that "one of these might please Ted." So they
were brought up for him to choose from. Poor Cissy! she would fain have
carried them in; but alas! for fear of infection, she could not be
allowed to see her brother, which made of these last days a double
sorrow to her, though she did not know how ill he was. Ted touched the
pretty things with his little thin hand.

"They are very pretty," he said. "I like this one best, please, mother."

"This one" was a snow-white cross, and his mother's heart ached with a
strange thrill as she saw his choice; but she smiled as she placed it
beside him, where it stood, ever in his sight, till his blue eyes could
see it no more.

There came a morning on which the winter sun rose with a wonderful
glory; gold and orange light seemed to fill the sky, as if in prelude
to some splendid pageant. It was Sunday morning. Ted lay asleep, as if
carved in marble, his little white face rested on the pillow, and as
his mother turned from the marvellous beauty outside to the small figure
that seemed to her, just then, the one thing in earth or sky, she
whispered to herself what she felt to be the truth.

"It is his last Sunday with us. Before another my Ted will have entered
that city where there is no need of the sun, of which God Himself is the
light. My happy Ted! but oh, how shall we live without him?"

She was right. Ted did not live to see Christmas or his birthday.
Sweetly and peacefully, trusting God in death as he had trusted Him in
life, the little fellow fearlessly entered the dark valley--the valley
of the _shadow_ of death only, for who can doubt that to such as Ted
what _seems_ death is but the entrance to fuller life?

So, children, I will not say that this was the _end_ of the simple life
I have told you of--and in yet another way Ted lives--in the hearts of
all that loved him his sweet memory can never die. And if I have been
able to make any among you feel that you too love him, I cannot tell
you how glad I shall be.

They laid him in a pretty corner of the little cemetery from which can
be seen the old church Ted loved so well, and the beautiful chase, where
he so often walked. And even in those midwinter days his little friend
Gertrude found flowers for his grave. It was all she could do to show
her love for him, she said, crying bitterly, for she might not see him
to bid him good-bye, and her heart was very sore.

So it was with Christmas roses that the grave of our Christmas child was
decked.



_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, _Edinburgh_.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Missing punctuation has been added. The following additional changes
were made to the text:

In chapter 4, the misprint "Hs" was changed to read "He" in the sentence:

    HE would not leave the least shred of paper or even crumbs about

In chapter 10, the word "other" was changed to "another" in the sentence:

    (...) he would not take the round of the Skensdale farm for
    ANOTHER three or four days at least




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A CHRISTMAS CHILD: A SKETCH OF A BOY-LIFE ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

