Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net











FIVE LITTLE STARRS SERIES

_ILLUSTRATED_

Price per volume 35 cents

          FIVE LITTLE STARRS
          FIVE LITTLE STARRS ON A CANAL-BOAT
          FIVE LITTLE STARRS ON A RANCH
          FIVE LITTLE STARRS IN AN ISLAND CABIN
          FIVE LITTLE STARRS IN THE CANADIAN FOREST

(In Preparation)

FIVE LITTLE STARRS ON A MOTOR TOUR

[Illustration: Mike Sat Down on a Log to Watch Over the Children.]





FIVE LITTLE STARRS IN THE CANADIAN FOREST

BY

LILLIAN ELIZABETH ROY

AUTHOR OF THE "BLUE BIRD SERIES"


[Illustration]

          New York
          THE PLATT & NOURSE CO.




Copyright, 1915, by

THE PLATT & PECK CO.




CONTENTS


          CHAPTER                                PAGE

             I A LUMBER CAMP IN PROSPECT            7

            II A LUMBER CAMP IN WINTER             30

           III THE INDIAN TRAPPER                  53

            IV THE ENGINEER'S ASSISTANTS           76

             V JUMPIN' JANE'S ANTICS              100

            VI OUTDOOR FUN IN A LUMBER CAMP       126

           VII CHRISTMAS AT THE LUMBER CAMP       147

          VIII MIKE'S BEAR TRAP                   170

            IX FATHER BEAR VISITS THE CAMP        190

             X AFLOAT ON THE RIVER RAFT           212




FIVE LITTLE STARRS IN A CANADIAN FOREST




CHAPTER I

A LUMBER CAMP IN PROSPECT


"DADDUM, are we 'most there?" asked Dorothy Starr, impatiently, as the
uncomfortable local train creaked over its uneven tracks through dense
forests in Western Ontario.

"Almost, Dot--have a little more patience and soon you will be able to
exercise those active little legs," returned Mr. Starr, as he consulted
his watch.

"Guess we'll all be glad to exercise after this awful smoky, crampy
ride," grumbled Donald, Dot's twin brother.

"Our winter in the lumber camp will have to be mighty fine to make us
forget this outlandish trip ever since we left Grand Forks," declared
Meredith Starr, the oldest boy.

"We have one consolation, Mete, and that is, we don't have to travel
home in the Spring by the same route," laughed his sister Lavinia.

"Well, children, you all have had some remark to make about the
discomforts of this car and the dreadful condition of the tracks, but it
is far better than riding in a springless lumber wagon for the same
distance," commented Mrs. Starr, shifting the baby's sleepy head from
her shoulder to her knees.

"We'd never have come if Daddum knew we had to travel _that_ way!"
exclaimed Don.

"No, but Daddum had to travel that way, and on horseback, years ago,
before this track was laid," replied Mrs. Starr.

"Did you, Daddum? Oh, do tell us about it!" cried the restless children,
as they crowded into the seat beside their father.

"It isn't an exciting tale, but it is very appropriate at this time,"
replied Mr. Starr, smiling at the eager faces. "I was a very young man
then. I didn't find out until I returned to New York after that trip
what a prize your mother was."

"Oh, how does Mumzie know about the trip, then?" asked Dot.

"Because I have often told her how that trip decided for me my future
business life," replied Mr. Starr.

"Dot, please don't interrupt Daddum with silly questions again," said
Lavinia to her little sister.

"When I got off the train at Grand Forks, on that trip, I expected to
meet an old friend at the station, but he was not there. I stopped at
the best hotel in the town, which would have been about sixth-rate
anywhere else, and the next morning my friend Dean came in. He had had
to ride about forty miles out of his way on account of a flooded river
and that was why he was not on time to meet me.

"Well, after he had made a few purchases in town he was ready to start
back. I had a good horse waiting for me at the hotel shed, and soon we
were on the return trip.

"The further north we went the more beautiful and wilder the scenery
became until I thought we would be lost in the dense primeval forests.
How Dean managed to find his way I could not make out, but he seemed to
know every stump, every mound, and every blaze on the trees along the
trail.

"We stopped at noon to rest the horses and have a bite to eat. While we
lay under the trees smoking our pipes and waiting for the horses to
finish their oats, an old hunter passed by.

"We invited him to join us but he was anxious to meet an Indian trapper
some miles further on, so we were compelled to decline Dean's
invitation.

"After finishing our pipes, we started on the last half of our journey.

"We hadn't gone more than four miles before we saw in the trail the deep
cut of a wagon-track that struck in from a side-trail that led to an
eastern lumber-town.

"'Huh! Must be pretty heavy pulling for the horses,' said Dean, knowing
that it would take a heavy load to make the wheels sink down so far in
the soft soil.

"'Were they here yesterday, when you came by?' I asked.

"'No, and I should say the outfit wasn't very far ahead, either,'
replied Dean.

"And so it was. In a short time we caught up with a kind of
'prairie-schooner' wagon, and found that a pioneer with his family had
dared the wilderness of the Canadian forest to wrest a living from the
earth.

"Dean rode alongside for a time, giving the man some valuable points
about the country, and advising him as to the best trails. The man
thanked us profusely as we rode on.

"While Dean talked with the man I rode by the side of the wagon and
spoke with the wife who was a very sweet woman of about thirty. She held
a child about two years old in her lap while a boy of five slept upon a
bundle of clothing on the rough wagon-floor.

"Now, this family had come from a town eighty miles east of the trail
where we met them, and they were bound for a distant, fertile valley
about a hundred miles further to the west where they intended to stop
and look about for a permanent home. The woman and children were stiff
and sore from the jolts of the springless wagon as it bumped over huge
rocks, or suddenly slid into wide ruts made by washouts. But they never
complained about aching bones, for they knew the father couldn't help
them, and they were trying to keep up his spirits.

"Dean and I continued along the trail until we came to the flooded
region that made him miss my coming the day before. The river seemed
higher than ever, Dean said, and we had to try the roundabout way again.
We traveled along the banks for at least thirty miles, but not a spot
could be found where we could ford, or even swim our horses.

"Finally, we pulled rein to discuss the problem, when Dean saw a thin
wreath of smoke rising among the trees near at hand. As no forester ever
permits the sight of smoke to go uninvestigated for fear of forest
fires, he jumped off of his horse and rushed into the woods. After a
short time he returned with our friend the hunter and an Indian.

"'The men say we can't get over to-day--we'll have to wait about until
the water recedes somewhat,' Dean explained.

"'Can't we cross where you did last night?' I asked.

"'Not to-day--the water has risen much higher since then and it would be
taking too much of a chance to risk it. We'll stay here until it is
safe,' said Dean, as he led his horse into the woods toward the
Indian's temporary camp.

"I followed the three men and wondered how the Indian ever got the name
of Mike. Later I heard that his own name was so hard to pronounce that
everyone who knew him abbreviated it to 'Mike'.

"Well, we camped and hunted and fished there with the two elderly men
for a week before we could go on, but it was a week of rare sport, for
the hunter and trapper were experts, and they had many exciting stories
to tell of narrow escapes from wild animals and other adventures.

"Dean and I finally arrived at the lumber camp where the men had
decided to send out a scout to trail Dean, who they feared was lost, or
injured somewhere on the way. So, they were greatly relieved to see us
ride along the river-road that led into the camp which consisted of a
small group of huts."

"Daddum, that story wasn't as good as most of yours are," criticised
Don.

"Perhaps not, my son," laughed Mr. Starr, "for I see we are nearing our
destination and I only planned to keep up the tale long enough to keep
you from thinking of your tired selves."

"Get there in about seven minutes, sir," announced the old conductor as
he shuffled through the car.

"Hurrah!" cried Don, jumping upon the seat to get his baggage.

"Why, I can't see any town!" exclaimed Dot, looking out of the car
window.

"Don't bother about the town, Dot, but take your hat and jacket out of
the rack," advised Lavinia, who was busy trying to gather together the
various belongings of the family.

"Babs! Wake up, little sister," called Mrs. Starr as she gently shook
the sleepy little girl.

"Is 't mornin'?" yawned the baby.

Everybody laughed so that Babs soon sat up and looked about in
surprise.

"Oh, see out there--the funny place!" exclaimed Dot.

"That's the city where we shall stay over night," said Mr. Starr,
carrying suit-cases and grips toward the door.

A surprise awaited the Starr family as they descended from the train,
for Mr. and Mrs. Latimer were there to greet them.

"Well, when did you get here?" asked Mr. Starr, after greetings were
over.

"Day before yesterday, so we thought we would wait and start for the
camp together," returned Mr. Latimer.

As there were no porters or cabs in the isolated town, they had to
carry their own luggage. Mr. Latimer undertook to find a boy with a
wheelbarrow to take the trunks to the hotel. "Hotel! Is there such a
thing here, Mr. Latimer?" laughed Meredith.

"Wait until you see! You will be very proud to send home picture
post-cards of the place!" replied Mrs. Latimer.

"Where's Paul and Marjory?" suddenly asked Meredith, who had missed
Jinks, his chum, on the trip from Oakdale.

"Why, Marjory is reading to an old invalid this afternoon and Paul went
fishing with some boys," explained Mrs. Latimer.

While the Starrs are following their friends, the Latimers, from the
station to the hotel, let us see how they all came to be in this faraway
place in Canada.

When the Starrs left the island in Casco Bay in the early part of
September, Mr. Latimer, who lived in Portland, Maine, mentioned a trip
to the lumber regions of Canada. As Mr. Starr was interested in a large
lumber deal with Mr. Latimer, and had spent his summer in Maine on that
account, he decided to associate himself with Mr. Latimer in the
Canadian Pine Investment Co.

Consequently, the Starr family packed up their belongings and returned
to Oakwood from Maine several weeks sooner than they had expected, for
it was necessary that the children be completely fitted out with warm
clothing, and other necessities, if they were to spend the winter in a
lumber camp with the Latimers.

Of course, Mrs. Starr worried about keeping the children from school all
winter, but Mrs. Latimer said that the governess, who had been with her
children for several years, could so arrange her hours that all the
children could study under her direction. This arrangement satisfied
Mrs. Starr, and the only drawback to enjoying the novelty of life in a
lumber camp was entirely removed.

The Starrs left Oakwood the latter part of October and reached Grand
Forks the first of November. From there they traveled by various routes
until they reached their destination in the extreme southeastern part of
Manitoba.

Here, the Latimers awaited them, and had made all arrangements for the
further journey into the heart of the forests where the pine and other
valuable timber stood.

The lumber crew, consisting of a foreman, cook and two helpers,
hostlers, drivers, and most of those that felled trees, had gone on to
the camp some time previous to the Starrs' arrival, but a few of the men
were still in town waiting for their foreman.

The lumbermen who were waiting to start for camp stood about the small
stoop of the house which was known as the "hotel," and scanned the group
slowly walking toward them. The Latimers were already known to the men,
but the new-comers were a source of curiosity.

The men who were to supervise the cutting, hoisting and hauling of the
timber to be cut that winter were of a rugged, good-natured type, and
the Starrs were glad to note their clean-cut appearance.

Mr. Latimer had explained to the new arrivals the presence of the crew
at the hotel, and also the various work the different men had charge of.
Don and Dot had overheard this conversation, and the moment the family
reached the porch Don carefully looked over the group and whispered to
Dot. Together they walked over to the men and entered into an animated
discourse with them.

"I heard that one of you men was an engineer on the engine that pulls
the trees out of the woods," said Don.

"I'm the one," remarked a tall muscular man, while his companions smiled
at the two children.

"We know how to run an engine," began Dot.

"Sh!" interrupted Don to his sister. "We didn't come over to tell you
that, but we wanted to say that we are glad to meet you. We three ought
to have some nice rides this winter on that engine of yours."

This brought a laugh from all but the engineer. He looked very serious
as he said, "I sure am glad to make your acquaintance. I reckon we'll be
very friendly." And he stuck out his large hand and shook Don's and
Dot's small hands most energetically.

"Did you say you run an engine?"

"Yep! when we were down on my grandfather's ranch in Texas. There were
some Indians always stealing and hiding in the woods and Dot and I
helped catch 'em," said Don, looking about to see if any of his family
overheard his remark.

"Don, that wasn't when we drove the engine. You know--I mean the time
the old thing ran away with us and everybody was so frightened!"
corrected truthful Dot.

"Well, it doesn't matter, now," hurriedly said Don. "I haven't heard
your name yet, mister. My twin-sister's is Dot an' mine is Don."

"My name is Jim--Jim Akerman, all told, but just call me Jim. An' now
I'll introduce you to the crew if you like," said the man, smiling at
the twins. "This man is fireman on the engine and his name is Pete. We
call him Pete on account of his job of piling peat on the fire."

"Do you use peat? Why, I thought you burned wood," said Don.

"We do up here, but down in Carolina we used a lot of bog-peat, 'cause
it's so hot a fire," explained Jim; then continued:

"Here's Bill, the tackle man; an' Jake, the swing-man; Ben and Johnny,
there, are hook-men. Then there's Alf, Jerry, and Mack, who have charge
of the cables."

Just as the introductions were over, Mr. Starr called from the front
door telling the children to come in and dress for supper.




CHAPTER II

A LUMBER CAMP IN WINTER


THE boss of the machinery crew came by the morning train and the next
day the entire party were ready to start on their way.

The men rode, while the women and children sat in a comfortable
carry-all drawn by four horses. The baggage and extra camp outfits were
packed in a cart drawn by two mules.

"Jus' like a picture of folks going west in the gold-fever time,"
ventured Don, looking ahead at the escort and behind at the cart and a
few riders.

"Let's play we are pioneers, shall we?" cried Dot, always ready for an
exciting adventure.

"And Mete can be the pioneer and Venie his wife. Babs will be their only
child," explained Don.

"Then who are we?" asked Dot.

"Me and you? Why, we are the Indians that hold up the wagon and shoot
everyone," replied Don, trying to look savage.

"Oh, dear, if we had only known this we could have worn our Indian suits
that we left home," sighed Dot.

"Never mind; I'll pin on this horse-blanket that's under the seat, and
you can wrap this linen dust-coat about you," said Don, dragging the
blanket out from its hiding place.

"I won't look a bit like an Indian in that old coat. Can't you see
another blanket with stripes on it?" asked Dot.

"Not a blanket, but here's a plaid lap-cover," replied Don, as he spied
the cotton cover under the blanket.

"What are you children pulling from under that seat?" asked Mrs. Starr,
who always watched the twins in fear and trembling.

"We're jus' goin' to be Indians and wear these things," explained Don,
carelessly.

Meredith had been sitting with the driver of the cart for some time,
hearing stories of life in the wilds, and Lavinia had been playing with
Babs during the time the travelling was bad, when the wagons went
slowly.

This was Don's opportunity.

Dot and he managed to get out of the back of the carry-all unnoticed.

They hid behind some bushes and as the leaders came opposite, Don jumped
out and shouted, dancing about and waving a club over his head. Dot
followed her brother's example, and both pranced and shrieked such
blood-curdling yells that Mrs. Starr almost fainted while Mrs. Latimer
hurriedly leaned out of the wagon to see who had been run over.

The horses merely jumped at the unexpected apparitions, then kept
plodding up the hill. Don and Dot clambered up the steps of the
carry-all trying to mimic the real scalpers, but Mrs. Starr caught each
one by an arm and bade them sit down and not get out again without her
permission.

Meredith had witnessed the whole performance from the cart and laughed
teasingly at the climax of the raid.

The journey took two days; the first day, at five o'clock, Mr. Latimer
called a halt for camp. This part of the trip was great sport for the
children for they roamed about the woods while the men cut fir branches
for beds, and watched the cook prepare a fine dinner out in the
wilderness.

The second day, about noon, the travellers reached the place selected
for a permanent camp. Of course, everyone was deeply interested in the
novel appearance of their winter home and, as soon as the twelve o'clock
dinner was served, started in to investigate the quarters.

The children trailed after the grownups, making their own observations
of affairs.

The bosses' cabins were among some magnificent trees, about one hundred
yards from the main camp. They were rough little log huts large enough
to hold four bunks, two on either side--a lower and an upper bunk--and
a chest of drawers at the side opposite the door. An opening in the roof
gave ventilation, and a small square window at each side of the chest of
drawers gave light in the daytime. The only light to be had at night was
from a candle, and heat, if the city folks needed any, must be had from
oil heaters, several of which had been included in the outfit.

The bunks of the crew were directly opposite the "bosses'" huts. A large
cleared space lay between the two sections, and at one end stood the
cook's quarters, with a long shed-like cabin in front of it to screen
the kitchen from the company. This shed was dining-room, parlor, and
general social center. At the fourth side, opposite the dining-room and
kitchen, was a commodious office with three rooms. Here the clerical
force worked, and the bosses planned and ordered the work of the
company.

This sort of life suited Don and Dot perfectly, and they peeped into
every bunk, and hovered about the kitchen, with the satisfaction of
having reached the great goal in life.

"This bunk is for the children--Don and Dot, Venie and Babs," explained
Mr. Starr, showing the bunks adjoining the hut which would be occupied
by himself and wife.

"Can't Dot and I have a hut all to ourselves?" asked Don, who hoped to
have great fun in these little huts.

"Not much!" laughed Mr. Starr. "I doubt if Venie can keep you two in
order, but we will try it."

"Where's Mete going to live?" asked Dot eagerly.

"Meredith and Paul will have bunks in the same hut with the foreman, and
Elizabeth has a bunk partitioned off from her father and mother's half
of a hut," replied Mrs. Starr.

"Well, guess I'll have a look at my house," ventured Don, stepping into
the log cabin which was to be his abode for a time.

"Dot, look'a here! they don't have bed-springs in these bunks,"
whispered Don, lifting up a corner of a sweet smelling mattress.

"And the mattress! What is it stuffed with?" exclaimed Dot.

"Don't know, but it smells fine, don't it?" said Don.

Meredith and Paul peeped in just then and seeing the two examining the
beds, laughed.

"You ought to see ours, if you think the company ought to provide you
with Dutch feather-beds," said Paul.

"What are yours?" Don asked.

"Just balsam branches heaped up in the bunks; we spread a blanket over
them at night and sink into peaceful dreams."

"Then we want balsam branches, too," demanded Dot.

"Why should we have these things if the other men have branches?"
queried Don.

"We'll ask Daddum next time we see him," said Meredith, as Paul and he
continued on their way.

"Dot, we'll just go over and take a look at those balsam beds. If we
like them better, we will ask Mumzie to have ours changed. If ours is
best, we won't say anything," whispered astute Don.

They found Paul's bunk filled with balsam branches as he said, but they
felt perfectly content with their nice soft mattresses after the balsam
had been tested.

Before any further matters of interest could be found, a deafening sound
came from the cook's quarters. The twins ran out to the clearing to find
the meaning of the noise, and saw one of the cook's helpers walking
about banging a wooden potato-masher furiously upon the bottom of a
brass pan. The echoes of the strokes could be heard coming from every
direction in the forest.

"What's that for?" asked Don, running over to Mose, the helper.

"I'se callin' you-alls for dinner," grinned Mose.

"Hey, Dot! come quick," called Don, turning to see if his sister was in
sight. "It's dinner time, and Mose is ringin' the bell."

Without further ado, Don went over to the shed and looked for his place
at the long table. For once he was undecided. There were two long
tables, and the places set were so exactly alike that Don was not sure
where he was supposed to sit.

"Where are all of the other men, Daddum?" asked Lavinia, seeing that
only half of the men were present.

"They have been cutting out rough roads from our timber to the river,
and have taken their dinner in pails, as it is too far for them to come
to camp and then return afterward," said Mr. Starr.

"What river, Daddum?" asked Don, quickly.

"The river down which the logs float in the spring," said Mr. Starr.

"Do you own the river?" asked Dot, wondering how much of the earth her
father possessed.

"We own the right to use it for our logging business," replied Mr.
Starr, and smiled at his little girl's disappointed look.

"Why do they cut roads, Daddum? Aren't there any ready made that you can
use?" asked Dot.

"Not in the forests, Dot. We have to break out roadways so the heavy
skidding and loading machines can go in among the trees and lift the cut
timber up and on the sledges that will cart it down to the water,"
explained Mr. Starr.

"You will soon be able to see the way it has to be done and then you
will understand better," added Mr. Latimer.

"When can we see--this afternoon?" asked Don, impatiently.

"Maybe you will have time to go with me directly after dinner," hinted
Mr. Latimer.

"Yes, yes! Of course we will, 'cause we don't begin lessons 'till
Monday, you know," exclaimed Don and Dot together.

The rice pudding was almost forgotten that day, so eager were the
children to go and see the interesting work of the men of the camp.

They trudged along the newly cut road which they had travelled over in
the morning, but, after walking for half a mile, Mr. Latimer left the
road and went along a narrow trail that ran into the thick forest.
Walking along this for a mile or so, the children heard the sound of
chopping, and crashes every now and then, and the shouting of men to
each other. In about ten minutes' time they could see moving figures
between the thick trunks of trees, and soon came to the place where the
road was being broken out.

Here, indeed, was activity and exciting work. The children were
cautioned about the danger.

Don watched with every faculty strained to its utmost. He saw an
opening through the thick growth of pine trees running far into the
depths of the forest. In the opposite direction, where the men were
working, the forest remained intact.

"Guess that's the road Daddum said they were breaking out," he
commented, to the other children.

"An' that's what they have to cut down to get out to the river," added
Paul, pointing toward the thick trees on the other side.

Suddenly, a shout of "Ye-ho!" was heard and the lumbermen ran off in
every direction, while a crackling sound came from the tree that was
being cut; in another moment down crashed the giant pine, tearing away
obstructing branches from other trees.

"Oh!" sighed Don, clutching his hands in tense interest, and the other
children sat as rigid as statues until the tree was down.

Some men instantly hopped upon the fallen giant and started lopping off
the branches, while the other men began work on the next tree in the
road.

The "breaking out" of the road through the virgin forest kept on in this
way until the men were some distance farther on than they were when the
children first came upon the scene. When Mr. Latimer returned to take
them back to camp they were quite willing to go.

That evening the children had a great deal to tell their mothers and Don
added, "Guess I'll be a lumberman when I'm big."

"Have you decided to give up the canal-boat life that you promised Molly
you would lead?" asked his father, teasingly.

"Well, a man can run a canal-boat and be a lumberman, too, can't he?"
returned Don, not willing to admit his loss of interest in the
canal-boat life.

"I always said that it was better for a man to do one thing and do that
well, than to try and do several things poorly," hinted Mr. Starr.

The others laughed, for one of Don's weaknesses was to take a
tremendous interest in anything new and then leave it half finished for
the next absorbing idea.

"Well, I'm eating these pork and beans just now, and I'm doing it well,
ain't I?" retorted Don, making everyone laugh again.

"Dot and you always do the meal-work thoroughly," replied Mrs. Starr,
still laughing.

No one about the table that evening seemed to have a failing appetite,
for the wonderful pine-scented air and the unusual life made everyone
hungry for the brown bread, beans, baked potatoes, and slices of crisp
ham.

A huge log fire was built in the center of the clearing and,
immediately after supper, the crew and the bosses' families sat about
it in a circle while the "timber-children," as Mr. Latimer called them,
told the other children wild stories of adventures in the forests.

Don sat with wide-opened eyes and body leaning forward listening eagerly
to every word. These tales were stored away in his mind for some future
development or use.

At eight o'clock Mr. Latimer called out, "Youngsters' bedtime!"

"Why we never have to go so early as this," said Don.

"In a lumber camp every man goes to bed at nine o'clock, sometimes
earlier, if the day is long. We are up at five, you see, and work from
six. Just wait until you see us work some nights until long after your
tired eyes have closed," explained Mr. Latimer.

"Crickets! From five until night! I guess I wouldn't like _that_ life!"
announced Don, emphatically.

"No, indeed," added Meredith, while everyone laughed at Don's honest
confession. "Don loves his warm bed in winter."

As the children rose to leave the fire, they thanked the men for the
entertainment and said good-night. The engine-driver had been quite near
to Don all evening and now Don asked a question.

"'Most ready with that engine that I'm goin' to help you with?"

"Not yet, Mister Don; we have to break out that road before I can run my
engine in there, you see," whispered the man.

Perfectly contented to think that he wouldn't miss any fun on that
engine, Don said good-night to Jim and ran after the family who were on
the way to the bunks.




CHAPTER III

THE INDIAN TRAPPER


THE routine of life in a lumber camp never became tiresome, but it
systematized matters for the children. Every morning at five o'clock the
rising gong was beaten by the cook's helper, and at five-thirty the men
had breakfast. The families ate at six-thirty, and at seven-thirty an
hour was given to study of the daily lessons. Then an hour of freedom
came, followed by three hours of close application to school. The
classes met in one of the large rooms of the office building and Miss
Miller had scholars who were eager to study, for not one of them wished
to be detained after school; there were too many wonderful things to be
done, and being detained after school hours meant the missing of some of
the wonders.

After the first week in camp the children became quite resigned to the
early rising and breakfast, for it seemed to lengthen out the hours of
the day so that a great deal more could be crowded into the time for fun
and play.

On the second Sunday in camp everyone was sitting in the dining-room
listening while Mr. Latimer read the service. He had finished the Bible
reading and suggested a hymn that all of the men knew by heart, when the
door opened at one end of the shed and a queer old face peered in.

Don sat nearest the door and, seeing a stranger at the door, nudged his
twin. She leaned over and stared at the wrinkled skin, twinkling eyes,
and long straight hair.

"Why, Don, it's an Injun!" whispered Dot, with surprise.

By this time the door had opened far enough to admit the stranger and he
stepped in and squatted down just inside.

Most of the men sitting with faces toward the door saw him but the
reader and part of his audience were not aware of the visitor. Dot
nudged her father and whispered about the Indian's presence. The service
continued, however, without interruption, to the final song. Then many
of the men rose and came over to the visitor.

"Hello, Wilotemike! Where'd you come from?"

"Wilotemike! Let me see him!" exclaimed Mr. Starr, in great surprise. He
stepped out before the old Indian and saw the same friendly trapper that
had advised his friend Dean about the flooded river, and entertained
them for a week. He came forward and held out a welcoming hand.

"Well, well, I don't believe you know me, Mike, do you?" asked Mr.
Starr, grasping the old man's hand.

After thinking deeply for a few moments, the Indian's face lit up and he
smiled recognition at Mr. Starr.

"Mike know friend! Many moons he not come back!" said the Indian
reprovingly.

"Not my fault, Mike. Me want to come but find a nice squaw and she keep
me home," laughed Mr. Starr, beckoning for his wife to join him.

Of course the children were shown to Mike and the old Indian smiled as
he allowed his hand to light gently upon Bab's yellow curls.

Most of the timber men knew Mike, or had heard of the trapper, and he
was generally welcomed at any camp he visited. In this case, however, he
was doubly welcome, for he was a friend of one of the bosses, and the
story soon went the rounds of the entire camp.

"Going to visit us for the winter, Mike?" asked Mr. Latimer, thinking of
the great boon he would be to go about with the children after school
hours. Knowing the forests as he did, he could teach and show them
everything and at the same time prevent any danger from coming to them.

"Mike set traps nex' moon, way up mountain," replied Mike, laconically.

"Mike stay here till time for trap to catch big game!" eagerly came from
Mr. Starr, who sensed part of Mr. Latimer's plan.

"Mike, get much money for time he stay. Mike show little ones all over
woods and teach many good things about everything!" added Mr. Latimer.

By this time the ladies realized what the two men were after, and
abetted the plan with all of their persuasions.

Mike stood uncertain. He smiled down at the children who showed in their
faces how delightful life would be with a real Indian trapper to show
them about the woods, while the ladies urged the proposition
resistlessly, and the men stood waiting expectantly for an answer.

"Mike not make much pelts las' year. Not eat much this year. Mike tink
dis snow make a big pelt time--make much money," explained the trapper.

"Mike take all this money from this day to trapper's day. Mike go to
mountain on trapper day and set traps. Watch much. Get big pelt and come
back soon; Mike make more money here with white man," spoke Mr. Starr,
taking a roll of bills from his pocket and counting out fifty dollars
upon the table, giving Mike to understand that the money was his if he
would remain in camp until December 15, which day was generally
Trapper's Day in the North.

The Indian looked about at the faces and saw only the kindly desire to
have him remain, and his eyes became misty at the unusual welcome from
the white men.

Don and Dot could hardly restrain their impatience to have Mike say
"yes," so Don ran over, took the dark hand of the trapper in both his
and shook it, saying, "Come on, Mike, we want you."

The children all flocked about, coaxing the Indian to remain, until he
smiled and consented to be their guard after school hours. Miss Miller
heaved an audible sigh of relief, for she had had her troubles in the
last two weeks, trying to keep Babs and the twins always in a "safety
circle" beneath her watchful eye.

Cook came in just then and asked a question.

"Hey, boss, when is church out? My dinner is cooked an' waitin' fer the
two boys to set up de tables."

At that everyone hurried out that the cook might not be delayed in his
programme of feeding so many hungry people.

"Take Mike into the office and tell him all you have seen since you have
been here," suggested Mr. Latimer to the children.

While the children danced over the frozen ground showing the Indian the
way to the office, the elders gathered in the Starr's log hut and
discussed the value of the trapper.

"Everybody knows Mike for hundreds of miles around this part of the
country, and he knows every foot of ground, the depth of waters, the
bog-lands, and the haunts of wild animals. He is as true and honorable
as any white man, and more trustworthy than many," explained Mr. Starr.

"He is almost too old a man to continue trapping, I should think,"
remarked Mr. Latimer. "Why, he must be almost seventy years old."

"More than that, I think," replied Mr. Starr.

"You never can tell an Indian's age after a certain period. He may be a
hundred and fifty and he would not show it any more than to-day," said
Mrs. Latimer.

"Well, the one essential thing is that he is perfectly capable and agile
enough to guard the children in their wanderings," added Mrs. Starr, who
was greatly relieved to have such a treasure.

"If he would consent to give up trapping this winter, I would willingly
pay him more than he will get out of any pelts he might get. And life
here would be much easier for him without being too civilized," said Mr.
Starr.

"Well, we'll let him try it for a time and perhaps he will like the
children enough to wish to remain for the season," suggested Mr.
Latimer.

Meanwhile, the children were having a glorious time with their new
friend and guardian. The twins were enchanted to be living with a real,
true Indian, and Babs seemed to take a violent fancy to the long haired
old man.

Mike was like one of the children, telling them Indian legends in his
own queer English, which Paul called "Pidgin English." The afternoon
passed quickly for the children and they were all amazed when the gong
banged for supper.

The following day while the children were at school, Mike looked about
the camp with curiosity and then walked away to see how much timber the
men had cut. Unknown to anyone, Babs quietly crept after her new
play-fellow, and soon was out of sight of the camp.

Babs was past three years and quite able to amuse herself at times, and
since coming to the woods she had enjoyed playing in the clearing with a
toy shovel and pick and a blunt axe. She liked to make believe she was
chopping down trees and piling them up in tiny heaps of firewood that
cook's helper generally used for kindlings. No one was concerned about
the child as she had played quietly in that way for several days and she
was not given to adventure like the twins. So, it was with a startled
expression that Mrs. Starr called Babs and, receiving no reply, went to
the door of the log cabin to find her. As no Babs was to be seen, and
nobody had seen her anywhere for the past half hour, Mrs. Starr felt
frightened.

Mrs. Starr and Mrs. Latimer ran over to the school room to inquire, but
no one had seen Babs there. Then, they ran to the office where the two
bosses were writing and figuring, but neither one of them had seen Babs.

"Where's Mike?" asked Mr. Starr.

"Oh, I never thought of him," replied Mrs. Starr with a feeling of
relief.

"If Mike isn't about the clearing you can rest assured that he has Babs
with him, and she is as safe as she would be in bed," said Mr. Starr,
going out of the office to inquire about Mike at the cook's quarters.

As Mike had not been seen about for an hour, there was no doubt that
Babs and he were out together.

Now Mike had loped silently over the frozen ground toward the direction
of the timber cutting, without ever looking behind him. Had he glanced
back he might have seen a tiny little girl making great efforts to
follow after him. Mike was too entirely a creature of nature to walk in
a beaten path when a short-cut through the woods saved so many steps.
Therefore, Babs found her path beset by many obstacles as she tried to
follow exactly in the way Mike had chosen.

Her short little legs could not keep up with his agile old ones, and
soon Babs was left behind. Try as she would she could not run fast
enough to find Mike again. She could barely remember in which direction
she last saw him going, and finally, she sat down upon a flat rock and
cried. She was tired, she was hungry, she wanted to go home, and she
wanted Mike. But not one of these wants were satisfied, and she cried
lustily for someone to come and find her.

Since living in the forest, Mother had often warned the children never
to go out of sight of the clearing, for there might be bears about the
woods. To add to her fear of being lost, came a queer sound among the
underbrush.

"Oh, it's a bear!" wailed Babs, trying to locate the wild beast and
seeking shelter behind a huge tree.

She hugged the immense trunk of the pine while she poked her yellow head
out to see if the bear was in sight, but he had not yet come into view.

She stood behind the tree until wearied of inaction, and as the noise
could no longer be heard, crept out of hiding, and Babs started off in a
direction she hoped would bring her to Mike. She stumbled and fell over
roots, got up and went on again; dodged between the thick growth of pine
trees, and finally came to the road that was broken out by the men when
they first came to camp--the road that led to the trail running into
town.

Babs was thankful to find a road but not sure which direction to take,
and when a little girl is very tired and hungry and forlorn the work of
thinking hard is apt to put her to sleep, especially if she sits down
upon a large pile of pine needles and leans against a stump to think.
And so it was with Babs. She leaned her tousled curls against the stump
and closed her eyes.

In taking the short-cut to the timber-cutters, Mike had seen tracks of
wild hares and quail, and finding that the work in the timber was not as
interesting as he thought it would be, he decided to follow the road
back and get his rifle to shoot some game for the cook.

He was quietly loping along the road when he saw the little white hood
bobbing down behind the pine stump.

Mike looked all about for some evidence of the children or elders, but
not a sign or sound was to be heard except the strange cracklings of
forest silences. Mike gave a shrill whistle to call anyone who had
strayed close by, but no one answered except Babs who was suddenly
awakened from her nap.

"O-oh, Mike! Did oo know I is losted affer oo?" said she, rubbing her
eyes with her mittened hands.

"Mike take Babby home," coaxed Mike, lifting the child to his shoulder.

Reaching the clearing Mike carried Babs over to the office where he
heard how everyone missed the child and, finding that Mike was gone
also, they felt that Babs was safe, for doubtless the two were together.

Mike understood perfectly but said nothing about finding Babs alone a
mile from the clearing, for he silently vowed never to leave the little
one alone again.

So the devotion of the old man proved a great boon to Babs, for she soon
knew many simple wood-secrets that Mike taught her, as well as being
shown the homes of hares, quail, squirrels, and other small denizens of
the forests.

One day, Mike went off alone, with his rifle over his shoulder. Babs had
to remain indoors that day as she had fallen into a pool of water and
had to have all of her clothes dried in the kitchen. That night Mike
came into camp with a medium sized deer slung over his back. Everyone
was interested in the event and watched Mike hang it up by the legs,
while he went to his tiny log hut and brought out a sharp knife. The
deer was soon skinned and the meat cut up into steaks and chops which
were sent over to the cook. The skin was then prepared, as only an
Indian can cure it, and left for a time to season.

"What are you going to do with it, Mike?" asked Don.

But Mike smiled as he shook his head, refusing to tell.

The children insisted, however, and Mike confessed that he intended
making a deer-skin suit for Babs to wear out-of-doors.




CHAPTER IV

THE ENGINEER'S ASSISTANTS


ONE day, soon after Babs' adventure in the woods, Mr. Starr received a
letter from a large machine company at Grand Forks. He read it aloud at
the dinner table, thereby making all of the timber men very happy.

"The skidder is on the road, boys," said Mr. Starr.

"She is!"

"When will she git here?"

"Mos' time--we are beginnin' to need her!"

These and many other exclamations greeted his news, and Mr. Starr
looked at the date of the postmark to figure out the time they might
expect the skidder to arrive at camp.

"The roads are frozen fine and hard now, and there hasn't been any snow
except a few flakes now and then, so she ought to get here by tomorrow,
I should think," replied Mr. Starr.

"It'll begin to look as if we were workin' some, when the logs begin to
move out toward the river," declared the foreman.

"She'll have some logs to haul!" said Mr. Latimer, pleasing the men by
the suggested praise of their work.

"What's a skidder, Daddum?" asked Dot.

"Why do you call it a she?" added Don.

While many who heard Don's question, laughed, Mr. Starr tried to explain
to the twins what a skidder was and what use it was.

"Then the engineer has to drive her, eh?" asked Don, eagerly looking
over at Jim.

"Yes, he has to steer her, watch over her steam works, and keep her from
going into the crooked paths of evil," laughed Mr. Latimer.

"She sure does get into evil ways, sometimes," added Jim, laughingly.

"Why, I saw one of 'em once, that was reely possessed with a contrary
spirit. She never _would_ go the road she was shown, but allus went down
a side track as like a horse that shies as anything I ever saw,"
exclaimed Bill.

"Ah, but Bill, yeh know why she shied that way!" said Jerry. "She was
put together skew-geed an' one side of her was so out of geer that she
couldn't run straight even on a macadam road."

"There's everything in puttin' the parts together right, Mr. Starr. Is
the fact'ry goin' to send a man down to show us how to gear her up and
run her?" asked Jim.

"Yes, indeed. We wouldn't take any chances with such an expensive
machine unless a machinist came along to show us what to do in case of
emergency."

The next day a caravan hove into sight coming slowly along the new road
leading in from the old trail. As the first team came to the road broken
out from the timber to the river, some of the lumbermen spied it. They
shouted and soon every man that could get away from his job gathered
about the interesting machinery. There were four trucks and four horses
to each truck. The machinists who came from Grand Forks to put the
different parts of the skidder together, jumped down from the driver's
seats and shook hands with the bosses.

"Where are you goin' to run her?" asked one of the men of Mr. Latimer.

"We'll begin down near the river, and clear all of that land first; that
will give us open space to pile our logs along the waterfront and at the
same time pack the road down harder and harder every trip the teamsters
make," said Mr. Latimer.

So, the heavy trucks were taken in upon the new road broken out between
the dense pine trees and, after several miles on this road, a halt was
called. A small clearing had been made by cutting down all of the
timber. Here the skidder would find space in which to swing her great
arms and lift the immense trunks from their resting place over to the
low sledge waiting to receive them.

It took all of that day and the greater part of the next to fit the
machine up for work. The horses of the party were cared for by the men
but extra bunks there were none, for visitors were not expected, so the
men had to sleep upon the floors of the offices and school-room. Being
city men, it was rather interesting to sleep upon a heap of fresh
hemlock boughs and wash in a shed where a long row of basins and towels
were provided for the men. But the few days braced them up wonderfully,
and they always delighted in telling of the camp where the cook prepared
fine meals, and the system and orderliness of the timber men were so
good that ladies and children mingled with them as freely as if they
were the sons of clergymen. As timber men had the reputation of being
everything coarse and evil, this story gave an entirely new view of
them.

As soon as the parts were together, the experts tried the machine. She
soon had steam up in her boilers and, at the signal, one of the men
threw out her tackle and a huge pine trunk was lifted as lightly as a
feather and carried over and laid parallel with the roadside.

The men stood about in a circle admiring the wonderful machine that
seemed almost human in its methods of work; the long arms that reached
out in the direction of the fallen tree, the fingers that opened to
grip the trunk, the graceful swing of the arm as it carried the log
exactly where it was wanted and then opened its hand again to give up
the grasp the fingers had on their burden.

"If you had your sledge here by the roadside we could load up a pile in
no time and the men could cart them to the river," said one of the
experts to Mr. Latimer.

"I figured on that and told several teamsters with sleds to come with
us," replied Mr. Latimer.

"She makes the work jump along all right!" ventured the foreman, greatly
pleased with the headway he could make.

The machinists remained all that day to watch the men work with "Jumpin'
Jane" as she had been called, and, the following morning, left the camp
to return to the city.

The work of cutting, loading and hauling logs went forward with
tremendous speed after Jumpin' Jane arrived.

After a week's work the logs began to bank up along the river's edge,
while the clearing about the Jumpin' Jane grew into a wide area.

The ladies and children at camp heard stories every night of the
experiences of the day and felt sorry that they could not witness some
of the adventures. Finally, Mrs. Latimer spoke:

"If it is a fine day tomorrow, why can't we come down to the cutting and
see Jumpin' Jane work? We want to see everything worth while."

The next day was cold and clear and the children were bundled up well,
while the ladies muffled themselves to the ears. Mike was included in
the party, and, as usual, had charge of Babs.

The men knew there was to be an observation party, so had work planned
that would show off the spectacular part of lumber cutting.

"Ho, there, Jim, can we come up on Jumpin' Jane and help you?" called
Don, when he saw his old friend fingering the valves and levers of the
engine.

"Pretty soon, mebbe. It's all up to your ma," said Jim.

"Not now, Don; wait until we see how it works," replied Mrs. Starr,
catching hold of Don's hand to keep him beside her.

Meantime, the timber men had been running a huge saw through a giant
pine tree until the foreman shouted "All Back!"

Instantly, everyone ran to safety, except the man who fastened the
"clutch" of the Jumpin' Jane into the trunk of the tree. Then he too ran
back to join his associates.

The foreman gave the signal, Jumpin' Jane gave a little wrench, and lo!
the king of the forest started to lower his head. With a crash and a
dragging off of all the branches impeding its descent, the pine measured
its enormous length along the cleared ground. No sooner was it down than
a dozen men jumped over and lopped off boughs until it looked like a
telegraph pole. Another signal was given to Jim, and he pushed a lever
that governed the huge steel arm of the machine. This arm swung over
toward the pine and whirled out a cable with the hooks wide open ready
to clasp about the tree. A man stood by and as soon as the hooks
descended he guided them about the trunk and locked them. A signal, and
Jim pushed upon another lever that brought the steel arm back to first
position, dangling the immense pine over the flat sledge as if it were
a tooth-pick. A man was waiting to use his cant-hook to steady the log
at one end while the cable deposited its freight lengthwise on the floor
of the sledge. Before the steel arm of Jumpin' Jane could be signalled
for another trip, another huge tree had been sawed through and awaited
its downfall.

Don and Dot were so excited over Jumpin' Jane that they could not keep
their eyes from her. After constant coaxing, they succeeded in gaining
unwilling permission to climb up to the engineer's caboose and watch Jim
work.

Jim managed to show them the different levers and valves during the
intervals between loading and lifting. The twins were completely
fascinated by the machine and asked many pertinent questions that Jim
delighted in answering. If Jim had known the twins better, or had spent
the summer with them on the ranch in Texas, he would not have explained
so minutely how the engine worked. But he thought they craved knowledge,
and he told them all he could.

After witnessing all of the branches of the work, the visiting party
started back but Don and Dot looked behind, wistfully, many times before
the trees hid the Jumpin' Jane from their view.

The men worked late that night as the following day would be Sunday
when they could rest. Jim wondered what would be best to do--bank up the
fires in Jumpin' Jane or let them die out and build fresh ones on Monday
morning. Deciding to act upon the latter plan, he saw that everything
about the great truck and engine was in perfect order, then ran after
the men who had started for the clearing.

"The first thing Monday morning, we must have Jane hoist some of those
small trees out of our way. They have been cluttering the work all
afternoon, but I was so anxious to get those big trees down on the river
crib that the little ones just had to lay there and wait a turn," said
Mr. Latimer, as they reached camp.

Now, Don and Dot had plotted all afternoon just what they could do if
they had an opportunity to run Jumpin' Jane. They overheard Mr.
Latimer's sentence as he passed the little ice-puddle where the twins
were sliding, and they looked at each other knowingly.

That night, just before the children were sent to bed, Don and Dot crept
to the Cookee's bunk and asked for some bread and butter. The twins were
great favorites with Cookee, so he grunted as he rose from his chair and
went to the shed where he kept his stock.

"Oh, Cookee, those are nice apples!" hinted Don.

"Want some?" laughed the man, handing an apple to each child.

"An' I love crackers, too," added Dot, seeing a can of graham crackers
standing upon the shelf.

"Here, now, take this sandwich, an' I'll give ye each a cracker," said
the Cookee, handing a thick double slice of bread and jam to the
children. Then taking out a handful of crackers, he gave them to the
eager hands that were outstretched.

"Whist, now! run off to bed wid ye," laughed he, watching the twins skip
across the clearing toward their own bunk.

As the twins were afraid that Lavinia might hear them talk inside, they
whispered before they entered the bunk. Don placed a sandwich in each
deep pocket of his mackinaw coat, and pushed an apple on top of each.
The crackers were too tempting to keep, so they were gradually nibbled
until all disappeared. The twins then stole softly to bed, to wait until
everyone was asleep.

Dot did her very best to remain awake, but her eyes refused to obey
orders and soon she was fast asleep. Not so, Don. He made up his mind to
keep awake and, when his eyelids started to drop over his eyes in sleep,
he pinched himself. Finding that this plan soon lost its effect, he sat
bolt upright in bed until he heard Lavinia breathing regularly in her
sleep.

Don slept in the upper berth, or bunk, so he had to scramble down
without making any noise. He dragged his blankets after him, and then
proceeded to wake Dot up without causing an outcry. Dot was tired and
slept heavily, but he succeeded in rousing her after a struggle, and she
began to remember the great fun they were going to have with Jumpin'
Jane. She crawled cautiously out of bed and took her blanket out.

Both children donned their heavy clothing and pulled toboggan hoods down
over their ears. Then wrapping the blankets about them, they opened the
door on a crack to see if the coast was clear.

Being Saturday night, the men and elders of the camp were still in the
dining-room. The timber-jacks were playing cards while the Starrs and
Latimers were having a game of chess. All was quiet in the solemn light
of the full moon.

"Good! We can get away easy," whispered Don, as he stepped carefully
from the doorway.

Dot followed and closed the door behind her.

The twins ran forward as fast as they could until they were out of the
circle of light shed by the great lanterns that were hung on trees all
about the clearing. Then they went slower as they reached the cut-road.

"Yah! I'm sleepy," yawned Dot.

"So'm I," said Don.

"It's awful cold," shivered Dot.

"Wait till Jumpin' Jane gets fired up an' you won't feel cold,"
encouraged Don.

They tried to hurry over the frozen rough road but found the blankets an
impediment, so Don suggested that they take them off and carry them
instead. This was done and walking was much easier.

"I'm hungry, shall we eat the apple?" asked Dot.

"You'll be hungrier for breakfast if you eat the apple now. Remember, we
ate the crackers," said Don.

So Dot stoically resisted the temptation to devour the apple in Don's
pocket.

"Oh, I'm so tired! Let's sit down here a minute and rest," said Dot.

"No, you mustn't! Haven't you ever heard that it's dangerous to sit down
in the cold when you're tired? Folks get frozen stiff that way," said
Don.

After a long, cold walk--the latter half dragged out by half-frozen
feet--the children reached the spot where the timber cutting was being
done. The gaunt forest trees looked very weird in the moonlight, and
Jumpin' Jane stood like a grim ogre waiting to swallow anything so small
as the twins.

"Oh! but she looks awful!" whispered Dot, as they drew near the great
black thing.

"I hope her fires didn't go out! We couldn't have a speck of fun if they
were," worried Don, as he climbed up inside the caboose to investigate.

Don had flung his blanket over Dot's arm while he climbed into the
machine, but soon he reappeared and told Dot to come in out of the cold,
taking the blankets from her while she got up.




CHAPTER V

JUMPIN' JANE'S ANTICS


"HERE, Dot, throw the blankets down on that seat," said Don, pointing to
a tiny bench next to the boiler.

"I don't see's it's any warmer in here than outdoors," grumbled Dot,
rubbing her eyes and yawning again.

"Soon will be. I haven't looked at the fire, yet," returned Don, as he
tried to open the fire-pot door.

"Gee! fire's most out! I've got to get some wood an' keep her going or
we won't have any fun in the morning."

"There's some pieces right by your side," said Dot, seeing a few sticks
of pine lying by the fire-pot.

"Good stunt! This'll keep her going till I can get some more."

"I saw a big heap of pine knots and thick chunks of wood piled in a heap
back there," Dot yawned.

"Ah, stop your yawning an' help me, can't you!" cried Don, with
exasperation as the wood refused to burn.

"What d'ye want me to do?" asked Dot, testily.

"Go back and get some of those chunks," replied Don.

"I will if you go with me, but I'm not going to walk past those woods
alone. A bear might jump out!"

"Pooh, no bears about--wish there were, then we'd have some fun catching
him," bragged Don.

"Yes you would, like you did the brown calf on the canal," teased Dot.
As the calf-bear story was one Don preferred forgotten, he made no
answer, but prepared to accompany his sister.

"When we get back, that wood in there will be burning," said he, taking
a last look at the smouldering pine.

The twins found the heap of wood and took as much as their arms could
carry. This was strenuous work for the chunks were heavy and awkward,
and the children cold and tired. They managed, however, to lift them to
the engine room and then Don easily dragged them over to the door.

Meantime, his fuel had ignited and the pine was beginning to burn
brightly. One of the large chunks was thrown in and the children felt
better. As soon as the chunk started blazing the whole place began to
grow warmer, and the children grew drowsier.

They laid down in their blankets to talk plans for working Jumpin' Jane,
but soon fell asleep.

They might have slept on until found by Jim in the morning, but the fire
died down again and the cold made the twins restless. Finally, Don sat
up and grumbled for more covers. Finding himself on a hard floor he
soon recalled their escapade. He looked about. The moon had set and a
grey streak showed through the cut announcing that dawn was on its way.

"Guess I had better not sleep any more," said Don to himself, as he got
up and looked into the fire-pot.

"Gee, she's most out again!" said he, looking about for kindlings.

Some twigs and small pieces of pine were in a box not seen in the dark
of the night, so Don threw them all into the embers and as soon as they
were burning, he pushed one of the chunks of pine inside. He looked down
at Dot and was about to call her to duty, then thought better of it and
decided to have a roaring fire going before he made her get up.

In the growing light he found all the pine wood he wanted and soon had a
fierce fire blazing away in the engine. The sparks that flew out of the
funnel shot up and seemed to act like tiny demons dancing in the wind
that tossed them up and over the trees.

Dot awoke with the noise Don made about the engine, and jumped up to see
what was cracking the engine to pieces.

"It's the steam!" explained Don. "I haven't found the right valve to
turn it into the feeder."

"Why, Jim said this big black handle did it," advised Dot, taking hold
of a valve handle.

Don turned it a bit and immediately the feeder began banging and
cracking like a cannon.

"Sounds just like our radiator in the playroom at Oakwood, doesn't it?"
grinned Dot.

"Yes," said Don, absent-mindedly, as he looked out of the little window
at the small trees lying about.

"We may as well carry those trees out of the way for the men to begin
work tomorrow. You know, Mr. Latimer said he would have to get them
cleaned out of the path for the big ones to come down," said Don.

"But--can you work Jane?" asked Dot.

"Sure thing! Didn't Jim show me just how to do it?"

"What do you want me to do to help you?" asked Dot.

"We'll have breakfast first, then we'll go to work," replied Don, taking
the sandwiches from his pocket.

"I'm glad now that I didn't eat my apple, 'cause I'm so awful hungry. I
just can taste how good those pancakes and maple-syrup tastes this
morning," said Dot, smacking her lips.

Don took out an apple and laid it on the floor, but seemed not to
remember his own.

"That's only one--where's the other?" asked Dot.

"Gone!"

"Where? did you lose it?" asked Dot, sympathetically.

"No, I ate it this mornin' when I woke up. I did a heap of work long
before you got up and I had to have something to stay my stomach,"
admitted Don, in the words often heard from Jim.

"Then break mine and take half," offered Dot.

Never backward in such things, Don thanked his sister, and split the
apple in two.

Breakfast over, the two went to work in their exciting experiments.

"Now, you go over by that tree trunk and wait for Jane's arm to run out.
The moment I blow the whistle, you watch out for the tackling clutch to
come down and lock it around the tree. Then, I'll work the arm and bring
the tree over by the roadside and drop it in the ditch," explained Don.

"You're sure you know which thing to pull out or push in," ventured Dot.

"Sure--watch me!" and Don opened the valve that sent steam into the
feeder. He pulled a lever at the left and immediately a great vibration
started as the travelling crane, or arm, swung about their heads and
tossed the steel cables about in the air.

"Hi, that's the way, all right!" laughed Don, at his successful
experiment.

Dot saw the cables with the grappling hooks swing over her head and
dodged down inside the caboose.

"You go over to the trees and play you're a timber-jack. I'm the
engineer that runs Jumpin' Jane," ordered Don.

Dot jumped down and ran over to the place where several small pine trees
lay parallel upon the ground. Don started the lever and watched the
travelling crane swing around on the opposite side of the skidder from
that where Dot waited to hook up the grapplers.

"Humph! guess I pushed on the wrong side of the board," murmured Don, as
he pushed the other lever over on the right hand side.

He forgot to pull the first one back in place so the arm swung over to
the right and back again to the left, then reversed until its cables
with grappling hooks were swinging back and forth dangerously near to
the children's head.

Dot screamed: "Turn her off, for goodness sake! Those hooks'll tear us
to pieces!"

Don was nervous over the error and wondered why they acted that way.
Suddenly, he saw that he had not turned off the first lever. As soon as
they were both shut off the arm remained where it was, and the cables
gradually stopped swinging.

"Say, Don, how long shall I stand here waiting?"

"Just a minute--I'm trying another handle," said Don.

He had spied a smaller handle near the large one, so he turned on the
large one that sent the crane out over Dot's head, and then, seeing that
the cables were almost over a log, he pulled back the small lever.

"Wait a minute, until I catch hold of these lines," shouted Dot, but Don
had already pulled the small lever over.

As he did so, the grappling hook caught hold of Dot's belt of patent
leather that fastened her heavy coat about the waist. The smaller lever
locked the irons and Dot was swung up high in the air as Don pulled back
the large lever. He was so intent upon the machine that he failed to
see his sister up about twenty feet in the air suspended over the logs.

Dot was so surprised that she failed to utter a sound for a moment, but
as soon as she felt herself going up in the air she started to scream.
One scream after the other rent the quiet forest morning until Don
became so excited he forgot which lever to pull that would let the crane
come down to the ground again. He pulled out the right one and swung Dot
over to the forest trees, then he pushed it back and swung her back
again.

Meantime, no one missed the twins for they were supposed to be asleep
in bed. The chess game was very exciting and, after that, Cookee served
some hot lemonade and cakes, so that the men and bosses enjoyed a
veritable party. It was later than usual when they said good-night and
Mrs. Starr went to her cabin to find Babs dreaming and beating the bed
in her effort to wake up.

In the morning, Jim had a lame back and stayed in bed longer than usual.
Being Sunday morning, the breakfast was later than on work days, and Jim
took advantage of this.

Lavinia awoke and called the twins but received no answer. She jumped up
and looked in the bunks. Dot's was empty but pulled to pieces, while
Don's sheets were dragged down and the blanket gone. Instantly, Lavinia
recalled kidnapping stories, and bears and Indians carrying away little
children.

She opened the door and cried for her mother to come.

"Mumzie, I can't find the twins, and I can't think where they have
gone!" wept Lavinia.

"Oh, just about somewhere with Mike," replied Mr. Starr, to console
Lavinia and allay his wife's fear.

"But their blankets are gone and Don's bed hasn't been used," said
Lavinia.

Mr. Starr stepped up and examined the upper bunk.

"Oh, yes, it has, Viney, but he forgot to pull down the second sheet.

"You see the dent in the pillow where his head lay," said Mr. Starr, in
a tone that made them all feel easier.

"Just one more of the twins' tricks of mischief," added Mr. Starr, as he
went out to look for Mike.

But Mike was nowhere about either, and the family were all quite sure
that the old trapper had taken the twins out on some new hunt very early
in the morning, and the twins had thought the sport would be enhanced if
it were kept secret. So, the camp sat down to breakfast without a
misgiving as to the twins' welfare.

Early that same morning, Mike stole out of his tiny cabin and made for
some distant traps he had set the day before.

The day was cold and invigorating and Mike loped over the ground,
straight through the maze of forest trees as if he were following a
pathway. He reached his traps and found one sprung but nothing in it,
and the other one just as he had left it. But tracks all about in the
light covering of snow showed that several large animals had sniffed at
the bait and tried to get it away.

Mike's eyes smiled with gratification as he said to himself: "Mike make
big one! Him come agin for supper!"

Then, seeing there was nothing he could do, he decided to walk down by
the river and see how much timber had been piled in the roll-ways.

From there, he started up the cut from the river toward the
forest-timber where stood the Jumpin' Jane.

Several times he stopped and put his ear to the ground to listen, then
shook his head.

"Mike go old! Mike hear noise!" said the Indian to himself.

After loping some distance he was sure he heard the call, and stood
perfectly still to await another sound. It came.

"Mike good ear!" commented the old trapper as he started on a swift run
up the road.

Coming through the dense growth of trees when quite near the clearing,
Mike saw the cause of the shouting.

There hung Dot, by belt and garment, high up in the air, while just
under her were several immense logs. She was too frightened to kick or
squirm, which saved her from a painful fall.

Don was trying to climb out on the iron derrick when Mike came on the
scene.

"Dun--no, no!" cried Mike, running over to hold Don.

"Mike get lil' gal down," concluded he.

"You can't budge it, Mike. I've tried in every way," wept Don, who was
more frightened at seeing his beloved twin hanging so high above his
head, than Dot was.

Mike had no intention of using the machinery to lower the derrick, but
he resorted to an Indian manner of rescue.

He sought for and found a rope coiled up near some trees. In this he
made a loop which he flung with such dexterity that it shot over the
upper end of the derrick, just above the grapple that held the cables.
By pulling on the other end of the rope, Mike slipped the knot so hard
and fast that nothing could have moved it from the grapple.

He then ran the other end of the rope about the trunk of a tree in a
line where Dorothy hung. This end he fastened, and Mike then started,
hand over hand, up the inclined rope until he reached the cable where
Dorothy was suspended. Here he threw an arm over the cable and twisted
his legs about the rope. In this way he kept his hold of the rope while
sliding himself closer to the little girl. In a short time he saw what
had clutched her.

"Doot, put arms in Mike's neck!" advised the Indian.

Dot turned her head as far as she could and saw Mike's head just beside
her. She tried to squirm about but could only get her left arm about the
Indian's neck.

"Doot hol' fast?" asked Mike.

"Sure as anything!" replied the brave little girl.

"No hands slip?" queried Mike.

"Nope! I can hang on your neck like a string of beads."

Mike smiled in spite of the danger and felt assured of the undertaking.

He lifted the child with one hand as his other, that was slung over the
cable, cut away the belt and coat that were caught in the irons.

"Now, hol' tight!" warned Mike, as the last shred was severed and he
swung the little girl about and held her fast.

"Hip, hip, hurrah!" yelled Don, as he jumped up and down with
excitement.

An answering call seemed to come from the direction of the camp, and Don
wondered if they knew of the escapade.

It was not so easy for Mike to get hold of the rope again with his hands
as it was to climb up on it, for Dorothy had to be held with one arm.

After many maneuvers, however, the old trapper managed to shift the
little girl upon his chest, where both her arms could hold fast about
his neck. Then he slid down the inclined rope and soon felt the ground
under his feet.

At the same time, a number of timber-men, with Mr. Starr, Mr. Latimer,
Paul and Meredith, came running out of the road that led to camp. They
were just in time to see Mike make his descent.

"What's all this?" asked Mr. Starr, suspicious of the twins' mischief.

"Lil' Doot hang oop there," replied Mike, not knowing how she got there,
or that he was leading Don into punishment.

"Don, what _does_ this mean?" insisted Mr. Starr, sternly.

"Well, you see, Daddum, Dot and I know all about engines, so we thought
we would help the men clean away these little trees," Don started to
explain.

"Yes, and try to see just how much fun and daring you could get out of
it!" remarked his father.

When the whole story was told, Don's father reprimanded him severely,
and Don promised never to be so venturesome again.




CHAPTER VI

OUTDOOR FUN IN A LUMBER CAMP


SNOW and ice prevailed after the middle of November, and the cold was
there to stay for the winter. The roads already cut out had frozen hard
before the snow came, and that made easy travelling for the huge sledges
that carried the timber from forest to riverside.

The men were now cutting close to the main road, and the walk from camp
to cutting was not so tiresome for the ladies and children, and it often
happened that they visited the men in the afternoon.

The children had toy hatchets and saws, and they loved to play about the
felled trees, chopping off small branches or sawing off rough fragments.
Then, too, it was fine sport to be lifted up on top of a high heap of
huge logs and ride down to the river-bank. On the return trip they would
sit down on the low braces of the sledge, and the horses would make
quick time with no load to pull.

One Saturday morning the sun shone so brightly that Mrs. Starr said the
children might go with Mike, to play near the cutting, but they must
keep a long distance away from the actual work of the men.

The men had come across a dip in the forest which was filled with
water, and this water had frozen solid during the past week. The trees
had been cut before the ice was hard, and here was offered a nice spot
for skating. The children slung their skates over their shoulders and
planned hockey games, and tag, and other sports on the ice. When they
beheld the pond, however, they soon realized that it would be impossible
to play hockey, but tag! Yes, tag would be great fun, as the stumps
stuck up through the ice, here and there, and the skater could dodge
around these stumps to get away from the one who was "it."

Babs had her tiny shovel and hatchet to play with, and Mike sat down on
a log to watch over the children. They shouted, skated and tore at each
other for a long time, then wearied of the game and sat down on the log
by Mike to hear a story.

Just as Mike finished telling of an adventure, a loaded sledge came down
the road and Paul called to the driver.

"Give us a ride?"

"Climb up!" replied the man.

"Room for us all?" asked Meredith.

"'Nodder comin' right behind," replied the driver.

Paul looked and nodded.

"Mete, you and the kids get on this one with Mike, and Vene, Elizabeth
and I will get on the next load. We'll all meet down by the river and
come back together."

"Let's take our dinner with us and eat it down there. Then we can sit on
the logs by the river and come back with the men on the next load,"
suggested Meredith.

"Good idea!" exclaimed Paul. "You get up on this and I'll run for the
lunch boxes and get back before the other sleigh gets here."

So the Starr children, with Mike, climbed up and sat upon the logs of
the first sledge, and the other children waited for the second load to
come in sight.

The sleigh-ride over the rough road to the river was great fun, for
often the sleigh would bump over a huge snow-covered stump or rock, and
make the children roll against each other and cling fast to the chains
that bound the logs together.

The horses went slowly, for the loads were heavy and the road hard and
rough, so the ride of two miles took some time.

The children had visited the roll-ways at the river before, but had
never had an opportunity to remain and understand the whole scene.

Arrived at the roll-ways, the men made quick work of unloading the logs
from the sledge and rolling them down to the river's edge. In many
cases, where the water was shallow, or the ice thick enough, the logs
were rolled out a few feet, and piled up in tiers so that when the
spring freshet came they would sink down into the water and be the first
to float down stream.

In several instances, rafts had been made and floated out a short
distance from the shore, and here the timber-men used to fish before the
river froze over. These rafts were still there, and the ice between them
and the shore was safe.

After the sledges returned to the forest, Meredith suggested that they
walk out to the rafts and have their lunch there. The other children
greeted the idea with glee and Mike looked carefully about to decide
that it was all right.

"Mike get fire, boys take dinner out," advised Mike, as he began picking
up kindlings and pieces of wood for a fire.

The children picked up their dinner boxes and started off across the
ice. The largest raft held all of them, and soon Mike came over with a
huge bundle of wood that he dragged across the ice to the raft.

He deftly prepared a kindling fire and placed a few of the large pine
chunks upon it. In a short time the children were as warm as if it were
summer time, and the smoke of the wood fire rose straight up in the
clear windless air.

They enjoyed the novelty of the raft dinner so much that several loads
came and the sledges returned before the children were willing to talk
of going back.

"This is dandy ice--wish we could take a skate up and down," ventured
Don.

"'Tis fine ice, isn't it?" abetted Meredith, looking up and down the
river as far as eye could see.

"Let's! Just one spin around," said Paul.

"Mike won't like it," hinted Lavinia.

"Mike won't care. We are perfectly safe on such thick ice," said Don,
looking out of the tail of his eye in Mike's direction.

Mike squatted on the raft smoking his pipe, but he said nothing. He was
thinking over the words the children had spoken.

"Mike, guess we'll take a spin over the ice," said Paul.

"Mike no like him--pouf! full of holes of air!" said Mike, making a
sound to show the children the danger of air-holes.

"We know an air-hole when we see it--and I can't see any of them around
here," replied Paul.

"Besides, we are only going to skate around the raft," said Don.

"Mike no like him, big boys like him, what Mike can do?" said the Indian
helplessly, as he shrugged his shoulders.

"Mike, I won't go--neither shall Dot," said Lavinia.

"Oh, but I am, Viney! Don't think that I am going to sit here like a
baby when Don is off streaking across the ice or doing the 'outer
edge,'" retorted Dot, taking her skates from the bag and unbuckling the
heel straps.

Two sledges had finished unloading and the drivers called out to Mike.

"Comin' back this trip?"

"Nah! we're going to have a skate on the ice," shouted Paul, waving the
men back to the forest.

The boys and Dot put on their skates while Lavinia and Babs sat beside
the fire and watched them. Mike had gone on shore to find something.

After the boys were off, Mike returned dragging a long slender birch
tree along the ice. He placed it near the raft and sat down on the edge
of one of the logs, saying nothing about his errand.

For half an hour, enjoyment of skating made the forest depths echo with
laughter from the children. Then they got tired and Paul made a
suggestion.

"Let's go out to that log that sticks end up out of the ice, and
starting from that, skate back to see who can win a race."

The idea appealed to the others, but Meredith ordered Dot to go back to
the raft.

"I, wa-wa-nt to race too! I do-do-n't wa-a-nt to g-go back!" chattered
Dot, with blue lips.

"You've got to! You're so cold now you can't talk straight!" exclaimed
Meredith.

"Ah, go on, Dot! You're spoilin' my fun!" cried Don, turning to give Dot
a little shove toward the raft.

"No, I won't," pouted Dot, dropping upon the ice in sheer contrariness.

"All right, sit there, if you want," said Meredith, starting off,
followed by the other two boys.

Dot watched them for a while, but feeling too uncomfortably cold she
slowly skated back to the raft and crouched near the fire.

Mike heard her telling Lavinia what the boys were going to do, and he
jumped up, grabbed the end of the birch tree and ran swiftly across the
ice with his sure-footed buck-skins helping him.

"Hi! Hi!" cried Mike, trying to get the boys' attention. But the wind
was against him.

"Him channel! Big hole! Water swish!" yelled Mike, in an agony of fear
lest the boys reach the channel-mark before he could get there.

Paul and Meredith were swift skaters and soon outstripped Don, but just
as they came near the log which was the goal, Paul's skate loosened and
he fell down on the ice. Meredith came over to assist him, and they
found that a screw was loose.

"Don's got a broken knife blade that we can use for a screw-driver.
We'll wait for him," said Meredith.

Don soon skated up and produced the knife with the broken blade, and
Paul tried to fasten the screw in place again.

So intent were they over the repairing of the skate that neither of them
heard an ominous crack along the ice as soon as Don's extra weight came
near the log.

A few more dull cracks sounded as the ice seemed suddenly to become
lined with crooked white lines. Before Paul could fasten his skate on
again, however, Mike's voice reached them.

"Back! Back! Big channel by log!"

At the same time, a grinding crack went directly under the boys' feet
and Don shot back toward Mike, screaming for Meredith and Paul to come
back.

Meredith saw the danger and tried to help Paul up and away, but Paul's
skate was still loose and it made him stumble. As he fell down again,
the ice, now all ready to yawn for its victim, slowly sunk down with the
weight placed upon it, and Paul was almost submerged before Meredith
could drag him over to the piece upon which he clung.

At the same time, Mike ran the birch tree over the ice and advised the
boys to cling to it for all they were worth.

Paul had all he could do to cling fast to the trunk, for the suction of
the channel waters under his stomach and legs was awful!

After some struggling, however, Mike and Don dragged on their end until
the boys were pulled over out of the danger zone of the channel.

During this interval, Lavinia sat spell-bound with fear, but Babs was
too busy poking twigs in the embers to notice her sister's white face.

As Mike drew the two boys over the ice, Lavinia heaved a mighty sigh and
started to cry softly.

"Him big hole! Mike know river oop and down. Mike lil' Injun, so big,
Mike take canoe oop and down," explained the trapper, holding his hand
down to his knees to show the boys how long he had been acquainted with
the treacherous channel.

Paul was soaked and Meredith partially wet, so the boys ran over to the
raft where a hot fire was soon blazing to dry off their outer clothing.
Mike made the older children sit close together facing the fire, while
he took the dry coats of Don, Lavinia and Dot, and spread them over the
backs of the five, then he hung the wet coats upon a sapling near the
heat to dry.

In half an hour a shout came from the shore and two more sledges were
emptied of logs and waiting for the children to go back. In a few
moments, they were all sliding and running across the ice and clambered
up the bank to get aboard the sleighs.

Dot was eager to tell all about the accident and rescue, but Mike shook
his head, and Lavinia placed her hand over her sister's mouth.

The horses were tired after a long day's hauling and moved slowly back
to the forests where the men were still cutting timber.

From there, Mike hurried all of his party along the road toward camp and
told the girls not to speak of the incident then.

Meredith and Paul were taken to Cookee's cabin and made to sit near the
fire while their clothes were hung up to dry. Lavinia went to their
bunks and brought clean underclothes to Mike, and so no one knew of it
until several days after.

Don and Dot strolled over to the office while the others were in the
kitchen, and sat down by the table to have a game of dominoes.

After playing several games, Don made a remark.

"Those rafts will make fine play this spring."

"We won't be here when the river thaws," replied Dot.

"Maybe--who knows how long Daddum'll have to stay."

"Well--s'pose we do, what then?" asked Dot, curiously.

"They're chained fast to the logs--can't break away. We can have heaps
of fun playin' on them and paddlin' them back and forth to the shore."

"Ye'es, I s'pose so! But I won't play on 'em until I see for myself
whether the chains are rusty or good," retorted Dot, thinking of all the
other scrapes her twin had led her into, in which she generally got the
worst of the bargain.




CHAPTER VII

CHRISTMAS AT THE LUMBER CAMP


CHRISTMAS was seldom made much of among the timber-jacks, but this
winter they were to have such a celebration as they had never dreamed of
before.

Mr. Starr had held several secret meetings with his wife and the
Latimers, and the result was that one day in the early part of December,
he took the fastest team and the sleigh and drove to town.

Mr. Starr went directly to the express office of the little station and
made inquiries.

"Has any box come for me from Grand Forks?" asked he.

"Yaas, guess that's what you're lookin' fer," replied the man who was
ticket-agent, baggage-master and express agent, all three in one.

"That's it!" smiled Mr. Starr, taking his money out to pay the charges.

"All paid, and nuthin' to c'lect," laughed the man.

"Ho, that so? Well, then, just keep this and buy the kiddies some
Christmas," said Mr. Starr, handing the man a dollar.

A whole dollar for a present meant more to this man out in the
wilderness than a hundred dollars would to one in the city.

The box was set up in front of Mr. Starr's feet in the cutter, and the
horses pranced away with sleigh-bells jingling like a veritable Santa
Claus!

Several stops were made at stores where candy, pop-corn, trimmings for
trees, fruit, and toys were sold. Mr. Starr then drove his team to the
stable and left word to be called for an early start in the morning. He
went into the house, greeted the hotel keeper who had never before had a
transient guest in the winter, and had supper with the family. Early
that night he went to bed, leaving orders to be called at five.

By six o'clock the next morning, Mr. Starr, with all of his shopping
piled in the back, under the seat, and in front of the sleigh, was
flying back to the lumber camp.

The weather held good, and late that night the camp heard the jangle of
bells as Mr. Starr drove over to the stables.

Great secrecy and whispers were the result of that trip to town. And
many hours, while the children were at school, Mrs. Starr and Mrs.
Latimer were busy sewing.

Finally, the great festival time arrived, and everyone wondered what
sort of Christmas fun could be had out in the woods.

The two ladies had spent several days in the kitchen showing Cookee some
marvelous things! He had never seen a plum pudding cooked before, but
he declared he could make one like it, after having watched Mrs. Starr
prepare an immense one.

High, flaky cakes, with chocolate or jelly between the layers, were
baked and stood hidden in the closet back of the table.

The timber men had come across a cranberry swamp in the early days of
cutting and Mrs. Starr had quietly appropriated the pretty red berries
for a future use. Now they reappeared as cranberry sauce.

"Huh! who'd a'thought them sour little balls'd made sich a fine juice!"
exclaimed Cookee, smacking his lips after a taste of the sauce.

"That's to go with the venison on Christmas Day," said Mrs. Latimer.

"Didn't yeh know? Heven't yeh hearn what Mike cotched?" asked Cookee
eagerly.

"No, what?" asked the ladies, expectantly.

"Couple of wil' turkeys! Dey was roostin' near his trap, and Mike ain't
never had a catch in it this year, so he was feelin' like a mighty poor
kind of a trapper, when dese turkeys lit on a line wid his eye. It was
some job to cotch bote on em, 'cause one allus flies away soon's a sound
is hearn. But, Mike--he jest says to hisself, 'By gum! I'll git bote on
yer or chase yer all over the Nort!'" and Cookee laughed as he thought
of Mike's determined manner when he threw down both turkeys.

"Why, how perfectly lovely! We will have a real Eastern dinner after
all," cried Mrs. Starr.

"An dat ain't all dere is to it, nuther! Mike, he's gone duck shootin'
to-day an 'spects to bring back several brace of ducks to hep out on de
turkeys," said Cookee, grinning at the way he gave away Mike's secrets
for Christmas dinner.

"We'd better save the venison steak for New Year's, then," suggested
Mrs. Latimer.

"Huh, huh! I will," replied Cookee, who was a favored mortal in camp,
for timber-jacks could do without sleep but not without food.

"Now's we got the juice done, an' the cakes baked, I'll jes' show you
what I done made fer the feast," said Cookee, leading the ladies into a
lean-to shed that he had built up against the cabin, to store his cooked
foods safely away from men and children.

In the spare minutes between meals when he had to cook and serve food
for more than fifty hungry men, Cookee had delighted in baking cookies
of every conceivable shape. These were for the children.

From the ankle bones and hoofs of the deer he had boiled out the jelly
and flavored it with lemon and nutmeg and made a mould of jelly that
looked exactly like calf's-foot jelly, but tasted much better. It shook
upon its platter like the showpiece in any caterer's window.

He had cored large apples, and, with a concoction of beaten eggs,
molasses, nuts and a bit of mint to flavor it, filled the gaps and baked
them. The apples were soft and shiny when they came forth from the oven,
and immediately, Cookee poured some melted sugar over them and allowed
them to crystallize in the cold.

Several other unique side dishes had been made by the ingenious cook,
and the ladies were most generous in their praise.

For several nights preceding Christmas Eve, the children had been sent
to bed as soon as supper was over, to give the elders plenty of time to
string pop-corn, make paper trimmings, and arrange generally for the
great tree they were to have in the clearing if the day was fair, or in
the dining-room if it stormed.

Christmas Eve was very clear and not too cold to be enjoyable out of
doors. So, the men planted the tree in the middle of the clearing in the
morning, and the children wandered about it all that day, trying to
figure out how it ever would get trimmed.

"Tause," said Babs to Dot, "Dere ain't any chimbley fer Santy to come
down!"

"But, we are almos' up in his home an' mebbe he don't use chimbleys at
the North Pole," ventured Dot, who was somewhat suspicious of fat old
Santa ever creeping down their chimneys at Oakwood.

That afternoon, Mike was told that the driver of one of the sledges
would be free to take the children on a sleigh-ride party to the place
where he knew the holly and mistletoe grew. The children were eager to
go, and soon were out of the way.

The moment the coast was clear the elders hurried out of the cabins with
huge bundles of trimmings for the tree and started to dress it up in all
manner of finery. Long chains of white and colored pop-corn, fancy cut
and fluted tissue-paper chains, paper flowers, rosy apples, numerous
paper bundles that meant gifts for everyone, tinsel threads everywhere
from tip to tip of the branches, and last of all large candles that
would not blow out in a light breeze and would burn a long time.

Huge pine torches were stuck in safe places all about the clearing, and
the large lanterns that hung on poles were ready for the illumination.

The timber men came in early that day, for they knew of Santa Claus'
visit early that night, and washed and dressed for the occasion.

The sledge with the children returned about four o'clock laden with
vines and berries for trimming the dining-room.

The moment the children came toward the clearing, however, they gave
shrieks of pleasure. Everyone ran out to see the cause of the joy and
everyone was surprised (?) to find the tree all ready for lighting.

"Oh, Mumzie, I thought Santa never came until night!" cried Dot,
disappointed to find that her plot to catch him had failed.

"That is the way down home, of course; but here, why I suppose this will
be his first stop as we are so near his home," replied Mrs. Starr.

Babs stood gaping at the tree and never saying a word.

"Say, Mumzie, you jus' said 'Would be his first stop' but he's been and
done it!" exclaimed Don.

"Oh, but he hasn't distributed the gifts. Don't you think he will want
to hand them about himself?" asked Mrs. Starr.

"Maybe he won't have time, you know. He has to go so far to-night. Maybe
that's why he hung them here so early--so's we could he'p ourselves,"
ventured Dot, thoughtfully.

"Well, we will wait until dark and see. If he hasn't returned by
five-thirty or six o'clock, I guess we will do the giving," said Mrs.
Starr, leading Babs away to the cabin to be dressed for Santa in case he
should come.

"I'm goin' to put on my best dress, too, Mumzie," said Dot, and Don
whispered that he wanted to put on his Sunday suit.

"All right, dearies, but hurry so you will be here if he comes,"
returned Mrs. Starr, smiling with anticipation.

Now, the postman who brought mail and any shopping from the town to the
camp, every week, had been engaged to keep up the delivery all winter
for very good pay, and he willingly took the risk of getting caught in a
storm for the salary he got. He had a brother who was the very image of
a Santa Claus--short, fat, with white beard and ruddy complexion; jolly
as could be, too. Mr. Starr talked with him while he was in town and
arranged for both of the men to spend Christmas Day at the camp where
the jolly one was to play Santa Claus for the children.

Mr. Starr had purchased material for clothing and the ladies cut and
sewed them. The jolly man would have to hide himself all evening, so
Babs and the twins would not see him and thus find out the trick played
upon them. But, he could reappear the next morning in costume and remain
so until time for the brothers to return to town. This would make the
whole Christmas Day one of bliss for the three little ones--to think
that Santa stayed with them a whole day on the return trip to the North
Pole, after his night's work was done!

The children were dressed and warmly wrapped up by the time a horn was
heard. Heads popped out of cabin-doors, and everyone looked in the
direction of the tree. It was wonderfully illuminated, every candle
flickering brightly in the dark. All about the clearing the great pine
knots flared and the lanterns burned steadily, making the entire place a
glow of light.

"Oh, Dot, run, run!" called Don, dragging his sister out by the hand.

"O-oh! isn't it grand!" sighed Dot, standing with clasped hands.

The others came out of their cabins and hurried over to the tree.

"Santa's come again and lit de lights!" cried Babs, ecstatically.

"Did he, Daddum?" asked Don, doubting that Santa did the lighting.

"I didn't do it, and I don't believe anyone of the men did it--did you?"
asked Mr. Starr, turning to the group of smiling men.

"I didn't, and I know not one of the timber-jacks did it," said Mr.
Latimer, soberly.

Suddenly, Babs, who was seeking under a branch for a tempting ball of
pop-corn that hung low, gave a shriek of mingled fear and joy.

"Oh, he's here! He's sleeping in here!" cried she, pointing her chubby
fingers toward the tree.

"Who? What?" demanded the twins, running over to Babs.

Meredith and Paul hurried over also and stood surprised to see real
Santa Claus come out from under the branches, rubbing his eyes and
yawning.

"Well, well, well, friends! I must have taken a nap! I am so tired from
working nights over all the dolls and toys! But, now I will soon have to
go!" chuckled the jolly old fellow.

Babs stood as still as could be, but Don and Dot danced a frenzied dance
and shouted with joy to find dear old Santa really there with them.

"Oh, Santa, we are _so_ glad to see you," they cried, while everyone
smiled and repeated the welcome.

"And I'm glad to be with you. I made up my mind that I would try to stop
early on my way to the other children. Now, if you want me to give you
these gifts, I'd better be busy for I have a long way to travel
to-night, you know. But I may stop over in the morning and see how you
like your presents."

This was too much for the twins' cup of happiness, and they ran up and
clung to their beloved friend.

The distribution of gifts then took place and everyone from Mike to Mr.
Latimer was remembered.

The children knew there was no place toys could be had in that faraway
forest, so of course Santa Claus had brought them when he came!

The revelation that there was a really and truly Santa Claus gave Dot
and Don more happiness than anything else, for, at home, some of the
boys and girls said it was all make-believe.

While everyone sat in the dining-room eating supper, and talking their
heads almost off about the tree and the fun, Santa went away, for he was
nowhere to be found when the children ran out again toward the tree.

During the singing of carols, and the story of the Star of Bethlehem,
Don and Dot often turned their heads to listen, but no jingle of bells
could they hear, so he _must_ have gone on his route.

The children slept like tops that night, but early in the morning when
they came out for breakfast, there sat Santa, under the tree, as happy
and fresh as could be, after his long night's work.

All that day was one long uninterrupted dream that had come true. Santa
played all kinds of games with the children and seemed to have the time
of his life. Then, toward dusk, he shook hands with everyone in camp and
said he had to start for the North Pole.

"Come again, Santa!" called Babs, as she waved her hand at the old
fellow.

"I'll try to, Baby," said Santa Claus as he went toward the stable.

"Gee, Dot, we never thought to peep in the stable and see his reindeers
and sleigh," whispered Don.

Mrs. Starr suspected what Don had said, however, and replied, "No, of
course not! Do you suppose we want Santa to think we are such ill-bred
people as to be curious? Let the dear old man depart in peace."




CHAPTER VIII

MIKE'S BEAR TRAP


WORK and play went quickly after the holidays and February soon arrived
with the timber-men working harder than ever to get out all the logs
possible before the thaw set in. Just as soon as the thaw sets in in the
northern woods, the roads become almost impassable and ice starts to
break up. The river overflows its banks and carries everything before
it.

The river that was expected to flood and carry down the logs of the
Manitoba Lumber Company generally drove them into a large lagoon where
the saw-mills belonging to the company stood.

February was a short month, but the weather held good so that the men
got out more timber that month than in January. The banks of the river
were completely hidden under immense roll-ways of pine logs, so arranged
that the moment the water rose the logs lying in the edge of the water
would float out and that would gradually roll the entire mass of lumber
into the water.

The first few days in March were very warm, and cracklings of ice could
be heard distinctly through the woods. The men feared that work for the
season was over, for, with the thaw, the work of hauling timber would
have to cease. Still, they hoped that a period of cold would come on top
of the thaw and that would just about permit them to finish the area of
forest timber that had been mapped out in the Fall.

Mike had decided to abandon his trip to the North Woods for hunting and
trapping, for he figured out that he could make more money by accepting
the bosses' offer. This money was clear profit and he could put it in
the bank at Winnipeg to await his old age when he could work no more.

But Mike set traps and did some hunting about the woods and kept the
camp supplied with game and venison. He had one large trap set several
miles from camp, but as yet had not caught anything in it.

The day before the warm spell set in, Mike sniffed the air and took note
of various signs in the woods that told him a thaw was on the road.
Consequently he knew that, if it was of a long enough period of time,
many of the animals that sleep during the winter months would be tempted
to come out and look about.

Finding nothing to eat, they would be led to seek farther afield, for
they would be hungry after a long sleep.

Mike loped over to his traps that afternoon, and, having found the
large one in good order, he baited it and arranged it so deftly that not
one bit of the iron showed through the twigs and leaves.

As he expected, the thaw began that night and the temperature became
higher each day until the trees seemed about to burst into blossom.

Mike didn't visit the trap the first day of the thaw, but on the
afternoon of the second day he hurried out to cross the forest in the
direction of his traps. Halfway there, he stopped and looked at some
tracks in the soft slushy snow.

"Ha! Mike in time for him. Him big bear. Him hungry an' come see camp,
but smell meat in trap--ha!"

Mike followed the tracks eagerly and found they led him almost directly
to the place where his long-waited-for prize was caught.

The bear was exhausted from struggling to escape from the trap and Mike
soon put an end to her pain with a rifle-bullet.

She was an immense black bear which must have come some distance for
food. Mike looked her over carefully and nodded his head with
understanding as he spoke to himself while loosing the spring on the
trap.

"Her got cubs at home in her cave. Her hungly an' hunt eats for her
babbies. Mike mus' hunt for babbies an' carry home to feed."

The trap was set again, and with satisfaction that his whole winter was
not wasted in a civilized life--proof--the bear he was dragging back to
camp--Mike appeared at the clearing just as the children wondered what
had become of their play-mate.

Mike dragged the improvised carrier made of boughs, with the black bear
laid out upon them, into the camp where everyone gathered to behold the
trophy of the Indian's trap. They felt of the thick fur, the still warm
nose, and examined the sharp claws that could be so cruel.

"My, but she's a big one, Mike!" said Mr. Latimer.

"Humph! Her got two cubs--home. Mike mus' go fin' 'em now. Babbies
hungly an' got no eats. Babbies starve."

The bear was taken to a place under the trees back of the Cookee's
cabin, and Mike filled his belt with ammunition and saw to it that his
rifle was in perfect order, for he might meet with opposition from some
hungry animals on his way to find the cave.

Cookee packed a good kit of food for Mike, and, strapping this, with a
blanket, upon his back, he started off on his quest. The children stood
mournfully watching him disappear through the thick forest, then turned
their attention to planning what to do with the little bears.

"Wish I could have gone with him," said Paul.

"Me too! What's the use of spending a winter in Canada if you have to
snoop around camp all the time," added Meredith.

Mike found the tracks of the bear where he had first seen them, and
followed them closely.

That night, Mike made camp out in the open forest, and heard enough
beasts prowling about his fire during the night to prove that they had
not all been frightened away.

Early in the morning, after a hasty breakfast, Mike picked up the tracks
again and kept on going until the steep cliffs of the mountain were
reached. Here he became very watchful, for at any moment a panther or
bear might pounce upon him.

Mike was prepared to battle with the mate of the old she-bear if
necessary, but he thought it likely that the bear had followed his mate,
in search of food for the cubs. If he had, he would most likely get
caught in the trap also. If he was about the cave, Mike would have his
hands full in smoking him out, or in watching for him and shooting him
when he found him.

The trapper surely was favored that day, for he soon found the trail
that led to a large cave in the side of the cliffs, and after careful
investigation, found that tracks of both bears led down the mountain
side, but that none returned. He lit a torch of resinous wood and crept
carefully toward the cave.

He looked all about and laid his ear to the ground to ascertain if
anything were approaching. Finding all quiet, except a faint rustle of
leaves in the cave, Mike poked the long pole, with the torch at the end,
ahead of him into the cave.

After following the winding tunnel for some yards, he suddenly came out
into an open space about seven feet wide, and five feet high in the
middle. He had to stoop to get in and, when his eyes grew accustomed to
the circle of light thrown upon the walls of the cave, he saw two fat
little cubs curled up in a bed of dried leaves and twigs. He planted
the torch against the wall and turning over one little cub he found they
were both fast asleep--probably had not yet opened their eyes since they
were born. As Mike had to bring both away to keep them from starving, he
slung his rifle over his back and took a little cub under each arm. He
started out of the cave very carefully, on guard against the old fellow
who might come in at any time. But there was no obstacle to his getting
down the side of the mountain quickly and along the trail by which he
came.

The little cubs shivered slightly and curled up closer to Mike's side,
and he chuckled over them as he thought of the surprise they would
receive at camp.

Mike avoided the trail after he reached familiar woods and struck off
across the forest for camp. His gun had to be slung upright at his back
to permit his passage between trees, but he soon came out upon the
road-cut and then it was easy walking The fat little cubs felt heavy
before Mike reached camp and Mike was only too thankful to deposit them
in his bunk at the little cabin which he called his own.

He tried to waken the furry balls by pulling their ears and rolling them
over and over, but they snoozed on as peacefully as if cuddled by their
old mother's paws.

Mike had been gone from camp two days, and the children were not yet
aware of his presence, but Cookee saw him lope across the clearing and
enter his cabin.

"Cookee, give us some crackers?" asked Don, as Dot and he rushed into
the kitchen after the cook.

"Crackers! what fer? to feed Mike?" teased Cookee.

"Mike? No, for ourselves. Wish Mike was back, though, 'cause Paul said
the other old bear might kill him."

"Mike's back--I saw him go in his cabin a few minutes ago," said Cookee,
turning to take some crackers from a jar.

He turned again to hand them to the twins but laughed when he found
them gone--running for all they were worth to Mike's cabin.

"Funny lil' critters! An' don' they just love Mike!" said the cook to
himself, as he started to roll out the biscuit dough.

"Hello, Mike! when did you get back?" cried both Don and Dot as they
rushed into the cabin.

Without waiting for an answer, both children saw the two furry balls on
the bunk and stepped softly over, to see what they were.

"Oh, the cuties! what are they, Mike?" cried Dot.

"Cubs; old bear's babbies!" said Mike, smiling at the twins as they
hugged and cuddled the cubs.

"Oh, Mike! _they_ will never grow up to hurt anyone, will they?" asked
Dot, doubtfully.

"No siree! 'cause we are goin' to keep 'em and train 'em to be as good
as a Newfoundland dog," said Don.

"But they are Mike's bears," said Dot.

"But Mike will give 'em to us, if we love 'em," replied Don.

"Dat's what dey for!" said Mike.

"Oh, oh! Look Mike, see this little one stick out his tiny pink tongue,"
shouted Dot, excitedly.

"Him hungly! Mike git dinner!"

So, leaving Don and Dot to watch the cubs, Mike went to the cook's cabin
and hunted for a bottle with a slender neck. With a red-hot wire he
bored a small hole through a cork and, after filling the bottle with
diluted condensed milk and oatmeal gruel, he drove the cork into the
neck. He wrapped the bottle inside his coat and hurried over to the
cabin with it.

The ladies and the other children had been called to the exhibition by
Don, after Mike went to the kitchen, and all of them were delighted over
the dear little fur-balls. Lavinia held one of the soft, velvety paws in
her hands smiling at the tiny toes and pink skin underneath. Suddenly,
however, the cub stretched and from the velvet paw there shot out five
sharp nails, long enough to make the children gasp.

"Where does he hide them?" said Lavinia.

"Gee! I never thought bear babies had claws like that!" said Don,
showing more respect for the cubs thereafter.

"Oh, Mike, what are you going to do?" asked everyone who had seen the
bottle.

"Feed babbies," grinned Mike, as he opened a cub's mouth and stuck the
bottle inside at an angle that would let the liquid run out--and in.

Immediately, the cub gulped and started sucking at the impromptu feeding
bottle.

Mike watched the milk diminish and when the bottle was half empty he
took it away and opened the other little cub's mouth for its food. The
first one, being comfortably fed, rolled over and went on sleeping.

The second cub was the smaller of the two and could not drink the milk
as rapidly as the sturdier one. Several times it choked and had to cough
and sneeze, which made the children laugh delightedly, but Mike waited
patiently until it had recovered breath.

"Mike, won't they wake up and play?" asked Dot.

"Him wake up, tree-four-five day!" replied Mike.

"Not before?" asked Don.

"Not before him eye open--'bout five day!" returned Mike.

Mike made a bed of balsam tips covered with an old buck-skin shirt.

The cubs were deposited upon the new bed and curled up close together,
never missing their old home or realizing that they had a foster-mother.
Mike fed them regularly, and the children found them a never-ending
source of delight.




CHAPTER IX

FATHER BEAR VISITS THE CAMP


THE following morning after his return from the cave, Mike started off
to inspect his traps. He rather suspected that the old father bear had
deserted the mother and cubs and wandered over the mountain in another
direction and possibly been trapped by some hunter. If such was not the
case, he might have come upon his mate's tracks and followed her to the
trap. In that case he might have been trapped as his mate was. There was
still another thought which came to Mike, but he disliked dwelling on
it: the bear might scent the man who stole the babies and follow him.
Mike knew of cases where a mother bear had followed her cubs for miles
and miles and then fought with the thief.

Therefore, Mike was very observing as he crept through the woods and
started through the glade where the trap was set. He saw tracks, which
had been recently made, all over the soft top ground, for the thaw had
melted the snow that bore the she-bear's tracks and soaked the ground
enough to soften it for half an inch into the frost; here were plainly
seen the marks of great paws as they trampled the area about the trap,
but never came near enough to be caught.

But there was no sign of a bear about. Looking very carefully from right
to left, Mike started back to camp, prepared at the first sound or sign
to shoot.

Mike had almost reached the camp when he heard shouts and cries of
terror. He ran as fast as he could, and found the women and Babs in the
dining-room with doors closed, shouting directions from a partially
opened window. Cookee was at the window of his kitchen waving a pail of
boiling water about. The older children were shut in the office with
faces pressed close against the panes of glass, but Don and Dot were in
his own cabin which had but one small pane of glass let in the front of
the door. The door was closed, but a ponderous shaggy bear stood
snuffling at the crack at the bottom, and uttering, ever and again, the
most terrifying growls.

The people had sought safety wherever they had been caught at the time
the bear marched into the clearing, after following the scent of his
dead mate's body. With nose to the ground he must have been on his way
toward the little shed where the she-bear hung, when a new scent greeted
his nose. He made for Mike's cabin and began to realize that his
children were in there.

Immediately he tore at the wood and demanded in stern tones to be
admitted.

Don and Dot, looking at each other in dismay, peeped out of the window
to behold that most appalling hulk standing at the door!

Mike understood, but he must plan to get a good sure shot at the
maddened bear without hitting the glass in the door.

He crawled noiselessly across half of the clearing to get an aim at the
bear from another vantage-point, but the bear, in his intensity, was all
alert to sound, and heard the almost imperceptible noise the Indian made
on the soft ground.

He turned, and stood glowering at his enemy who was about thirty feet
away. He seemed to know intuitively that this was the man who had ruined
his home, and he stood looking him over from head to foot.

Mike, very slowly, so as not to cause the beast any action, brought his
rifle up to his shoulder, but before he could take aim, the bear sprang
forward toward the man.

It took Mike but a moment to dodge into the children's cabin and shut
the door. No, not quite!

The bear wheeled as soon as Mike dodged, and came after him. The time
lost in turning the door-knob and getting inside gave the bear time to
get to the door. The door was almost closed upon the catch when the
nose of the beast came plump up against the wooden obstacle. The door
was pushed halfway open, but Mike exerted all of his strength to shove
it back again, and dragged the bureau up against it. Before he could
turn the lock to make the catch hold better the bear threw his entire
weight up against the outside and forced the door in again.

While he held his shoulder against the door to keep the bear out, he
used his rifle to smash in the glass of the little square window near
the door.

The moment this was done, Mike jumped from his post behind the door and
managed to squeeze his body through the window, while the bear, feeling
resistance give way from inside, forced himself in to devour his enemy.

Mike got out and immediately caught hold of the door from the outside
and banged it shut, caging the bear in the little room.

The bear's face appeared at the window whence his intended victim had
escaped, and he tried to get out. He could barely push his large head
through but his shoulders stuck fast in the opening.

Mike looked about for help and found every window about the clearing
with a face pressed against it. He yelled for the cook.

"Cookee! Him make Mike's lil' gun ready!--in cabin!"

The cook, seeing that the wild beast was safely shut up for the time
being, ran out of his kitchen and hurried over to Mike's aid. Mike made
him understand that a revolver was to be found in his cabin. Cookee ran
and loaded it, coming back to Mike's side, just as the bear, snarling
and chewing at the inner sill in his rage to get out, poked his head
through the opening.

"Cookee, hol' fas' door--Mike put gun in him head!" said Mike, as he
motioned the cook to take his place at the door.

At that moment, Don came out and shouted to Mike.

"Hi, there, Mike! Let's leave him in there and keep him caged up until
we go home. Dot and I'll sleep in the office if you'll let the bear live
there."

"Yes, Mike, please do," added Dot.

"Whaf'fer?" asked Mike.

"To sell to the Central Park Menagerie!" shouted Don.

"The big father bear and his two children will be fine for everyone to
come and see, and Dot and I'll get a heap of money fer 'em, and you can
have half," added Dot.

Just at that crisis, when the ladies were going to call to Mike to shoot
the bear and be done with it, the timber-men were heard coming from the
cutting.

Mr. Starr and Mr. Latimer came first, and, seeing that some unusual
event was going on, they ran over to Mike to ask the cause. Just as Mr.
Latimer's eyes came opposite the opening of the window, the bear stuck
his big bushy head out and, with eyes like balls of fire, he uttered a
snarl that curled back his lips, showing frightful fangs ready to tear
everyone to shreds.

Mr. Latimer made a queer noise, halfway between a shriek and a groan,
and fell up against Cookee. It was so unexpected and sudden that Cookee
was toppled off of his feet and the door swung halfway open again. In
that second the bear came down from the window and thundered at the
door, but Mike was too agile an Indian to have that door open, and
before the bear could get his nose through the crack, the door slammed
shut again, and Mr. Starr was stationed there to hold it.

"Meester Don an' Doot, say, 'Keep bear live for park,'" explained Mike,
waiting orders from the bosses.

As soon as Cookee gained his breath, which had been knocked out by the
sudden fall, he explained.

"The twins want to let the bear stay in this cabin and they'll sleep in
the office. They want to sell him to the park and get a lot of money."

"Shoot him, quick!" ordered Mr. Starr, seeing the wet nose of the bear
appear at the opening again.

Mike took a good aim this time and soon a crack of the gun, followed by
a heavy thud inside the cabin, made them all breathe easier. The doors
of the other buildings opened and the prisoners stepped out to ask if it
was safe to come over.

Don and Dot did not wait for an answer but ran to join the men.

Mike carefully crept up to the window and tried to see the inside of the
cabin, but he could only see the two bunks opposite the window. After a
short time, not a sound being heard inside, Mike pushed his head inside
the window.

There lay the ponderous animal on the floor under the window just as he
had dropped.

"All gone!" said Mike, laconically as ever.

The door was opened and the men peeped in first. Then the door was
opened wide and everyone went in.

"Two big dead bears, and two little live ones," said Meredith.

"Not so bad for one trap's work, eh?" said Paul.

"I was just thinking: what did Mike want these for? Did we need food, or
fur, or was it just the natural hunting spirit in most men that made him
do this," said Meredith.

"I feel that way, myself, Mete," added Lavinia. "And I am dreadfully
sorry for those dear little babies. What will we ever do with them?"

"I'm going to keep one," cried Don.

"An' I've decided to keep the other," added Dot.

"And remain in Canada after we go home, eh?" laughed Mr. Starr.

"Why, no, we'll take them with us," said Don.

"Not with my consent. Pay double fares from Winnipeg to New York, then
have everything in Oakwood torn to pieces, including the family, when
the bears grow larger."

"Oh, we'll only keep them while they are cute like puppy dogs, then
we'll send them to the menagerie," replied Don.

"Better turn them loose in the woods," said Cookee.

"Why, no, now that we have had all the trouble of getting them, and they
are orphans, they will never know any other home than a cage, so I agree
with the children--let us keep them while we remain and they will play
like puppies, then ship them to the city to be trained," said Mrs.
Starr.

As her word was generally obeyed, the matter was considered settled, and
the cubs remained where they were for a time.

In a few days, the cubs opened their tiny twinkling eyes, and soon were
able to roll around. At first they tried to stand, but their fat little
legs would not hold them up, and they rolled on the floor like balls of
fur. Many a shout of glee rang out from the dining-room when the cubs
tried to exercise. But in a week's time they could jump and run after
the twins if they teased them.

A long, hard spell of cold weather followed the bear-fight, and the
children had to play indoors every afternoon for some time, but they
preferred it on account of their new play-fellows.

The little bears grew strong and mischievous, and many a bout they had
with Don and Dot, the latter generally having to climb upon the table to
get away from them.

Mike took especial pride in keeping them clean and chubby, and the two
bears followed him as if he was a natural protector. He never teased
them and said little, but they knew that he was their foster-mother.

The first week in March, the cold broke up and the thaw began slowly but
surely to melt away the deep snows which fell in February, and ice
started to soften and crack.

The men realized that most of their season's work was completed and were
happy to find that they had cut several thousand feet more than the
figure given them. As they still had several days in which they might
work, it would figure up to nearly 50,000 extra feet of timber ready to
market.

One morning, Mr. Starr stood talking to his wife, when the children
came across the opening toward the school-room. Close upon the twins'
heels came the two cubs, stopping now and then to sniff at something on
the ground, then trying to run and catch up but falling over each other
in the attempt.

As the group came up to Mr. and Mrs. Starr, the former said, "Well,
children, our winter in the forest is almost over. Mumzie and I were
just talking about packing up for home."

"Home!" said Don, aghast.

"Oh, no!" added Dot.

"Yes, home," repeated Mr. Starr. "The rivermen will soon start the logs
down stream and there is nothing further to keep us here, but I am
needed at the other end."

"Oh, I was hoping we might live here until summer," said Lavinia,
regretfully.

"You are not homesick, then," smiled Mrs. Starr.

"Homesick! I should say not!" declared the children.

"Well, to tell the truth, children, I've had a most unusual winter of
enjoyment, but I shall be heartily glad to see my beautiful home again,"
said Mrs. Starr.

"So shall I," added Mrs. Latimer. "Camp life is fine for a few months,
but I have had enough to last me a long time. I want a porcelain bathtub
and electric lights for a change."

Everyone laughed, and the children went on to school, but the suggestion
made them all feel a bit homesick, though reluctant to leave the grand
old forests.

A few days later, Mrs. Starr and Mrs. Latimer began to pack their
various belongings, to have things in readiness to leave when the time
came.

Cookee also began packing the travelling outfit, for he would accompany
the men on the trip down the river. They would make a camp at a place
for a night or two, and then move on, as the large drift of logs
permitted.

A large case had been ordered from the town for the cubs, and it was
decided to put them in, nail slats across the top and ship them directly
to the park commissioner at Central Park, for the menagerie there.




CHAPTER X

AFLOAT ON THE RIVER RAFT


AS the milder weather settled down to stay, Don began thinking of the
river and the fun of watching the piled up logs gradually sink down into
the water, so he spoke to Dot about it.

"Let's go down to the river on Saturday morning and play," suggested he.

"Oh, it's awful far, Don, an' we won't get back to dinner," objected
Dot.

"We'll get Cookee to give us something to eat and we can walk slowly so
you won't get tired. The roads are all cut out now, and there is no
snow," persisted Don.

"All right. I'll go. Goin' to bring the others?"

"'Course not!" retorted Don.

Saturday morning was warm and clear and Don ran into Cookee's kitchen
after breakfast with a request for some lunch as Dot and he were going
to have some fun. Cook willingly gave lunch--glad to have the twins out
of the way for the morning while the baking was done.

Don and Dot hurried off without being seen by anyone. Mike had kept an
eye on them since their escapade of the Jumpin' Jane, but he was busy
showing Babs the bear cub's sharp white teeth and warning the baby
about playing with them when no one else was about.

The timber-jacks were cutting way back beyond the road that ran past the
clearing, and the twins had every opportunity to get down to the river
without being seen. Even the road that had been cut from the forest to
the river was now abandoned by the teamsters, for they had cut a new
road some miles the other side of the old one and had it paved with logs
to keep the wheels of the low truck from sinking into the soft thawing
earth.

It took the twins some hours to gain the river-side, for the walking was
troublesome. In some places where the ice and snow still clung to the
exposed knolls, it was slippery, but in others, where the thaw had
melted the frost and poured its waters into the glades, they had to
skirt the pools or go through them. Consequently, by the time they
reached the river, they were tired and wet to the knees.

"Ah! here we are at last!" cried Dot, as she sat down to rest.

"Come up on this tall heap of logs," said Don, scrambling up to the top
of a twenty foot pier.

The children sat there looking all about the country with delight. The
air was warm enough to be comfortable, and the river looked wonderful
with the swift current pouring down the center and huge blocks of ice
floating up against the banks or being whirled into the stream by
suction of the current.

"Great, isn't it!" exclaimed Don.

"Yes, but I wouldn't want to be on one of those cakes of ice," shivered
Dot.

"Neither would anyone!"

"I'll tell you what I would like to play," said Dot.

"What?" asked Don.

"I'd play I was one of the river-men with a peavie an' I'd try to push
the logs down in the river," said Dot, looking down at some logs lying
halfway in the water.

"How could we manage--let me see! We could get out on that raft and
stand on that to push the logs out," suggested Don.

"Sure! We'll pull the raft up to the bank by the chains, an' then push
her out again with our peavies."

So the two scrambled down from the logs and hunted about for two long
sticks that would answer for the peavies the timber-jacks used. After
finding two desirable poles, the twins ran down to the river to pull in
the raft.

This was not quite so easy as it would seem, for the logs were
water-soaked after a long winter in the water, but after a long tiresome
haul they brought the raft near enough to board it by climbing out over
a huge cake of ice.

"But we can't reach the logs from here!" cried Dot, finding that they
were on the other side of the ice-cake.

"We'll have to shove that iceberg out into the river," said Don, looking
about for the best channel to work through.

"Let's push our raft up behind it and then we can push the ice easier,"
advised Dot.

This was sensible, so both children pushed their peavies into some
smaller ice floes and managed to move the ponderous raft into a position
so the large ice-floe could be moved. The ice was thick and the weight
of it made it sink down low in the water, but after many breathless
efforts it was moved out of the way far enough to permit the twins to
work the raft in closer to shore. Here they met with a new difficulty,
for the logs were still clinging to the ground with frost and were not
to be coaxed into the water.

"If we only had cant-hooks so we could yank them in!" sighed Dot.

"Guess I'll have to jump ashore and try to tip one of those top logs
down," said Don, looking up at the pile they had sat upon.

"Pooh! you can't budge them a mite! It takes two men with hooks to pull
them out," said Dot.

Nevertheless, Don made up his mind to get _one_ log in the river at any
cost. He couldn't stand the thought of being defeated by an inanimate
log.

He found that, the large ice-floe being out of the pathway to shore, he
would have to jump from one small cake to another and follow the bank of
the river until he reached a small land-jetty about fifty feet down
stream.

This he did while Dot watched him breathlessly, expecting every moment
to see the ice sink and slide him into the stream.

Don reached the bank in safety and then ran back toward the place where
the raft was anchored. Before he reached the place, however, he stopped
and looked with interest at some attraction on the bank. Dot saw him
stop but could not see what it was as the logs all along the edge of the
river hid the object from view.

After a few minutes, he ran on to the narrow landing where they had
boarded the raft.

"Say, Dot, there are lots of logs lying almost in the water down there
by that crooked tree. If we could move that raft down there we could
have lots of fun floating them out to the current," said Don.

"That's easy to say--move the raft! How can you move anything that's
chained as this is?" asked Dot, disgustedly.

"I don't know! Let me think!"

Don crawled in under the tier of logs to the place down at the edge of
the river where the chain of the raft ran ashore. He pulled the chain up
as it lay slack in the water and found that the loop on shore was thrown
about a low stump of pine that was left sticking out of the bank, almost
hidden by the high pile of logs over it.

"Ha! if I can haul the raft in a few feet, while you push with your
stick, I can lift this chain off of the stump," called Don, showing Dot
how the raft was fastened.

Dot began pushing and Don pulled until the heavy raft floated in shore
far enough for Don to drag the chain off the stump.

The raft, released from its moorings, moved slightly out toward the
former position, the chain slipping into the water and dragging behind.

Don was satisfied with the result of his idea and ran down to the spot
where the logs could be readily edged into the water if the small ice
floes were out of the way. He pushed and worked at the ice until a clear
pathway of water lay before the logs. Those in the edge of the water,
were easily shoved out, but the others were too heavy to budge.

"Hi, there! Dot, shall I bring out the lunch for the raft?" called Don,
as he bethought him of going back to Dot.

"Yes, an' hurry up, 'cause I think this raft is movin' some toward the
river!" replied Dot, anxiously.

"Ah, naw, she ain't! She's only swirling about a bit in the motion of
the water!" said Don.

He ran and got the lunch and then tried to jump from one cake of ice to
another just as he did when he went ashore. But he found that going
ashore against the current was much easier than going out with the
current, for every cake of ice he jumped upon shot out from under his
feet with the river current.

As he was halfway over, he had to continue or leave Dot alone on the
raft. That was entirely out of his plans, so he used his pole to push
himself over as near to the large ice-floe as possible. The cake of ice
he was on was small enough to be submerged every time Don pushed his
pole against anything, and by the time he was able to jump on the large
ice-floe his feet and legs were soaking wet again. Once up on the large
floe, Don felt relieved for a fear had assailed him when he found he
couldn't jump the small cakes.

"Push the raft over to me--I can't make this floe budge!" called Don.

So Dot shoved the pole against a mass of ice and moved the raft over
toward Don's floe. As soon as he could jump, he came on the raft and the
two felt better for being together.

"I'm hungry, aren't you?" said Don, taking the lunch from his pockets.

"Yes; let's have lunch now, and play river-men after," returned Dot.

As they sat munching the lunch the motion of the wavelets under the
raft, dancing it up and down, made them laugh.

The ice-floe stuck close to them after Don jumped from it, and they
never noticed that the floe and raft were slowly floating out from
shore.

A sudden jar of the raft against another huge ice-floe that came down
stream made them take notice of their greater distance from shore.

"Gee! Dot, we have floated out more'n ten feet from the bank!" said Don,
looking about doubtfully.

"So we have! We'd better pole back again," said Dot.

Without another word, both children tried to pole back, but they were
working against the current that had begun to take hold of the ice-floe
and raft.

The ice-floe was so deep down in the water that the current that ran
underneath drew it along. But the raft being on the surface was not so
easily carried. Don thought for a few seconds.

"Dot, if we try to push that floe off we won't be dragged along with it.
She's doin' all the mischief!"

So both children turned their effort to shoving off the ice-floe and
soon succeeded in moving it beyond the reach of the poles. As they
watched it being caught gradually by the river current, Don whispered
to his sister.

"Now, let's get back as quickly as we can!"

But the poles were too short now to touch bottom, and there were no ice
cakes about to offer the necessary resistance.

"What now?" asked Dot, looking at Don with full understanding of their
dangerous position.

"What would you advise?" said Don, looking at the dark water.

"Can we swim ashore?" asked Dot.

"Nope! not in this current. Besides the water's as cold as ice, you
know. We'd have cramps in a minute."

Silence for some time, while each one thought of some way to escape from
the raft.

"I know! Pull up the chain from the water and let's sling it over
something on shore as soon as we float opposite!"

"Ain't that just like a girl! Why, Dot, I thought that bein' my twin
you'd have more sense than that!" replied Don, disdainfully.

True to her feminine nature, however, Dot lay down flat upon the raft
and hauled in the chain with the loop at the end.

"You can't fling it 'cause it's too heavy, and the raft will float out
further all the time--not toward shore!" objected Don, as he watched.

Dot was still down on the raft but Don was standing up when, suddenly,
an immense ice-floe coming down stream struck another one and shot out
toward shore striking the corner of the raft such a blow that Don
measured his full length out on the logs. The raft was partially
submerged but was shoved out of the way of the floe, and left within a
few feet of the bank.

"Hurrah! Now we can pole back!" yelled Don, scrambling to his feet to
snatch his pole. He looked about but the pole had been washed off when
the corner of the raft went under water.

"Hi, there, Dot, gim'me yours--quick!" cried Don, as he saw the raft
slowly turn about and go out into the current again.

Dot rolled off of her pole, upon which she had been lying, thereby
saving it from the water.

Don pushed and pushed for all he was worth and managed to propel the
clumsy raft further toward shore. Every foot made it easier, for the
water was shallower and the current less. Within a few feet of shore,
Dot flung her chain out, bound to have her way about a rescue. As the
chain shot out, Dot slipped on the wet logs, and fell into the water.

Don was stupefied for a moment, but Dot had great presence of mind and
was going to swim when she felt a solid foundation two feet under
water. She managed to stand up and called to Don:

"See, I'm standing on something hard. Guess it's logs!"

As it was on one side of the raft, Dot held on to the edge of the raft
and felt her way along the hard logs under water until she reached the
extreme end of the raft. Here she let go and slowly shoved her foot
ahead of her until she felt the water getting shallower as she proceeded
toward shore. She was now but five feet from the bank where a huge pine
log had fallen end-wise into the river. She climbed up and held on to
the rough bark, scrambling, hand over hand, along the trunk until she
reached the towering pile from which the pine had rolled.

Don saw the way to go ashore, and immediately sat down on the edge of
the raft and slid off into the water just where Dot had held on to the
corner of the raft. He also felt the hard logs underneath and crept
along until he reached the pine-tree.

As soon as he was up beside his sister, they looked at each other and
heaved a mighty sigh.

"The raft's skidding," said Dot, pointing out to the water.

Don looked; sure enough, the raft must have been caught in a side
current and sent down stream.

"That tumble of mine was the best thing I did!" grinned Dot.

"Yes! an' if you hadn't slung that chain ashore you wouldn't have
tumbled into the water," admitted Don.

"Say, Don, how do you s'pose those logs are kept under water?" asked
Dot, wondering about her escape.

After a few moments silence, Dot said, "Don, I guess I'm just a little
bit cold. These things won't dry out here!"

"So'm I--let's go home!"

So the two trudged home, cold, forlorn, and hungry.

"That's the first time I got left when I made up my mind to do
anything!" grumbled Don, as the camp was reached.

"We didn't get left! the river wanted to gobble us, and _it_ got
left--just because I knew enough to fling that chain!" said Dot; the
latter half of her sentence was given with a grin at her brother.

"Mercy sakes alive! where _have_ you two been to get so wet!" cried Mrs.
Latimer, meeting the twins.

"We were playing and fell into the water!" was all Don said, and no one
ever knew the narrow escape the twins had from being whirled down the
dreadful river, and, perhaps, drowned.

They were soon hustled into dry clothing and made to drink hot lemonade
with plenty of ginger in it.

No unpleasant effects were felt from the drenching as every one of the
children were too hardy from the outdoor life to take cold easily.

The very next day, Sunday, the weather grew so warm that everything was
dripping. The timber-men found it impossible to cut more that season and
started to get ready for the logging on the river. Cookee was ready to
move on with the men, and the two families finished packing and were
ready to start back to civilization early Tuesday morning.

The cubs were shipped off Monday morning with the trunks.

Mike almost cried as he said good-bye to the children, but he had had a
fine winter's income, and the sale of the cubs would give him enough
money to keep him with care, in old age.

As the carry-all, filled with children and the ladies, started out of
camp, the timber-men waved their hats and yelled after the disappearing
vehicle, making the children feel that they were leaving good friends
behind.

So the Five Little Starrs left their Winter Camp in the Canadian Forest
and went home. We next hear of them in the book "Five Little Starrs on a
Motor Tour."


THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Page 9, "disstance" changed to "distance" (for the same distance)

Page 10, "freind" changed to "friend" (to meet an old friend)

Page 51, "eveyone" changed to "everyone" (while everyone laughed)

Page 98, "musn't" changed to "mustn't" (No, you mustn't)

Page 102, repeated word "in" deleted (that wood in)

Page 159, "stoods" changed to "stood" (Babs stood gaping)

Page 227, "childred" changed to "children" (word, both children)






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE LITTLE STARRS IN THE CANADIAN FOREST ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

