Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Transcriber's Note

Inconsistencies and variations in spelling, hyphenation, capitalization,
punctuation and grammar have been preserved in this ebook to match the
text of the original document published in 1799.

A few typographical corrections have been made; details of these changes
can be found in a second Transcriber's Note at the end of this text.




  AN IMPARTIAL
  NARRATIVE
  OF THE
  _MOST IMPORTANT_
  ENGAGEMENTS
  WHICH TOOK PLACE BETWEEN
  HIS MAJESTY'S FORCES
  AND THE
  _REBELS_,
  DURING
  =The Irish Rebellion=,
  _1798_.

  INCLUDING VERY INTERESTING INFORMATION
  NOT BEFORE MADE PUBLIC.


  _CAREFULLY COLLECTED_
  FROM AUTHENTIC LETTERS.


  DUBLIN:


  =Printed and Sold by John Jones=,
  91, BRIDE-STREET.


  1799.
  (_Price 1s. 1d._)




PREFACE.


The Editor with the most profound respect, submits to the Public the
following NARRATIVE.--It forms a small portion of a more extended
work, calculated to contain the particulars of every remarkable
occurrence, connected with the Rebellion, which happened in the
course of the last year;--a year which will constitute an EPOCH in
the history of Ireland, and the events of which ought to be
universally known.

The moment of action is not the most favourable to accuracy of
detail:--Notwithstanding the purest intentions and the most
scrupulous regard to truth, much will remain, for candour to
extenuate and information to supply. Impressed with this sentiment,
and feeling the importance of the subject, the Editor has waited
till the season of tranquility, and now presents to the public eye,
the produce of his exertions. He wished to postpone the Publication
in order to complete it, but he yields to the entreaties of his
Friends, and finds it necessary to make some sacrifice to the
eagerness of public curiosity: The remaining part is in preparation
for the Press, and as he continues to be supplied by those who were
witnesses at the transactions, and consequently most capable of
communicating correct intelligence, he hopes soon to accomplish
his design.

The Reader will perceive from the following specimen, that the
accounts of the Battles are not arranged in chronological order;
neither do they boast of any great pretensions to literary merit;
but they will be found to have a recommendation more valuable than
either--AUTHENTICITY. The Editor was less solicitous about the style
of the work, than the truth of it, and where, upon investigation,
the matter conveyed to him proved correct, he has given it in the
language of his correspondent.

If History be, as it has been elegantly described, "Philosophy
teaching by Example,"--what example more necessary to be held out
to public view, and transmitted to posterity, than that which shews
the dreadful effects of a Revolution attempted by force? Where the
visionary politician enjoys for so short a time his sanguinary
triumph--suspected even by those whom he calls his friends, he is
superseded by such as are more ferocious than himself, while the
fury of Fanaticism equally destroys _his_ prospects in the mad
effort to exterminate one religion and substitute another.

The perusal of such transactions must suggest useful reflections.
The surviving Loyalist will rejoice in the triumph of _law_ and the
restoration of _order_. The surviving Rebel will repent of his
folly, and enjoy the comforts which Law and Order distribute.

Such are the motives and such the object which influence the Editor
of this little Work. From those who may approve of it, and whose
situation and leisure furnish the opportunity, he requests further
assistance. Particulars of Engagements, not included in this part,
will be thankfully received, and due attention paid to them in the
subsequent Publication.




CONTENTS.


                                                       PAGE.

    Description of Clonard,                                3

    Battle of Timahoe,                                     9

    Junction of the Wexford and
        Kildare Rebels,                                   12

    Battle of Clonard,                                  _ib._

    Mrs. Tyrrell's sufferings while
        prisoner with the Rebels,                         20

    Character of Col. Perry and
        Priest Kearns who were
        executed                                          30

  LETTERS.

    I.   Battle of Carlow,                                34

    II.  Battle of Ross,                                  38

    III. Battle at Castlecomber, &c.                      41

    IV.  Battle of Kilcomney,                             49

    V.   Second Account of the
         Battle at Kilcomney,                             52

    VI.  Battle of Saintfield,                            57

    VII. Battle of Kilbeggan,                             60

  OFFICIAL ACCOUNTS.

    Battle of Naas                                        63

    Battle of Kilcullen,                                  65

    Battle of Hacketstown,                                67

  LETTERS.

    VIII. Battle of Arklow,                               70

    IX. Account of the depredations
        of the Rebels at Gorey--their
        sacrilegious treatment of
        the Church, in which they
        immolated two Protestants,                        73

    X.  Situation of the Rebels on
        Vinegar-Hill,                                     78

    Description of
        Vinegar-Hill--the Battle,                         76

    The Rebels are defeated,                              77

    XI. Accurate detail of the effects
        of the Rebellion in the County
        Wexford.                                          78

    Battle at Oulard,                                     80

    Attack at Enniscorthy,                                80

    Battle at the Three Rocks,                            81

    Atrocities of the Rebels and the
        sufferings of the
        Loyalists in Wexford, &c.                         83

    Names of Clergymen and principal
        Gentlemen put death,                              86

  APPENDIX.

    Copy of an Affidavid made before
        the Right Hon. the Lord Mayor
        of the City of Dublin, relative
        to the attack on Prosperous                       87

    Account of the murder of Capt.
        Swayne--Burning of the
        Barracks, and the cries of the
        Soldiers consumed therein--Murder
        of Messrs. Stamer and Brewer, &c.                 88




           *       *       *       *       *


  _WEXFORD CRUELTIES!_

  A GENUINE WORK.


    J. Jones informs the Reader that in a few Days he will publish
    the _Fourth Edition, greatly enlarged_, on a small Type, and
    good Paper, intended to bind up with the present Narrative,

    (_Price only Sixpence Halfpenny_)

    A NARRATIVE
    OF THE
    Sufferings and Providential Escape
    OF
    _CHARLES JACKSON_,
    LATE RESIDENT IN WEXFORD:
    _Written by himself._

    Giving an account of his confinement and ill treatment
    received from the Rebels; the political and religious
    interrogations of Dick Monk; the situation of Lord
    Kingsborough; description of the Rebel Camp; General Roache's
    proclamation from Vinegar-hill; description of Messrs. Harvey,
    Keugh and Grogan; the unheard-of cruel manner of piking the
    Loyalists; the re-taking of Wexford by his Majesty's troops;
    the liberation of the prisoners, succeeded by a truly
    affecting scene--The general orders from Carrick-Byrne
    Camp;--Proposal of the Rebels to General Lake, and his answer,
    with the singular account of Mr. Colclough's behaviour at the
    place of execution; also Mr. Grandy's Information before four
    magistrates at Duncannon-Fort.

    This present Edition sells for _half_ the price of another
    published in Dublin.

    Printing executed on the shortest Notice--Emblematic Ribbands
    impressed with Gold and Silver.


           *       *       *       *       *




  A
  NARRATIVE,
  OF THE MOST IMPORTANT
  ENGAGEMENTS,
  IN THE
  _IRISH REBELLION_,
  1798.


Clonard is situate about Twenty five miles from Dublin on the
Western road leading to Mullingar. Tho' constituted a post town,
it is a very small village, consisting of an Inn and a few thatched
houses; but from its situation being on the confines of two
counties, Kildare and Meath, and having a bridge across the river
Boyne, which opens a communication from Dublin to Westmeath, and
from thence to Athlone and the Province of Connaught, it must be
considered as a very important pass in all times of commotion and
war. On the Dublin side of the town is situated the mansion house of
the Tyrrell family, and at present belongs to _John Tyrrell_ Esq.
It is an old fashioned house, fronting the road from which it is
separated by a high wall and a court yard; having an extensive
garden upon its right, and a sheet of water upon the left.--Mr. John
Tyrrell, being a Magistrate of both Counties, Kildare and Meath, and
having exerted himself early to suppress the disturbances which were
occasioned by the Defenders, naturally became an object of their
resentment, and having been repeatedly menaced with an attack, he
fortified his house by building up the original hall door, opening
another, which might flank the approach to the house, and barricading
all the lower windows, so as to render them musquet proof.

Upon the institution of the Yeomenry, Mr. John Tyrrell was honoured
with a Commission to raise a Corps of Cavalry, which was immediately
embodied, under the Title of the _Clonard Cavalry_, and Thomas Tyrrell,
and Thomas Barlow, Esqs. were appointed Lieutenants. This Corps soon
distinguished itself by its unwearied exertions to preserve the
peace of the neighbourhood; but in the course of the Spring of 1798,
Mr. John Tyrrell the Captain, receiving positive information of a
conspiracy to take away his life, thought it prudent to retire with
his family into England.

The command of the Corps consequently devolved upon Mr. Thomas
Tyrrell, the first Lieutenant, who had also at this critical period
been appointed High Sheriff of the County of Kildare.--Upon the
tenth of May 1798, he received an official letter, ordering the
Clonard Cavalry upon permanent duty; in this emergency Mr. Thomas
Tyrrell, finding his own house at Kilreiny about one mile and a
half from Clonard inconvenient, and in truth indefensible from
its situation, removed with his family to his Kinsman's house at
Clonard, before described, where he mounted a guard of one Serjeant
and 18 men who were to be relieved every week.

Orders were about the same time issued to Captain O Ferrall of the
Ballina Cavalry, to mount a permanent guard at Johnstown, near the
Nineteen Mile house, which were accordingly complied with: but upon
the 16th of May, reports of a general rising having been circulated,
and being corroborated by encreasing outrages in the neighbourhood,
Captain O Ferrall was permitted to fall back from Johnstown to
Clonard in the night time for protection; repairing to Johnstown at
four o'Clock in the morning, and retiring to Clonard in the evening.

In this way matters went on for some time, when the country becoming
still more disturbed and apprehensions of an attack upon Clonard
becoming more serious, Lieutenant Thomas Tyrrell repaired to Dublin,
with an escort of his Corps, leaving the command at Clonard with
Lieutenant Barlow. The object of this visit to Dublin, was to
represent to Government the situation of that part of the country,
the daily apprehensions of an attack, and the necessity of a
reinforcement. Lord Castlereagh, to whom these representations were
made, answered, that under the existing circumstances no force could
be sent to Clonard, but Mr. Thomas Tyrrell was authorized to raise
some Supplementaries, for whom he would be supplied with arms and
ammunition.

Pending this application in Dublin, viz. upon the 29th of May the
Rebels assembled to the number of 800 in the village of Carbery,
five miles from Clonard, where they burned the Protestant Charter
School and several houses; they then proceeded through Johnstown,
burning and destroying the house of every protestant near the road.
Towards evening they halted at a place called Gurteen, where they
destroyed the house of Mr. Francis Metcalf.--When intelligence of
these transactions reached Clonard, Lieutenant Barlow marched out
with a party of the guard, and being joined by Captain O Ferrall
they went in pursuit of the Rebels, but did not over take them,
until they had halted at Gurteen, where they had taken a very
advantageous position upon each side of a narrow road, behind
strong quickset hedges, so that Cavalry could not approach them
with any prospect of success. Lieutenant Barlow halted his men,
and then advancing some paces towards the enemy, took off his
helmet, and challenged them to come forward. They however declined
leaving their entrenchments, and night approaching, the Yeomenry
with great reluctance returned to their Guard house.

On the 30th of May Lieutenant Thomas Tyrrell arrived safe from
Dublin, with his escort, carabines for the Troop, musquets for
the Supplementaries and a quantity of ammunition. The next day
he enrolled nineteen well affected protestants to act as
Supplementaries and dismounted.

By this time the Rebels had collected a very considerable force and
every night committed some outrage and depredation. They encamped
upon an Island in the bog of Timahoe, and also at Mucklin and
Dreihid; they plundered almost every house in the neighbourhood of
their respective places, drove away all the fat cattle and horse
they could meet, and intercepted the supplies for the Dublin market.


_BATTLE OF TIMAHOE._

Government being apprized of these proceedings, dispatched General
Champagne to Clonard, where he arrived upon the 6th of June; and
after consulting with Lieutenant Tyrrell, was escorted by him to
Edendery, where the General expected a detatchment of the Limerick
Militia; but being disappointed in this respect, an express was sent
to Philipstown to hasten the reinforcement, which arrived at
Edendery upon the evening of the 7th; and on the next day, General
Champagne, having arranged his plan of operations, marched from
Edendery, with the following forces: A detatchment of the Limerick
Militia, under Lieutenant Colonel Gough; the Coolestown Yeomen
Cavalry, under Captain Wakely and Lieutenant Cartland; the Canal
Legion, under Lieutenant Adam Williams; the Clonard Cavalry,
Lieutenant T. Tyrrell; and the Ballina Cavalry, Captain O Ferrall.
These several corps were distributed, so as that the Cavalry should
surround the bog of Timahoe, while the Infantry attacked the Camp
upon the Island: This judicious plan was completely executed,--the
contest was obstinate for some time, owing to the small number
of the Infantry, who led on the attack; but their firmness and
discipline supplying the want of numbers, the Limerick, headed by
the gallant Colonel Gough, and ably supported by Lieutenant Williams
marched into the entrenchments, drove the Rebels from their camp,
who were attacked in their flight by the Cavalry and many of them
put to death. The Camp was entirely destroyed; and a great quantity
of prisoners and considerable booty were carried off by the victors!

On the 29th of June, Lieutenant Tyrrell having received information
that a large body of Rebels had stationed themselves upon a hill
near his dwelling-house at Kilreiny, and had committed various
robberies in the course of the preceding night, he went to Kinnegad
to solicit a reinforcement and sent an express to Edendery for a
force to co-operate with him. The Kinnegad Yeomen Cavalry, under
Lieutenant Houghton, and a small party of the Northumberland
Fencibles immediately marched with Lieutenant Tyrrell to Clonard,
and from thence being joined by his own Corps, he proceeded to
_Fox's hill_, where the Rebels were posted to the amount of
600.--The attack was began by the Clonard Supplementaries, who
displayed great steadiness upon this occasion; the Kinnegad Corps
and the Northumberlands supported the attack with great zeal, and
the Edenderry force consisting of a detatchment of the Limerick,
Lieutenant Colonel Gough, the Coolestown Cavalry, Captain Wakely
and the Canal Legion, Lieutenant Williams, having fallen upon the
Rebels from the opposite side, they were routed with considerable
slaughter. Their commander, one _Casey_, his brother and another
Leader were killed in this action, and their bodies brought to
Edenderry, where they were exposed for several days.


_JUNCTION OF THE WEXFORD AND KILDARE REBELS._

It might have been hoped, that these successes would have established
tranquility in this neighbourhood, and probably such effects would
have followed the military exertions, were it not for the irruption
of a large column of Wexford Rebels into Kildare, under the command
of Colonel _Perry_ who being immediately joined by Colonel _Aylmer_,
commanding the Rebel Camp at Prosperous, was prevailed upon to abandon
his intention of penetrating into the North, and to adopt a plan
suggested by _Aylmer_, of attacking Clonard, pushing on from thence
by Kilbeggan to the Shannon and surprising Athlone. In pursuance of
this plan, the Rebel Forces amounting to 4000 men made a movement
towards Clonard.


_BATTLE OF CLONARD._

Lieutenant Tyrrell was totally unapprised of the intention, or
motions of the enemy:--his guard were extremely vigilant during
each night, but not apprehending any danger in the day time they
frequently dispersed through the village for the purpose of
recreation and refreshment. This happened to be the case with many
of his men upon Wednesday morning the 11th of July, on which day,
about eleven o'Clock Mr. _Richard Allen_ galloped into the Court,
and brought intelligence that he was pursued by a piquet guard of
the Rebels, whom he narrowly escaped as they were well mounted; and
he was confident a considerable force was approaching. The alarm was
instantly given--every exertion was made to collect the scattered
men, and parties were stationed in the most advantageous positions.
As the enemy were expected from the Dublin side, six of the Corps
(including Mr. Allen and Thomas Tyrrell junr. the Lieutenant's son,
and only fifteen years of age) took possession of an old Turret at
the extremity of the garden; and which commanded the road. Such
was the rapidity with which the Rebels advanced, that the firing
actually commenced from this quarter upon their Cavalry before the
entire guard could be collected, and the gate leading into the
Court yard was under such necessity closed to the exclusion of
several, so that when Lieutenant Tyrrell came to ascertain his
strength, he found he had only _Twenty-seven_ men, including his
own three sons, the eldest of whom was only seventeen years old!
Such a critical situation required the coolness of a man innured
to military danger, and all the exertion, firmness and skill of a
veteran soldier. But although Lieutenant Tyrrell never had served in
the Army, his own good sense supplied the want of experience, and
his native courage furnished resources adequate to the magnitude of
the occasion. He found his men as zealous as himself, determined to
maintain their post and to discharge their duty to their King and
Country, or fall in such a glorious cause. After sending a supply of
ammunition to the advanced post at the Turret, and stationing other
out-posts, he retired into the house with the main body, from which
he selected the best marksmen, and placing them at particular
windows gave directions that they should not fire without having
their object covered, he had the rest of the men secured behind the
walls and incessantly employed in loading musquets and carabines for
the marksmen at the windows.

The firing as we have observed commenced from the Turret at the
extremity of the garden. About 300 of the Rebel Cavalry lead on by
one _Farrell_ formed their advanced guard, and approached the Turret
in a smart trot, without appearing to apprehend any danger. The
first shot was fired by young Mr. Tyrrell, which mortally wounded
Farrell, and being followed by a general discharge from the rest
among the body of the Cavalry, threw them into great confusion, in
which state they fled out of the reach of the firing. The Infantry
however coming up, many of them contrived to pass the Turret under
cover of the wall, and numbers were posted behind a thick hedge on
the opposite side of the road, from which they kept up a smart fire
against the Turret, but without doing any material mischief.

The Infantry who had passed the Turret being joined by a party who
came by a cross road (for it seems their plan was to surround the
house by advancing in different directions) they stationed a guard
upon the Bridge to prevent any reinforcement arriving in that
direction. About ten or a dozen of this guard were in a very few
minutes shot by the marksmen from the windows, upon which the rest
fled; not one of the Rebels ventured afterwards to appear upon the
Bridge, so that the communication with the Western road was in a
great measure preserved, the importance of which to the little
garrison in Clonard will appear in the event of the day.

The enemy being thus defeated in their first onset in both points
of attack, became exasperated to an extravagant pitch of fury, and
determined upon the most savage revenge. A large party contrived to
penetrate into the garden, by the rere, and some of them immediately
rushed into the Turret. The Yeomen stationed there were upon an
upper floor--they had the precaution to drag up the ladder by which
they ascended;--the Rebels endeavoured to climb upon each other, so
as to reach the upper story, but they were killed as fast as they
appeared; others then ran their pikes through the cieling, and
fired shots but without effect--the conflict was obstinate--twenty
seven of the Rebels lay dead on the ground floor, when at length, a
quantity of straw was brought and set on fire. The building was
soon in flames; two of the yeomen, Mr. Michael Cusack and Mr. George
Tyrrell, endeavouring to force their way through the smoke were
immediately put to death; the rest of the party viz. Mr. Allen,
young Mr. T. Tyrrell, and two others escaped by leaping from a
window twenty foot high into an hay-yard, from whence under cover of
a wall which divided it from the garden they escaped into the house.

Having succeeded so well by the effect of conflagration, the enemy
set fire to the Toll house and some other cabbins on the left near
the Bridge, for the purpose of embarassing and confusing the
garrison; during this operation, they were seen throwing their
dead into the flames, for the purpose, it was thought of evading
discovery.

The Battle had now lasted near six hours: about five in the evening
the approach of succour was descried from the house--the hopes of
all were elevated and they fought with renovated vigour.

One of the guard who had been excluded by the sudden shutting of the
gates in the morning, finding he could be of no other use, repaired
to Kinnegad, represented the situation of his friends at Clonard,
upon which fourteen of the Kinnegad Infantry, under Lieutenant
Houghton, and eleven Northumberland Fencibles, under the command of
a Serjeant, immediately collected and with great gallantry marched
for Clonard. The communication by the Bridge having been kept open
in the manner before related, Lieutenant Tyrrell sallied from the
house, and soon effected a junction with this reinforcement. A
few vollies completely cleared the roads, and having then placed
the Northumberland and Kinnegad men in such situations as most
effectually to gall the enemy in their retreat from the garden,
the Lieutenant undertook in person, the hazardous enterprise of
dislodging them from thence.

At this time, it is supposed there were 400 Rebels in the garden;
numbers of them were posted upon a mount planted with old fir trees,
which afforded considerable protection, and many lay concealed
behind a privet hedge, from whence they could distinctly see
every person who entered the garden, tho' they could not be seen
themselves--Lieutenant Tyrrell at the head of a few picked men,
rushed into the garden; and was received by a general discharge from
both parties of the enemy: no time was lost in attacking the party
behind the hedge, who being defeated, retired to the mount;--here
the action again became warm, the Rebels appeared determined to
maintain the advantage of their situation, and the Yeomen, tho'
fatigued with the labour of the day, could not think of retiring.
Six of them were badly wounded, among whom was Mr. Richard Allen,
who had so gallantly defended the Turrett--a ball passed thro' his
left arm, and entered his side; his comrades still persevered
with the most undaunted courage, and supporting a steady and well
directed fire against the mount, the enemy were at length dispersed,
and in their flight were met by the Northumberland and Kinnegad
Corps who made great havoc among them.

The victory was now complete--as glorious an achievement, we will
venture to say, as occurred during the whole rebellion, and for
which the gallant officers and men can never be too much applauded,
whether we consider it as an unexampled display of genuine loyalty
and true courage, or estimate its value from its immence importance
to that part of the country and the kingdom at large. It was the
first check which the United Army of Wexford and Kildare experienced
and proved the fore-runner of those multiplied defeats which
terminated in its total dispersion.


_MRS. TYRRELL'S SUFFERINGS WHILE PRISONER WITH THE REBELS._

After the Battle it might have been expected that the little garrison
would have given themselves up to an excess of joy; but the breast of
their Commander was filled with anxious solicitude----the partner of
his heart--his wife, the mother of those three gallant youths, who
mixed in the hottest scenes of the day, was absent the whole time,
and no tidings of her had reached the garrison. The men sympathised
with the husband and the children, and success was thought incomplete,
until she was restored to their embraces.

Probably the reader may participate somewhat of a similar feeling,
and desire some gratification from a brief narrative of the
circumstances attending the Lady while in possession of the Rebels.

On the morning of the 11th of July, about the hour that the guard
dispersed, as we have before mentioned, Mrs. Tyrrell went in her
carriage from Clonard to her own house at Kilreiny upon some
domestic concerns--she soon heard the Rebels were approaching, and
speedily drove back with the hope of reaching Clonard before them.
In this however she was disappointed; the noise of musquetry
convinced her of the impractibility of this attempt. The servant
was ordered to turn about and drive to Kilreiny, from whence she
intended to send an express to Edenderry--she had not however
proceeded many yards, when the carriage was overtaken by two men
on horseback, armed with drawn swords who with oaths and menaces
ordered the servant to stop--They turned the carriage back towards
Clonard until they overtook about 200 men armed with pikes, a few
musquets and some swords. They searched the carriage for arms,
but did not find any. Mrs. Tyrrell describes the men as a ragged,
wretched looking banditti: three of them, armed with musquets
mounted the boot of the carriage; three more got behind it--and in
this manner attended by a great crowd, the carriage was drove two
miles round to the high road leading from Dublin to Clonard: here
they kept her a prisoner, notwithstanding her frequent entreaties
to be enlarged; she at one time apprehended the pike-men would cut
her to pieces, as they quarrelled among themselves, some disposed
to treat her with civility--others the reverse--After some time
she prevailed upon them to permit her to retire into a cabin, the
inhabitants of which knew her, and two men armed with musquets
were placed as centries. She there remained, until the Rebels
were defeated at Clonard, when the whole body upon their retreat
assembled at the cabin; one of the rebel officers came in and
desired Mrs. Tyrrell to get into her carriage; she asked for what
purpose. He replied, that she must go with them; she entreated him
to permit her to remain where she was, and that her carriage and
horses were at his service; he for some time denied her request: but
falling on her knees to supplicate him, he told her she might
stay:--He then withdrew, but immediately a great common fellow came
in, seized her by the arm, dragged her to the door, and desired some
men to lift her upon a horse, which had been provided for her, as
some wounded men were to be put into the carriage. Mrs. Tyrrell's
alarm now became excessive--she looked round for the person, who
had consented to let her remain in the cabin, and getting her arms
round him reminded him of his promise. He acknowledged his
engagement, but confessed he had not power to perform it--that she
must go with them, but would be accomodated with her own carriage.
Three or four men then thrust her into the carriage, which moved on,
attended by an immense body of people, and a great number of
officers. When they had proceeded about a mile, the carriage was
stopped and entered by Col. _Perry_, who said, he was fatigued.
Mrs. Tyrrell endeavoured to prevail upon him to let her go--but in
vain--she told him, she would use all her influence for his
advantage, if ever she had an oportunity--He answered, that the
Yeomen had taken a general officer, at Clonard, and that she must
remain a Prisoner till his fate was known.--After some time,
the carriage was stopped again, and a fellow came in, who told
Col. _Perry_, _he_ had a right to it, as he had taken it, and tho'
quite a common fellow, _Perry_ had not power to prevent him.
Mrs. _Tyrrell_ then applied to this man for protection; he answered,
that she could not obtain her liberty. She was now reduced to all the
anguish of despair, when a gleam of hope suddenly darted across her
mind, upon seeing a man riding beside the carriage whose countenance
was perfectly familiar--This was one _Kearns_, a popish priest, who
had been for some time a curate in the neighbourhood of Clonard, and
had always been received in Mr. Tyrrell's house, with the respect
due to his clerical function, and the hospitality of an Irish
gentleman. Upon meeting a man, who had feasted for weeks together at
her table, and a clergyman too! she thought herself secure and
implored his protection:--He coldly answered--"O, yes, Madam"--But
with all the base and black ingratitude of a sullen and unfeeling
heart, insensible to _past_ kindness, he drew back his horse, and
with the jesuitical prevarication, natural to such a character,
determined not to interfere, while he neglected to console her with
an implied offer of assistance.----Thus deserted, she again
abandoned herself to despair, and began to prepare herself for that
death, which she now looked upon as inevitable.----A man, who sat
upon the boot of the carriage, was suddenly struck with the fervency
of her devotion, and turning round, said, _He_ had as much authority
as any other man there, and that the lady should do as she pleased.
Elevated a little from her despondency by this expression,
Mrs. Tyrrell gave him her gold watch, promising him any further
reward he would demand, if he would procure her liberty.----At
this time a person in the garb of an officer, and whose countance
beamed with the rays of humanity, rode up to the carriage--she
immedeiately addressed him in the most supplicating terms--imploring
him to take pity upon a poor defenceless woman, who had not, and
who could not injure him--He interrogated her as to who she was
and how she came there.--She told him--He protested, that he did
not before know of any such thing and requested to know, what she
wished to do----She replied that she only required to be let on
her feet, that she might proceed home. He immediately ordered the
cavalcade to stop--handed her out of the carriage in the most kind
and humane manner--conducted her thro' an immense crowd of armed
men, and apologized for not accompanying her to Clonard, by saying,
"she knew, he could not do it with safety."--Mrs. Tyrrell made him
the acknowledgements of a grateful heart, and begged to be entrusted
with his name, that if ever it should be in her power, she might
return the kindness she had then experienced and repay the
obligations she had received.--He said, he was afraid, she could not
do him any service, and with apparent reluctance, told her, he was
Captain _Byrne_!--He then returned to his party, and Mrs. Tyrrell
having met some of the people in whose cabin she was a prisoner,
they accompanied her to Clonard, where she was consoled for all her
sufferings by finding her husband and children alive.

The gentleman (for such his conduct evinced him to be) who called
himself, Captain _Byrne_, proved to be Mr. _Byrne_ of Ballymanus,
in the county of Wicklow, who afterwards surrendered himself to
Government, and Lieutenant Tyrrell being in Dublin at the time,
repaired to the Castle, had an interview with Mr. Byrne, expressed
his acknowledgements to him in the warmest terms, and represented
the conduct of Mr. Byrne to the administration in such a manner, as
shewed the Lieutenant's sense of the obligation, while it promoted
the lenient disposition which was afterwards manifested to Mr. Byrne.

Thus have we given an authentic detail of the battle of Clonard and
the circumstances attending it, which in fact have been but little
known, no official account having ever been published concerning it.
One subject of regret however remains for the victors in the loss of
Mr. _Richard Allen_, who died of his wounds in a few days after at
Mullingar, regretted by all who knew him, as a young gentleman of
unsullied integrity and undaunted courage--attached to his King by
the purest principles of loyalty, and to his family by the warmest
affection--He was a zealous yeoman and a steady friend. All that
seems necessary to add, is to say a few words respecting the fate
of this Rebel Army and its leaders.


_FATE OF THE REBELS._

After proceeding some distance from Clonard, along the Dublin road,
they turned to the right and took up their quarters for the night
in the village of Carbery--where they possessed themselves of Lord
Harberton's house, and indulged in drinking wine and spirits to
excess--they were most of them intoxicated, in which state had they
been attacked, they must have been totally destroyed.--But the force
at Clonard was too small, had suffered too severely and expended too
much ammunition to attempt a pursuit--On the morning of the 12th of
July, the Rebels moved from Carbery to Johnstown, and from thence by
the nineteen-mile-house into the county of Meath--They were pursued
by Lieutenant Col. Gough, with a small party of the Limerick Militia,
and the Edenderry yeomen--An express had been sent to Col. Gordon,
commanding at Trim, to march out with a force from thence, and
co-operate with the Edenderry detachment--Col. Gordon accordingly
left Trim with 200 men and two pieces of cannon, but from some
fatality, yet unexplained, did not join in the attack, which
Lieutenant Col. Gough, after waiting some time and reconnoitering
the enemy posted upon a hill, commenced against them, with only sixty
infantry and twenty cavalry. The event of that engagement is well
known, the Rebels were compleatly defeated, leaving immense booty of
cattle, &c. behind them.

They were next pursued by General Myers, with detachments of the
Dublin Yeomenry and Buckinhamshire Militia, and tho' the General was
not fortunate enough to overtake them, yet he drove them towards
Slane, where they were attacked by General Meyrick, and in several
subsequent days were met by different military bodies who successively
routed them, so that at length this formidable body was completely
dispersed.


_CHARACTER OF COL. PERRY, AND PRIEST KEARNS WHO WERE EXECUTED._

Every man who surrvived thought only of providing for his own
safety--Col. _Perry_ and Father _Kearns_ made their escape into the
King's County, and were attempting to cross a bog near _Clonbollogue_,
where they were apprehended by Mr. Ridgeway and Mr. Robinson of the
Edenderry Yeomen, who brought them to that town, where they were tried
and executed by martial law. _Perry_ was extremely communicative, and
while in custody both before and after trial gratified the enquiries
of every person who spoke to him, and made such a favourable
impression, that many regretted his fate--He acknowledged, that
150 of the rebels were killed and 60 wounded at Clonard--which tho'
accomplished by 27 men will not appear extraordinary, when it is known
that these 27 men fired upwards of 1300 ball cartridge.

_Kearns_ was exactly the reverse of his companion--he was silent
and sulky, and seldom spoke, save to upbraid _Perry_ for his
candid acknowledgements--The history of this Priest is somewhat
extraordinary--He had actually been hanged in Paris, during the reign
of _Robespierre_, but being a large heavy man, the lamp-iron from
which he was suspended, gave way, till his toes reached the ground--in
this state, he was cut down by a physician, who had known him, brought
him to his house and recovered him. He afterwards made his escape into
Ireland;--was constituted a Curate of a chapel near Clonard, and
having suffered so much by democratic rage and insurrectionary fury,
he was looked upon as an acquisition in the neighbourhood, then much
disturbed by the defenders--He inveighed against these nightly
marawders with such appearance of sincerity and zeal, that he was
frequently consulted by the Magistrates, and sometimes accompanied
them in their patroles--Some suspicion of treachery on his part was
at length entertained, from the uniform discovery of the operations
agreed upon by the Magistrates, in consequence of which, he was
excluded from their councils, and a positive information being sworn
against him for instigating a murder which was afterwards actually
committed, he fled into Wexford, where he became a member of an
assassinating committee, in which capacity he continued to be
extremely active, until he accompanied Col. _Perry_ upon the
expedition into Kildare, which he is known to have encouraged, and
which finally led him to that fate, which was the just reward of an
hypocritical and malignant heart, filled with gloomy and ferocious
passions--He seemed rather to be an instrument of Hell, than a
minister of Heaven, for his mind was perpetually brooding over
sanguinary schemes and plans of rapine, while he assumed the sacred
vestments of a servant of Christ!




_The following Authentic Letters may be relied on, having been
written by Persons of undoubted Veracity, who were fully assured of
the Facts therein recited._


LETTER I.


CARLOW JUNE 31st, 1798.

_My Dr. Friend_,

Your affectionate letter I did not receive till eight days after date:
I have felt much uneasiness at not having it in my power to answer it
sooner; you may think it strange that in the space of ten days I could
not procure time for that purpose, but were you acquainted with my
situation you would be convinced that it is a fact. If I live to see
you, I trust fully to convince you of the same.

Providentially for me I was absent from Carlow the time of the
attack on that Town, I say providentially, for my warm spirit and
forward disposition might have led me into danger. The account which
I received from people of veracity, who were on the spot is as
follows.

On the 24th of May, the day preceding the attack, Haydon, a Yeoman,
but an officer of the Rebels, repaired to the Country, and spent the
day in mustering his Forces. A letter relative to the business,
directed to Mr. J. D. of Arles, was by mistake put into the hands of
a Loyal Yeoman of the same christian and sirname, and residing in the
same place: The bearer was conveyed to Maryborough and executed, and
the letter sent to Col. M-- who commanded in Carlow, by means of which
the Military had timely notice of the intentions of the Rebels. There
being no Barrack for Infantry in the Town, the men were billeted upon
the Inhabitants; the genteeler sort paying for their lodging, they
were in general quartered in the Cabins. The intention of the Rebels
was to murder the Soldiers in their lodgings, surprise and take the
Horse Barracks, and then make themselves masters of the Town, which in
all probability they would have done, had not God brought their
designs to light in the manner above mentioned; for on receipt of the
above information the Infantry were ordered into the Barracks, and
kept under arms till the Insurgents had entered the Town.

About twelve o'Clock the Rebels came forward in great force, and too
confident of a victory not yet gained, gave three cheers crying "the
Town is our own!" but how dreadfully were they disappointed? for in
that moment, the military rushing forward, cut them down in all
quarters; and having posted themselves in an advantageous manner
cut off almost all possibility of a retreat. Many of these deluded
creatures fled into the houses for shelter, but there justice pursued
them--for the Soldiers set them on fire immediately. About eighty
houses were burned, but the numbers consumed therein could not be
ascertained.

It is supposed not less than six hundred fell that morning; and what
is surprising, only two I believe were found among the bodies with
any simptoms of life!

Thus did God frustrate the designs of the wicked, and display his
justice and mercy in a singular manner--His justice, in suffering
the ungodly to fall into the pit which they had digged for their
innocent, unoffending neighbours; and his mercy, in preserving those
whom he employed as the Executioners of his vengeance on his
Enemies. Not a Soldier or Yeoman was so much as slightly wounded!
One Soldier indeed who had not left his billet, they hung with a
sheet; but being soon extricated he recovered immediately.

Sir. E. C. Bart. Haydon, Kelly, Kane, Borro, two Murphys, one of
them a Serjeant in the Yeomenry, and several others were executed
a few days after. Haydon it is said, finding it going against his
friends, slipt into his Father's house, dressed himself in his
Regimentals, and came out and fought against those whom he had a
few hours before led to the slaughter.

Thus by the interference of HIM who declares a hair of our head
cannot fall without his permission, was an innocent people saved
from the murderous designs of a Sanguinary Foe.

I Remain yours Affectionately

F. R.




LETTER II.


ROSS, JULY 20th, 1798.

_My Dr. Friend_,

The following account relative to the affair at Ross is remarkably
brief: particulars would fill a Volume, and as there are many things
said concerning it which cannot be depended on, I think it best to
confine myself to a few plain facts which are not disputed by any.

On the 4th of June in the evening, the Rebels to the amount of near
20000, took possession of Corbit Hill, one mile distant from Ross.
The military force in the town was remarkably small, the fears of
the Inhabitants were raised to an alarming height, but the coming
in of the County Dublin Militia quieted them much.

Between three and four o'Clock on the morning of the fifth, the
engagement commenced, Early in the action the Rebels were for some
time victorious, having driven before them all the black cattle they
could collect through the country; this threw the military into
confusion, and obliged many of them to retreat in great confusion
over the Bridge; some pieces of Cannon also fell into the hands of
the Enemy. The Rebels then set fire to the houses in the suburbs,
about two hundred and fifty of which were consumed; but this turned
to their own disadvantage, for the wind blowing towards them they
were inveloped in smoke, which together with the immoderate quantity
of spirituous liquors they drank on Corbet-Hill, rendered them
incapable of their business. The Dublin and Donegal Militia who kept
the guards at the Market-house and Fair-gate never left their post,
by means of which the Rebels could not penetrate into the centre of
the town; had they ran, Ross, and in all probability the provincial
towns in Munster would have fallen.

The Soldiers who retreated (except some who fled to Waterford) soon
rallied again, and entering the town in a furious manner, obliged
the enemy to run. The Battle lasted for near twelve hours--3000
Rebels it is said lay dead in and near the town; many also must have
died of their wounds: 'tis thought that between fifty and sixty of
the Military fell: 'twas too many, but we could hardly expect such
a victory on more reasonable terms. B. B. Harvey was commander in
chief of the Rebels; but for his bad generalship on that day was
deposed, and the command was afterwards given to Roach.

'Twas on this dreadful day that the Barn at Scollabogue, in which
one hundred and seventy Protestants, Men, Women, and Children were
confined, was burned: the Rebels in their retreat from Ross set it
on fire, lest the Prisoners would escape. About twenty of these
sufferers I was personally acquainted with, some of them were my
intimate friends. This burning was not the act of one person as some
report, Priest Shallow of the parish of Newbawn was present, and
twenty five not included in the above number were shot in the most
deliberate manner, their cloaths being worth preserving. I pass
within two miles of the melancholy spot every month, and often
converse with those who know every particular relative to it, both
Loyalists and Rebels.----

Yours, F. R.




LETTER III.


COLLIERY, AUGUST 1st, 1798.

_My Dr. Friend_,

It would give me much satisfaction to have it in my power fully to
comply with your request, by furnishing you with an accurate detail
of the Engagements which took place between his Majesty's Troops
and the Rebels, for the publication you mention. If the following
particulars to which I was an eye witness can be of any service,
you are at liberty to make what use you please of the same.

On the Morning of the twenty third of June, the Rebels who had been
driven from Vinegar Hill appeared opposite New-Bridge or Gore's-Bridge,
a neat Village on the River Barrow, Co. Kilkenny. The Forces quartered
there, consisting of one Troop of the 4th Dragoon Guards and a Company
of the Wexford Militia prepared to stop their progress, and in order
thereto took possession of the Bridge; but perceiving the Rebels
planting their Cannon on the opposite side, and fording the River in
considerable numbers (the water being low,) they were obliged to
retreat; all the Cavalry escaped, but about twenty of the Infantry
were made Prisoners, many of whom were put to death on that and the
following day. Their intention (as one who had been prisoner with
them informed me) was to form a junction with the Colliers, and after
taking Castle Comber, to proceed to Kilkenny on Monday morning.

From New-Bridge they proceeded through Kelly-Mount (plundering as
they went along) to a hill five miles from Castle-Comber, in the range
of mountains called the Ridge, where they stopped for the night.

Finding it impossible to get to Ross according to my travelling
plan, I was obliged to take up my quarters in the Colliery the week
before. Here I remained in total ignorance of what was going forward
in other parts of the Country, till the twenty third, the day above
mentioned, when an Express arrived, informing us that the Rebels had
crossed the Barrow, and were on their way here. In order to know
the truth of the information I rode off accompanied by a friend
towards the Ridge. After riding about three miles I got in view
of their Camp, and by the assistance of a pocket Tellescope could
discern their numbers to be about 8000. They had two stand of white
Colours, and some Soldiers (I suppose those taken that morning)
along with them. Here I met ten or twelve Loyalists with fire arms;
two or three of their company were just murdered by the Rebel
picquets, and some more wounded. Having procured a musket I advanced
with four more till we came in sight of the dead bodies; but as the
Rebel scouts were within musket shot we did not think it prudent to
venture farther.

Seeing a Man covered with blood a distance from me, I called to him;
he crawled forward and fell at my feet,--he was a Loyalist, and had
received a dreadful wound from a broad sword on the head, and a few
slight wounds on other parts of the body. Imagining there was no
probability of his recovery, I advised him to make the best use of
the few remaining moments he had, but on examining his wounds, and
having cause to believe they were not mortal, I bound them up in the
best manner I could, and procuring a horse to carry him, my friend
and I at the risk of our lives brought him four miles across the
mountains to Castle-Comber, were he was dressed: He is now perfectly
recovered; and the happiness which the remembrance of that transaction
affords me, more than compensates for the danger and labour which
attended it.

From seven till ten o'Clock the roads were crowded with the
Protestants flying from all parts of the adjacent country, into
Castle-Comber. At one o'Clock a Troop of the 4th Dragoons, a Company
of the Downshire Militia, and a few Yeomen arrived from Ballinakill;
these with a Troop of the R. Irish Dragoons, two Companies of the
Waterford Militia, and one Corps of Yeomen Cavalry, about two
hundred and fifty in all, made up the whole of our Military force;
a small number to oppose 8000 Furies! but that the Battle is not to
the strong, the event of that day proved.

About four o'Clock, the Rebels arrived at Gurteen, three miles from
Castle Comber, where they heard Mass; at five they had Mass again,
(it being a holyday) at the Gizebo, a mile nearer.

Between six and seven the engagement began at Cool-bawn, one mile
and half from Town. Being with the advanced Guard I was present at
the commencement. The Rebels advanced in the most daring manner, and
in pretty good order, having placed their Musketeers in the front
who kept up a brisk fire. I continued behind the Infantry for about
fifteen minutes, during which time the balls were whistling on every
side. I was so ignorant as to enquire what occasioned the whistling
noise, and being informed it proceeded from the balls, I began to
think of providing for my safety, as my presence there was useless,
having at this time no Arms. I then planted myself behind the pier
of a gate; but observing the Rebels advance and the Soldiers to give
way, I rode back to the Town: the Cavalry followed immediately, and
just behind me shot a villain who had the audacity to desire the
Officer to surrender the Town. Here I had a miraculous escape; for
many of the Infantry who came down close behind me were shot, by
lurking Rebels from behind the hedges.

The Military then took possession of the Bridge, where the battle
continued hot for the space of fifteen minutes, when Captain G--n.
ordered a retreat: the Cavalry and part of the Infantry instantly
obeyed, but about twenty of the Waterford Militia absolutely refused,
declaring "they would prefer death to dishonour." they were mostly
Roman Catholics! I had not heard the order, but my horse taking head
ran off; when I knew their intentions, I did not attempt to prevent
him. We halted about a mile and half from the Town, when looking
behind we beheld it all in a blaze, the Rebel Inhabitants and some
who came the back way, set it on fire. The firing ceased for a few
minutes, the cause I know not, but words cannot express what I felt
that moment; I concluded that my unoffending friends had fallen
victims to the human Savages: they were presented to my imagination
in a thousand dreadful forms. God pardon my feelings in that moment!
how hard it is to forgive such Enemies. I proceeded slowly till I met
General Asgill, with about 1000 Men: with these I returned, sunk with
sorrow, fearing the tragic sight which I expected to present itself on
entering the Town would be too much to bear; but thanks be to God my
fears were groundless,--the few Military which remained, and about
thirty Protestants, who were determined to fight for their Wives and
Children, or perish with them, kept possession, nor suffered a Rebel
to cross the Bridge. Our Cannon in mistake played on the Town for some
time, but providentially no lives were lost thereby. The Rebels on
sight of the reinforcement took shelter in the woods, and from thence
killed a few of the Military; but eighteen rounds of Grape shot
dislodged them. 'Twas four in the afternoon before they retreated. It
is said 400 of the Rebels fell. There were twenty six Protestants in
coloured cloaths, and about twenty Soldiers killed, some of the former
were butchered in cold blood, in a manner too dreadful to relate.

For the safety of Kilkenny, the Troops were obliged to return there
that night; the Loyalists who fled with them I think could not be
less than 600; they left the most of their property behind them,
which a party of the Rebels who returned carried off.

The hand of God was visible in our deliverance that day; but
remarkably so in three instances which I shall mention.--First, from
midnight till five o'Clock, we had the greatest Fog I remember to
have seen; had it not been for this, in all probability the Rebels
would have divided themselves into different parties, and surrounded
the Town: but being strangers in the Country, and not knowing where
they might meet the Army, they kept in a body on the main road, and
attacked us but in one place. Secondly, the burning of the Town; for
the day being remarkably calm, the smoak lay on the street, which
prevented them from seeing our Force; for had they known that the
Army fled, 'tis more than probable they would have entered, as
there were many Entrances unguarded.

Thirdly, the Waterford Militia's disobedience of Orders,--had they
retreated without a very extraordinary miracle the Loyalists would
have fallen a prey to their unmerciful yet unprovoked Enemies.

Yours &c. F. R.




LETTER IV.


KILKENNY, AUGUST 30th, 1798.

_My Dr. Friend_,

In a former letter you have an account of the fate of Castle-Comber,
&c.--I have only to notice in this, that some Gentlemen who fell into
the hands of the Rebels while in possession of that town were brought
into the presence of the Rebel general Murphy, who is said to have
been a Priest in the Co. Wexford, and was excommunicated for his bad
conduct many years ago.--He was dressed in black, affected the
appearance of a stupid enthusiast, and shewed some bullets which he
said had been fired at him, but had rebounded from his invulnerable
body--incredible as it may seem, this wretched invention was
generally believed by the more wretched dupes under his command--You
have here a real statement of the facts, of which I know you have
sufficient curiosity to desire to be informed.

On Monday morning[A] our reconnoitring parties observed the Rebel
Army posted on the bog, between John's-well mountains and the Ridge,
about eight miles distant from this City--they seemed to be at rest,
and remained quiet except when relieving their Centinels, till four
o'Clock, when they were observed to move to the right along the
Ridge towards Kelly-mount and New-bridge.

[Footnote A: _The writer omitted the date._]

In the course of the evening several false alarms electrified the
inhabitants here--Yet the Garrison was left the whole day at rest.
Next morning Sir C. Asgill marched with a large force, consisting of
two pieces of Artillery, part of the Wexford and Wicklow regiments,
of the 4th, 5th, and 9th, Dragoons, of Hompesch's Cavalry, the
Romney Fencibles, and of the Kilkenny, Gowran, Fassadineen
Shillelogher, Desart, Thomastown, Myshall, and Kellishin Cavalry,
he was joined on the march by the Leighlin-bridge Infantry, and part
of the Downshire Militia, with their Artillery, also the Maryborough
and Ballyfin Corps of Yeomen Cavalry.

About six o'Clock he came up with the Rebel Army, amounting to from
five to six thousand men, advantageously posted on a rising ground,
in an extensive flat, at Kilcomny, near Gore's-Bridge--nothing could
exceed the joy of our brave Soldiers, after so many fatiguing
marches, at last to have a pleasing prospect of retaliating; the
Officers were constantly obliged to restrain their ardour. The
engagement began with a terrible fire of Artillery, which the Rebels
returned with quickness, but entirely without effect.

A very hot fire was kept up near an hour, but unable to withstand
the impetuosity of our troops the Rebels began to give way, and fled
towards the Co. Wexford.

A horrible slaughter now ensued, which lasted six or seven hours,
nor did it cease while a Rebel was to be seen--1100 Rebels were left
dead on the field of Action! among whom was the _invulnerable
commander Murphy_. This victory was so very decisive that we have
got possession of all their Artillery, amounting to 15 pieces of
different callibre--all their Standards, Ammunition, and Baggage,
a vast number of Pikes, Muskets, Swords, &c. 700 horses, a great
quantity of black cattle, Sheep, &c. also a vast quantity of
bedding, blanketting, and wearing apparel which were given up to
the Soldiers who bravely contended for the same.

Yours, &c. &c.----




LETTER V.


MARYBOROUGH, APRIL 20th, 1799.

_My Dr. Friend_,

Being desirous of making public the valour of the Troops of this
town under the command of Major Matthews of the Royal Downshire
Regiment, against the Rebels, I send you a plain narrative of facts
as follows:

On the 24th of June 1798, four hundred of the Downshire Regiment,
with their Battalion guns, Captain Pole, with the Ballyfin Troop
of Yeomen Cavalry, and Captain Gore, with the Maryborough, (both
Troops under the immediate command of Capt. Pole) proceeded towards
the Collieries of Castlecomber and Donane, by order of Sir Charles
Asgill. On the Road we saw Castlecomber on fire; soon after we
arrived at Moyad, and saw the Rebel Army in great force on the high
grounds above Donane; we then received intelligence that Sir Charles
had engaged them at Castlecomber that morning, and that his force
was at least double ours, but that he had retired to Kilkenny. It
was now too late in the evening for us to attack; we therefore fell
back on Timahoe, determined to be at them in the morning. At Timahoe
an express met us from Sir Charles, desiring we should return to
Maryborough; this was answered by an express from us, proposing
to Sir Charles to attack the Rebels next morning on the road from
Donane, and that we would attack on the road from Timahoe. The
answer to this proposal we received at 7 o'clock next morning from
Sir Charles, who could not agree to it, as he said his Troops were
fatigued, but left it to us to fight, we could do it with security,
where we were, or to return to Maryborough. We chose to risque the
former, and the proper arrangements being made, returned to Moyad,
where we had last seen the Rebels: when our Cavalry arrived there,
they found the Rebels had gone off to the Ridge; there we pursued
them, and were again disappointed in bringing them to action, as
they had marched for Gore's-Bridge: our Cavalry then proceeded to
Old Leighlin, from which place Capt. Pole, who had gone forward for
intelligence, sent an express to inform Sir Charles Asgill of what
he had done, and of our intention to attack the Rebels wherever we
found them. At Old Leighlin we met with Mr. Vigars, to whom our
intention of attacking the Rebels was made known, and he, seeing
our men much fatigued, immediately supplied us with a number of cars
to carry them, without which assistance we should have been much
distressed; he likewise accompanied us to the scene of action, and
was always in front giving us every assistance in his power. The
whole Corps arrived at Leighlin-Bridge about twelve at night. In
two hours after an express came from Sir Charles, desiring us to
meet him at Gore's-Bridge at five in the morning; we instantly
marched, but on the road we got such intelligence as induced our
Commanding Officer to alter his route, in order to get between the
Rebels and the mountains; an account of which he sent to Sir Charles,
by Mr. Moore, Collector of this place, who, with his brother Mr. Pierce
Moore, marched with us, and to whose able advice and knowledge of the
country I heard Major Matthews say, we in a great measure owed our
success. After a march of about three hours we came in sight of the
Rebels; and, as soon as we got within a proper distance, fired some
cannon shot at them: they retired from us about a mile and a half to
form their line; we followed in Column, with our guns in front, and
our Cavalry in the rere; just as we got orders to form our line for
the attack, we heard Sir Charles's cannon on the other side of the
hill; at this instant our Cavalry were ordered to charge, which they
did in a most gallant stile; the Rebel line was instantly broke, and
we joined Sir Charles's Troops in the pursuit, which continued with
great slaughter for above six miles; all the cannon, horses, stores
and prisoners they had were taken, and their Army dispersed.

When it is known that the Rebel Army would not have been brought to
action, or even an attempt made upon them, but for the exertion of
this little Corps--and when it is known that this Corps pursued a
large body of Rebels at least five thousand strong, with ten pieces
of cannon, for nearly forty miles, without orders or directions from
any general Officer whatsoever, and that, except some bread they got
at Leighlin-Bridge, not a man of them tasted food for forty-four
hours, I think you will agree with me that they did their duty, and
that their country ought to know it.

Yours, &c. &c.----




LETTER VI.


BELFAST, APRIL 29th, 1799.

_Sir_,

In compliance to your request I shall set down briefly what has been
already communicated to a few, but must thro' the medium of your
intended publication be more generally circulated.

On Saturday morning June the 9th, 1798. Col. Stapleton having
received intimation of a number of people assembled at Saint-field,
and neighbourhood, he set out from Newtownards, with a detachment
of the York Fencible regiment, accompanied by the Newtownards and
Comber Yeomen Cavalry and Infantry; all-together about 320 men, and
two Field Pieces.

About half past four o'clock in the evening, this little Army fell
in with a body of Rebels, supposed to be between six and seven
thousand men, near Saintfield.

The Light Infantry, commanded by Captain Chetwynd advanced with
great gallantry to secure an eminence on the right, which having
accomplished, he was attacked by a force of at least three thousand
Rebels--the front armed with pikes, the centre and rear with
muskets, whose fire galled them severely till the body of the Troops
and Field Pieces came up, when the Rebels were routed with huge
slaughter. The Rebels by their own account lost above five hundred
men, among whom were many of their leaders. The King's Troops after
routing the Insurgents marched to Comber, where they halted during
the night--next morning proceeded to this Town.

I am much concerned to inform you of the loss of three brave
Officers by those miscreants hands in this action--_Capt. Chetwynd_,
_Lieut. Unite_, and _Ensign J. Sparks_: Lieut. Edenson was wounded.
The whole return of his Majesty's Troops were--29 Killed, and 22
wounded. Not only the valour of the other Officers that fell in
this engagement deserves to be publickly recorded, but that of the
amiable, gallant and much beloved Capt. C. ought not to be passed
without particular notice--This brave fellow at the head of his men
received no less than nine pike wounds! notwithstanding which he
continued his position, encouraging by his example his men to fight
like loyal Soldiers; till alas, two wounds from muskets deprived
this hero of his existence, and our country of his future services.

Poor Sparks--whose race of glory was now ended, was but sixteen
years old, and had just before he fell, received for his intrepid
conduct the public approbation of his commanding Officer.

Too much praise cannot be given the Newtownards and Comber Yeomen
Cavalry, who, conducted by Captains Houghton and Cleland, evidenced
the greatest intrepidity during the whole of the action.

If it be possible to convince those deluded creatures who were then
in arms against the peace and prosperity of this Nation, and of
their certain destruction, should they again have recourse to such
rebellious measures, it must be the event of the above action, where
so many were cut off by such an inferior force.

P. S. It was ludicrous to behold the varied badges of distinction as
worn by the Rebel chiefs; some were dressed in green jackets, turned up
with white, others yellow, white vests, buckskin breeches, half-boots,
hats with white cock-neck feathers and green cockades, &c.

Yours, &c.----




LETTER VII.


TYRELL'SPASS, APRIL 30th, 1799.

_Dr. Friend_,

I should have answered your favour sooner, but was making every
possible enquiry in order to furnish you with the best account
of the engagement at Kilbeggan. The gentleman, the bearer of this
(one of our Officers) and I were present on the occasion.

On the 17th of June 1798, (on the preceding day a fair was held in
Kilbeggan. The lower order of the people appeared uncommonly civil,
and this country had a more placid appearance than for some time
before,) at 11 o'clock at night a recruit of Capt. Clarke's gave
information that the town would be attacked on the next day. As
many similar alarms had been circulated before, this was not much
regarded--however the Videts of Horse were ordered to keep a sharp
look-out, and give instant intelligence should any number of men be
descried by them.

At break of day, (at that time of the year about two o'clock) some
persons were perceived on the top of a hill westward of the town.
Immediate notice of this was given to the Officer commanding, who
directed that the horse-guard should continue to observe the motions
of the enemy; and should their numbers encrease, to retreat slowly,
about two hundred yards in front to the town, and apprize him of
the same.

It soon appeared that their force was between three and four
thousand divided into bands, from sixty to an hundred, in regular
order, with different kinds of Arms, principally pikes, from five to
ten feet long, pitch-forks, &c. Each band moved separately headed by
an Officer, distinguished by a green sash or cockade--most of the
men had white paper bands round their hats.

It was generally remarked that they had all clean shirts on, had
each a piece of oat-bread in their pockets, and many were apparently
intoxicated.

The town (the subject of this letter) has not been remarkable
for loyalty--the principal fears of the garrison arose from an
apprehension of treachery. There were then under arms sixty of the
Northumberland Fencibles, about thirty of the Fertullagh Cavalry,
and thirty loyal Protestants, who either belonged to the town or
had fled there for refuge.

On the first appearance of the Rebels, (three hours before the attack
commenced) an express was sent to Tullamore where the principal part
of the 7th Dragoons lay--General Dunne forwarded a Troop about
eighty in number--the want of a sufficient force was of the worst
consequence, as the Rebels attacked our party in the mountains, and
obliged the Fencibles to retreat back to the town--Meantime the
Loyalists cleared the streets which were now full of Rebels without
the loss of a man--the Cavalry pursued--Sergeant Price alone killed
fourteen Pikemen. On hearing the firing a few of the Cavalry stationed
at Tyrell's-pass flew to the scene of action, just before the Black
Horse arrived--both, aided by the dismounted from Tyrrell's-pass
killed 400 of the enemy.

Yours, &c. C. F.




The Publisher having waited in vain for a detail of the engagement
at Naas, Kilcullen, Hacketstown, &c; and public curiosity daily
encreasing, being desirous of gratifying the same, he deems it most
advisable to insert the following OFFICIAL ACCOUNTS received at the
Castle, with their dates.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Extract of a Letter from Lord Viscount Gosford, Colonel of the
Armagh Militia, and Major Wardle, of the Ancient British Light
Dragoons, to Lieutenant General Lake, dated Naas, Thursday Morning,
8 o'Clock, 24th May, 1798._


This morning, about half past 2 o'Clock, a Dragoon, from an Out-post,
came in and informed Major Wardle, of the Ancient British, that a
very considerable armed body were approaching rapidly upon the Town.
The whole garrison were instantly under Arms, and took up their
position according to a plan previously formed in case of such an
event happening. They made the attack upon our Troops, posted near the
Gaol, with great violence, but were repulsed: They then made a general
attack in almost every direction, as they had got possession of almost
every avenue into the Town. They continued to engage the Troops for
near three quarters of an hour, when they gave way, and fled on all
sides. The Cavalry immediately took advantage of their confusion,
charged in almost every direction, and killed a great number of them.
A great quantity of Arms and Pikes were taken, and within this half
hour many hundred more were brought in, found in pits near the town,
together with three men with green cockades, all of whom were hanged
in the public street. We took another prisoner whom we have spared, in
consequence of his having given us information that will enable us to
pursue these Rebels; and from this man we learn that they were above
a Thousand strong: They were commanded as this man informs us, by
Michael Reynolds, who was well mounted, and dressed in Yeoman Uniform,
but unfortunately made his escape; his horse we have got.

About thirty Rebels were killed in the streets; in the fields, we
imagine, above an hundred; their bodies have not yet been brought
together.

It is impossible to say too much of the Cavalry and Infantry; their
conduct was exemplary throughout.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Extract of a Letter from Lieutenant General Dundas to Lord Viscount
Castlereagh, dated Naas, May 25th, 1798._


In addition to the account which I had the honor of sending you
yesterday, I have the satisfaction to inform your Lordship, that
about 2 P. M. yesterday I marched out again to attack the Rebels,
who had assembled in great force on the North side of the Liffey,
and were advancing towards Kilcullen-Bridge: They occupied the hills
on the left of the road leading to Dublin; the road itself and the
fields highly enclosed, on the right. The attack began between 3
and 4; was made with great gallantry, the Infantry forcing the Enemy
on the road, and driving them from the hills on the left; the Cavalry
with equal success, cutting off their retreat. The affair ended soon
after 4. The slaughter was considerable for such an action; one
Hundred and thirty lay dead. No prisoners.

I have the further satisfaction of stating to your Lordship, that
his Majesty's Troops did not suffer in either killed or wounded. The
Rebels left great quantities of all kinds of Arms behind them, and
fled in all directions.

This morning all is in perfect quietness. General Wilford, from
Kildare, joined me last night; an Officer with whom I serve with
unspeakable satisfaction.

The Troops of every description, both officers and men, shewed a
degree of gallantry which it was difficult to restrain within
prudent bounds.--Captain La Touche's Corps of Yeomenry distinguished
themselves in a high stile.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Extract of a Letter from the Reverend James Mc Ghee, Vicar of
Clonmore, County Carlow, dated Hacketstown, three o'Clock, P. M.
May 25, 1798._


In consequence of an information received this morning, that a large
body of Rebels were marching to attack the Town, Lieutenant Gardiner,
with the men under his command, and a party of Yeomenry commanded by
Captain Hardy, went out to meet them. Having reconnoitred their force,
which amounted to between three and four Thousand, they took post on
a hill under the Church, and when the Rebels came tolerably near, the
Officers and Men made a Feint, and retreated into the Barrack.

The Rebels seeing this, came on with a great shout, imagining the
day to be their own. In a few minutes Captain Hume came up with
about thirty of his Troop, and instantly charged them, on which the
Rebels retreated. A general Pursuit took place; and so complete was
the rout that above Three Hundred of the miscreants now lie dead on
the field of battle.

To say that the _Antrim_ Regiment behaved well is not any thing new;
but the Yeomen under Captain Hardy's command behaved astonishingly;
nor can I sufficiently commend the conduct of Captain Hume and his
Corps; for though his right arm was in a sling, owing to a very
severe fall from his horse, which prevented his using his sword, he
headed his men with gallantry, and went on with spirit and bravery
that surprized every one, considering his situation.

As to Lieutenant Gardiner, his conduct and steadiness throughout the
whole affair is far beyond my praise; but I am sorry to inform you
that a severe blow of a stone he received on his breast from a
villain whose life he had just saved, prevents his writing to you
himself. He is, however, thank God, walking about, and having been
let blood, is much better; the villain was shot dead on the spot.

Every one of the _Antrims_ was vying with each other who should do
his duty best; and I have very great pleasure in telling you that
not a man (Mr. Gardiner excepted, and one Soldier, who received a
contusion in his arm) was in the least injured.--In short, the
loyalty and zeal of the whole party was beyond any thing that has
been seen on a similar occasion.

       *       *       *       *       *




The Publisher having been favoured with the two following letters by
an intimate Friend (to whom they were written without any intention
of appearing in print,) and also being personally acquainted with
the writer, assures the Public that every particular set forth may
be received as Facts.

Such is the established character of the writer, who is known to
numbers, that he would not advance a falsehood--he was in most
engagements from the breaking out of the late Rebellion to the
defeat of the French at Balinamuck; an account of which is now in
the possession of the publisher, and shall be given in due time.




LETTER VIII.

Some account of the Battle of Arklow, by H. G. of the Armagh
Militia, in a letter to a Friend in Dublin, dated Arklow,
June 13th, 1798.

Written on the Field of Action.


_My Dr. Friend_,

I wrote to Mr. H. by one of the Conductors who promised to leave
the letter at your house, in which I gave him a circumstantial
account[B] of what took place from the time I left Naas, till the
battle of Gorey, and our retreat to Wicklow afterwards.

[Footnote B: _The Press was stopped for ten days, and every possible
enquiry made to recover the Letter alluded to, but for the present
it cannot be procured._]

On Saturday last we were informed that the Rebels in great force
were pursuing us, the drums beat to arms, and our forces assembled
immediately. Our General formed a square of Infantry at one end of
the town, and left the Cavalry to defend the other. In a little
time the Out-posts were driven in, and shortly after appeared their
Colours flying. They extended for more than _five miles_ around us:
a most awful sight! In order to intimidate us they fixed their hats
on their Pikes and rushed on.

Their Artillery was planted on an eminence which commanded us--Their
armed men in Front, and pike to charge in the Rear. In this order
of Battle they came forward. We waited the first onset; in a few
minutes the firing commenced in all quarters, which lasted from four
o'clock in the afternoon, till near nine at night. They endeavoured
to break our square in every quarter, but like true Soldiers we
cleaved together and repelled them; they stormed our little line
twice, but were beat back with slaughter; they drove their
dismounted horses to the mouths of the Cannon in order to shelter
themselves, but the grape shot made them fall on every side; they
even set the town on fire in order to annoy us with the smoak, but
the wind at the order of _our God_ turned, drove it from us, and
confounded them in their own device; they did every thing like
inveterate enemies, and desperate madmen to accomplish their ends;
and their Priests informed them that they could catch the Heretics
balls in their hands, and threw some (as tho' they had caught them)
to their rebellious mob to fire again at us, and declared they could
beat us with the dust of the earth. Oh what superstition! This was
confirmed by deserters from their Camp, who informed us likewise,
that flushed with victory at Gorey, they thought that after they had
taken Arklow, nothing could stop them till they arrived at Dublin;
and indeed I believe, that this Battle for the present, has decided
the fate of this Kingdom.

One of the Antrim Militia, who fled from them after the Battle reports
their Army to have been 20,000 strong. Among the slain was Father
Murphy from the County of Wexford. They lost about 1000 killed and
wounded, and numbers were hanged in the streets. Every Regiment vied
with each other for victory; we took several stand of Colours from
them, made of green, white and yellow stuff. We have prepared every
thing in case of another attempt--If they do not come forward, we will
go immediately and retake Gorey, and storm their Camp. They are
greatly discouraged. Blessed be God, notwithstanding I was exposed to
a heavy fire I never received one wound. On our side we had about 18
killed and 28 wounded. We are all in high spirits. Capt. Knox of the
Yeomenry and two of his men were killed pursuing Rebels. Our men (in
a former engagement) kept the town of Gorey when the rest of the army
left them. They are worth gold. Pardon this scroll, as I am in haste.
We have been under arms these four days and nights.

Farewell,

I am yours in friendship,

W. H. G.




LETTER IX.


GOREY CAMP, 28th OF JUNE, 1798.

_My Dr. Friend_,

A deliverance from hostilities and severe fatigue these two days
past affords me an opportunity to address you. In my two last
letters to Dublin, I gave a particular account of those facts to
which I was an eye-witness--You shall now have those which have
since occured.

The 13th Inst. we received orders to move forward from Arklow, and
in the evening arrived at Gorey--but oh! what a strange reverse! The
town in the absence of the Army was plundered, and almost totally
destroyed by the Rebels; even the Church did not escape their
sacrilegious fury!--they demolished the windows, dragged down the
pulpit, and tore to pieces many of the pews; but what is still more
shocking to relate, at which your soul must recoil, stained it with
the blood of two _Protestants_, whom they immolated inside--they
burned the two elegant seats belonging to the Ram family here.

The Rebels upon being apprised of our approach, broke up their Camp,
and precipitately retreated to Vinegar-Hill--We next morning pursued
and killed several of them on the way. In the evening we pitched
our Tents in a small village called Houlett, within seven miles of
Wexford, with an intention of remaining there for the night; but
perceiving their pickets on an adjacent hill that commanded our
Camp, at ten o'clock we struck our Tents, marched by a circuitous
route, and in the morning at dawn of day we found ourselves on the
off-side of their daring position.

From their great numbers and strong bulwarks they concluded they
were impregnable. It is agreed they had that day on Vinegar-hill
30,000! We reconnoitred for some time, and distinctly observed them
to draw up in _solid lines_. The order of Battle was to commence, by
the command of Gen. Lake, at 9 o'clock. His Army took one side of
the Hill to bombard it, the Light Brigade, under Col. Campbell took
another--other Commanders were fixed in like manner. Our Brigade,
consisting of the Armagh, Cavan, Durham, Antrim, and part of the
Londonderry, Dunbarton, Tyrone and Suffolk--in all about 3000 brave
Troops had to march four miles; it being appointed that we should
flank them in another quarter.

I shall give you a view of their situation--Vinegar-hill is very
steep, rising in the form of a cone: at the but of it are two other
hills, with quicksets and other ditches across them--these were
lined with their musketry men:--a river ran at the bottom of both,
and adjacent was a small wood. At the bottom of Vinegar-hill was the
once beautiful, but now ruined town of Enniscorthy--on the top of
the great hill was the but of an old windmill, on which they had
placed their _green flag_ of defiance--in a word, the position of
the Rebels was one of the strongest I ever saw. The Rebels did not
wait the time appointed, but commenced cannonading at seven o'clock.
They could not tell what to make of the bombs, and said "they spit
fire at us"--indeed they answered they desired end, by the numbers
they destroyed upon their bursting.

The Light Brigade, assisted by the Cavalry gained one of the lesser
hills, planted their Cannon and played briskly on them: in a short
time we possessed ourselves of both--the Rebels made to the top of
Vinegar-hill with all possible speed--the Soldiers pursued hard
after them, and beat them off it. In a little time the _green flag_
became a prey to the Royal Band, who triumphed in its fall--it was
an arduous attempt, but we succeeded in the end. The Rebel
commanders deserted their men when they found the day proved
unfavourable to their interests and fled towards Wexford, leaving
the deluded wretches to be cut in pieces. The engagement lasted two
hours and an half--the Soldiers merited the cloth they wore, and
gloried in the name of WILLIAM. Our Brigade remained all night in
the demesne of Harvey Hay, one of the Rebel Chiefs: next day we
returned to Houlet again, where we encamped for two days. The
scouting parties killed more after the different engagements than
what fell in Battle--many of their Commanders, were taken and
hanged. We have suffered much from lying on the roads and ditches
rolled in our blankets, I have almost lost my hearing, but am
content when the good old cause triumphs.

P. S. At Vinegar-hill we killed men of 70 Years old--we rescued
three Officers of the Antrim Militia, and twelve Privates of the
same regiment: yesterday we hanged two of them for endeavouring to
vote away the lives of two of the above Officers and Soldiers when
prisoners.

Yours truly,

W. H. G.




The following letter was written by a sufferer in the Wexford Rebellion,
while in possession of the Rebels--it fully corroborates the truth of
the atrocities stated in the Narrative by Charles Jackson, printed, and
now selling by the Publisher hereof.--price 6dh.


LETTER X.


WEXFORD, MAY 1st, 1799.

_Sir_,

Altho' I have not the happiness of being personally acquainted with
you, at the request of your Friend, Mr. W--s, it affords me pleasure
to have it in my power to send you a copy of an _acurate detail_ of
the effects of the late dreadful Rebellion, as it respected this
part of the Kingdom, written by an intimate and fellow sufferer with
me and transmitted to Dublin, for publication in July 1798.

On Friday evening the 25th of May, about 9 o'clock, the North Cork
Militia then quartered here, with the Wexford Yeomen Cavalry and
Infantry were ordered under arms, in consequence of an alarm that
the Insurgents were rising in the neighbourhood of Camolin, in this
County; and we continued under arms the whole of that night. On
Saturday orders arrived here from Dublin-Castle to the High Sheriff,
to apprehend B. B. Harvey, J. Colclough of Ballyteigue, and Edward
Fitzgerald of New-park; and they were committed to goal on Saturday
evening and Sunday morning. Early on Sunday morning the 27th of May,
an express arrived here that the day before an engagement took place
between a party of the Camolin Cavalry, commanded by Lieutenant
Buckey, and a large body of the Rebels, that the Lieutenant was
killed, but that they had repulsed the Rebels; that they were then
(Sunday morning) in great force in the neighbourhood of Oulard,
burning the houses of different Protestant Inhabitants in that part
of the County. In consequence of this information; Lieutenant-Colonel
Foot with Major Lombard, and six other officers, and 106 men of the
North Cork Militia, immediately proceeded from this town, and came up
with the Rebels at an advantageous position they had taken on a hill
near Oulard. Through the rashness of the Major, in charging the Rebels
in an incautious manner, the whole party were surrounded, and not a
man escaped instant destruction but the Lieutenant-Colonel and two
privates. By this defeat the Rebels had acquired a powerful accession
of strength and confidence, having got the whole of the arms and about
57 rounds of ball-cartridge from each man, they not having fired above
three or four rounds when they attempted to charge them with Bayonets.
On the following morning, the 28th, the Rebels attacked Enniscorthy,
and after a severe conflict of three hours, and above 500 of them
being slain, they took the town owing to the treachery of some of the
inhabitants in setting fire to the town during the engagement, which
obliged the Militia and Yeomenry to evacuate it, and they, with all
the Loyal inhabitants that could escape, retired on Monday evening to
Wexford. On Tuesday the 29th, the Rebels formed two powerful Camps,
one at Vinegar-Hill, near Enniscorthy, and the other about three miles
from Wexford, at the Three Rocks, on the road between Wexford and
Ross, and sent threats in here that 10000 men would be detached from
those Camps to attack the town next morning.--On Wednesday the 30th,
information was received that a body of the military, (supposed to be
the 13th regiment) was attacked by the Rebels near their Camp at the
Three Rocks; this induced Lieut. Col. Maxwell, who arrived the day
before with two hundred of the Donegal Militia, to march out with his
men and four troops of Yeomen Cavalry to their assistance; but before
he had come up with them, they entirely cut off the party, which
proved to be a slight detachment of the Meath Militia, of about 100
men who were coming to Wexford with three howitzers; and with these
howitzers the Rebels attacked Col. Maxwell's party, and obliged him
to retreat into Wexford. The 13th regiment, who were coming to our
relief, finding they could not proceed to us without attacking the
Rebel Camp, returned back to Waterford. From these rapid successes,
and their encreasing numbers, (as it was supposed there were then
20000 men ready to attack Wexford) the people here were panic-struck;
and finding that many who were entrusted with arms had deserted the
barriers, and it being considered that others could not be depended
on, the Officers concluded that the town was not tenable, and without
firing a shot it was evacuated on the 30th of May, and shortly after
entered by the Rebels; who kept possession of it until the 21st of
June. As to the different engagements the army has had with the Rebels
at Ross, Newtownbarry, Arklow, &c. you must already be informed of
them; in many instances the reports were vague and contradictory, I
shall therefore confine myself to such particulars as fell within my
own knowledge, of that I have reason to believe are facts.

The atrocities committed by those ferocious tygers while they held
this town, were I believe unprecedented. After taking possession
of the town, without opposition, they immediately shot several
Protestant Inhabitants, tore open most of our houses, destroyed and
carried off our effects, (their rage was most particularly directed
again at poor Mr. Daniels and mine) put every Protestant inhabitant
whom they spared from immediate death (some few excepted that they
received amongst them) to prison; but they would not stop here, we
were obliged to slaughter each other. The Sunday after they had
taken the town, June the third, Pigott, Robson, a Mr. Edwards and
I, were dragged from our cells, and forced by the Rebels to put to
death a man for being an approver against a Priest of the name of
Dixon, who had attempted to swear him to be an United Irishman;
after being made the instrument of his destruction, we were forced
for to drag his body from the place of execution and throw it into
the river. After deliberating for some time whether they should
dispatch us at that moment or not, they carried us back to goal.
Others of the prisoners were obliged to perform the like Office to
another approver. After every species of insult and tyranny to us
in prison, the fatal day at length arrived (Wednesday the 20th of
June,) when the total extermination of the prisoners (namely 500)
and all the Protestant inhabitants of the town, man, woman and
child, was openly avowed to be their fixed purpose! About 95 of the
prisoners were taken out and tortured to death by pikes on the
bridge of Wexford; they returned for more victims, and I was dragged
out of the cell, when above fifty wretches (whose ill-will I had
incurred by exerting myself in the line of my duty,) cried out to
have me destroyed. Providentially an express arrived at that moment,
that the army had defeated a considerable party of the Rebels at
Long Graige, between this and Ross, and requiring an immediate
reinforcement; this made them beat to arms, and induced them at
that time to stop the work of blood. The following day they were
totally defeated at their great camp (as they termed it) at
Vinegar-Hill, and routed in all directions, and on the same day the
remaining prisoners were liberated by the army. The horrid cruelties
they committed in this town fell short (if possible) of what they
did in other parts of the County; at Scullabogue, between Taghmon
and Ross, they put 150 Protestants into a barn and burnt them to
death, amongst whom were two beautiful and accomplished young ladies
of the neighbourhood; poor G--d, the Surveyor of Taghmon, attempted
to escape from the flames at this place and was shot by them--at
Enniscorthy they scarcely left a Loyal man alive that they could
find, and the town was almost consumed by fire--There were about ten
of their leaders hanged here, upon the arrival of the army, amongst
whom were B. B. Harvey, Cor. Grogan of Johnstown, Captain Keugh,
J. H. Colclough of Ballyteigue, and Kelly of Killarn, who were
afterwards beheaded, and their heads placed over the Court-house.
In consequence of a proclamation from General Lake, inviting the
Rebels to desert their leaders, and promising pardon, numbers came
in with pikes, &c.----

Such my dear Sir, is the recital of what I can recollect of the
barbarities practised here during the reign of these monsters. What
my feelings and sufferings were during that period, I cannot attempt
to describe. That the Almighty providence may preserve us all from
such another visitation, is the ardent prayer of, Yours, &c.----


_The following Clergymen and Gentlemen, were taken Prisoners and put
to death by the Rebels._

The Rev. Samuel Haydon, Enniscorthy; Rev. Robert Burrowes and Son,
Oulart; Rev. Francis Turner, Ballingale; Rev. Mr. Pentland, Killarn;
Rev. Mr. Troke, Templeshannon; Captain Allen Cox, Coolelife; Major
William Hore, Harpurstown; Edward Turner, Esq. Slane Lodge; Edward
Howlin D' Arcey, Esq. Ba----n.




APPENDIX.


No account having appeared of the attack at Prosperus, 'tis presumed
the following AFFIDAVIT made before the Right Hon. the Lord Mayor of
the City of Dublin, will furnish the Reader with every particular
relative thereto. The Examinant is well known to the Publisher, and
favoured him with a Copy of the same for the present _Narrative_.
The Examinant suffered much in the Rebellion, being obliged to
desert his house, and property to a considerable amount, which
became a prey to the Rebels.


[Sidenote: _County of the City of    }
Dublin, to Wit._                     }]

The Examination of J. D. late of Prosperus, in the County of Kildare,
who being duly sworn on the Holy Evangelists, maketh Oath, and saith;
That for many nights previous to the night of the 23d of May last,
this Examinant and his family were very much alarmed lest they should
be attacked by the Rebels commonly called United Irishmen; That
Examinant thought he and his family were in some degree secure, by
the arrival of detachments of the Ancient Britons and the North Cork
Militia; That however Examinant still continued to be alarmed, as his
house was a considerable distance from the Barracks; That Examinant
saith that he was awakened about the hour of one o'clock in the
forenoon, by the barking of a large dog he had, and some time after
he was alarmed by the firing of some shots; Examinant saith that on
looking out of his window, he perceived a great body of people armed
with Pikes and Fire Arms, between whom and the Soldiers in the
Barracks a constant firing was maintained; That as the balls passed by
this Examinant's house, and one of them close to his head, he withdrew
and let down the window; That soon after Examinant saw the Barracks on
fire and heard the Soldiers exclaim, "The house is on fire; we shall
be burnt up or suffocated, we can fight no longer"; That soon after
Examinant saw the roof of said Barracks fall in; Examinant saith that
the said Rebels (whose numbers had encreased so much as to fill the
streets of Prosperous and to cover the adjacent fields) on the falling
of the roof of said Barracks, gave many shouts which seemed to rend
the skies, and made this Examinant and his family thrill with horror;
That the said Rebels exclaimed "That the day was their own, and they
would there plant the Tree of Liberty". Examinant saith that the said
Rebels knocked at his door and desired to have it opened, expecting
to find there a party of Soldiers who had been billited there a short
time before, and Mr. Stamer, who had lodged therein when he went there
to receive his rents, as part of the town of Prosperous belonged to
the said Stamer; Examinant saith that the said Rebels approached his
house in a large body, six of which preceded the rest mounted on some
of the horses which they had taken that morning from the Ancient
Britons at Prosperous; That Examinant as soon as he came out of his
door was surrounded by a party of the said Rebels, who presented their
Pikes at him, and who he expected from the ferocity of their looks
would have instantly put him to death; that one of the said Rebels
held a musket at Examinant's breast with his finger on the trigger;
that another of the said Rebels who was a turf-cutter, held a drawn
sword over Examinant's head, and Examinant verily believes they would
have instantly put him to death, but a young man in the croud who
seemed to have some influence interposed, beat down the musket which
was presented at his breast and said he should not kill him; Examinant
saith that he knew many of the said Rebels to whom he and his family
had been very kind. That soon after the said Rebels went in quest of
the said Stamer, who lodged at some distance from the said town; that
having seized him the said Stamer, they led him through the street by
Examinant's house, surrounded by a number of Pike-men, while a low
fellow held a pistol at his head; Examinant saith that as he passed
by the Examinant's house, he the said Stamer cast a melancholy farewel
look at Examinant and his family, that soon after the said Rebels
massacred the said Stamer; Examinant saith that soon after he went
out with an intention of enquiring for his friend Mr. ---- an inhabitant
of Prosperous, and that before Examinant had gone far he was again
surrounded by the said Rebels, who he verily believes would have put
him to death, but for the interference of the person who had saved him
before; Examinant saith, he discovered soon after that Mr. Brewer, a
respectable manufacturer of said town, who had employed many of the
said Rebels, had been massacred by them, and that his body had been
mangled with savage barbarity; Examinant saith that they also
massacred a poor old man of the age of 70 years and upwards, who
served as Serjeant in his Majesty's forces, they having considered him
as an Orange-man; Examinant is convinced in his mind the only reason
why the said Rebels murdered the said Serjeant was his being a
protestant; Examinant saith that when the said Rebels had committed
the said barbarities, they exclaimed with savage joy "where are the
Heretics now? shew us the face of an Orange-man"; Examinant saith that
many women, who acting with the said Rebels, used expressions of that
nature, as often and as loud as the men, and that some old women who
were amongst them seemed to brighten on the occasion, and to shew as
much fervent joy as the youngest amongst them; That some of the said
women kissed and congratulated their fathers, their husbands, or their
brothers, on the victory they had gained, and exclaimed "Dublin and
Naas have been taken and are in possession of our friends; down with
the Heretics, and down with the Orange-men." Examinant saith that many
of the wretches who had been actors in that bloody scene, had come
into the town of Prosperous the preceding day, and in presence of
Capt. Swayne, of the--Cork Militia, whom with a party of his Regiment
that morning, viz. the 24th of May, they had massacred, and also in
the presence of their Parish Priest of the name of Higgins, and
declared their contrition for their past errors, and gave the
strongest assurance of their loyalty, for the future--that many of
the said Rebels surrendered their Pikes to the said Swayne, and as
such surrender was considered as a test of their repentance, and as
necessary to entitle them to written protections, numbers of them
lamented that they could not obtain such protections, as they never
saw nor had a Pike, and that many of them declared they would sell
their Cow to purchase a Pike if they knew where it could be bought;
Examinant saith that notwithstanding these declarations many of the
said Rebels appeared in the ranks well armed with Pikes; Examinant
saith he is convinced in his mind that the said Rebels would have
plundered and burnt all the other loyal houses of Prosperous, and
would have murdered the remaining Protestant inhabitants thereof,
but that a party of the Ancient Britons and the Cork Militia, being
a part of the detachment they had murdered that morning, unexpectedly
approached the town, and that the said Rebels on their appearance,
fled towards the bogs and morasses; Examinant saith he could not
refrain from shedding tears at seeing such scenes of savage barbarity,
and that a servant who continued faithful to him desired him not to
shew any sign of concern, lest he might draw on him the anger and
vengeance of the Rebels.

(_A true Copy._)




ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.


At the breaking out of the late unfortunate Rebellion it was my
intention to _note_ every occurrence of any _moment_, and at some
future day to arrange and publish the same.--SOME Materials for such
a Work I have collected, others I still wait for----Such an Historic
RECORD may be found acceptable; when ready it shall be announced to
the Public.

The present Publication, now offered to the IRISH NATION, while it
enumerates the dangers which awaited every loyal Man, must
demonstrate to the deluded Creatures (aiding and abetting) the
certain Impossibility of succeeding in any similar attempt.

To those persons who kindly supplied the Letters, &c. for the
foregoing pages, I feel particularly indebted, and beg they will
accept my grateful thanks. As I intend continuing an account of the
other Engagements down to the French Invasion and their defeat at
Ballinamuck, Gentlemen who have been in the different Battles which
are not yet come to hand, are invited to forward an account of them
as soon as possible previous to the completion of the SECOND PART
of this NARRATIVE.

With respect,

I am the Reader's

Obliged Servant,

_No. 91, Bride-street_,    }          JOHN JONES.
_June 5th, 1799_.          }




Transcriber's Note

Inconsistencies and variations in punctuation, spelling, hyphenation,
capitalization and grammar have been preserved to match the text of
the original document published in 1799.

Because the original plate for Page 25 made only a partial impression,
some words along the left side of the page were cut off and were thus
determined from context.

Letter XI is listed as an entry in the Table of Contents. However,
the original text does not contain any document titled "Letter XI."

Four page numbers in the Table of Contents have been changed in this
ebook to accurately reflect the location of material in the text.
The following additional typographical corrections have been made
in this ebook:

  Page ix: Added missing letter 'i' (sufferings)

  Page 13: Removed duplicate word 'the' (six of the Corps)

  Page 15: Changed Adout to About (About 300 of the Rebel Cavalry)

  Page 28: Added missing letter 'f' (a steady friend)

  Page 52: Removed duplicate prefix 'in-' (invulnerable commander)

  Page 84: Removed duplicate word 'to' (to be their fixed purpose)

  Page 89: Added missing letter 'b' (whose numbers had encreased)






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN IMPARTIAL NARRATIVE OF THE MOST IMPORTANT ENGAGEMENTS WHICH TOOK PLACE BETWEEN HIS MAJESTY'S FORCES AND THE REBELS, DURING THE IRISH REBELLION, 1798 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

