Online Distributed Proofreading Team (https://www.pgdp.net/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 18437-h.htm or 18437-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/4/3/18437/18437-h/18437-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/8/4/3/18437/18437-h.zip)





TROUBLESOME COMFORTS

A Story for Children

by

GERALDINE ROBERTSON GLASGOW







[Illustration: At the Seaside (frontispiece)]




Thomas Nelson and Sons
London, Edinburgh
Dublin, And
New York





TROUBLESOME COMFORTS.




CHAPTER I.


Mrs. Beauchamp sat in a stuffy third-class carriage at Liverpool Street
Station, and looked wistfully out of the window at her husband. Behind
her the carriage seemed full to overflowing with children and paper
parcels, and miscellaneous packages held together by straps. Even the
ticket collector failed in his mental arithmetic when nurse confronted
him with the tickets.

"There's five halfs and two wholes," she said, "and a dog and a bicycle."

"All right, madam," he said politely, "but I don't see the halfs."

"There's Miss Susie, and Master Dick, and Miss Amy," began nurse
distractedly, "and the child in my arms; and now there's Master Tommy
disappeared."

"He's under the seat," said Dick solemnly.

"Come out, Tom," said his father, "and don't be such an ass."

Tom crawled out, a mass of dust and grime, not in the least disconcerted.

"I thought I could travel under the seat if I liked," he said.

"Oh, if you _like_!" said his father; but nurse, with a look of despair,
caught at his knickerbockers just as he was plunging into the dust again.
"Not whilst I have power to hold you back, Master Dick," she said.--"No,
sir, you haven't got the washing of him, and wild horses won't be equal
to it if he gets his way."

"Well, keep still, Tommy," said his father.

Tommy squirmed and wriggled, but nurse's hand was muscular, and the
strength of despair was in her grip. Mrs. Beauchamp realized that in a
few minutes the keeping in order of the turbulent crew would fall to her,
but for the present she tried to shut her ears to Susie's domineering
tones and Tommy's scornful answers. Susie always chose the most
unsuitable moments for displays of temper, and Mrs. Beauchamp sighed as
she looked at the firm little mouth and eager blue eyes. She felt so
very, very sorry to be leaving Dick the elder in London--so intolerably
selfish. Her voice was full of tender regret.

"It seems so horrid of me, Dick. It is _you_ who ought to be having the
holiday, not me."

"Oh, I shall manage quite well," said Mr. Beauchamp cheerfully. "It is
rather a bore being kept in London, of course, away from you and the
chicks"--this came as an afterthought--"but I hope you will find it plane
sailing. I want it to be a _real_ rest to you, old woman."

His eyes wandered past her sweet, tired face to the fair and dark heads
beyond, of which she was the proud possessor, and his sigh was not
altogether a sigh of disappointment. Mrs. Beauchamp glanced at them too,
and the anxious line deepened between her eyes. She pushed back with a
cool hand the loose hair on her forehead. "It is an ideal place for
children," she said--"sand and shells; and they can bathe from the
lodgings."

"You will be good to your mother, boys," said Mr. Beauchamp. He was
directly appealing to Tommy, but he included the whole family in his
sweeping glance. "Don't overpower her.--And, Susie, you are the eldest;
you must be an example."

Susie flounced out her ridiculously short skirts with a triumphant look
round. "I _am_ a help, aren't I, mother?" she said.

"Sometimes, dear," said her mother, with rather a tired smile.

"And you won't bother about me, Christina?" he said.

"How can I help it, darling?"

She leant farther out of the window, but one hand held firmly to Amy's
slim black legs--Amy had scrambled up on to the seat, and was pushing the
packages in the rack here and there, searching for something.

"There is the guard; we are just off, I suppose. O Dick, how I wish you
were coming too! But I will write as often as I can.--Susie, be quiet. I
cannot hear myself speak."

"Well, mother," said Susie, shaking back her hair, and poking the point
of her parasol between the laces of Dick's boots, "look at the way he has
laced himself up; you said yourself he was to do it tidily. And his face
is smutty already; look at him."

"Good-bye, Dick," said Mrs. Beauchamp. The train was moving smoothly out
of the station, and she leant out as far as she dared, to get a last look
at the erect figure.--"There, Susie, father is out of sight. Leave the
boys alone."

Susie frowned.

"She'd better," said Tommy, in a choked voice.

"Now you're going to be naughty," said Susie.--"I know they are,
mother--they always begin like that; they're clawing at me with their
sticky fingers. Mother, tell them not to; I didn't say anything."

"You are a beastly blab," said Tommy defiantly.

"Tom, what a word! Sit down by nurse and look out of the window.--Susie,
it is really your fault--you are so interfering."

"I'm not interfering," said Susie, aggrieved. "I'm helping you to keep
them in order."

"Well, _don't_. I would rather manage them alone.--Don't squabble, boys;
there's plenty of room for every one."

"O mother--" said Amy.

Mrs. Beauchamp still held unconsciously on to the slim black leg, but the
sudden movement of the train had jerked Amy off the seat. She clung for a
moment to the rack, but her hand slipped, and she fell headlong on to the
opposite seat, and there was a dull thud as her head crashed on to a
little wooden box.

"It's all right, darling," her mother said, and she held her close in her
comforting arms.




CHAPTER II.


Amy was a good little girl, and she tried very hard not to cry; but she
sat pressed very close to her mother's side, with her large blue eyes
full and overflowing with tears. Dick, who was very tender-hearted,
begged her to eat his toffee, which would have been comforting; but nurse
would not allow it at any price.

"No, Miss Amy," she said, "I won't hear of it--not in your pretty blue
dress. And don't lean upon your mamma; you'll wear the life out of her."

Amy pressed her soft cheek against her mother's arm, and looked up in her
face with her tearful blue eyes. She was relieved to see just the shadow
of a smile.

"Give me Master Alick, nurse," said Mrs. Beauchamp; "I am afraid he has
toothache.--There! see, Alick, all the pretty green fields going past
outside."

"It's _us_ that is going past," said Dick.

"Hold me too, mother," said Amy suddenly; "take me in your arms like you
do Alick."

"But Alick will cry if I put him down. See, I can manage like that; there
is room for both of you."

She made a large lap, and Amy scrambled on to it. It was like a nest with
two birds in it--not very restful, perhaps, to the nest, but quite
delightful for the birds. They were very good little birds, too, and they
did not quarrel; and presently Amy nudged mother's arm, and spoke in the
tiniest whisper. "One of the birds has gone to sleep," she said.

Alick's eyes were shut, and his round, flushed face was lying on mother's
hand. When she tried to take it gently away he stirred, and squeaked
restlessly.

"Let's pretend he's a cuckoo and push him out," suggested Tom.

"Tommy!" said his mother.

"Oh, I didn't mean him to fall far," said Tommy--"just a kind of roll."

"Not the kind you eat," said his mother.

"No, dear, I couldn't let you; he would be startled even if he wasn't
hurt."

"A train's so stupid," said Tommy, yawning.

Susie was on the alert in an instant.

"There! I knew he was going to be naughty," she said delightedly. "Soon
he'll be pulling the cord, or trying to break the glass, or doing
something else he oughtn't to. When he begins like that he's generally
very tiresome."

"Hush, Susie," said her mother; "see how good Dick is."

"And me!" cried Tommy.

"Yes, you are good too."

"When you're sleeping," added nurse.

"There, Miss Prig!" said Tom.

"There, mother!" cried Susie, in the same breath.

"Well, Susie, it is your own fault."

Susie flounced away to the farther end of the carriage, and sat looking
at the reflection of herself in the glass. She saw a little girl with
short blue skirts and a shady hat. When she took off the hat she could
see very large, brown eyes and a cross mouth, and the more she looked the
crosser it got. There was a fascination about that cross little mouth.
It seemed to Susie that she sat there a long while, whilst nobody took
any notice of her. In the reflection she could see baby asleep on
mother's lap, with mother's hand tucked under his cheek. He looked a
darling; but Susie frowned and looked away. Amy was sitting "in mother's
pocket"--that was what nurse called it--and Susie felt unreasonably
vexed. Dick and Tommy were leaning out of the window buying buns--Tommy
was paying. They were at a station, and there were heaps of buns. Susie
saw the cross mouth in the reflection quiver and close tightly; the brown
eyes blinked--she almost thought the Susie in the reflection was going to
cry.

"Nobody cares," she said to herself miserably. "Mother doesn't care; she
loves Amy and Alick more than me. The boys hate me; they will eat all the
buns, and I shall die of hunger. I wish--"

"Susie," said mother's voice, "the children are stifling me. Come and
have tea; we have bought such a lot of buns. Will you help me put baby
down in your corner? and you might give him your jacket for a pillow."

Susie could see nothing, but she kept her eyes on the reflection in the
window, with a fascinated stare.

"Susie, I _want_ you," said her mother gently.

In a minute Susie had swept the tears away with her sleeve, and had
launched herself across the rocking carriage, and flung her arms round
her mother's neck.

"Gently, gently, darling," said mother, smiling. "I haven't got a
hand--Alick is holding it so fast--but I missed you, Susie. There is
something there, outside, that I wanted to be the first to show you."

Susie, still rather subdued, leant as far out of the window as the bars
allowed, and let the wind from the engine blow the curls about her face.
Away, far on the horizon, was a silver line, as straight as if it had
been ruled with a ruler, and a shining white speck showed against the
yellow evening sky.

"What is it?" said Susie, breathlessly.

"It is the _sea_," her mother told her, "and the white sails of the ships
are going out with the tide."

"Mother, I mean never to be naughty again," said Susie suddenly; "only I
know that to-morrow I shall forget, and be as horrid as I was to-day."

Susie was tired, and more tears seemed imminent. The train was slowing
down, and the screeching of the engine almost drowned her voice.

"Pick up the parcels, and be quite ready to jump out," said Mrs.
Beauchamp hastily. "Susie, you must not grow perfect _too_ suddenly;
I shouldn't know you!"




CHAPTER III.


The next day was radiantly beautiful, and Susie started well. Directly
after breakfast the four elder ones trooped down to the sands with spades
and buckets, whilst Alick, left alone with nurse, waved his good-byes
from the balcony. Mrs. Beauchamp looked after them a little anxiously;
but Susie in her best mood was so very trustworthy that she smoothed the
anxious line out of her forehead, and turned back with a restful sigh to
the empty room and the silence.

And out on the beach things went swimmingly. They made sand castles and
moats, and the rising tide flowed in just as they wished it to. Like
another Canute, Tom flung defiance to the waves, and shouted himself
hoarse; and then, to his immense surprise, the little ripples swept
smoothly back, and left a crumbled castle, and white foamy ridges that
looked like soap.

"Come on, Susie," he said; "it's no fun when there's no water in it.
Let's go over to the rocks and look for insects."

"No; let's stay here," said Susie. "I like watching the ships and the
steamers."

"Fudge," said Tom.

"The rocks are awfully jolly, Sue," said Dickie.

But Susie shook her shoulders, and gazed straight before her. "I'm not
going," she said.

"Very well; we jolly well prefer your room to your company," said
Tom.--"Come on, Dick."

Susie was sitting on the ruins of the castle, with her knees drawn up and
her elbows planted on them. She really was not listening to Tom a bit,
for her fascinated eyes were fixed on the line of silver sea, on which
the passing steamers rose and fell. Far away at the back of her mind was
the consciousness that Tom was going to be naughty, and that she might
prevent it; but she pushed her fingers into her ears, and gazed straight
before her.

It was Amy tugging at her dress that made her turn reluctantly at last.

"Tom is calling you, Susie," she said.

"Oh, bother!" said Susie. "You can go and see what he wants."

Amy obediently struggled over the heavy sand to the fine strip of pebbles
on which the boys were disporting themselves. Their boots were wet
through; their shrill voices pierced Susie's poor defences.

"Susie--Susie--Susie!"

But Susie did not move.

All the same, she knew perfectly well that Amy was struggling back over
the shingle and the sand, and had dropped panting at her feet, quite
unable to speak for want of breath. Her little delicate face was pink
with heat and excitement, and her thin legs trembled.

"They want to get a box and send Dickie out in it, like a boat," she
explained.

"They haven't got a box," said Susie.

"But they say they can get one easily. It's father's; and they can tie a
string on to it and drag it."

"They can ask mother," said Susie impatiently.

"Yes, I suppose so." Amy had crept nearer, and put a small, unsteady hand
on her knee. "Please don't let them do it, Susie," she said; "don't let
them be naughty."

"Don't bother," said Susie. "I can't help it."

She shook off Amy's hand impatiently; but she was sorry a moment
afterwards. Susie often said things like that, and it was rather
a comfort that Amy was always quite ready to be forgiven.

"It is so beautiful here, Amy; and I dare say they are not being naughty
really. They only hope we are looking; but I'm not going to."

She resolutely turned her back upon the boys and the strip of pebbles.
But Amy could not keep still; her eyes kept turning nervously to the
sturdy jersey-clad figures, and presently she nudged Susie again.

"They've got the box, Susie. You can't think how deep the water is, and
it looks so horrid; and Dick has a cold."

"Oh, don't bother," said Susie.

"Mother said you were to look after them, because you are the eldest,"
urged Amy.

"Why weren't one of you the eldest?" said Susie crossly. "I've been the
eldest all my life, and I'm tired of it. Mother knows I can't manage
them."

Without turning her head she knew that Amy was creeping again across the
strip of pebbles. She heard her foot slipping, and the shouts of the boys
when she reached them; then Amy's soft little frightened voice--and
then silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later Mrs. Beauchamp was sitting on the little balcony outside
the drawing-room window. The sky was divinely blue, and the sun was
dazzling. Close to her feet was a basket of stockings that needed
darning, but she felt as if she must lay her needle down every now and
then, to look at the gray, glittering sea, and the shifting crowd upon
the beach. Her feet ached with perpetual running up and down stairs; but
she was glad to think that the children were happy and good. In the room
across the passage she could hear nurse singing Alick to sleep, and down
in the street below a funny little procession was winding up from the
sea. She rose and looked over the balcony on to the tops of two sailor
hats, and what looked like two soaking mushrooms. She stared at them
stupidly, wondering why the box they dragged behind them was so familiar,
and why they left such a long wet trail behind them.

After them sauntered a few idle fishermen; but just for a minute she
could not grasp what had happened. Then she pushed the basket on one side
and ran to the drawing-room door.

Up the stairs came the hurried rush of feet, with the box bumping from
stair to stair. Then the dripping family clung about her with soaked
garments, and hair that looked like seaweed.

"Mother, change us, please, before nurse sees us."

"But what is it?" she cried. "How did it happen?"

"It was Tom's fault," said Susie, whimpering. "He sent Dick out to sea in
the uniform case, and it has a hole in it, and it went down."

"Oh, run upstairs and change; Dick has a cough."

"He didn't drown," said Tom, "because we had tied a rope to it, and a
fisherman pulled it up."

"And where is Dickie?"

"I told him to go up on the roof and dry--he's on the leads by now. It's
awfully nice there; we went this morning."

"_On the roof!_--Susie, tell him to come down, whilst I get their
clothes.--Tom, how can you do such things?"

"Why, you never told us not to," said Tom, with innocent eyes.

Susie crept upstairs, very white and quiet. She had been really
frightened, and she had an uncomfortable feeling at the back of her mind
that somehow it was her fault. She found Dick scrambling on to the roof,
and hauled him in with unnecessary vigour. When she got downstairs she
was sulky because her mother had not time to listen to her eager excuses,
but put her hastily on one side.

"Never mind now, Susie. The first thing is to slip off your wet clothes
and get dry, and then help me with the others. Give me the big towel, and
untie Amy's frock."

"But, mother," argued Susie, "I couldn't guess he was going to be so
naughty, could I?"

"You didn't try to guess," said Tom resentfully; "and now you are trying
to make mother think you are better than me. You wouldn't hem our sails
or dig with us. We had to do something."

"And now you want me to quarrel," said Susie.--"Mother, I want to
explain."

"Hush, Susie! there is no time to explain now; you must tell me
by-and-by."

Susie flung the towel on to the floor, and felt a great lump in her
throat. Dick had to be dried and warmed, in order to stop that horrid
little croaking cough; and no one cared for her excuses or explanations.

With angry tears blinding her she ran across to the nursery, and stood
looking out at the silver line of sea and the bobbing ships. Alick was
stretching in his cradle, and it creaked under his weight. She could see
his curly head and his outstretched fat legs. He was so accustomed to
having his legs admired that he always pulled up his petticoats solemnly
to exhibit them, as though pathetically hoping to get it over and have
done with it.

Susie's ill-temper evaporated like smoke. She flung herself beside the
cradle, and hugged Alick in her arms, leaning so closely over him that
nurse, in hurrying to and fro, paused to expostulate.

"Not so close, Miss Susie, please--the child can't breathe; and I don't
want you putting any of your naughtiness into his head."

"How can I, when he can't walk?" said Susie indignantly.

"Well, I wouldn't put it beyond you," said nurse. "I know you've been up
to something, or you wouldn't be here now, looking as if butter wouldn't
melt in your mouth."

"I'm trying to be good," said Susie, still indignant.

"Well, we shan't see the result yet awhile," said nurse, "for the way
you've devil-oped these holidays is past imagining."

She always pronounced it in that way, and the word held a dreary
significance for Susie.




CHAPTER IV.


That horrid, teasing cough of Dick's got worse and worse, and by evening
he was lying patiently in his crib, with a steaming kettle singing into
the little tent of blankets that enveloped it, and a very large and very
hot linseed poultice on his chest. Susie, sitting down below, could hear
the hasty footsteps and the hoarse, croaking sound that always filled her
with panic. Their tea was brought to them by the overworked maid, and she
and Tom ate it in a depressed silence, and then sat again on the
window-sill looking silently and miserably out to sea. By-and-by nurse
came in hurriedly, with the news that baby was crying and had to be
attended to, and that she and Tom must manage to put themselves to bed.

"I haven't time to brush your hair," nurse said regretfully; and Susie's
face lightened.

"Nurse, is Dick better?" she asked breathlessly.

"He's about as bad as I've ever seen him," nurse said shortly, and turned
to leave the room; but Susie clung desperately to her skirt.

"Don't go, nurse. Let me do something--let me hold baby."

"No, indeed, Miss Susie," said nurse; "you've done mischief enough
already. Go to bed quietly, and try to get up right foot foremost
to-morrow."

Susie went back to the window-sill, and huddled up close to Tom. With
blank eyes she looked at the stars and the moon bursting from behind
hurrying clouds. Even when she put her fingers into her ears that rasping
cough pursued her. Tom's heavy head fell against her, and she knew he
ought to be in bed; but it wanted really desperate courage to shake him
into consciousness and get him up somehow to his room.

And upstairs, next to Tom's little bed, was an empty space, from which a
crib had been hastily wheeled into the next room. On the floor beside it
lay a vest and knickerbockers, still heavy with sea water, and a red tin
pail and spade. It made Susie sick to look at them. But she got Tom at
last into his bed, and covered him up. He tried to say his prayers, but
he was too sleepy; and Susie hushed him at last, and crept away to her
own little room in the dark.

Amy was so soundly asleep that she did not even turn; but Susie could not
rest. All through the miserable hours she sat straight up in bed, looking
before her with staring eyes, and listening to the uneasy movements next
door.

It was almost morning when Amy woke at last and turned her startled gaze
on Susie's face, but what she read there drove her out of her own bed and
on to Susie's. Then she stretched out two comforting little arms and held
her close.

"Don't, Susie, don't," she said breathlessly; "it wasn't your fault."

"Yes, it was," said Susie harshly.

Amy rubbed her rosy cheek against Susie's sleeve, and at the touch
Susie's frozen heart melted. Tears came and sobs, till the sheet was wet,
and she could only speak in gasps.

"Mother _trusted_ me! I am going to mother, Amy. I can't bear it any
more. If Dick dies, it is me that did it. I was the only one who knew."

"Let me get your shoes," said Amy.

But Susie would not wait. She slipped out of bed on to the cold boards--a
small, miserable figure, disfigured with crying--whilst Amy watched her
breathlessly. She opened the door and listened. Every one seemed to be
asleep, except that in the room next door she heard hushed voices and the
tread of careful feet, then the rattle of a cup and Dick's cough. She
opened the door as gently as she could and looked in. The blind was up
and a fire burning. The tent of blankets had been pulled down, and Dick,
with the poultice still on his chest, was sitting up in bed, wrapped in
a soft red shawl. By the table stood nurse, making tea; and his mother,
looking pale and tired, was sitting by the crib. She looked up when the
door opened, and without a word held out her arms.

Susie fairly tumbled into them.

"O mother," she kept repeating, as if nothing more would come.

"_Susie!_" said mother.

"Oh, I have been awake all night!" Susie panted out the words. "If he had
died it would have been my fault. Mother, is he getting well?"

"My darling Susie," said mother, "I had not time to come to you. I never
dreamt you were awake. Dick is _much_ better; but he has been very bad,
and he must go to sleep."

"Mother, let me tell you! I am so _wicked_. _I felt sure_ they would not
be really naughty; I_ felt certain--_"

"Susie," said mother faintly, "_I_ must go to sleep too. Some other time
we will talk it over, but not now."

"But I can't sleep," said Susie, "unless I tell you first."

"Come, Susie, try. I am sure it would be a great comfort to make excuses;
but, just for once, choose the harder part, and say nothing. You and I,
Susie, must get our beauty-sleep."

She stroked the flaxen pigtail and gently unloosed Susie's clinging
hands.

"Come, let me tuck you in," she said.

"Nurse is going to stay with Dick. Susie, I am very, very tired."

Susie's sobs ceased suddenly, and she stood up straight. It was the
hardest battle she had ever fought, but she was never one for half
measures. In perfect silence she allowed her mother to lead her away and
tuck her comfortably into the little bed, where Amy patiently waited for
her, and then, still silently, she put her two arms round her mother and
hugged her.

"Oh, thank you, Susie," mother said gratefully.




CHAPTER V.


Dick took many days to get well, and all the time his crib remained in
the corner of his mother's room. The red pail and spade were tidied away,
and his knickerbocker suit was put out of sight; and in the afternoon,
when the house was empty, and nurse, and Susie, and Amy, and Tom, and
baby were all out on the sands, his mother used to read delightful
stories to him, whilst he lay and watched her with round, wondering eyes.
His cough was troublesome at night, but however often he twisted, and
turned, and choked, there was the familiar face bending over him, her arm
beneath his head.

Dick was a very kind little boy, and he tried always to cough under the
bed-clothes, so as not to wake her, but it was no use. However carefully
he coughed, her eyes always opened at once.

"I am taking away your peace-time," he said, over and over again. And she
always answered, "Never mind, darling; I _could_ not sleep if you wanted
me."

"You look so funny," he said once.

"Perhaps I am tired, Dickie."

But she smiled as she spoke, and he felt relieved. It was when she was
too tired to smile that her face was strange.

And Susie's behaviour was quite angelic. She was happy and busy, and
brimful of good resolutions. She gave up many and many a morning on the
sands to play with Dick, and to let her mother go out to walk or shop.
Her astonishing meekness was a constant surprise to Tom, and he was
relieved by occasional flashes of temper, which showed him that the old
Susie was only sleeping, not dead!

But at last Dick was able to be wheeled down to the sands in Alick's
perambulator, and perhaps it was the joy of his recovery that turned
Susie's head, or perhaps she was tired of her long spell of goodness, but
whatever the reason, she was particularly teasing and tiresome. She did
not like to see her mother sitting close to Dick, ready to wheel him home
if he was tired; and she would not allow her to read in peace, but kept
breaking in with silly questions and remarks.

"You never let _me_ sit in your pocket," she said at last crossly.

"My dear Susie"--mother shut her book with a very faint sigh--"there is
not room for all of you on my lap. I should have to nurse an arm or a leg
at a time."

"You could _make_ room," said Susie.

"She would be like the donkey that wanted to be a lap-dog, wouldn't she,
mother?" said Tom. "It sat upon its master's lap."

Every one laughed, except Susie.

"Well, I'm not a donkey," she said, "and I'm not a lap-dog; and, besides,
you want to yourself."

"No, I don't," said Tom stoutly. "I hate to sit on any one's lap; if you
are so anxious you can sit on nurse's."

Susie's eyes threatened to overflow.

"Oh, don't cry, Susie," said her mother, in alarm, "or I shall have to
put up my umbrella. Go and build a castle with Tom, and take Amy. I trust
her to you. Nurse and I must get the babies home."

Susie always rose to any demand made upon her, and was proud of being
trusted. She gathered Dick's shells and seaweed and glittering stones
skilfully into his pail, and was really helpful in rolling up the rugs
and cushions. She was so pleased to see his rather thin, unsteady legs
gathering strength as they wobbled slowly over the sand. When she put her
arm round him, she was proud to feel that he really needed support. At
the foot of the wooden steps leading up the cliff his mother took him
in her arms. She was looking tired and pale, but she smiled very sweetly
at Susie.

"My kind little daughter," she said; and Susie beamed.

When she got back to Tom and Amy she found that they were not alone: two
other children, a boy and a girl, with bare feet and tucked-up skirts,
were standing talking to them.

The boy had black eyes and black hair, and the girl was the image of him;
her long, thin legs were like pipe stems, and she spoke in a loud,
domineering voice.

"We have watched you all the week," she said, "and we made up our minds
to know you. We thought we had better wait until your mother and nurse
were out of sight, in case they forbid us to come. Us two are twins."

"Oh, they wouldn't forbid you," said Amy, with hasty politeness.

The boy smiled in a superior way. "They _might_" he said. "Nurses
generally do. We are not particularly good, and nurses are so
narrow-minded."

"We are reckless," said the girl. "Our names are Dot and Dash."

"They're pretty good names," said Tom.

"They fit us," said the twins in a breath.

"Both of we were taken out of church last Sunday," said Dot, in an
explanatory way and with an air of pride. "When the clergyman came from
inside the railings, Dash forgot he was in church, and he jumped up and
said quite loud, 'Shut the gate.'"

"Whatever for?" said Tom.

"You see," said Dash, with his air of modest pride, "I always spend the
time thinking how many sheep I could pen into the pews, and how many cows
I could get behind the railings. I think it could be seventeen _with a
squash_, but of course, if you left the gate open, the cows would get
into the sheep pens; so, when I saw him go out and leave the bar up, I
felt I must run and shut it, and I spoke out loud. I didn't really mean
to, but father marched us out of church, and he wouldn't let me explain."

"I suppose you oughtn't to have been thinking of cows and sheep in
church," said Amy, in her surprised little voice.

"Shut up, Miss Prig," said Dash; and Amy was obediently silent.

"Shall we play together?" said the twins, with one voice.

"It would be jolly," said Tom.--"Wouldn't it, Susie?"

"Well, you mustn't tell your people," they said, "but every morning after
your babies go in we might have a jolly game."

"Mother wouldn't mind, would she, Susie?" said Amy.

"We don't want your opinion," said Tom loftily.

Amy blushed till the tears came. "Would she?" she repeated desperately.

"There's no harm in playing," said Susie.

All her good resolutions were slipping away, and her voice grew excited.
Susie was always so carried away by the spirit of adventure, and she
forgot so easily. These sands, and the silver sea full of monsters! The
black rocks and seaweed--no nurse to bother about wet stockings--no
babies who needed a good example! Susie's spirits rose.

"There wouldn't be any harm," she cried eagerly, "and we might have some
jolly games. We only wouldn't tell mother, because it might worry her."

"Mother can walk on the rocks," cried Amy eagerly.

"I don't believe it," said Dash. "I don't believe an old woman like that
can walk a bit--not like we can."

"Not as fast as us," said Susie.--"Don't be tiresome, Amy; it isn't
mother who is tiresome--it's nurse."

"Well, we'll meet to-morrow," said the twins, speaking together, as they
generally did, at the top of rather squeaky voices.

They pulled Susie to one side.

"Don't tell the other one," they said, in hoarse whispers; "she'd go and
tell."

"She's very young," said Susie, in quick apology, as she ran off.

"Both of we has pails," shouted the twins after her, "and we can bring
cake."

"We are not allowed curranty cake," said Susie reluctantly.

"Bosh," said the twins. "Who's to know? We come of a very gouty family,
and _we_ may eat curranty cake."

"I dare say a little piece wouldn't matter," said Susie.

"O Susie," said Amy, as she plodded breathlessly over the sand to the
steps, "she called mother an old woman!"

"Well?" said Susie.

"She is the most young and the most beautiful lady I have ever seen,"
said Amy, with flushed cheeks.

"Yes, of course," said Susie.

"They seemed rather rude," said Amy.

"It isn't being rude, it's being _reckless_. Didn't you hear them say
so?"

"Aren't they the same, Susie?"

"Not at all," said Susie, with her nose in the air. "It's _older_ to be
reckless; it's much easier to be rude. But you mustn't tell, Amy."

"O Susie, I'll try not," said Amy; "but when mother asks me I don't know
what to do."

"Well, you can hold your tongue," said Susie sharply.




CHAPTER VI.


Susie felt a little excited next morning when she remembered the twins,
and all the time she was digging moats and piling up sand castles she had
one eye fixed on the active figures of her new friends, who, with bare
legs and shrill voices, attracted a good deal of attention. Once she
tried timidly to "draw" nurse on the subject, but nurse was not
responsive.

"Those are rather splendid children," she said wistfully.

"Where?" said nurse, lifting a calculating eye from the heel of the
stocking she was knitting, and looking vaguely round the horizon.

"There--on the rock," said Susie eagerly. "Tom and I want to go on the
rocks so much, and those children could help us; they are so very--so
very _reckless_."

"So very rude," said nurse dispassionately.

The very words Amy had used. The angry blood flew into Susie's face.

"I don't know what you mean by rude," she said obstinately. "It's very
dull sitting here and making castles with babies; and Tom and I want to
go on the rocks."

"Well, your mamma will take you some day, when she feels better," said
nurse. "She's had a wearing time since she came. No doubt it's a trial to
see other children, with no decent nurse to look after them, running wild
and shouting like wild Indians; but I have my duty to you and your mamma,
and you must just bear it as best you can. You should take example by
Miss Amy and be contented, and be glad to think you have Master Dick back
with you again."

"Mother always makes a fuss about Dick," said Susie.

"Well," said nurse, rising with difficulty and shaking the sand from her
dress, "I'm going to take the little ones in, Miss Amy and all. She can
play with Master Dick whilst I get baby to sleep. Perhaps you will help
me, Miss Susie?"

Of course Susie would help; her face lightened at the thought! All the
jealous lines disappeared as if by magic. Alick's little hands felt like
rose leaves on her face. She forgot the twins, forgot to be cross, as she
folded her arms tightly round him. She had half a mind to go in with them
and have a nice nursery game; but when she hesitated and looked back, she
saw Tom waving impatiently, and it was difficult to say no.

She handed Alick to nurse, and stood staring after him as he leant his
round red face over her shoulder and waved his chubby hands. When they
all disappeared on to the parade at the top of the cliff she turned and
flew over the sands.

"Take off your shoes and stockings," shouted the twins; "us both always
do." And Susie, without a thought, unlaced her boots, and flung them
hither and thither, never stopping to look behind her or to be sure that
they were safe. The water was quite warm and the sea was sapphire blue.
It was a very low tide, and the rocks stretched away to a long, low
island, crowned with grass, where a few nimble goats perched on unlikely
crags. From rock to rock flew Susie's active feet, but Dot was always
ahead; and so, slipping, splashing, torn by the rocks, drenched with the
warm spray, Susie revelled in a long hour of liberty. She was wild with
excitement, eager to come again, full of reckless promises.

"We'll go as far as the island another day," said Dot, "but we have to
choose a low tide. Aren't you glad now that you didn't go home and play
like a baby?"

Susie was hastily rubbing the sand out of her toes and hunting for her
stockings. Her feet were very cold, and her fingers seemed thumbs. She
did not answer Dot. She did not feel quite sure what to say; things
always looked so different before and after, and what nurse had said
about a _wearing time_ stuck in her mind.

"Well, aren't you?" said Dot impatiently.

"No," said Susie bluntly.

She stopped to lace Tom's boots, and then looked up with a face that had
grown suddenly red.

"I can't help it," she said desperately, "but I never _am_ glad
afterwards."

She went on lacing laboriously, whilst Tom lay on his face kicking and
plunging about. Dot looked at her curiously.

"But you wanted to come on the rocks?" she said.

"Oh yes," said Susie. "I shall always want to come, but I shall be sorry
afterwards. I think I ought to warn you because I am like that. I can't
help it. It is silly of nurse," she went on, as she tied the lace in a
draggled knot. "Why shouldn't we play with you? I feel _perfectly
certain_--" She seemed to remember using those words before on an
unfortunate occasion, so she hastily changed them. "I am _quite sure_
that you are a very good companion. Me and Tom couldn't learn any
harm from you."

She was persuading herself, not the twins, but it was a twin who
answered.

"We can have lots of fun," said Dot, "and no one will know. The first
chance we will cut over the rocks to the town and buy some sweets."

"Generally I have to look after the little ones," said Susie.

"Well, no one would eat them if they stayed here alone till you came
back, would they, stupid?"

"No," said Susie, rather shortly.

She was not quite sure that she liked being called "stupid."

       *       *       *       *       *

"I can't think how all this sand has got into your stockings," said
nurse. "I should hope you didn't paddle after I left you, against my
orders!"

There was silence, and in another moment Susie would have told the truth,
but before the words came faltering out nurse spoke again.

"But there! I can trust you, with all your troublesome ways," she said.

And this time Susie _could not_ speak.




CHAPTER VII.


As time went on it grew so perilously easy to be deceitful! No one
thought of doubting them--no one thought of asking what they did when
they were left alone.

Day after day, as nurse's toiling figure disappeared up the wooden steps
on to the cliff, Dash and Dot burst round the corner of the rocks, and
almost without a word spoken, Susie's shoes and stockings were flung to
the winds, and she was scampering at headlong speed from pool to pool,
with Tom at her heels--like a wild creature, and in a condition that
would have fairly horrified poor nurse, who held that all well-conducted
young ladies, like the Queen of Spain, should have no visible legs!

Really, in her heart, Susie did not like the twins so very much. They
were wild and unkempt, and very boisterous; their twinkling black eyes
radiated mischief, but it was the sort of mischief that bewildered Susie
and rather frightened her. Nurse puzzled over her mangled stockings and
the hideous rents in her skirts, and Mrs. Beauchamp's patient fingers
grew stiff with darning; but whilst Susie flew about the rocks, careless
and dishevelled, she always forgot how sorry she was going to be
afterwards, and how uncomfortable her conscience was at night.

"I really won't go again," she said to herself time after time; and yet
the first sight of the twins splashing round the rocks scattered all her
good resolutions to the winds.

"I am glad I can trust you," her mother often said. "You are a comfort to
me."

"Troublesome comforts I should call them," nurse said; and, like many of
nurse's wise sayings, it was remembered by Susie, and left a little sting
in her memory.

This afternoon she came to the beach quite resolved to withstand
temptation, and to play demurely with the little ones. It had rained all
morning, and now Tom had gone to the town with his mother to buy some new
sand-shoes. For some time Susie was perfectly happy building castles of
sand and letting the rising tide flow into her moat. Nurse was indulgent
enough to waste a few of her valuable minutes in making a scarlet flag
and mounting it on a wooden knitting-pin, whilst Dick and Amy busily
ornamented its base with fan shells. Dick was the king, with Alick for
his knight--rather a top-heavy knight, with wayward legs--and Susie and
Amy were the besieging army, fighting with desperate courage as long as
they had breath.

Susie flung herself panting on the sand. "Isn't it funny, nurse," she
said, "that all the bad men were good kings, and all the good men had to
be beheaded?"

"I don't know much about any king, Miss Susie," said nurse, "except King
Henry the Eighth, and _his_ beheading was on the other side. He was a bad
man if you like, and I never had any patience with him."

"Oh, I forgot him," said Susie; "and I wouldn't say that King Edward was
a bad man exactly, though he is a good king; but he isn't what you would
call _prime_, is he?"

"Oh no, my dear, not prime," said nurse.

"And Charles the Second wasn't prime either," said Susie.

"I don't know about him, my dear," said nurse. "But to go back to King
Henry. I always felt very much for poor Annie Bullen. A monster of
iniquity I call him, dressed up in his ermine and fallals, and not a
policeman or a judge daring to say him nay."

"How nice it is that common gentlemen don't behave like kings!" said Amy.
"If I was a queen, I would throw my crown away when it was time for my
beheadal."

"No, you'd cry," said Dick solemnly.

"_I_ wouldn't," said Susie. "I'd march proudly out with my lovely hair
floating in the wind, and my swannish neck rising out of a black velvet
dress, and I'd stand on the block and say, 'I _will_ my limbs--that means
my legs and arms--to the four quarters of the country, and my heart to
the tyrant who broke it.'"

"Much he'd want it," said Tom disdainfully.

But Susie stood declaiming on the sand-hill, inspired by her own
eloquence, and gazed at with admiration by Amy for a courage she could
not match.

"O Susie, how brave you are!" she said. "They'd have to kill you to get
at it; you couldn't get at your heart till you were dead. I don't believe
I could ever be as brave as that. I know I should cry."

"It's called _weep_, my dear," said nurse, "when it's done by kings and
queens."

"Well, I should weep," said Amy. "And I make my wills quite differently
to Susie. I made a will this morning when it rained. You know you said
you were going to give me a paint-box on my birthday, nursie! Well, if I
live till my birthday, I'm going to leave it back to you in my will."

"You needn't trouble, Miss Amy," said nurse, "because if you don't live
till your birthday I can keep it."

"But that wouldn't be my _will_," said Amy, puzzled.

"But it would be your wish, my dear, which comes to the same thing."

"Well, mine would be my will, but it wouldn't be my wish," said Susie.
"It would be history, and things in history are never so bad as things
that happen to yourself."

"But it _would_ happen to yourself if it was _your_ legs and arms you
gave away," said Amy.

"And I dare say it was just as bad to have your head cut off a hundred
years ago as it would be to-day," said nurse--"I mean for the people
themselves."

"Do you think," said Susie, "that the Jews and people who had their teeth
pulled out by the king for fun felt it just as much as we do when we go
to the dentist?"

"_For fun!_" said Dick, in a horrified voice.

"Did they have gas?" said Amy.

"Gas!" said Susie, with a superior smile. "How silly you are, Amy! They
had no gas then--only candles, or perhaps lamps. And I don't see how they
could pull out teeth with lamps; do you?"

"No," said Amy, in a small, mortified voice.

"I daresay," nurse went on, as if there had been no interruption, "that
it would have been easier for Miss Susie to have been brave in a history
book than if the trial came to her here."

"I don't see why," argued Susie.

"Well, we are made so," said nurse. "Other people's trials are a deal
easier to bear than our own. Now you've been good children to-day, and
I'll make a surprise for tea as a reward. I'm going to leave you Master
Dick for an hour, Miss Susie; and you'll look after him well, and when I
wave you'll bring him in. Don't sit down any longer, but have a bit of
play on the sand; it's getting chilly, and it looks like more rain."

"All right," said Susie.

She was filled with light-hearted joy, and nurse's praise warmed her
heart; nurse so seldom praised her. She helped Alick's wilful legs to the
foot of the steps and watched him out of sight.

"I am so very glad I have made up my mind to be good," she said to
herself; "it is _perfectly easy_ if you make up your mind. I wish the
twins would come and want me to leave Dick, or go on the rocks, or do
something naughty. I would just stand here and look at them with my large
innocent eyes and my gentle smile, and I would say, '_Never_, twins!
Nurse has trusted him to me, and I have turned over a new leaf. I would
not touch the rocks with my bare feet, not for a king's ransom.'"

"Susie," cried Dick.

"Yes," said Susie impatiently.

"Come here, Susie," he said again--"quick, I'm so wet!"

"Oh, bother," said Susie.

She turned slowly, still inspired by her own eloquence; and there,
straight before her, as if they had walked out of the sunset, stood the
twins, with black hair waving, and bare, wet legs.

"Come on!" they shouted breathlessly. "It's a perfectly heavenly
afternoon for the rocks, but it's awfully late; you've kept us waiting an
hour whilst your nurse simply _clacked_."

"All right," said Susie.

It was really all wrong, but she had forgotten her promises, her
resolutions, her boasted courage. At the first demand of the enemy she
laid down her weapons and surrendered the fort, and in another moment
she too was flying bare-footed over the rocks, with Dick stumbling
laboriously after her.

"Susie"--his shrill, faint voice pursued her--"Susie, my shoes is wet;
come back!"

"Come on," cried Susie.

"My feet is tired. Susie, _it's Dick_."

But Susie was far ahead.

"Susie!" he called again.

Wet and miserable, he sat stolidly down upon a rock.

"If Susie leaves me I shall _weep_," he said out loud.




CHAPTER VIII.


It was growing dusk, and the line of gold upon the sea had merged into
the gray twilight around. A drizzling rain fell like a veil between Susie
and the shore, and suddenly she remembered that for some time she had not
heard Dick's pleading voice. Instantly all the excitement and pleasure of
the stolen hour fell away from her, and with a frightened pang at her
heart she began a frantic search over the slippery rocks, flying in
heedless haste and shouting as she ran.

Her terror and tears impressed even the twins, though they were a little
inclined to mock. They too rushed and splashed from rock to rock, making
difficult and dangerous leaps that only bare toes made possible. The
pools between the rocks were full of water, and there was no yellow
reflection now from the wind-tossed sky. Susie felt despairing; but
suddenly, almost at her feet, she heard Dick's uncomplaining little
voice, "It's _me_, Susie. I knew you would come back; I am so glad. My
toe has got hurt, and I have sitted here till all my clothes has got
wet."

"How tiresome he is!" said Dot impatiently. "What a tiresome, silly
little boy! That's always the way with babies; they spoil all your fun."

"I'm not a baby," said Dick defiantly.

"Well, you're very like one. Every one will know now, and a jolly row
you've got us into."

"I'll tell you what," said Dash, in a hissing whisper into Susie's ear.
"Let's run back to the shore, and then they'll think he went alone."

"Come on, Susie, or we shall be drenched," said Dot. "When once we've got
on our shoes and stockings we can easily rush out and rescue him. Look at
the white horses, and the waves against the island. We are really a good
way out, but we could rescue him in two minutes, and your mother would be
_grateful_ to us."

But Susie was not listening. The twins' suggestions beat on her brain,
and found no entrance. All the best of Susie--the real, comfortable
Susie--brimming over with a love that was almost motherly, was in the
kind, quivering face she bent over Dick as he held out his tired arms.

In a minute she was down beside him, stroking and folding him close, till
his sobbing breaths were stifled on her shoulder.

"Oh, do come on, Susie!" said the twins; "we can't stay another minute.
If you won't leave him you'll be caught, and you will never be allowed to
play with us again."

Susie looked up, bewildered, into the twins' anxious faces. What did it
matter if she were caught, or blamed, or punished? The idea of leaving
Dick, even to make a sensational rescue, never entered her head for a
minute. _Leave him_, frightened and alone, out on the dark rocks! As she
had herself said, such a little while ago, "not for a king's ransom." She
only wanted the twins to go and leave her in peace, and so she told them
with that plainness of speech which to Susie seemed to suit the occasion.
"Please, please go," she said. "I can carry him quite well after he has
rested a little bit."

"You will be found out," said the twins warningly.

"Oh, it doesn't matter," said Susie.

"It seemed to matter a good deal a little while ago," said Dot
resentfully.

"Nothing matters now," said Susie, "except to get Dick home."

"Well, you can't rest long," said Dash, "because the tide's coming in."

Susie looked vaguely at the island behind her, with the waves splashing
against its sides, and then at the glistening rocks that made rough
stepping-stones to land. She had no idea about the tides; she only knew
that on some days the rocks showed more above the water than on others,
but there were always rocks. She shook her head impatiently.

"I know all about the tide," she said. "I am perfectly certain I can get
home all right."

"Oh, you're always perfectly certain," said Dot.

"So I am," said Susie.

"Well, good-night," said Dash. "Don't fiddle about too long with Dick,
that's all."

"Good-night," said Susie cheerfully.

She saw the two active figures leaping away into the twilight, splashing
from rock to rock, till they became gray and indistinct like moving
shadows. She felt suddenly chilled and lonely, and the silence and gloom
enveloped them--a forlorn little group in the midst of the growing dark.

"Dickie," said Susie presently, "we must start back before it gets any
darker. I think it's going to pour. If I put my arm round you, do you
think you can walk?"

"Why, the water would go over my head," said Dick.

He pushed out a fat leg and let it dangle against the rock; already the
white spray was splashing over it. Susie stared at it incredulously. When
the twins left, it had been a shallow pool, and they had waded through
it.

"Oh, hurry up, Dick!" she said, in a sudden panic. "Mother will be
frightened."

"It's fun, though," said Dick.

Fun! The word did not seem at all the right word to Susie, but she said
nothing. She knew now in a flash what the twins meant by the rising tide,
but all she saw was her mother's face with the fear on it.

But Susie had not been the eldest of the little family for so many
years for nothing. She knew that, whatever happened, Dick must not get
bronchitis, and she put her own fear bravely on one side to think of him.

First she slipped over the rock, and found that it reached her waist, and
that every wave made it more difficult to stand. With Dick on her back it
would be impossible; and the long links of the chain of rocks stretched
such a weary way with those shining pools between. The wind roared
against the island, and the spray dashed up it; but Susie remembered the
grass and the goats, and a gleam of hope sprang up within her.

"O Dick, we are close to the island," she said. "I had quite forgotten.
We must clamber over the rocks and get there; and, Dickie darling, even
if your foot hurts, you will be brave."

"I will be brave, Susie," said Dick.

The rocks were slippery, and the seaweed popped under their feet like
little guns; but jumping, slipping, clinging together, they reached the
foot of the island, and then began the difficult scramble upwards. Dick
hung heavily on to Susie's skirt, and his little feet were torn and
bruised. But Susie's courage was the courage of hope, not of despair. She
lifted him over difficult places, and clung to edges of the cliff where
it seemed as if even the seagulls had not room to stand. Once she found a
narrow track, but she lost it again in the darkness, and still she felt
the splash of the waves and heard the startled birds crying overhead.
Never, never had Susie been so tired; but those pursuing waves chased her
up, and by-and-by she felt dry crags under her feet, and then welcome
grass--wet with rain, not sea.

Drawing long, sobbing breaths, Susie sank down and drew Dickie into her
arms. In the far, far distance little lights were twinkling in the town,
and Susie's heart gave a passionate leap; it wanted to annihilate time
and space, and carry her home.

"Mother, mother, mother!" she cried under her breath.

Dick was wet and tired, but he was too excited to lie still. He lay in
the hollow of Susie's lap, with his wet feet curled up into her skirt,
and his round eyes shining.

"We can't be drowned now, Susie," he said, smiling.

Susie had to make quite an effort before her stiff lips would speak.

"No, Dickie, we are quite safe," she said; "but the ledge is so narrow
you must not fidget about. I am going to make you a dear little bed like
a bird's nest."

"I don't want to stay here all night," he said.

"But there are goats here."

"I don't want there to be goats," he said again.

"I only mean," said Susie, "that if God can take care of the goats, He
can take care of us too."

"I would rather," said Dickie, after a pause, "that He would put us back
into our cribs."

"Perhaps He will," said Susie; "but you must sit quite still, and let me
creep down and try if there is any other way to get to shore."

"No, Susie, you mustn't go," said Dick, whimpering. "I won't cry if you
are here, but if you go I shall--I shall _weep_," he said.

"O darling Dick, don't," said Susie imploringly. "Perhaps mother will
come to the shore and see us, or perhaps the twins will tell her, or
perhaps the fishermen will bring a boat."

"I shall _weep_," repeated Dick firmly. After that he did not speak
again, but he put his two chubby arms so tightly round her neck that he
nearly choked her. "I won't _let_ you go," he said sleepily.

Susie felt in despair. "I must go, Dick. I don't see what else I can do."

"You said yourself"--Dick's voice was sleepier, and he nestled
closer--"you said yourself that God would take care of us and the goats."

Dick was so determined that Susie was afraid to try to get away. She was
sure that he would insist on coming too, and that she would never be able
to do that terrible scramble again. Susie's active brain flashed from
point to point in a moment of time, and it seemed to her that there was,
after all, nothing particular to be gained by going down on to the rocks.
No one could see her through the mist and darkness, and her feeble voice
would never be heard through the wind. Dick was almost asleep, and the
ledge was sheltered. _If_ she could get him to sleep! She rolled him out
of her arms, keeping her arm as a pillow under his head. Then with her
free hand she unfastened her serge skirt and tucked it round him. When
he coughed, she slipped off her flannel petticoat and wrapped it round
his head and throat, and almost before he had shut his eyes she heard
his even breathing.

"O darling Dick!" said Susie, under her breath.

She crept as near to him as she could, sheltering him in the crevice of
the cliff. Her one flimsy petticoat was soaked, and her legs felt like
ice; but those little choking snores filled her with a joy almost too
great for words.

The rain beat in her face and flicked her wet hair against it like the
lash of a whip; but Susie felt nothing except the warm comfort of the
little body behind her, saw nothing but the gleaming row of lights that
marked the Parade. All her heart moved in one passionate cry, "If mother
will only forgive me!" And then she realized, with a glow of happiness,
that she had never really doubted it; that she had known quite well all
the time that there would be no need for tears or protestations--mother
would understand.

The stars came out and the leaping waves seemed to fall asleep, whilst
Susie, with wide-awake eyes, settled herself for the interminable night.
But nature is very kind to the remorseful sinner as well as to the happy
and the innocent, and presently her head fell back against Dick's
comfortable, cosy shoulder, and she too fell into a dreamless sleep.




CHAPTER IX.


Meanwhile Tom and Mrs. Beauchamp had bought the sand-shoes and various
other little necessaries, had had tea in an Oriental coffee shop, and, as
the climax of a delightful afternoon, were coming home on the top of a
tram--a leisurely proceeding that gave plenty of time for enjoyment. The
weather had clouded over early in the afternoon, but they were halfway
home before a fine rain began to fall and to blot out the shimmering sea.
Just at sunset it cleared up for a little while, and a long path of gold
stretched straight away to the horizon, showing the rocks and the island
silhouetted very clear and black against a pale yellow sky.

"Mother," said Tom suddenly, "do the goats ever come down to drink?"

"What goats?"

"The goats on the island?"

"And do they drink what?"

"The sea."

"Oh dear no, Tom; they would not drink the sea-water--it is much too
salt. I expect they stay on the island all the summer and come home in
winter. I know their masters go and look after them at low tide."

"Well, is it low tide now?" persisted Tom.

Mrs. Beauchamp peered into the dusk.

"No; it is nearly high, I think. There is very little of the rocks to be
seen."

"Well, there is something scrambling about on the island, quite low down,
and it looks just like goats."

"Sea-birds, Tom?"

"They don't _scramble_," said Tom.

"Well, fishermen perhaps. Show me where you see them."

But the black dots had disappeared. The fine drizzling rain had come on
again, and the island was misty; heavy clouds were banked on the horizon,
and it had grown suddenly cold and dark.

"Come inside, Tom," said Mrs. Beauchamp; "hold on to the rail and don't
tumble off. Isn't it pleasant to think of the warm, cosy nursery and
supper?"

"Is it supper-time?" asked Tom, amazed.

"Well, it is past six, and we are a good way from home yet. I hope all
the family were safe under shelter before the rain came on. Do you see
the white horses dashing up the sides of the island? It looks very cold,
doesn't it?"

"I'm glad I'm not a goat," said Tom.

"So am I! See, there are the Parade lights. Get all the parcels together,
and be ready to jump off when we stop."

A shopping expedition alone with mother was always a great treat. There
was so much to tell afterwards--so many parcels to open and examine. Tom
scampered up the Parade in advance of Mrs. Beauchamp's soberer footsteps,
so it was he who first caught sight of nurse's face when the door was
opened to his clamorous knock.

"Go up to the nursery, Master Tom," she said.

Tom dashed on merrily, and a minute later he heard his mother's voice in
the hall, with a quick note of anxiety in it.

"What is it, nurse?"

"It's Miss Susie," said nurse, "and Master Dick."

Tom hung over the banisters to hear more.

"I left them out on the beach for a bit, whilst I came in to make the
tea; and they had my orders to come when I signalled, but they never took
no notice. So I ran down to the beach, and there wasn't a sign of them;
and there was nothing more that I could do till you came home."

"How long ago?" asked Mrs. Beauchamp.

All of a sudden the tired look had come back to her face. She was
anxious, but she was not frightened.

"It was about five I called to them, and it's past six now."

"Have you any idea where they are?"

"Well, I've heard Miss Susie speak of the town and buying sweets; and
she's that audacious by times she might have dragged the poor child off
without stopping to think--and it's a long three miles, and a regular
downpour coming on."

Simultaneously both mother and nurse turned back to the pavement and
looked critically at the sky and the sea. There was very little to be
seen but scurrying clouds and one or two misty stars, but the boom of the
waves on the shore was loud and importunate. Without a word they came in
and shut the door.

"I don't think they _can_ be on the beach," said their mother, as
cheerfully as she could, "but it is like looking for a needle in a
haystack. I will go and speak to the policeman and the fishermen."

She spoke wearily, and the anxious line deepened between her eyes, as she
stood irresolutely on the steps, looking into the darkness and feeling
the lashing of the fine rain against her face. A sickening wave of fear
rolled over her, but nurse could not tell it by her voice.

"No doubt they started for the town--Susie is thoughtless. Open my
umbrella, please, nurse, and keep their supper hot."

"I _do_ hope Master Dick don't get his nasty cough back," said nurse.

"Oh, I don't think he will," said Mrs. Beauchamp.

She ran down the steps, holding her umbrella firmly, and battling with
the gusts of wind that swept the Parade. The insistent thunder of the
waves sounded very dreary.

She ran over to the sea wall and down the wooden steps on to the beach.
Two or three fishermen were sheltering close under the cliff; the wind
was so loud that she had to shout at them to be heard.

"Have you been here long?" she said.

"Yes, most of the day." A short black pipe was removed to allow of the
remark.

"Have you seen some children playing about--a little girl in a red
jersey, a boy in a sailor suit?"

The answer was very deliberate. A great many boys and girls had been
playing on the sands--there always were a "rack" of them--the rain came
and swamped them. He hadn't noticed no red jersey in particular.

"Did you see any of them on the rocks?"

No; but then they might have been, for he hadn't been looking that way.

"But _some_ of you would have seen them," Mrs. Beauchamp urged. "If two
children had been scrambling on the rocks at sunset, some of you would
have noticed them?"

"Maybe, maybe not."

"Is it high tide?" she asked.

"In another hour." And some one added out of the darkness, "Don't you be
feared, ma'am; children and chickens come home to roost."

Mrs. Beauchamp thanked him gratefully and felt comforted.

Again she wearily climbed the steps, and flew rather than walked down the
long Parade. The flickering gas lamps showed between patches of darkness,
the rain drizzled on, and she felt helpless and bewildered, not knowing
where to turn next. Wherever Dickie was, bronchitis must be dogging his
footsteps, and all the time she seemed to hear Susie's voice appealing to
her. Poor Susie! who always came back to her best friend--who was always
so sorry afterwards!

She spoke to the policeman at the corner of the Parade, and he was very
determined. He would go to the police station and give notice, he said;
but there wasn't the least use in her wearing herself out by running on
into the town. He knew the young lady from No. 17 quite well by sight--a
very sensible young lady!--and he was as certain as that he stood there
that she had not passed him since five o'clock. She was on the beach then
with the little boy and some other young ladies and gentlemen; he had
seen them himself. They were playing and shouting, and having a fine
time. No, he was quite certain he wasn't making a mistake; he knew her by
her face, and her brown plaits, and her scarlet jersey. She certainly was
playing with other children.

Mrs. Beauchamp tried to push aside the urgent fear that was knocking at
her heart. If even the policeman had confidence in Susie, should her
mother be behindhand? She told the policeman, for his information and her
own comfort, that she was only frightened because the little boy had been
ill, and it was such a cold, wet night, but at the same time she thought
she would walk round to the town by the beach. "And you will go to the
police station? Some one may have seen them. I cannot feel satisfied
doing nothing."

"If you take my advice, lady," said the policeman, "you should go home
first. Perhaps they'll have got back, or perhaps the other young lady
could give you an idea. Children know a good deal of each other's ways."

The advice was sensible and practical, and Mrs. Beauchamp was relieved at
any definite suggestion. Amy might possibly know something about the
others which she had not confided to nurse. She caught at the hope, and
fought her way back before the wind, up the long, wet Parade, until she
stood, drenched and breathless, at the door.

Nurse opened it almost on her knock, and peered anxiously behind her into
the dark, but Mrs. Beauchamp shook her head.

"No, I have done nothing," she said, in a strained voice. "I can't think
what to do--no one has seen them, nurse."

Her voice trembled a little, but she tried to smile. She would not break
down.

"I want to speak to Amy, nurse, and Master Tom; but Amy is less
excitable. Send them to me on the stairs here; we must not wake baby."

"I've questioned them," said nurse, "but they don't seem to know
anything. They'll be ready enough to tell if they do; they are very
upset."

Mrs. Beauchamp sat upon the lowest stair, with her anxious eyes fixed on
the nursery door. They were curiously like Susie's eyes, but with a
sweeter expression. They were smiling still, but it was such a sad smile
that after one look Amy flew helter-skelter downstairs and flung herself
into the welcoming arms.

"Amy," said her mother gently, "don't cry now; I haven't time. I am
anxious about Dickie's bronchitis"--it was curious how she clung to the
belief that it was only the bronchitis that troubled her--"it is so rainy
and cold! Do you know where Susie has gone?"

"No, mother," said Amy. She knelt upon the stair with her pale little
face pressed against her mother's cheek.

"Think, Amy," Mrs. Beauchamp urged.

"I have thoughted and thoughted," said Amy, "and I can only remember that
once, a long time ago, the twins said--"

"What twins?"

"Oh, I forgot you didn't know. They are twins, and they are friends of
Susie's. They are very reckless on the rocks, and sometimes Susie went
too."

"But when, Amy?"

"I don't know," said Amy, with literal truthfulness. "They didn't tell
me; they said I was a baby." Amy's eyes filled. "I wish Susie could be
found," she said.

"But you are helping me to find her," said her mother. "Now I have
something to go on.--Did you know, Tom? Have you ever been on the rocks
with the twins?"

"They told me not to tell," said Tom sturdily.

"But, Tom, that does not matter; it is right to break such a promise."

"If you break your promise you go to hell," said Tom.

"No, no, Tom--not when it is a matter--a matter of life and death. Do you
think they went on the rocks to-night?"

"I will tell you if you want me to," said Tom, "but Susie will be angry.
I don't know if she went to-day; so there!"

"Did you ever go?"

"Heaps and heaps of times," said Tom.

"And who are the twins?"

"I don't know."

"But their _name_, Tom?" she urged.

"I truly don't know, mummy."

"O Tom!"

Tom too had broken down, and his arms were round her neck.

"O mother, Susie didn't mean to go. She often and often didn't want to.
Don't be angry with Susie. Nurse often said, 'I can't think where you get
your stockings in such a mess.' But the twins asked Susie, and she went;
often and often she didn't want to--"

"Poor Susie," said Mrs. Beauchamp.

"And you needn't think she's drowned," said Tom, "because Susie knows
quite well how to walk on seaweed. She wouldn't be such a silly as to be
drowned."

Tom's testimony and the policeman's! She alone--Susie's mother--had been
faithless and unbelieving. She began to regain her confidence in Susie.
She got up a minute later with a more hopeful smile. As she shook out her
wet umbrella she stooped to kiss Amy's eager face.

"It is so much easier to find four people than two," she said,
"particularly when two of them are twins, and one wears a scarlet jersey.
Some one must have seen such a noisy crew, and there is less chance of
their having disappeared."

"Susie isn't such a silly as all that," said Tom, with serene confidence.

Mrs. Beauchamp's eyes shone, and when Tom opened the door she looked out,
over his head, into the deepening night. A few stars had struggled
through the clouds, and the moon shone fitfully above the island. It
looked very big and black and peaceful, and Mrs. Beauchamp paused for a
moment and looked back at it.

"_If_," she said to herself, and then again "_if_" out loud.

But whatever the disturbing thought might be, she would not give it
entrance. She fixed her mind resolutely on the twins and the red jersey,
and pinned her hopes on the police inspector.




CHAPTER X.


But it was extraordinarily difficult to find any clue to the missing
family, and the long, miserable hours passed, and brought Mrs. Beauchamp
no nearer to the twins. She trudged up and down the Parade, to the police
station, and down the steps to the beach, over and over again, with feet
so tired that they almost refused to carry her.

The wet pavement reflected the flickering gas-lamps. One by one the
lights in the windows were put out, and late visitors hurried home. She
clung to the policeman's solid tramp with a lingering hope, but she was
growing desperate; and over everything was the fine rain, coming in gusts
from a cloudy sky, wetting her hair, her face, and soaking her skirts. It
was a miserable night, and the police inspector deeply sympathized with
her. He went along the town road and cross-examined the policeman. He
made inquiries and issued orders, and took upon himself to beg the pale,
tired lady to go home and wait and see what turned up. But Mrs. Beauchamp
felt that to sit at home doing nothing would be intolerable. She shook
her head and turned again on to the Parade, and with her went Susie's
light feet, so real, so active, that she almost saw the red jersey on a
level with her shoulder, and those brown, defiant eyes. For it was of
Susie that her mind was full--poor Susie, who had "often and often not
wanted to go," but who had gone.

It was easier for little Dickie; all his life it would be easier for Dick
than for this eager, forgetful, repentant daughter, whose passionate
sorrow always came too late.

Mrs. Beauchamp leaned over the railing at the top, and looked down on to
the sands, debating whether it was worth another effort. The group of
fishermen still stood close under the shelter of the cliff; their gruff
voices floated up to her, and gave her a feeling of companionship. She
ran down on to the beach, but when she stood in front of them she felt it
impossible to speak. One by one they rose awkwardly, and gazed at her in
an embarrassing silence, but making no suggestion, so that it was she
who spoke first.

"I have not found them; I cannot trace them anyhow. Can none of you help
me?"

Her sweet, impatient voice appealed to them rather hopelessly, and there
was no response.

"I'm willing to do what I can," one of them said at last. "At daylight
I'll bring round my boat and go over the rocks. It's an ebb tide."

"Oh no," she said, and shuddered. "I can't sit still till
daylight--indeed I cannot. It is only ten o'clock now."

"It's a fair offer, lady," said the man.

"But it is going to be a fine night," she pleaded. "The rain is over. If
I could find the twins of whom my children speak! Can you not help me?
You are at least men."

"Why, ma'am"--it was a new voice that answered her--"if it's children you
want, I'll find them fast enough if they are on shore; it's only the sea
that keeps her own. A set of lubberly men that can't help a lady in
distress! That's not how the Royal Navy acts. And don't you cry, lady.
Lads and lasses don't get mislaid as easy as that; bad halfpennies come
back to their moorings. We'll knock at every door in the town before we
give up."

He was an old man, but there was a very different note in his voice from
the flabby sympathy of the other men. He put out his pipe with a horny
thumb, and gave a rather contemptuous look round the lounging group of
longshoremen. "Royal Navy" was written all over him--in his keen eyes,
his upright carriage, and his kindly, respectful manner. At the
confidence in his voice Mrs. Beauchamp's wavering hope steadied, but she
suddenly felt the strain of the anxiety and fatigue. As she turned she
stumbled over something small and black that the ebb-tide had left in the
ridge of damp seaweed on the beach. She slipped and recovered herself,
for the old man's hand was on her arm.

"Steady, ma'am," he said cheerfully; "it's only a bit of an old boot."

"A bit of a boot!" The object swam before Mrs. Beauchamp's eyes, her
hands trembled. "It is a child's," she said, and there was anguish in her
voice.

"Oh, well"--he picked it up and flung it on one side--"the sea don't give
up boots without the feet they held. Wherever the little girl is, ma'am,
she's gone without her boots. Carry on."

The Royal Navy, as the senior service, went first, and Mrs. Beauchamp
stumbled after him; but there was new hope springing in her heart. His
sturdy common-sense had infected her. Was it she only who doubted
Susie--who had no confidence in her common-sense? The sea gives back
only what it takes, and it had given back only Susie's empty boot.

Stumbling, dizzy, tired out, she still felt a divine peace at her heart
as she heard the comfortable, steady steps beside her, and saw the fine,
weather-beaten face, with its clear, keen eyes.

"You see, ma'am," he said, "longshoremen are good lads enough for
sunshine and fair weather, but it's the Royal Navy you look to when it
comes to foul weather and storm. That's where I got my training, and it
stands by you. Maybe you'd like to rest a bit and let me go on? I'll
knock at every door in the place before I give in, and I'll bring them
children with me."

"No, oh no," she said. Her voice was hoarse with fatigue, but was
undaunted. "I shall sail humbly in the wake of the Royal Navy. Only,
tell me what you mean to do."

He stood for a moment under a lamp, and his keen eyes seemed to see
through her. "I propose to begin with the first street out of the
Parade," he said, "and so on, by sections. I'll go first where I'm known.
There can't be such a rack of twins in the town that they can't be
traced. Trust me, lady."

"I _do_! I _do_!" she said; "but I feel frightened."

"Where's your faith, ma'am?" he said, rather sternly.

"I am sure I don't know," she said, with a faint smile. "It may be the
will--the will of--Providence--that the children should not come home."

The old man stood still again, and raised his cap from a silvery head.

"There's One above as won't let him go too far," he said. "We have our
orders, which is enough for me. Carry on."

And really faith or fortune did seem to befriend Mrs. Beauchamp at last.
It was just after they had knocked at the second closed door, and had
received a very short negative to their inquiry, which the maidservant
evidently considered to be an ill-timed joke, that a door on the opposite
side of the road opened suddenly, and a great stream of light flashed
out.

There were some confused farewells, a gathering up of skirts, and
laughter; and in a minute the Royal Navy was standing at the salute
before the master of the house.

"The lady and I are looking for some twins, sir."

Instead of the ready "No" they half expected, the man paused, and smiled
whimsically.

"Well, what have the little beggars been doing now?" he said.

Never had any words sounded quite so sweet to Mrs. Beauchamp. She too
came into the circle of light, and lifted her sweet, tired, beseeching
face.

"My children were playing with the twins this evening," she said, "and
they have never come home. Of course they may not be _your_ twins; but we
hope--"

"Come in, come in," he interrupted, holding the door hospitably open
until it had swallowed them all up. "Of course it is my twins. No one
else's twins are ever half so troublesome."

And then he sent a great, jovial shout up the stairs,--

"Dot and Dash, you are wanted!"




CHAPTER XI.


Instantly there were a scuffle in the upper passage and a rush of bare
feet to the top of the stairs. Mrs. Beauchamp, looking up, saw two slim
figures in white, and in another minute she was confronted by two pairs
of the very brightest and most daring black eyes she had ever seen.

Without a moment's hesitation Dot hurled herself against the slight
figure in the hall, and began a confused, breathless, incoherent
statement. "I could not sleep. Neither of we have slept all night. Susie
said she knew about the tides; she said she was quite certain"--most
familiar words in Mrs. Beauchamp's ears--"that she would get home all
right. But Dick had hurt his foot, and we left her on the rocks, sitting
quite in a pool. And it has rained so ever since; and perhaps she is on
the rocks still, and it is pitchy dark, and both of we feel as if we
couldn't bear it."

She paused for breath, but Mrs. Beauchamp's arms tightened round
her--always so ready to hold and comfort.

"Thank you," she said, very quietly; "you are giving me great comfort.
They would not _stay_ on the rocks, would they?"

"No, of course not." Dot spoke with comforting certainty. "They would
clamber on to the island if the tide was high; but it is so terrifying in
the dark. And it was our fault--Susie didn't want to come."

"It was a pity," said Mrs. Beauchamp.

Her eyes, over Dot's dishevelled head, flew to the doorway, and met those
other alert eyes that understood and answered their question. When did a
woman in distress ever appeal in vain to the Royal Navy?

"I'll get my boat out, and be ready in a quarter of an hour," he said.
"You can meet me by the steps, lady, and you'd best bide in shelter as
long as you can."

"Thank you. Can you?--is it possible? Those men said I must wait till
daylight."

"Lubberly loafers," said the Royal Navy. "In the Service things are
ordered different."

He opened the door and went out. Through the opening Mrs. Beauchamp
caught a glimpse of sailing clouds and starlight.

Dot was pressing on her again.

"Please forgive us if Susie gets home; it has been so miserable. I knew
Dash wasn't asleep because of his breathing. It has been dreadful for you
and for Susie, but it is worse for us."

Her voice fell to a husky whisper; her great black eyes were full of
passionate entreaty; she shivered in her thin nightdress.

"My poor, poor children"--there was nothing but the sweetest sympathy in
Mrs. Beauchamp's comforting touch--"I forgive you _now_--now while Susie
is out there and I am still waiting for her. I will let you know directly
we are back and they are safe. You must let me go now."

Their father had disappeared, and Dash came hurrying downstairs in a
shamefaced, sidelong fashion to be comforted. He did not like being left
beyond the reach of consolation. But Mrs. Beauchamp disengaged the
clinging arms.

"We will sit up till we know about them," Dot said, with tears.

"No; you must go to bed and wait there," Mrs. Beauchamp said firmly. "I
know," she went on hurriedly, as there were signs of another storm, "that
it is far harder; but duties like that _are_ hard, and it is the only
thing you can do to help."

"Very well," said Dot, with commendable meekness.

"Very well," echoed Dash.

"Here, get back to bed." The master of the house, booted and
mackintoshed, had come back into the hall, and the twins scampered up the
stairs at the unaccustomed sternness of his voice. He had a glass of wine
and some biscuits in his hand, and he spoke almost as severely to Mrs.
Beauchamp as he had done to the twins. "Of course I am going with you. I
have rugs and mackintoshes and some brandy. Can you suggest anything
else? No," as she returned the half-emptied glass; "drink _all_ the wine.
I _insist_ on it."

Mrs. Beauchamp obeyed mechanically. She seemed to feel new life, a sense
of protection, an atmosphere of help; there was some one else to command
and to decide.

The last sight she saw as she went out into the night was Dot's fuzzy
head leaning over the banisters at a dangerous angle.




CHAPTER XII.


Outside the rain had lessened, and the stars shone more securely. Without
a word she hurried down the cross street and on to the Parade by her
companion's side, but her feet no longer lagged. Hope had sprung anew in
her heart, and as they turned the corner she looked up at him smiling.

"I only know you as 'the father of the twins,'" she said, "and it is a
long address."

"My name is Amherst." Then a moment later, as they picked their way
across the muddy road to the top of the steps, "I have been trying all
this time to find a reason, and I can only frame an excuse--_they have no
mother_!"

"Oh, poor twins!" she said.

The tide was distinctly lower, and the wind had died down. The long waves
rolled in with almost oily smoothness, and showed no ridge of foam when
they broke upon the beach. Patches of seaweed caught and reflected the
moonlight.

The old sailor was baling out the boat, and half a dozen hands held her
to the shore. An air of excitement pervaded every one, and one or two men
offered their services rather sheepishly; but the Royal Navy did not need
assistance.

He settled Mrs. Beauchamp in the bow, with the rugs for a cushion; then
he pushed off with his oar, and in another minute they were gliding out
from under the shadow of the cliff, making straight for the island in
front of them.

Mr. Amherst had taken the other oar, and was rowing bow. On their left
little crests of half-submerged rocks showed black against the sea, and
on the far horizon the false dawn made a silver line between sky and sea.

Mrs. Beauchamp held the lines mechanically and leant forward, straining
her eyes to steer for a possible landing-place; but the beating of her
heart had quieted down, and she had a curious feeling that she was
drifting, drifting, in this solemn silence, out of a region of torturing
fear into the peaceful harbour of a dream.

The twist of the oars in the rowlocks, the rhythmical dip, and the ripple
of water against the boat were restful in their monotony. She felt her
eyes closing as something slipped through her fingers--Susie's boot, with
its long damp laces! She looked at her lap in horror, and tried to push
the dreadful object away; but there was nothing there, excepting the wet
lines that had fallen from her fingers. Some one put out a rough, kind
hand to steady her, and she straightened herself with a start, meeting
the old sailor's keen eyes.

"Carry on, ma'am, carry on." Then, a moment later, "Way enough!"

In a minute Mr. Amherst had caught at the crags and drawn the boat
alongside, and Ben had sent his voice pealing up against the cliff in a
volume of sound that was absolutely terrifying.

"Hulloo! Hulloo--oo!"

A few frightened sea-birds flew out of the crevices in the cliff and
wheeled about their heads, but there was no other sound. Mrs. Beauchamp's
eyes filled with agonized tears, but the sailor's cheeriness was
infectious.

"I'll wake them," he said.

Again his voice went up into the night, as if he defied the poor defences
of the dark.

"Hulloo! Hulloo--oo!"

"Susie!" cried Mrs. Beauchamp, in her thinner treble.

And this time there _was_ an answer--a cry small and faint; not at all
like Susie's boisterous everyday voice, but human. Ben was out of the
boat in a minute, scrambling from peak to peak, and shouting as he went.

Mrs. Beauchamp sat down with an uncertain movement, and covered her face
with her hands; whilst Mr. Amherst, clinging to the rock for fear the
ebbing tide should carry them out to sea, spoke to her with whimsical
entreaty. "Mrs. Beauchamp, please don't faint until Nelson comes back!
Pull yourself together--he _expects_ us to do our duty; and, besides, you
will frighten the children."

The last suggestion had an instantaneous effect. From that calm region
where love and despair were alike forgotten she came back with a
conscious effort to the unsteady boat, and Mr. Amherst's alarmed eyes,
and the lapping water against the bow.

"That's right," said Mr. Amherst, with great relief in his voice. "I
really didn't know how to get to you. Listen!"

"Safe!" The great voice came pealing down the cliff, waking the echoes on
the shore, and with a sort of incredulous joy Mrs. Beauchamp listened to
the sturdy steps coming slowly, surely, carefully down, with a little
ripple of shale following them.

She clutched at the gunwale of the boat until she hurt her hands, and
strained her eyes for the sight she longed to see. First there came the
stalwart figure of the sailor with a bundle in his arms, and behind him a
slim, bare-footed, bareheaded, stumbling little creature, who almost fell
into the expectant arms waiting for her.

"He's quite warm, mother." It was Susie's voice, faint, eager, appealing,
caught by deep sobs. "He has never coughed once--he has never _moved_. He
is quite warm; feel him."

"O Susie! And you?"

"Me! Oh, I'm all right," said Susie, wondering. "I did take care of him;
I tried my very best."

"But where are your clothes, Susie? And it rained so."

"They are round Dick," said Susie. "Mother, they kept him beautifully
warm."

The men jumped into the boat and pushed off. The little bundle of flannel
and serge that held Dickie rolled quite comfortably to the bottom of the
boat; but Susie's mother held two frozen feet in her warm hands and said
nothing. Words did not come easily.

Presently Susie spoke again in that strained whisper. "Mother, when I
went to sleep I dreamt a ferryman came for us, and his boat was close to
the shore, and we were stepping in when you called me back. I knew your
voice, and you said 'Susie' quite plainly. I wouldn't go, and I wouldn't
let him take Dick! I screamed and held him tight, and the ferryman said
we must pay him, all the same; and then you gave him two pennies, and he
went away."

"Susie, I _did_ call. In my heart I have called all night."

"Yes, I know," said Susie. "When I woke and saw the sailor, I thought it
was the ferryman."

"I _had_ paid," said Mrs. Beauchamp.

"Oh, I knew you would," said Susie.

Mrs. Beauchamp took the rug that Mr. Amherst threw to her, and folded it
close and warm about Susie's wet locks and damp body; and presently the
difficult, sobbing breaths grew quieter, but her mother knew that she was
not asleep by the fierce pressure of her fingers.

The day was breaking as the boat was beached, and a dozen willing hands
pulled her high and dry. The sea-birds were awake, fluttering about the
head of the island; the ebbing tide had left the rocks very black and
bare.

When they set Susie on her feet she was too stiff to stand alone, and
never for one moment did she loose her hold of her mother's dress. It was
the Royal Navy that finally took her into wonderfully tender keeping, and
carried her up the steps and along the Parade, and laid her, still
wrapped in the rug, on her own white bed, that nurse had made comfortably
ready.

Dickie woke flushed and warm from his rosy sleep when they brought him
in, and looked at the old sailor with round, bewildered eyes.

"Is it Father Neptune?" he asked.

"No, darling, no."

"Oh, I see he hasn't got his three-pronged fork. Is it Nelson then?"

"I am sure I don't know," said Mrs. Beauchamp, and her laugh was very
near tears.--"You will tell the twins at once, please," she said to Mr.
Amherst as she said good-bye. "I cannot bear to feel that they may be
awake and waiting."

But Dot and Dash had not passed a sleepless night of misery. Long ago,
tired out with sorrow, they had fallen asleep on the nursery window-sill,
and dreamt that they were sailing on unknown seas in fairy boats!




CHAPTER XIII.


And the wonderful part of it all was that Susie was not even ill! She
slept "into the middle of next week," as nurse expressed it; but it was
a deep, steady, peaceful sleep, quite undisturbed by any commotion around
her. Amy sat most of the morning crouched up on the floor, just inside
the room, and waited for the opening of those brown eyes; whilst nurse
had even got Dick and baby safely dressed and out on the sands before
Susie's eyelids quivered, and she stretched her stiff limbs, and started
up with a cry, "Mother!"

"My darling Susie!"

"O mother! I was so afraid you were a dream."

"Then what are you?"

"A _troublesome comfort_. Nurse said so, and it is true."

She sat straight up in bed, with her knees drawn up and her hands clasped
round them. Her hair was rough, and there were no little stiff pigtails
telling of nurse's energetic brushing. On her hands there were bruises
and scratches that hurt her; but nothing mattered now that she was within
reach of the comfortable arms, and could lay her head on the blue serge
knee.

"Mummy, is Dick well?"

"Quite well, darling."

"Mother"--she pressed closer and hid her face--"I am sorry, but I don't
know how to say it. I didn't like the twins to think me a baby, and I
felt quite certain that I could get back."

"Perhaps you are too certain, darling."

"You mean," said Susie, "that there is too much talk and too little
_do_."

"Perhaps that _is_ what I mean, Susie; but when I try to think about it
clearly I only see a poor little cold, frightened child, and Dick as warm
as toast."

"I never thought about it, mother. I only prayed and prayed that he might
not get bronchitis."

"It is because you did not think about it that I love you, Susie."

"I will try and be better," said Susie humbly.

Straight across the room she caught sight of a reflection in the glass,
and she sat suddenly more upright and gazed at it. It reminded her of
that reflection in the train; but this mouth was smiling, not set into
sulky lines--these eyes were not full of angry tears!

"Oh, I am perfectly certain I can be good," cried Susie eagerly.

The reflection in the glass seemed to hesitate; the sparkling eyes fell,
and Susie's face went down upon her knees.

She groaned in despair.

"It seems as if I couldn't help it," she said. "I am always perfectly
certain."

"And I am perfectly certain that I hear your breakfast on the stairs,"
said Mrs. Beauchamp, "and that is the important thing."

She raised Susie's crimson face, and smoothed the rebellious hair, and
patted the pillow into a comfortable shape. Every good nurse knows that
tears and protestations must wait their time, and that little patients
cannot be allowed the luxury of repentance!

Susie would have liked to pour out volumes of self-reproach and ease her
burdened heart, so it was perhaps one little step in the right direction
when she resolutely closed her lips and welcomed Amy and the breakfast
with a smile.

She came downstairs in the afternoon and lay on the horsehair sofa in the
sitting-room, and held a sort of levée of her visitors. Tom was subdued,
and the twins were envious--nothing uncommon ever happened to them!
They knew too much or were too cautious, but they sat on two stools by
the window and followed Mrs. Beauchamp's movements with their uncanny
eyes, until the concentrated gaze made her nervous.

"Both of we would like to be your children," said Dash suddenly.

Mrs. Beauchamp tried to feel grateful for the compliment, and to hide the
dismay it inspired.

"It seems rather hard," Dot added, "that Susie should have
everything--_and_ a mother too--and we haven't."

"Perhaps you may share me," she suggested.

But the twins viewed the position gloomily. "Us two like things of our
own," they said.

"Well, you can't have mother," said Dick doggedly. "You can have our
buckets when we leave, and my boat, and Amy's shells."

"Oh, not my shells," cried Amy, aggrieved.

"That's selfish of you," said Tom; "but I have a proper collection, and
you haven't. You can have nurse," he generously added.

"Oh no, not nurse," said Dick.

"And that's greedy," said Tom: "you want every one."

"Yes, I do," said Dick sturdily.

"Us two," said Dot suddenly, "have adopted you for our mother. It is the
only way we can have you for our own."

"You can't have her," cried Tom indignantly; "she's ours."

"That doesn't matter," said Dot; "us two have settled it. She can't help
us adopting her. We are her kind of children now.--Aren't we, father?"

Mr. Amherst removed the twins before it came to blows, and left the
excited family sitting silently in the dusky room.

Mrs. Beauchamp, very tired and peaceful, was drawing a dispirited darning
needle through very worn stockings, and by Susie's sofa sat an upright
figure with keen eyes and silver hair.

"The little lady will be sleeping soon," he said. He rose and held out a
horny hand.

"In a softer bed than she had last night," said Mrs. Beauchamp gently.

"Well, as we make our bed so we lie in it," he said.

"Yes," said Susie, in a subdued voice.

He paused and smiled at her.

"But so much we didn't know of went to the making of the bed," he said,
"that perhaps little missy lay softly enough after all."

       *       *       *       *       *

"It is a pity about Miss Susie's boot," nurse said regretfully. "Of
course it's a mercy the poor child was brought back safe; and never
shall I forget what we suffered unknowing. But talking of beds brings
back that boot to me, and it's no use telling me it doesn't matter, for
it's sheer waste of the pair."

       *       *       *       *       *

Life in London seemed rather tame to the little Beauchamps after that
summer holiday, with the paddling and the boats, the rocks and the
island! They took as much of it all home as they could convey in biscuit
tins, and buckets, and cardboard boxes. But, after all, one cannot shut
the ocean into a glass aquarium or hold the sunset on a palette, and
there were many things that only memory could bring back to them--the
sea-birds wheeling against the blue sky, for instance, the ebbing and
flowing tide, the miles of seaweed on the beach, and one night the memory
of which will only die with Susie.

Dick has long forgotten it, for he lay "very softly" in the bed that
Susie made for him; but at any moment Susie can shut her eyes and hear
the trampling of the surf and the beating of the rain, and see the misty
stars!

The twins have taken their adopted mother very seriously, and have
established her in the citadel of their hearts. Like the pirates that
they are, they have stolen her love, and love her passionately in return.
Their undivided affection does not give her a very peaceful life, but it
is certainly never dull, and the bold black eyes have grown very dear to
her.

The traditions of the Royal Navy are always the mainspring of life in the
Beauchamps' nursery; they "carry on" under the auspices of Nelson, and in
obedience to his signal they do what England expects! Duty is their
watchword, and Ben is their model. Nurse often stands amazed at an
obedience that is almost alarming; but when she begins to think that Miss
Susie or Master Tom is growing too good to live, she is generally
reassured by some quite unlooked-for crime, and, to her relief, the
"troublesome comforts" remain troublesome.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TROUBLESOME COMFORTS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

