



  General Catholic Devotions



  COMPILED BY
  REV. BONAVENTURE HAMMER, O.F.M.


---


  NEW YORK, CINCINNATI, CHICAGO
  BENZIGER BROTHERS

  PRINTERS TO THE HOLY APOSTOLIC SEE
  PUBLISHERS OF BENZINGER'S MAGAZINE



  Imprimi Permittitur.
               FR. CHRYSOSTOMUS THEOBALD, O.F.M.,
               _Minister Provincialis._
               Cincinnati, Ohio, die 30, Martii, 1908.

  Nihil Obstat.
                REMY LAPORT, S.T.L.,
                     _Censor Librorum._

  Imprimatur.
                JOHN M. FARLEY,
                Archbishop of New York.



  NEW YORK, March 4, 1909.

  COPYRIGHT, 1909, BY BENZIGER BROTHERS.



  CONTENTS

  General Devotions

  MORNING PRAYERS
  EVENING PRAYERS
  PRAYERS AT HOLY MASS
  PRAYERS AFTER MASS
  PRAYERS FOR CONFESSION
       Before Confession
       After Confession
  PRAYERS FOR HOLY COMMUNION
       Before Communion
       After Communion
  VISIT TO THE BLESSED SACRAMENT
  PRAYER TO THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS
  PRAYERS TO JESUS SUFFERING
  THE STATIONS OF THE CROSS
  PRAYER TO OUR SUFFERING REDEEMER
  PRAYER TO THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY
  PRAYER FOR ALL THINGS NECESSARY TO SALVATION

  THE FOUR APPROVED LITANIES
  LITANY OF THE MOST HOLY NAME OF JESUS
  LITANY OF THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS
  LITANY OF LORETO, IN HONOR OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY
  LITANY OF ALL SAINTS







General Devotions


"The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon Him, to all that call
upon Him in truth. He will do the will of them that fear Him, and He
will bear their prayer and save them" (_Ps._  cxliv. 18, 19).

"Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, instant in prayer" (_Rom._
xii. 12).



Morning Prayers

On awaking, sign yourself with the sign of the cross, saying:

IN THE name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

I rise in the name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, who redeemed me by His
precious blood. Bless, guide, and protect me from all evil, O Lord!
Strengthen me to all good and lead me to eternal life. Amen.

After dressing, kneel and say:

My Lord and my God! I prostrate myself before the throne of Thy divine
Majesty, and give Thee infinite thanks, O Lord, that I have passed this
night safely and have not died in my sins, but was preserved by Thy
bounty for Thy further service.

I offer up to Thee all that I shall do and suffer to-day, and unite it
with the prayers, labors, and sufferings of Our Lord Jesus Christ and of
His blessed Mother Mary.

OFFERING

TAKE, O Lord, and receive all my liberty, my memory, my understanding,
and my whole will. Thou hast given me all that I am and all that I
possess; I surrender it all to Thee that Thou mayest dispose of it
according to Thy will. Give me only Thy love and Thy grace; with these I
will be rich enough, and will have no more to desire.

Indulgence. 300 days, once a day. (Leo XIII, May 26, 1883.)



Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity

MY LORD and God! I most firmly believe all that Thou hast revealed and
all that Thy holy Church believes and teaches, because Thou, who art
infallible Truth, hast so revealed and commanded.

My Lord and God! Because Thou art almighty, infinitely good and
merciful, I hope that by the merits of the passion and death of Jesus
Christ, our Saviour, Thou wilt grant me eternal life, which Thou hast
promised to all who shall do the works of a good Christian, as I purpose
to do by Thy help.

My Lord and God! Because Thou art the highest and most perfect good, I
love Thee with my whole heart, and above all things; and rather than
offend Thee, I am ready to lose all things else; and for Thy love, I
love and desire to love my neighbor as myself.

Indulgence. (1) A plenary indulgence, once a month, for devoutly making
these acts daily; under the usual conditions. (2) A plenary indulgence
at the hour of death, under the same conditions. (3) Seven years and
seven quarantines, every time. (Benedict XIV, January 28, 1728.) The
same Pope declared that it is not necessary to use any set formula, but
that any form of words may be used, provided it expresses the particular
motive of each of the three theological virtues.


To the Blessed Virgin Mary

Hail Mary, etc.

MY QUEEN, my Mother! I give myself entirely to thee; and to show my
devotion to thee I consecrate to thee this day my eyes, my ears, my
mouth, my heart, my whole being, without reserve. Wherefore, good
Mother, as I am thine own, keep me, guard me, as thy property and
possession.

Indulgence. (1) 100 days, once a day. (2) A plenary indulgence, once a
month, for saying it every day; under the usual conditions. (Pius IX,
Aug. 5, 1851.)


To the Angel Guardian

  ANGEL of God, my guardian dear,
  To whom His love committed me here,
  Ever this day be at my side,
  To light and guard, to rule and guide! Amen.

Indulgence. (1) 100 days, every time. (2) A plenary indulgence on the
feast of the holy Guardian Angels, for saying it morning and evening
throughout the year; under the usual conditions. (3) A plenary
indulgence at the hour of death, for saying it often during life. (Pius
VI, Oct 2, 1795, and June 11, 1796.) (4) A plenary indulgence, once a
month, for saying it daily; under the usual conditions. (Pius VII, May
15, 1821.)



Evening Prayers

ETERNAL and merciful God! I adore Thee and give Thee thanks for all the
graces and benefits which Thou hast conferred upon me during my whole
life, and particularly during this day. May the saints and elect,
especially the Holy Helpers, praise and thank Thee for me.

Enlighten me now through Thy holy Spirit, and let me know whether and
how I have offended Thee to-day in thought, word, deed, and omission of
duty.

Examine your conscience.


An Act of Contrition

O MY God! I am deeply sorry for all my sins, for those I committed
to-day, and for those of my whole life, because thereby I offended Thy
supreme and most loving goodness. Pardon me for the sake of Jesus, Thy
Son, who shed His most precious blood on the cross for our sins. With
the help of Thy grace, I firmly resolve to amend my life, and rather to
die than again offend Thee by a mortal sin.

PETITION

PROTECT me and mine and all men during this night, and through the
intercession of the blessed Virgin Mary and of the Holy Helpers preserve
us from all dangers of body and soul. Keep away from us sickness, fire,
and calamities of every kind. Protect us against the assaults of the
wicked and of Satan. Into Thy hands I commend my body and soul; let me
rest in Thy most holy wounds.

Visit, we beseech Thee, O Lord, this habitation, and repel from it all
the snares of the enemy; let Thy holy angels dwell herein to preserve us
in peace, and may Thy blessings be upon us for ever. Through Christ our
Lord. Amen.


To the Sacred Heart of Jesus

(_Prayer of St Alphonsus._)

ADORABLE Heart of my Jesus, Heart created expressly for the love of men!
Until now I have shown toward Thee only ingratitude. Pardon me, O my
Jesus! Heart of my Jesus, abyss of love and of mercy, how is it possible
that I do not die of sorrow when I reflect on Thy goodness to me and my
ingratitude to Thee? Thou, my Creator, after having created me, hast
given Thy blood and Thy life for me; and, not content with this, Thou
hast invented a means of offering Thyself up every day for me in the
Holy Eucharist, exposing Thyself to a thousand insults and outrages. O
Jesus, do Thou wound my heart with a great contrition for my sins, and a
lively love for Thee. Through Thy tears and Thy blood give me the grace
of perseverance in Thy fervent love until I breathe my last sigh. Amen.


To the Blessed Virgin Mary

REMEMBER, O most gracious Virgin Mary, that never was it known that any
one who fled to thy protection, implored thy help, and sought thy
intercession, was left unaided. Inspired with this confidence, I fly
unto thee, O Virgin of virgins, my Mother! To thee I come; before thee I
stand, sinful and sorrowful. O Mother of the Word incarnate, despise not
my petitions, but in thy mercy hear and answer me. Amen.

Indulgence. (1) 300 days, every time, (2) A plenary indulgence, once a
month, for having said it daily; under the usual conditions. (Pius IX,
December 11, 1846.)

Litany of Loreto (located in the list of litanies).


To St. Joseph

GUARDIAN of virgins and father, holy Joseph, to whose faithful care
Christ Jesus, very innocence, and Mary, Virgin of virgins, were
committed; I pray and beg of thee by these dear pledges, Jesus and Mary,
free me from all uncleanness, and make me with spotless mind, pure
heart, and chaste body, ever most chastely to serve Jesus and Mary all
the days of my life. Amen.

Indulgence. 100 days, once a day. (Pius IX, Feb. 4, 1877.)


Before Retiring

(_Prayer of St. Alphonsus._)

MY LORD and God Jesus Christ! I adore Thee and give Thee thanks for all
the graces which Thou hast granted me to-day. I offer up to Thee my rest
and every moment of this night, and implore Thee to preserve me from all
sin. Therefore I place myself into the wound of Thy sacred side, and
beneath the protecting mantle of my Mother Mary. May Thy holy angels
assist me and watch over my peace, and may Thy holy blessing remain with
me.

Indulgence. 60 days, once a day, also for the souls in purgatory. (Leo
XIII, June 30, 1898.)

INVOCATION

JESUS, Mary, and Joseph, I give you my heart and my soul.

Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, assist me in my last agony.

Jesus, Mary, and Joseph, may I breathe forth my soul in peace with you.

Indulgence. 100 days for the recital of any one of these invocations,
300 days for all three. (Pius VII, Aug. 26, 1814.)



Prayers at Holy Mass


Preparatory Prayer

ALMIGHTY and eternal God! I appear in Thy presence to assist at the most
holy sacrifice of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, Thy Son, my
Redeemer, and to offer it up jointly with the priest and the faithful
here present, in grateful remembrance of His passion and death, for the
promotion of Thy glory, and for my salvation. Together with all the holy
Masses that are celebrated throughout the world, I offer up this august
sacrifice for the following intentions: To adore Thee, O my God, as Thou
dost deserve to be adored; to give Thee due thanks for the innumerable
benefits which I owe to Thy bounty; to make reparation for the many
offenses I have committed; to appease Thy just anger, and to invoke Thy
infinite mercy for me, for Thy holy Church, for the whole world, and for
the souls in purgatory. Amen.


At the Beginning of Mass

O HEAVENLY Father! Hear the prayer of Thy holy Church invoking Thy
divine Majesty in the name of Our Lord Jesus Christ, to come to the aid
of Thy children in all their needs. Turn not from us Thy gracious eyes,
but deliver us from all evil, so that we may live to please Thee, die in
Thy love, and enter the kingdom of glory. Amen.


At the Gospel

ALMIGHTY God, Thou source of all truth, holiness, and justice; having
spoken in the Old Law by the mouth of Thy prophets, Thou spokest in the
fulness of time through Thy divine Son Jesus Christ, and speakest now
through Thy holy Church, appointed by Thee the Teacher of truth. We
thank Thee for the saving doctrines entrusted to her for our good, and
implore Thy grace to practise them and to please Thee by all our
actions.


At the Credo

Say the Apostles' Creed.

At the Offering

ALMIGHTY and eternal God! Look graciously on the forms of bread and wine
offered up to Thee on the altar by the priest, imploring Thee to bless
and sanctify them for the eucharistic sacrifice of the New Law. With
this sacrifice, O my God, I offer up to Thee my heart with all its
affections, desires, and inclinations. Sanctify my thoughts, words, and
deeds, that they may become a sacrifice acceptable and pleasing to Thee.


At the Preface

TO THEE, O Lord, I raise my heart in gratitude for all Thy mercies. For
truly meet and just, right and salutary is it for us to give Thee always
and everywhere praise and thanks, O holy Lord, almighty Father and
eternal God, through Christ our Lord; through whom the angels and
archangels, the cherubs and the seraphs praise Thy majesty and adore Thy
might. With them I unite my voice, joining in their hymns of praise, and
saying:


At the Sanctus

HOLY, holy, holy, Lord, God of hosts. Heaven and earth are filled with
Thy glory. Hosanna in the highest.

Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the
highest.


At the Canon

O GOD! Let my prayer be acceptable to Thee, and graciously hear the
intercession which I make confiding in the virtue of this holy
sacrifice. I commend to Thy mercy our holy Father, N., our bishop, N.,
and all bishops and priests of Thy holy Church. Let Thy kingdom be
spread more and more all over the earth; grant peace and concord to the
nations; protect our country; preserve peace and love in all families.
Remember graciously my parents, brothers, sisters, and relatives, my
benefactors, my enemies, and all for whom I am in justice or charity
bound to pray.


At the Elevation

HAIL, thou body of my Saviour, conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of Mary
the immaculate Virgin! With profound humility I adore Thee. Lord, have
mercy on me!

Eternal Father, I offer Thee the precious blood of Jesus, in
satisfaction for my sins, and for the wants of holy Church.

Indulgence. 100 days, every time. (Pius VII, Sept. 22, 1817.)


After the Elevation

MOST amiable Jesus! Thou art now present on the altar, God and man,
really, truly, and essentially. Divine victim for our sins, have mercy
on us! Be our mediator with Thy Father; avert from us the punishment we
have deserved for our sins, deliver us from all dangers that threaten
us, and from all evil. Promote the welfare of Thy Church, and remember
in Thy mercy those who have gone before us with the sign of faith and
rest in peace. (_Remember the departed for whom you intend to pray._)

To these, O Lord, and to all that sleep in Christ, grant, we beseech
Thee, a place of refreshment, light, and peace.

Also to us sinners, Thy servants, confiding in the multitude of Thy
mercies, grant some part and fellowship with Thy saints, through whose
intercession we invoke Thy favor, and into whose company we beseech Thee
to admit us, not in consideration of our merit, but of Thy own pardon.
Through Christ our Lord. Amen.


At the Pater Noster

INSTRUCTED by Thy saving precepts and following Thy divine directions,
we presume to say:

Our Father, etc.


At the Agnus Dei

LAMB of God, who takest away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.

Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, have mercy on us.

Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world, give us peace.


At Communion

LORD, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my roof; say but
the word, and my soul shall be healed. (_Three times._)


Spiritual Communion

O JESUS, I firmly believe that Thou art truly present in the Blessed
Sacrament. I see Thee therein full of love, willing to pardon us,
anxious to be united with us. I wish most earnestly to respond to this
Thy desire and love. I detest all the sins by which I have ever
displeased Thee. Pardon me, O Lord! I desire to receive Thee into my
heart, and since I now can not receive Thee sacramentally, come at least
spiritually to me.

I embrace Thee, I unite myself with Thee as if Thou wert really present
in my heart. With all my love I cling to Thee. Preserve me from sin,
that I may never be separated from Thee, but remain united with Thee for
ever.

Indulgence. 60 days, once a day. Also for the suffering souls. (Leo
XIII, June 30, 1893.)


At the Blessing

BLESS me, O Lord, by the hand of Thy priest, and let the power of this
blessing remain upon me for ever. In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.


At the Last Gospel

O JESUS, incarnate Word of the eternal Father, Thou true light which
enlightens the world! I give thanks to Thee at all times for having
dwelt among us, the only-begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and
truth. Amen.



Prayers after Mass

Hail Mary, etc. (_Three times._)


Salve Regina

HAIL, holy queen, Mother of mercy, our life, our sweetness, and our
hope! To thee do we cry, poor banished children of Eve; to thee do we
send up our sighs, mourning and weeping in this vale of tears. Turn
then, most gracious advocate, thine eyes of mercy toward us, and after
this our exile show unto us the blessed fruit of thy womb, Jesus. O
clement, O loving, O sweet Virgin Mary!

V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God.

R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

_Let Us Pray._

O GOD, our refuge and our strength! Look down with favor upon Thy people
crying to Thee; and through the intercession of the glorious and
immaculate Virgin Mary, Mother of God, of her spouse, blessed Joseph, of
thy holy apostles Peter and Paul, and all Thy saints, mercifully and
graciously hear the prayers which we pour forth to Thee for the
conversion of sinners and for the liberty and exaltation of holy mother
Church. Through Christ our Lord. Amen.

St. Michael the archangel, defend us in battle; be our protection
against the malice and snares of the devil. Command him, O God, we
humbly beseech Thee, and do thou, O prince of the heavenly hosts, by the
divine power, cast into hell Satan and the other evil spirits who roam
through the world seeking the ruin of souls. Amen.

Indulgence. 300 days. (Leo XIII, September 25, 1888.)



Prayers for Confession


Before Confession

MERCIFUL God! I give infinite thanks to Thee for the many and great
graces Thou hast bestowed upon me during my whole life. Would that I had
never been ungrateful to Thee, that I never had offended Thee. But I
have sinned exceedingly and often, and have done so again since my last
confession. Therefore I come to Thee, imploring Thee in profoundest
humility to give me Thy light and Thy grace, that I may know and
acknowledge all my sins, faults, and transgressions, be truly sorry for
them, sincerely confess them, do penance, and amend my life; for Thy
greater glory and for the salvation of my soul.

Examine your conscience.

SUPREME God and Lord! A poor sinner, I cast myself at the throne of Thy
divine Majesty, and contritely confess that I have sinned in thought,
word, and deed, and through the omission of my duties. I am heartily
sorry that I was ungrateful to Thee and have deserved to be punished in
this life and in the life to come. Above all I am sorry because by my
sins I have offended Thee, my supreme and infinite God, who art worthy
to be loved and honored above all else for Thy supreme goodness and
mercy. I detest and abhor my sins above all other evils, and wish I had
never committed them. Humbly I implore Thy pardon, and confidently hope
to obtain it through the merits of the blood of Jesus Christ shed for us
poor sinners, and through those of the Blessed Virgin Mary, of the Holy
Helpers, and of all the saints.

I firmly purpose to amend my life, to avoid all occasions of sin, to use
the means for conquering my passions, and to practise virtue by ordering
my life according to Thy divine will and pleasure, and rather to die
than to offend Thee again, my God and Lord. I am now ready to make
reparation to Thy divine Justice for all the offenses of which I have
been guilty against Thee, as far as is in my power. Therefore I will
confess my sins sincerely, contritely, fully, and perform the penance
imposed upon me.

Before entering the confessional.

The Lord be in my heart and on my lips that I may worthily and
competently confess my sins.



After Confession

O GOD of infinite mercy! I give Thee due thanks, and praise Thee for
having admitted me to the confession of my sins and for having, through
Thy minister, granted me absolution for them. I implore Thee by the
merits of Jesus Christ, Thy Son, of Mary, His most blessed Mother, of
the Holy Helpers, and of all the saints, to accept my confession, and in
Thy infinite mercy to condone and amend all the defects and faults I
committed in making it, and to ratify in heaven the absolution I
received on earth.

O my Jesus! How blind I was in not knowing Thee and preferring
transitory beauty and earthly attractions to Thy grace and love, and
thereby offending Thee! Now I acknowledge my fault, and am convinced
that it is my duty and privilege to love Thee above all things. Too late
I have learned it, but I shall zealously strive to make reparation for
my past neglect. Therefore I renounce the pleasures, vanities, and joys
of this deceitful world, and abhor sin and all that leads to it. In the
future nothing shall ever part me from Thy love. From this moment on I
am resolved nevermore to offend Thee. Confirm, O Jesus, this my
resolution, and with Thy almighty power strengthen my frailty. Seal my
purpose of amendment with the bestowal of Thy grace, and preserve me in
Thy grace and love unto the end. Amen.



Prayers for Holy Communion



BEFORE COMMUNION


An Act of Faith

MY LORD and Saviour Jesus Christ! I firmly believe that Thou art really
present in the Blessed Sacrament. I believe it contains Thy body and
blood, Thy soul and divinity. I acknowledge these truths, I believe
these wonders. I adore Thy power which has wrought them; I praise Thy
infinite goodness which has prepared them for me. "I will praise Thee,
my God, with my whole heart, and will recount all Thy admirable works; I
will rejoice in Thee, and bless Thy holy name" (_Ps._ ix. 2, 3). In this
faith, and with this acknowledgment, I presume to approach this adorable
banquet, wherein Thou bestowest on me the divine food of Thy body and
blood to nourish my soul. Grant, O Jesus, that I may approach Thee with
such a sense of reverence and humility as is due to Thy divine Majesty.
Who am I, O God, that Thou shouldst work such wonders for my sake?
Grant, O Lord, that I be not altogether unworthy of them, and that I may
now receive Thee with a pure heart, a clean conscience, and a sincere
and lively faith. Pardon my sins, which have rendered me most unworthy
to approach Thee. I detest them from the bottom of my heart, because
they are displeasing to Thee, my God. I renounce them for ever, and
promise to be faithful to Thee.


An Act of Hope

IN THEE, sweet Jesus, I place all my hope, because Thou alone art my
salvation, my strength, my refuge, and the foundation of all my
happiness. Were it not for the confidence I place in Thy merits, and in
the precious blood Thou didst shed for my redemption, I would not
presume to partake of this banquet. Encouraged, therefore, by Thy
goodness, I come to Thee as one sick to his physician, as a condemned
criminal to his powerful intercessor. Heal me as my physician, and as my
powerful advocate deliver me from the sentence of sin and death. It is
in Thy mercy that I put all my trust. Have pity, therefore, O Jesus, on
me, and save me, for Thou forsakest none that place their hope in Thee.


An Act of Love

O DIVINE Redeemer, how strong was the force of Thy love, that, being
about to depart from this world to Thy eternal Father, Thou didst
provide for us this divine banquet, enriched with all heavenly
sweetness! It was through an excess of Thy love that Thou hast left us
Thy body and blood for the food and nourishment of our souls; that, as
Thou didst unite Thyself to our humanity, so we might be partakers of
Thy divinity. I desire to love Thee, my Jesus, who art my only comfort
in this place of banishment, the only hope of my infirm soul, my
happiness above all I can enjoy in this life. I love Thee, my God, with
my whole heart, with my whole soul, and with all my mind and strength. I
wish that, as every moment is an increase of my life, so it may also be
of my love toward Thee. I desire, with all the affections and powers of
my soul, that, as the inmost thanks are due to Thee, so they may be
returned to Thee by all the faithful, for this divine food, which is our
refreshment, support, strength, armor, and defense in all our miseries;
and that my love may never cease, inflame my heart with the fire of
heaven, that it may continue burning till, nature and corruption being
consumed, I may at length be transformed into Thee. Come, O Lord, hasten
to release me from the bonds of sin, and prepare me for the blessing
Thou art now about to bestow on me.


An Act of Desire

MY LORD and Saviour, Jesus Christ! "As the heart panteth after the
fountains of waters so my soul panteth after Thee, O God!" (_Ps._ xlii.
1). Tired with my own evil ways, I now return to Thee, to taste Thy
banquet, that my soul may be refreshed. I henceforth despise all human
consolations, that I may be comforted by Thee, my only good, my God and
Saviour, whom I love above all things and desire to entertain within my
heart with as much devotion and affection as is conceived by Thy chosen
servants, who now sit at Thy table in celestial bliss. And however I may
have been wanting hitherto in my duty, I now for ever renounce my folly
and weakness, and from my heart request that for the future my joy, my
relief, my treasure, and rest may be entirely centered in Thee. May I
never desire anything besides Thee, and may all things seem contemptible
and as nothing without Thee, O my God!


An Act of Fear

O MY God and Saviour, it is with fear and trembling that I approach Thy
banquet, having nothing to confide in but Thy goodness and mercy, being
of myself a sinner, destitute of all virtue. My soul and body are
defiled with many crimes, my thoughts and tongue have been under no
restraint. I have frequently resolved to amend, and yet where do I
remain but in the midst of sin and vice? How little pains do I take to
recover from this misery and return to Thee, to whom I have repeatedly
promised to be faithful! These thoughts cause me to fear that what Thou
hast mercifully ordained for my salvation, I should now receive to my
judgment and condemnation. In this wretched condition I hasten to Thee;
to Thee I expose all my wounds, to Thee I disclose my depravity. Look,
therefore, on me with the eyes of compassion, and have mercy on me, O
Lord and Saviour!


An Act of Humility

O IMMENSE, almighty, and incomprehensible God, who am I, that Thou
shouldst vouchsafe to come to be my food, and to take Thy habitation
within my soul? The consideration of Thy greatness and my unworthiness
penetrates me with awe and confusion. With the utmost sincerity I can
only declare the extent of my misery, and admire that infinite goodness
which induces Thee to visit personally the lowest and basest of Thy
creatures. Receive, then, Thy unworthy servant into the compassionate
arms of Thy mercy. Cast all my sins out of Thy sight, and with the
tenderness of a loving father extend Thy arms to receive me; and let me
effectually experience the truth of Thy prophet's words: "A sacrifice to
God is an afflicted spirit; a contrite and humble heart, O God, Thou
wilt not despise" (_Ps._ l. 19).

IMMEDIATELY BEFORE COMMUNION

LORD, I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under my roof: say but
the word, and my soul shall be healed.

The body of Our Lord Jesus Christ preserve my soul to life everlasting.



AFTER COMMUNION


An Act of Thanksgiving

O JESUS, my God and Saviour! I return Thee thanks for having, out of Thy
pure mercy, without any desert of mine, been pleased to feed my soul
with Thine own most sacred body and blood. Suffer me sooner to be
forgetful of myself than to be ever unmindful of this great favor.
Although I have hitherto been ungrateful, with the help of Thy grace I
shall be so no more. But what return can I make Thee, being of myself
insolvent, indigent, and miserable? The sacrifice of all that I am or
have is not worthy to be presented to Thee; but, behold I offer Thee
Thyself, and consider all my debts as abundantly discharged. May Thy
infinite mercy be for ever exalted for having given me such an excellent
means of repaying Thee to the full. O that I could ever remember Thee,
think of Thee, ever love Thee alone! Imprint the memory of what Thou
didst for me so deeply in my heart, that I spend my whole life in
thanking Thee for all Thy benefits, but especially for this banquet of
Thy love. Amen.


An Act of Adoration

UNDER the sacred veil of Thy eucharistic presence, where Thy love of man
conceals the splendor of Thy majesty, I most humbly adore Thee, O
almighty God! The grandeur of the heavens is as nothing in Thy sight;
they shall perish, but Thou shalt remain for ever. The earth Thou hast
poised in Thy hand. The ocean is before Thee but as a drop of water. All
nature bows and trembles in Thy presence. How, then, shall I extol Thee,
immortal King of glory? What homage can I give in proportion to Thy
greatness? Thou art the perfect image of Thy Father's substance. Thou
art the splendor of His glory. Thou art His almighty Word, supporting
all things. Thee He has seated at His right hand. Thy throne, O God, is
for ever and ever; a scepter of justice is the scepter of Thy reign. I
bow before Thy sacred Majesty. I acknowledge with the sincerest
gratitude that Thou art my redeemer, my creator, the supreme arbiter of
my eternal destiny. I desire to humble myself as profoundly for Thy sake
as Thou art humbled for my love in the center of my soul, and to
consecrate to the glory of Thy name the whole extent of my being. Amen.


An Act of Oblation

O MY Saviour! What pledge can I give as an earnest of the gratitude I
owe to Thee? I have nothing worthy of Thee, and if I had, I have nothing
but what is Thine on several accounts. But such is Thy goodness as to be
content to accept from us what is already Thine. Wherefore, behold, I
offer to Thee my body and soul, which are both now sanctified by the
honor of Thy divine presence. I consecrate them to Thee for ever, since
Thou hast chosen them for Thy temple; my body to be continually employed
in Thy service, and nevermore to become an instrument of sin; my soul to
know Thee, to love Thee and be evermore faithful to Thee. And as I am
now resolved to serve Thee with body and soul, I will take pains to
correct their evil inclinations. I will declare war against myself,
renounce my wonted pleasures, my delights, my passions, my anger, my
self-love, my pride, my own will, and, in fine, whatever may offend
Thee.


Offering and Petition

ALMIGHTY God, I offer Thee this holy communion in union with the
superabundant merits of Jesus Christ, Thy beloved Son, and the infinite
love of His adorable Heart; in union with the Blessed Virgin and the
ardent love of her immaculate heart; in union with the Holy Helpers and
all the happy souls who enjoy Thy glorious vision in heaven, and with
all the just on earth. O my God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, present in me
in the eucharistic species; fill me with that lively faith, profound
humility, tender confidence, pure conscience, and ardent love, with
which so many happy souls are inflamed in partaking of this sacred
banquet, and supply by Thy mercy all my deficiencies. I offer my
communion to render Thee the honor and glory which are due to Thy
infinite majesty; to satisfy Thy justice, which I have provoked by my
sins; to thank Thee for the innumerable benefits which I have received
from Thy bounty; and to obtain from Thy infinite mercy the graces
necessary for me; particularly the grace to subdue my predominant
passion and to acquire the virtue in which I am most deficient; but
especially the grace of a happy death.

I likewise offer my communion, O merciful Father, in memory of the
passion and death of Thy dear Son, my divine Redeemer, to love Him with
more ardor and perfection; to participate in the merits of His labors
and sufferings; to acquire His spirit; to imitate His virtues; to model
my life on His, and to make His adorable Heart a public reparation for
all the sacrilegious communions, irreverences, and profanations which
are committed against Him in this sacrament of His love. I offer it to
thank Thee, O God, for all the graces Thou hast bestowed on mankind,
particularly for all those Thou hast conferred on Thy blessed Mother, on
all the angels and saints, especially on my guardian angel, on my holy
patron, and on the Holy Helpers. I offer it, likewise, for the triumph
of our holy religion, for the exaltation of the Catholic Church, for the
conversion of infidels, heretics, schismatics, and all those who are in
the unhappy state of sin. Also for the needs of my relatives, friends,
benefactors, and enemies; for the perseverance of the just, the comfort
of the afflicted, and the deliverance of the souls in purgatory; in a
word, for all those for whom I am bound to pray; and I desire to enter
into the intentions requisite for gaining the indulgences granted by the
Church to-day for worthy communicants.

INVOCATIONS

  SOUL of Christ, sanctify me!
  Body of Christ, save me!
  Blood of Christ, inebriate me!
  Water from the side of Christ, wash me!
  Passion of Christ, strengthen me!
  O good Jesus, hear me!
  Within Thy wounds, hide me!
  Permit me not to be separated from Thee!
  From the malignant enemy defend me!
  In the hour of my death call me!
  And bid me come to Thee,
  That, with Thy saints, I may praise Thee
  For ever and ever. Amen.


Indulgence, (1) 300 days, every time. (2) 7 years, once a day, after
receiving communion. (3) A plenary indulgence, once a month, to all who
have the pious custom of saying it at least once a day for a month;
under the usual conditions. (Pius IX, January 9, 1854.)


Prayer to Jesus Crucified

[Illustration: A crucifix]

LOOK down upon me, good and gentle Jesus, while before Thy face I humbly
kneel, and with burning soul pray and beseech Thee to fix deep in my
heart lively sentiments of faith, hope, and charity, true contrition for
my sins, and a firm purpose of amendment; while I contemplate with great
love and tender pity Thy five wounds, pondering over them within me, and
calling to mind the words which David Thy prophet said of Thee, my
Jesus: "They pierced my hands and my feet; they numbered all my bones"
(_Ps._ xxi. 17, 18).

Indulgence. A plenary indulgence, under the usual conditions, if said
before an image or picture of the crucified Redeemer, after holy
communion. (Pius IX, July 31, 1858.)



Visit to the Blessed Sacrament

(_Prayer of St. Alphonsus._)

LORD Jesus Christ, who through the love which Thou bearest to man, dost
remain with them day and night in this sacrament, full of mercy and
love, expecting, inviting, and receiving all who come to visit Thee; I
believe that Thou art present in the Sacrament of the Altar. From the
abyss of my nothingness I adore Thee, and I thank Thee for all the
favors which Thou hast bestowed upon me, particularly for having given
me Thyself in this sacrament, for having given me for my advocate Thy
most holy Mother Mary, and for having called me to visit Thee in this
church.

I this day salute Thy most loving Heart, and I wish to salute it for
three ends: first, in thanksgiving for this great gift; second, in
compensation for all the injuries Thou hast received from Thy enemies in
this sacrament; third, I wish by this visit to adore Thee in all places
in which Thou art least honored and most abandoned in this holy
sacrament. My Jesus, I love Thee with my whole heart. I am sorry for
having hitherto offended Thy infinite goodness. I purpose, with the
assistance of Thy grace, nevermore to offend Thee; and at this moment,
miserable as I am, I consecrate my whole being to Thee. I give Thee my
entire will, all my affections and desires, and all that I have. From
this day forward, do what Thou wilt with me and with whatsoever belongs
to me. I ask and desire only Thy holy love, the gift of final
perseverance, and the perfect accomplishment of Thy will. I recommend to
Thee the souls in purgatory, particularly those who were most devoted to
the Blessed Sacrament and to most holy Mary; and I also recommend to
Thee all poor sinners. Finally, my dear Saviour, I unite all my
affections with the affections of Thy most loving Heart; and thus united
I offer them to Thy eternal Father, and I entreat Him, in Thy name and
for Thy sake, to accept them.

Indulgence. (1) 300 days, every time this prayer is said before the
Blessed Sacrament. (2) A plenary indulgence, once a month, for saying it
every day for a month; under the usual conditions. (Pius IX, Sept. 7,
1854.)



An Act of Oblation to the Sacred Heart

DIVINE Heart of my Jesus! I adore Thee with all the powers of my soul,
which I consecrate to Thee for ever, with my thoughts, my words, my
works, and my whole self. I purpose to offer to Thee, as far as I can,
acts of adoration, love, and glory, like unto those which Thou offerest
to Thy eternal Father. Be Thou, I beseech Thee, the repairer of my
transgressions, the protector of my life, my refuge and asylum in the
hour of death. By Thy sighs, and by that sea of bitterness in which Thou
wast plunged for me throughout Thy whole mortal life, grant me true
contrition for my sins, contempt of earthly things, a burning desire of
eternal glory, trust in Thy infinite merits, and final perseverance in
Thy grace.

Heart of Jesus, all love! I offer Thee these humble prayers for myself
and for all who unite with me in spirit to adore Thee. Vouchsafe out of
Thy great goodness to hear and answer them, chiefly for that one among
us who will first end this mortal life. Sweet Heart of Jesus! pour into
his heart, in his death agony, Thine inward consolations; receive him
within Thy sacred wound; cleanse him from all stains in that furnace of
love, so that Thou mayest soon open to him the gates of Thy eternal
glory, there to intercede with Thee for all those who tarry yet in this
land of exile.

Most holy Heart of my most loving Jesus! For myself, a wretched sinner,
and for all who unite with me in adoring Thee, I purpose to renew and
offer to Thee these acts of adoration and these prayers at every moment
and to the last instant of my life. I recommend to Thee, my Jesus, our
holy Church, Thy well-beloved spouse and our true mother; the souls who
are following the path of justice, poor sinners, the afflicted, the
dying, all men on the face of the entire earth. Let not Thy blood be
shed in vain for them; and vouchsafe, lastly, to apply it for the relief
of the souls in purgatory, and above all, for those who in life were
foremost in their devotion to Thee.

Most loving heart of Mary, which, amongst the hearts of all God's
creatures, is at once the purest and the most inflamed with love for
Jesus, and the most compassionate toward us poor sinners, obtain for us
from the Heart of Jesus, our Redeemer, all graces which we ask of thee.
Mother of mercies, one throb, a single beat of thy burning heart,
offered by thee to the Heart of Jesus, has power to console us to the
full. Grant us, then, this favor. And then the Heart of Jesus, through
the filial love He had for thee, and will ever have, will not fail to
hear and answer our request. Amen.

DAILY OFFERING

O LORD Jesus Christ! In union with that divine intention, with which
Thou, whilst on earth, didst give praise to God through Thy most sacred
Heart, and which Thou dost still everywhere offer to Him in the Holy
Eucharist, even to the consummation of the world; I, in imitation of the
most sacred heart of the ever-immaculate Virgin Mary, do most cheerfully
offer to Thee, during this entire day, all my thoughts and intentions,
all my affections and desires, my words and all my works.

Indulgence. 100 days, once a day. (Leo XIII, Dec. 19, 1885.)

_Ejaculation_

Jesus, meek and humble of heart, make my heart like unto Thine!

Indulgence. 300 days, once a day. (Pius IX, January 25, 1858.)



PRAYERS TO JESUS SUFFERING

The Stations of the Cross

PREPARATORY PRAYER

MOST merciful Jesus! With a contrite heart and penitent spirit I bow
down in profound humility before Thy divine majesty. I adore Thee as my
supreme Lord and master; I believe in Thee, I hope in Thee, I love Thee
above all things. I am heartily sorry for having offended Thee, my
supreme and only good. I resolve to amend my life; and though I am
unworthy to obtain mercy, yet the sight of Thy holy cross, on which Thou
didst die, inspires me with hope and consolation. I will therefore
meditate on Thy sufferings, and visit the stations of Thy passion in
company with Thy sorrowful Mother and my guardian angel, with the
intention of promoting Thy glory and saving my soul.

I desire to gain all the indulgences granted for this exercise, for
myself and for the suffering souls in purgatory. O merciful Redeemer,
who hast said; "And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all
things to myself," draw my heart and my love to Thee, that I may perform
this devotion as perfectly as possible, and that I may live and die in
union with Thee. Amen.

_Before Every Station_

We adore Thee, O Christ, and praise Thee: Because by Thy holy cross Thou
hast redeemed the world.

_After Every Station_

Lord Jesus, crucified: Have mercy on us.


First Station

JESUS IS CONDEMNED TO DEATH

JESUS, most innocent, who neither did nor could commit sin, was
condemned to death, and, moreover, to the ignominious death of the
cross. To remain a friend of Caesar, Pilate delivered Him to His
enemies. A fearful crime--to condemn innocence to death, and to offend
God, in order not to displease men.

_Prayer_

O INNOCENT Jesus, having sinned I am guilty of eternal death, but Thou
dost willingly accept the unjust sentence of death, that I might live.
For whom, then, shall I henceforth live, if not for Thee, my Lord?
Should I desire to please men, I could not be Thy servant. Let me,
therefore, rather displease men and all the world than not please Thee,
O Jesus.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Second Station

JESUS CARRIES HIS CROSS

ON BEHOLDING the cross, our divine Saviour most willingly stretched out
His bleeding arms, lovingly embraced it, tenderly kissed it, and placing
it on His bruised shoulder, despite His exhaustion joyfully carried it.

_Prayer_

O MY Jesus, I can not be Thy friend and follower if I refuse to carry
the cross. O dearly beloved cross, I embrace thee, I kiss thee, I
rejoice to receive thee from the hands of God. Far be it from me to
glory in anything save in the cross of my Lord and Redeemer. By it the
world shall be crucified to me, and I to the world, that I may be Thine
for ever.

Our Father, etc. Hail, Mary, etc


Third Station

JESUS FALLS THE FIRST TIME

OUR dear Saviour carrying the cross was so weakened by its heavy weight
as to fall exhausted to the ground. Our sins and misdeeds were the heavy
burden which oppressed Him; the cross was to Him light and sweet, but
our sins were galling and insupportable.

_Prayer_

O MY Jesus! Thou didst bear my burden and the heavy weight of my sins.
Should I, then, not bear in union with Thee my easy burden of suffering
and accept the sweet yoke of Thy commandments? Thy yoke is sweet and Thy
burden light; I therefore willingly accept it. I will take up Thy cross
and follow Thee.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc,


Fourth Station

JESUS MEETS HIS AFFLICTED MOTHER

HOW painful and how sad it must have been for Mary, the sorrowful
Mother, to behold her beloved Son laden with the burden of the cross!
What unspeakable pangs her most tender heart experienced! How earnestly
she yearned to die instead of, or at least with, Jesus! Implore this
sorrowful Mother that she assist you in the hour of your death.

_Prayer_

O JESUS, O Mary! I am the cause of the great and manifold pains which
pierce your loving hearts. O that my heart also would feel and
experience at least some of your sufferings! O Mother of sorrows, let me
participate in the sufferings which thou and thy Son endured for me, and
let me experience thy sorrow, that, afflicted with thee, I may enjoy thy
assistance in the hour of my death.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Fifth Station

SIMON OF CYRENE HELPS JESUS TO CARRY THE CROSS

SIMON of Cyrene was compelled to help Jesus carry His cross, and Jesus
accepted His assistance. How willingly He would permit you also to carry
the cross! He calls you, but you hear Him not; He invites you, but you
decline. What a reproach, to bear the cross reluctantly!

_Prayer_

O JESUS! Whosoever does not take up His cross and follow Thee is not
worthy of Thee. Behold, I join Thee in the way of Thy cross; I will be
Thy assistant, following Thy footsteps, that I may come to Thee in
eternal life.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Sixth Station

VERONICA WIPES THE FACE OF JESUS

IMPELLED by devotion and compassion, Veronica presents her veil to Jesus
to wipe His disfigured face. And Jesus imprints on it His holy
countenance; a great recompense for so slight a service. What return do
you make to your Saviour for His great and manifold benefits?

_Prayer_

MOST merciful Jesus! What return shall I make for all the benefits Thou
didst bestow on me? Behold, I consecrate myself entirely to Thy service.
I offer and consecrate to Thee my heart. Imprint upon it Thy sacred
image, never to be effaced again by sin.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Seventh Station

JESUS FALLS THE SECOND TIME

JESUS, suffering under the weight of His cross, again falls to the
ground; but His cruel executioners do not permit Him to rest a moment.
Pushing and striking Him, they urge Him onward. It is the frequent
repetition of our sins which oppresses Jesus. Witnessing this, how can I
continue to sin?

_Prayer_

O JESUS, son of David, have mercy on me! Offer me Thy helping hand, and
aid me that I may not fall again into my former sins. From this very
moment I will earnestly strive to reform; nevermore will I sin. Do Thou,
O sole support of the weak, by Thy grace, without which I can do
nothing, strengthen me to carry out faithfully this my resolution.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Eighth Station

THE DAUGHTERS OF JERUSALEM WEEP OVER JESUS

THESE devoted women, moved by compassion, weep over the suffering
Saviour. But He turns to them, saying, "Weep not for Me, who am
innocent, but weep for yourselves and for your children." Weep thou
also; for there is nothing more pleasing to Our Lord, and nothing more
profitable for thyself, than tears shed from contrition for thy sins.

_Prayer_

O JESUS, who shall give to my eyes a torrent of tears, that day and
night I may weep for my sins? I beseech Thee through Thy bloody tears to
move my heart by Thy divine grace, so that from my eyes tears may flow
abundantly, and I may weep all days over Thy sufferings, and still more
over their cause, my sins.

Our Father, etc. Hail, Mary, etc.


Ninth Station

JESUS FALLS THE THIRD TIME

JESUS, arriving exhausted at the foot of Calvary, falls for the third
time to the ground. His love for us is not exhausted, not diminished.
What a fearfully oppressive burden our sins must be to cause Jesus to
fall so often! Had He, however, not taken them upon Himself, they would
have plunged us into the abyss of hell.

_Prayer_

MOST merciful Jesus! I return Thee infinite thanks for not permitting me
to continue in sin, and to fall, as I have so often deserved, into the
depths of hell. Enkindle in me an earnest desire of amendment. Let me
never again relapse, but vouchsafe me Thy grace to persevere to the end
of my life.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Tenth Station

JESUS IS STRIPPED OF HIS GARMENTS

AFTER arriving on Calvary, our Saviour was cruelly despoiled of His
garments. How painful must this have been, because they adhered to His
wounded and torn body, and with them parts of His bloody skin were
removed! All the wounds of Jesus are renewed. He is despoiled of His
garments that He might die possessed of nothing. How happy shall I die
after laying aside my former self with all evil inclinations and
desires!

_Prayer_

INDUCE me, O Jesus! to lay aside my former self, and to be renewed
according to Thy will and desire. I will not spare myself, however
painful this should be for me; despoiled of things temporal, of my own
will, I desire to die, in order to live for Thee for ever.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Eleventh Station

JESUS IS NAILED TO THE CROSS

JESUS, being stripped of His garments, was violently thrown upon the
cross, and His hands and feet were most cruelly nailed thereto. In such
excruciating torments He remained silent, because it thus pleased His
heavenly Father. He suffered patiently because He suffered for us. How
do I act in suffering and affliction? How fretful and impatient, how
full of complaints I am!

_Prayer_

O JESUS, gracious Lamb of God! I renounce for ever my impatience.
Crucify, O Lord, my flesh and its concupiscences. Scorch, scathe, and
punish me in this world; do but spare me in the next! I commit my
destiny to Thee, resigning myself to Thy holy will; may it be done in
all things.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


Twelfth Station

JESUS IS RAISED UPON THE CROSS, AND DIES

BEHOLD Jesus crucified! Behold the wounds He received for the love of
you! His whole appearance betokens love. His head is bent to kiss you;
His arms are extended to embrace you; His Heart is open to receive you.
O superabundance of love! Jesus, the Son of God dies that man may live
and be delivered from everlasting death.

_Prayer_

O MOST amiable Jesus! Who will grant me that I may die for love of Thee?
I will at least endeavor to die to the world. How must I regard the
world and its vanities, when I behold Thee hanging on the cross, covered
with wounds? O Jesus, receive me into Thy wounded Heart; I belong
entirely to Thee; for Thee alone do I desire to live and to die.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc


Thirteenth Station

JESUS IS TAKEN DOWN FROM THE CROSS, AND PLACED IN THE ARMS OF HIS MOTHER

JESUS did not descend from the cross, but remained on it till after His
death. And when taken down from it, He, in death as in life, rested on
the bosom of His Mother. Persevere in your resolutions of reform, and do
not part from the cross; he that persevereth to the end shall be saved.
Consider, moreover, how pure the heart should be that receives the body
and blood of Christ in the adorable Sacrament of the Altar.

_Prayer_

O LORD Jesus! Thy lifeless body, mangled and torn, found a worthy
resting-place on the bosom of Thy virgin Mother. Have I not compelled
Thee often to dwell in my heart, full of sin and impurity as it was?
Create in me a new heart, that I may worthily receive Thy most sacred
body in holy communion, and that Thou mayest remain in me, and I in
Thee, for all eternity.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc


Fourteenth Station

JESUS IS LAID IN THE SEPULCHER

THE body of Jesus is laid in a stranger's tomb. He who in this world had
not whereupon to rest His head, would not even have a grave of His own,
because He was not of this world. You, who are so attached to the world,
henceforth despise it, that you may not perish with it.

_Prayer_

O JESUS, Thou hast set me apart from the world; what, then, shall I seek
therein? Thou hast created me for heaven; what, then, have I to do with
the world? Depart from me, deceitful world, with Thy vanities!
Henceforth I will follow the way of the cross traced out for me by my
Redeemer, and journey onward to my heavenly home, there to dwell for
ever and ever.

Our Father, etc. Hail Mary, etc.


CONCLUSION

ALMIGHTY and eternal God, merciful Father, who hast given to the human
race Thy beloved Son as an example of humility, obedience, and patience,
to precede us on the way of life, bearing the cross; graciously grant,
that we, inflamed by His infinite love, may take up the sweet yoke of
His Gospel, together with the mortification of the cross, following Him
as His true disciples, so that we shall one day rise gloriously with
Him, and joyfully hear the final sentence: "Come, ye blessed of my
Father, and possess the kingdom which has been prepared for you from the
beginning," where Thou reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost, and
where we hope to reign with Thee throughout all eternity. Amen.



Prayer to Our Suffering Redeemer

O MY Lord Jesus Christ! Who, to redeem the world, didst vouchsafe to be
born amongst men, to be circumcised, to be rejected and persecuted by
the Jews, to be betrayed by the traitor Judas with a kiss, and as a
lamb, gentle and innocent, to be bound with cords and dragged, in scorn,
before the tribunals of Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, and Herod; who didst
suffer Thyself to be accused by false witnesses, to be torn by the
scourge and overwhelmed with ignominy; to be spit upon, to be crowned
with thorns, buffeted, struck with a reed, blindfolded, stripped of Thy
garments; to be nailed to the cross and raised on it between two
thieves; to be given gall and vinegar to drink, and to be pierced with a
lance; do Thou, O Lord, by these Thy most sacred pains, which I, all
unworthy, call to mind, and by Thy holy cross and death, save me from
the pains of hell, and vouchsafe to bring me whither Thou didst bring
the good thief who was crucified with Thee, who with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, livest and reignest God, for ever and ever. Amen.

Our Father, Hail Mary, and Glory be to the Father, etc., five times.

Indulgence. (1) 300 days, once a day. (2) A plenary indulgence, under
the usual conditions, on any one of the last three days of the month,
after saying this prayer daily for a month. (Pius VII, August 25, 1820.)



Prayer to the Blessed Virgin Mary

(_By St. Alphonsus._)

MOST holy and immaculate virgin, O my Mother, thou who art the Mother of
my Lord, the queen of the world, the advocate, hope, and refuge of
sinners! I, the most wretched among them, come now to thee. I venerate
thee, great queen, and give thee thanks for the many favors thou hast
bestowed on me in the past. Most of all do I thank thee for having saved
me from hell, which I so often deserved. I love thee, Lady most worthy
of love, and by the love which I bear thee I promise ever in the future
to serve thee, and to do what in me lies to win others to thy love. In
thee I put all my trust, all my hope of salvation. Receive me as thy
servant, and cover me with the mantle of thy protection, thou who art
the Mother of mercy! And since thou hast so much power with God, deliver
me from all temptations, or at least obtain for me the grace ever to
overcome them. From thee I ask a true love of Jesus Christ, and the
grace of a happy death. O my Mother, by thy love for God I beseech thee
to be at all times my helper, but above all at the last moment of my
life. Leave me not until thou seest me safely in heaven, there for
endless ages to bless thee and sing thy praises. Amen.

Indulgence, (1) 300 days, every time. (2) A plenary indulgence, once a
month, for having said it daily during the month; under the usual
conditions. (Pius IX, Sept. 7, 1854.)



Prayer for All Things Necessary for Salvation

O MY God! I believe in Thee; do Thou strengthen my faith. All my hopes
are in Thee; do Thou secure them. I love Thee with my whole heart; teach
me to love Thee more and more. I am sorry that I have offended Thee; do
Thou increase my sorrow. I adore Thee as my first beginning; I aspire
after Thee as my last end. I give Thee thanks as my constant benefactor;
I call upon Thee as my sovereign protector. Vouchsafe, O my God, to
conduct me by Thy wisdom, to restrain me by Thy justice, to comfort me
by Thy mercy, to defend me by Thy power. To Thee I desire to consecrate
all my thoughts, my actions, and my sufferings, that I henceforward may
think only of Thee, speak only of Thee, and ever refer all my actions to
Thy greater glory, and suffer willingly whatever Thou shalt appoint. O
Lord, I desire that in all things Thy will be done, because it is Thy
will, and in the manner that Thou willest. I beg of Thee to enlighten my
understanding, to inflame my will, to purify my body, and to sanctify my
soul. Give me strength, O my God, to expiate my offenses, to overcome my
temptations, to subdue my passions, to acquire the virtues proper for my
state. Fill my heart with tender affection for Thy goodness, a hatred of
my faults, a love for my neighbor, and a contempt for the world. Let me
always be submissive to my superiors, condescending to my inferiors,
faithful to my friends, and charitable to my enemies. Assist me to
overcome sensuality by mortification, avarice by almsdeeds, anger by
meekness, and tepidity by zeal. O my God, make me prudent in my
undertakings, courageous in dangers, patient in affliction, and humble
in prosperity. Grant that I may be ever attentive at my prayers,
temperate at my meals, diligent in my employments, and constant in my
resolutions. Let my conscience be ever upright and pure, my exterior
modest, my conversation edifying, my comportment regular. Assist me,
that I may continually labor to overcome nature, correspond with Thy
grace, keep Thy commandments, and work out my salvation. Discover to me,
O my God, the nothingness of this world, the greatness of heaven, the
shortness of time, the length of eternity. Grant that I may be prepared
for death, fear Thy judgments, escape hell, and, in the end, obtain
heaven.

All that I have asked for myself I confidently ask for others; for my
family, my relations, my benefactors, my friends, and also for my
enemies. I ask it for the whole Church, for all the orders of which it
is composed; more especially for our Holy Father, the Pope; for our
bishop, for our pastors, and for all who are in authority; also for all
those for whom Thou desirest that I should pray. Give them, O Lord, all
that Thou knowest to be conducive to Thy glory and necessary for their
salvation. Strengthen the just in virtue, convert sinners, enlighten
infidels, heretics, and schismatics; console the afflicted, give to the
faithful departed rest and eternal life; that together we may praise,
love, and bless Thee for all eternity. Amen.



The Four Approved Litanies



Litany of the Most Holy Name of Jesus

  LORD, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, hear us.
  Jesus, graciously hear us.
  God the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.
  God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.
  God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.
  Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, Son of the living God, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, splendor of the Father, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, brightness of eternal light, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, king of glory, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, sun of justice, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, Son of the Virgin Mary, have mercy on us.
  Jesus amiable, have mercy on us.
  Jesus admirable, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, powerful God, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, Father of the world to come, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, angel of the great council, have mercy on us.
  Jesus most powerful, have mercy on us.
  Jesus most patient, have mercy on us.
  Jesus most obedient, have mercy on us.
  Jesus meek and humble of heart, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, lover of chastity, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, lover of us, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, God of peace, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, author of life, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, model of all virtues, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, zealous for souls, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, our God, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, our refuge, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, father of the poor, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, treasure of the faithful, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, good shepherd, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, true light, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, eternal wisdom, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, infinite goodness, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, our way and our life, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, joy of angels, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, king of patriarchs, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, master of the apostles, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, teacher of the evangelists, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, strength of martyrs, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, light of confessors, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, purity of virgins, have mercy on us.
  Jesus, crown of all saints, have mercy on us.
  Be merciful, spare us, O Jesus.
  Be merciful, graciously hear us, O Jesus.
  From all evil, deliver us, O Jesus.
  From all sin, deliver us, O Jesus.
  From Thy wrath, deliver us, O Jesus.
  From the snares of the devil, deliver us, O Jesus.
  From the spirit of fornication, deliver us, O Jesus.
  From eternal death, deliver us, O Jesus.
  From the neglect of Thy inspirations, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By the mystery of Thy holy incarnation, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy nativity, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy infancy, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy most divine life, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy labors, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy agony and passion, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy cross and dereliction, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy languors, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy death and burial, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy resurrection, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy ascension, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy joys, deliver us, O Jesus.
  By Thy glory, deliver us, O Jesus.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Jesus.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear
us, O Jesus.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us,
O Jesus.
  Jesus, hear us.
  Jesus, graciously hear us.

_Let us pray_

O LORD Jesus Christ, who hast said: Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: mercifully attend
to our supplications, and grant us the gift of Thy divine charity, that
we may ever love Thee with our whole hearts, and never desist from Thy
praise.

Give us, O Lord, a perpetual fear and love of Thy holy name, for Thou
never ceasest to direct and govern by Thy grace those whom Thou
instructest in the solidity of Thy love; who livest and reignest world
without end. Amen.

Indulgence. 300 days, once a day. (Leo XIII, January 16, 1886.)



Litany of the Sacred Heart of Jesus

(_Approved by Pope Leo XIII, April 2, 1899._)

  LORD, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ, hear us.
  Christ, graciously hear us.
  God, the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.
  God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.
  God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.
  Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, Son of the eternal Father, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, formed by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin
Mother, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, substantially united to the Word of God, have mercy on
us.
  Heart of Jesus, of infinite majesty, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, sacred temple of God, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, tabernacle of the Most High, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, house of God and gate of heaven, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, burning furnace of charity, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, abode of justice and love, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, full of goodness and love, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, abyss of all virtues, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, most worthy of all praise, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, king and center of all hearts, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, in whom dwells the fulness of divinity, have mercy on
us.
  Heart of Jesus, in whom the Father was well pleased, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, of whose fulness we have all received, have mercy on
us.
  Heart of Jesus, desire of the everlasting hills, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, patient and most merciful, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, enriching all who invoke Thee, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, fountain of life and holiness, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, propitiation for our sins, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, loaded down with opprobrium, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, bruised for our offences, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, obedient unto death, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, pierced with a lance, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, source of all consolation, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, our life and resurrection, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, our peace and reconciliation, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, victim for sin, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, salvation of those who trust in thee, have mercy on
us.
  Heart of Jesus, hope of those who die in Thee, have mercy on us.
  Heart of Jesus, delight of all the saints, have mercy on us.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear
us, O Lord.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us,
O Lord.
  V. Jesus, meek and humble of Heart:
  R. Make our hearts like unto Thine.

_Let us pray_

O ALMIGHTY and eternal God! Look upon the Heart of Thy dearly beloved
Son, and upon the praise and satisfaction He offers Thee in the name of
sinners and of those who seek Thy mercy; be Thou appeased, and grant us
pardon in the name of the same Jesus Christ, Thy Son; who liveth and
reigneth with Thee, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without end.
Amen.

Indulgence. 300 days. (Leo XIII, April 2, 1899.)



The Litany of Loreto

_In Honor of the Blessed Virgin Mary_

  LORD, have mercy on us,
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us,
  Christ, hear us.
  Christ, graciously hear us.
  God the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.
  God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.
  God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.
  Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.
  Holy Mary, pray for us.
  Holy Mother of God, pray for us.
  Holy Virgin of virgins, pray for us.
  Mother of Christ, pray for us.
  Mother of divine grace, pray for us.
  Mother most pure, pray for us.
  Mother most chaste, pray for us.
  Mother inviolate, pray for us.
  Mother undefiled, pray for us.
  Mother most amiable, pray for us.
  Mother most admirable, pray for us.
  Mother of good counsel, pray for us.
  Mother of our Creator, pray for us.
  Mother of our Redeemer, pray for us.
  Virgin most prudent, pray for us.
  Virgin most venerable, pray for us.
  Virgin most renowned, pray for us.
  Virgin most powerful, pray for us.
  Virgin most merciful, pray for us.
  Virgin most faithful, pray for us.
  Mirror of justice, pray for us.
  Seat of wisdom, pray for us.
  Cause of our joy, pray for us.
  Spiritual vessel, pray for us.
  Vessel of honor, pray for us.
  Singular vessel of devotion, pray for us.
  Mystical rose, pray for us.
  Tower of David, pray for us.
  Tower of ivory, pray for us.
  House of gold, pray for us.
  Ark of the covenant, pray for us.
  Gate of heaven, pray for us.
  Morning star, pray for us.
  Health of the sick, pray for us.
  Refuge of sinners, pray for us.
  Comforter of the afflicted, pray for us.
  Help of Christians, pray for us.
  Queen of angels, pray for us.
  Queen of patriarchs, pray for us.
  Queen of prophets, pray for us.
  Queen of apostles, pray for us.
  Queen of martyrs, pray for us.
  Queen of confessors, pray for us.
  Queen of virgins, pray for us.
  Queen of all saints, pray for us.
  Queen conceived without original sin, pray for us.
  Queen of the most holy rosary, pray for us.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear
us, O Lord.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us,
O Lord.
  V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God:
  R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

_Let us pray_

POUR forth, we beseech Thee, O Lord, Thy grace into our hearts, that we,
to whom the incarnation of Christ Thy Son was made known by the message
of an angel, may by His passion and cross be brought to the glory of His
resurrection. Through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

  V. Pray for us, O holy Mother of God.
  R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.

_Let us pray_

VOUCHSAFE, O Lord, that we may be helped by the merits of Thy most holy
Mother's spouse; that what of ourselves we can not obtain may be given
us through his intercession. Who livest and reignest, world without end.
Amen.

Indulgence. (1) 300 days, every time. (2) A plenary indulgence on the
following five feasts of the Blessed Virgin: Immaculate Conception,
Nativity, Purification, Annunciation, and Assumption; under the usual
conditions, to all who shall have said it daily during the year. (Pius
VII, September 30, 1817.) These indulgences are granted for the litany
alone; hence the prayers following it may be omitted.



Litany of the Saints

  LORD, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ, hear us.
  Christ, graciously hear us.
  God the Father of heaven, have mercy on us.
  God the Son, Redeemer of the world, have mercy on us.
  God the Holy Ghost, have mercy on us.
  Holy Trinity, one God, have mercy on us.
  Holy Mary, pray for us.
  Holy Mother of God, pray for us.
  Holy Virgin of virgins, pray for us.
  St. Michael, pray for us.
  St. Gabriel, pray for us.
  St. Raphael, pray for us.
  All ye holy angels and archangels, pray for us.
  All ye holy orders of blessed spirits, pray for us.
  St. John Baptist, pray for us.
  St. Joseph, pray for us.
  All ye holy patriarchs and prophets, pray for us.
  St. Peter, pray for us.
  St. Paul, pray for us.
  St. Andrew, pray for us.
  St. James, pray for us.
  St. John, pray for us.
  St. Thomas, pray for us.
  St. James, pray for us.
  St. Philip, pray for us.
  St. Bartholomew, pray for us.
  St. Matthew, pray for us.
  St. Simon, pray for us.
  St. Thaddaeus, pray for us.
  St. Mathias, pray for us.
  St. Barnabas, pray for us.
  St. Luke, pray for us.
  St. Mark, pray for us.
  All ye holy apostles and evangelists, pray for us.
  All ye holy disciples of Our Lord, pray for us.
  All ye holy innocents, pray for us.
  St. Stephen, pray for us.
  St. Lawrence, pray for us.
  St. Vincent, pray for us.
  SS. Fabian and Sebastian, pray for us.
  SS. John and Paul, pray for us.
  SS. Cosmas and Damian, pray for us.
  SS. Gervaise and Protaise, pray for us.
  All ye holy martyrs, pray for us.
  St. Sylvester, pray for us.
  St. Gregory, pray for us.
  St. Ambrose, pray for us.
  St. Augustine, pray for us.
  St. Jerome, pray for us.
  St. Martin, pray for us.
  St. Nicholas, pray for us.
  All ye holy bishops and confessors, pray for us.
  All ye holy doctors, pray for us.
  St. Anthony, pray for us.
  St. Benedict, pray for us.
  St. Bernard, pray for us.
  St. Dominic, pray for us.
  St. Francis, pray for us.
  All ye holy priests and levites, pray for us.
  All ye holy monks and hermits, pray for us.
  St. Mary Magdalen, pray for us.
  St. Agatha, pray for us.
  St. Lucy, pray for us.
  St. Agnes, pray for us.
  St. Cecilia, pray for us.
  St. Catherine, pray for us.
  St. Anastasia, pray for us.
  All ye holy virgins and widows, pray for us.
  All ye men and women, saints of God: Make intercession for us.
  Be merciful: Spare us, O Lord.
  Be merciful: Graciously hear us, O Lord.
  From all evil, O Lord, deliver us.
  From all sin, O Lord, deliver us.
  From a sudden and unprovided death, O Lord, deliver us.
  From the snares of the devil, O Lord, deliver us.
  From anger, hatred, and ill will, O Lord, deliver us.
  From the spirit of fornication, O Lord, deliver us.
  From lightning and tempest, O Lord, deliver us.
  From the scourge of earthquake, O Lord, deliver us.
  From pestilence, famine, and war, O Lord, deliver us.
  From everlasting death, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through the mystery of Thy holy incarnation, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through Thy coming, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through Thy nativity, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through Thy baptism and holy fasting, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through Thy cross and passion, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through Thy death and burial, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through Thy holy resurrection, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through Thy admirable ascension, O Lord, deliver us.
  Through the coming of the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, O Lord, deliver
us.
  In the Day of Judgment, O Lord, deliver us.
  We sinners, Beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou spare us, we beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou pardon us, we beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to bring us to true penance, we beseech Thee, hear
us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to govern and preserve Thy holy Church, we beseech
Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to preserve our apostolic prelate and all
ecclesiastical orders in holy religion, we beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to humble the enemies of Thy holy Church, we
beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to give peace and true concord to Christian kings
and princes, we beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to grant peace and unity to all Christian people,
we beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to confirm and preserve us in Thy holy service, we
beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou lift up our minds to heavenly desires, we beseech Thee, hear
us.
  That Thou render eternal good things to all our benefactors, we
beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou deliver our souls and those of our brethren, kinsfolk, and
benefactors from eternal damnation, we beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe to give and preserve the fruits of the earth, we
beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe eternal rest to all the faithful departed, we
beseech Thee, hear us.
  That Thou vouchsafe graciously to hear us, we beseech Thee, hear us.
  Son of God, we beseech Thee, hear us.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Spare us, O Lord.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Graciously hear
us, O Lord.
  Lamb of God, who takest away the sins of the world: Have mercy on us,
O Lord.
  Christ, hear us.
  Christ, graciously hear us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.
  Christ, have mercy on us.
  Lord, have mercy on us.
  Our Father, etc.
  V. And lead us not into temptation.
  R. But deliver us from evil.

PSALM LXIX

  INCLINE unto my aid, O God: O Lord, make haste to help me.
  Let them be confounded and ashamed: that seek after my soul.
  Let them be turned backward and blush for shame: that desire evils
unto me.
  Let them be presently turned away blushing for shame, that say to me:
Tis well, 'tis well.
  Let all that seek Thee rejoice and be glad in Thee: and let such as
love Thy salvation say always, The Lord be magnified.
  But I am needy and poor: O God, help Thou me.
  Thou art my helper and my deliverer: O Lord, make no delay.
  Glory be to the Father, etc.
  V. Save Thy servants:
  R. Trusting in Thee, O my God.
  V. Be unto us, O God, a tower of strength:
  R. From the face of the enemy.
  V. Let not the enemy prevail against us:
  R. Nor the son of iniquity have power to hurt us.
  V. O Lord, deal not with us according to our sins:
  R. Neither reward us according to our iniquities.
  V. Let us pray for our chief bishop, N.
  R. The Lord preserve him, and give him life, and make him blessed upon
earth, and deliver him not up to the will of his enemies.
  V. Let us pray for our benefactors:
  R. Vouchsafe, O Lord, for Thy name's sake, to reward with eternal life
all those who have done us good.
  V. Let us pray for the faithful departed:
  R. Eternal rest give to them, O Lord, and let perpetual light shine
upon them.
  V. May they rest in peace.
  R. Amen.
  V. For our absent brethren:
  R. O my God, save Thy servants trusting in Thee.
  V. Send them help, O Lord, from Thy holy place:
  R. And from Sion protect them.
  V. O Lord, hear my prayer:
  R. And let my cry come unto Thee.

_Let us pray_

O GOD, whose property it is always to have mercy and to spare, receive
our petitions, that we, and all Thy servants who are bound by the chain
of sin, may, in the compassion of Thy goodness, mercifully be absolved.

Hear, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the prayer of Thy suppliants, and pardon
the sins of them that confess to Thee, that of Thy bounty Thou mayest
grant us pardon and peace.

Out of Thy clemency, O Lord, show Thy unspeakable mercy to us, that so
Thou mayest both acquit us of our sins and deliver us from the
punishment we deserve for them.

O God, who by sin art offended and by penance pacified, mercifully
regard the prayers of Thy people who make supplication to Thee, and turn
away the scourges of Thy anger, which we deserve for our sins.

O almighty and eternal God, have mercy on Thy servant N., our chief
bishop, and direct him, according to Thy clemency, in the way of
everlasting salvation, that, by Thy grace, he may desire the things that
are agreeable to Thy will, and perform them with all his strength.

O God, from whom all holy desires, righteous counsels, and just works do
come, give to Thy servants that peace which the world can not give;
that, our hearts being disposed to keep Thy commandments, and the fear
of enemies being taken away, the times, by Thy protection, may be
peaceable.

Inflame, O Lord, our reins and hearts with the fire of the Holy Spirit;
to the end that we may serve Thee with a chaste body, and please Thee
with a clean heart.

O God, the Creator and Redeemer of all the faithful, give to the souls
of Thy servants departed the remission of all their sins, that by pious
supplications they may obtain the pardon they have always desired.

Direct, we beseech Thee, O Lord, our actions by Thy holy inspirations,
and carry them on by Thy gracious assistance; that every prayer and work
of ours may always begin from Thee, and by Thee be happily ended.

Almighty and eternal God, who hast dominion over the living and the
dead, and art merciful to all whom Thou foreknowest shall be Thine by
faith and good works; we humbly beseech Thee that they for whom we have
purposed to offer our prayers, whether this present world still detains
them in the flesh, or the next world has already received them divested
of their bodies, may, by the clemency of Thine own goodness and the
intercession of Thy saints, obtain pardon and full remission of all
their sins. Through Our Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth and reigneth with
Thee in the unity of the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

  V. O Lord, hear my prayer.
  R. And let my cry come unto Thee.
  V. May the almighty and merciful Lord graciously hear us.
  R. Amen.
  V. May the souls of the faithful departed through the mercy of God
rest in peace.
  R. Amen.






