generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






CHATTANOOGA

OR

Lookout Mountain

AND

Missionary Ridge

From MOCCASIN POINT



BY

BRADFORD R. WOOD, JR.,

Brevet Captain, late U.S.A., Brevet Major U.S.V. Albany, N.Y.




A paper read at the Thirty-second Annual Meeting of the U.S. Veteran
Signal Corps Association, held at Saratoga Springs, N.Y., September 10,
1907.

MAJOR WOOD, when introduced, said:--

I wish to describe to the comrades present a great battle which
resulted in a victory for the Union, and to introduce you to some of
our Western soldiers. If I can give you one or two new facts, or
increase your love for the West or for all of our great and glorious
country, I shall be well pleased. My story is not all original, but
what is not I have taken from official and reliable records, so that I
can say that it is all true to the best of my knowledge and belief.




Published November, 1907
By The U.S. Veteran Signal Corps Association




LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN AND MISSIONARY RIDGE FROM MOCCASIN POINT


In the fall of the year 1863, during the Civil War, while serving in
the signal corps attached to the fourth corps of the army of the
Cumberland, it was my privilege to have a good station on Moccasin
Point, opposite Lookout Mountain, on the north side of the Tennessee
river, from which to witness the assault of the Union troops under Gen.
Hooker up the north face of the mountain, and also the charge of the
army of the Cumberland under Gen. Thomas up the western slope of
Missionary Ridge.

Moccasin Point is about three miles below Chattanooga and is formed by
a bend in the Tennessee, which turns to the east and north at Lookout
Mountain, continuing in that direction to a little north of
Chattanooga, when it inclines to the northwest and then again to the
southwest. The eastern side of Moccasin Point near the river is quite
steep and from 100 to 150 feet above it, the crest of the ridge being
covered with trees. The western side and the point slope gently to the
river bank and contain some cultivated fields and farm houses, the
peninsula being about a mile wide in the widest part. From the summit
of Lookout Mountain it bears some resemblance to an Indian's foot clad
in a moccasin, from which it derives its name. Lookout Mountain is an
elevated plateau extending from the Tennessee river about forty miles
southwest into Georgia and Alabama, its sides and summit being covered
with trees, with some open fields and cultivated farms. Near
Chattanooga its height is about 1500 feet above the river. The northern
slope from the Tennessee is rocky and steep for about 600 feet, when
the ascent is more gradual and contains an open space of a few acres
cultivated as a farm. A white farm house, known as Craven's, is
situated on the upper margin of the farm and near the western point.
From the southern side of the farm the ascent to the summit is very
rocky and almost perpendicular. The house was occupied by the
confederate general E. C. Walthall as his headquarters. Around the
point of the mountain, a little above the river, is the track of the
Nashville and Chattanooga railroad cut in the side of the rock, and
above it, across the open field, was a wagon road leading into Lookout
valley. On the eastern side of the mountain and connecting with this
was the road to Summertown, the only wagon road to the summit of the
mountain for many miles. Chattanooga creek, a good-sized stream, flows
into the Tennessee at the foot of the mountain on the eastern side, and
Lookout creek from Lookout valley on the western.

After the battle of Chickamauga the center of the army of the
Cumberland withdrew from the field in good order on the night of Sept.
20, 1863, to Rossville, a few miles south of Chattanooga, and was ready
to give battle on the following day, the right and left wings being
again in position. It was not however closely followed or attacked by
the enemy, but as Chattanooga was considered a much better position for
defense, on Sept. 22, the army took up its position on the hills
surrounding the town and was soon intrenched and securely fortified
against any attack. Its lines extended from the Tennessee river on the
south to the bank of the river on the north. It also held Moccasin
Point, the river being crossed by a pontoon bridge, and the north side
of the river to Bridgeport, from whence it received its supplies by
wagon road.

The Confederate army occupied Lookout Mountain, Lookout and Chattanooga
valleys on the south, and Missionary Ridge on the east, also Orchard
Knob and some other intervening hills. They had railroad connection
with Atlanta, 140 miles south, and could easily receive supplies and
reinforcements.

[Illustration: BATTLE OF CHATTANOOGA.]

On Oct. 20, 1863, I was ordered with Lt. S. A. Thayer and four flagmen
to establish a signal station of observation on Moccasin Point, to
watch the movements of the enemy and report to a signal station on
Cameron Hill directly south of Chattanooga, from whence there was a
telegraph line to the headquarters of the army in the town. Our station
was on the edge of a bluff overlooking the river, and about fifty yards
in rear of the guns of Capt. Naylor's battery, the 10th Indiana. This
battery consisted of one 10-pounder and one 20-pounder Parrott, and two
12-pounder brass howitzers. To the right and a little lower down on the
point, was Capt. Spencer's battery the 1st Illinois, formerly Capt.
Aleshire's, of two brass Napoleons and two 12 pounder howitzers. Still
further to the right and rear was encamped a brigade of infantry under
the command of Gen. W. C. Whitaker. On the north face of Lookout
Mountain were two lines of intrenchments with redoubts on the eastern
and western extremities, and a covered way around the point. There had
been a battery near the Craven house, but the fire of our guns was so
accurate that it had been withdrawn to the summit of the mountain where
it was more secure. Our batteries had a good range of the wagon road
across the point of Lookout and also of the Summertown road on the
eastern side of the mountain, a portion of which could be seen. As
Capt. Naylor was serving at division headquarters as ordnance officer,
Lt. Crosby was left in charge of his battery, and with his Parrott guns
he did some very fine shooting. He sank the trail of one of them in the
ground elevating the muzzle sufficiently to explode some shells
directly over the summit of the mountain. One day we noticed a signal
officer on the point of Lookout, signaling to Gen. Bragg's headquarters
on Missionary Ridge, and Lt. Crosby was about to fire at him when I
requested him not to do so in order that I might try to read his
message. I called off the numbers to one of my flagmen, who wrote them
down and afterwards compared them to the Confederate code which had
been given me, but they did not agree. As the flagman on the mountain
stood with his left side towards me, it was very difficult to
distinguish the motions of the flag from the right to the left; so I
thought I did not get the numbers correctly, or else the officer was
using a cipher. I tried again however, Lt. Crosby writing down the
numbers for me, but meeting with no better success, I said I had no
objection to his firing at the flag, which he did, the shell exploding
very near it, and we saw it no more. There was a rumor soon after that
a signal officer had been killed on the top of the mountain, but I
never heard it confirmed. The signal station was probably moved further
back on the summit where we could not see it, as communication was
still kept up with Missionary Ridge. For firing at the summit, Lt.
Crosby cut his fuses for twenty seconds, and for firing at the enemy on
the Craven farm and the Summertown road, for ten and twelve seconds. A
little later a section of 20-pounder Parrotts was placed on an
elevation to the right and some distance to the rear of the batteries
mentioned, which enfiladed the enemy's lines on the western slope of
the mountain. The firing from Lookout Mountain though frequent did
little damage on Moccasin Point, the shells either falling short or
going over our heads into the Tennessee river.

One evening while sending a message by torchlight it became necessary
to fill the stationary foot-torch with turpentine. In doing so some of
the fluid was accidentally spilled on the ground, which afterwards
became ignited from one of the torches, the flame spreading rapidly
among the dry pine needles and brush on the ground. The enemy seeing
the fire commenced shelling us, one shell striking very near, but with
the assistance of some men from the battery, by stamping and beating,
we soon succeeded in extinguishing the fire. Waiting a few minutes
until everything was quiet, I lighted my torches again and finished my
message without being again disturbed. Not long after this there was a
forest fire on the eastern side of Lookout Mountain, which burned for
nearly a week, but as it approached the houses near the point it was
extinguished.

The following are a few of the messages sent in cipher from the signal
station on Moccasin Point to the station on Cameron Hill:--

    Oct. 26, 1:20 a.m.

    GEN. THOMAS:--Beat the enemy off Williams' Island twice to-night.
    Want no help.

        (Signed) WHITAKER, GENERAL.

    Oct. 29, 7:50 p.m.

    GEN. THOMAS:--Rebel troops were moving about northeast. They were
    twenty-seven minutes in passing a given point.

    Nov. 15, 11:20 a.m.

    CAPT. LEONARD:--Naylor's battery firing at squads of men passing
    along the road near white house on Lookout, also at earthwork on
    the edge of open field below and to the right of the house.

    Nov. 15, 12:30 p.m.

    Battery No. 5 is now firing at a regiment of infantry and wagons
    going up Lookout.

    Nov. 16, 9:30 a.m.

    About a brigade of infantry just passed over the mountain towards
    Lookout valley. Our batteries opened on them.

    Nov. 20, 11:20 a.m.

    Rebels are extending rifle pits on Lookout below white house.
    Naylor's battery is shelling them.

    Nov. 21, 4:20 p.m.

    LT. BACHTELL:--They are rifle pits. I reported them to Gen. Thomas
    about a week ago when he was here. Have seen a few men passing
    there to-day but none at work. Naylor's battery will fire at the
    point you mention.

    Nov. 22, 9:55 a.m.

    CAPT. LEONARD:--The enemy are strengthening their earthworks on
    northeast face of Lookout. Naylor's battery is shelling them.

    Nov. 22, 11:15 a.m.

    Can see artillery and a long train of wagons going up the road on
    Mission Ridge, 85 degrees east of south from this station.

    Nov. 23, 11:15 a.m.

    Naylor's battery is firing at wagons going up the mountain and at
    men at work on earthwork near white house. Three shots from summit
    of Lookout this morning.

    Nov. 23, 3 p.m.

    Naylor's and Aleshire's batteries firing at enemy in line of battle
    on our right beyond rolling mill.

It is very probable that the firing of our batteries at this time was
intended to draw the attention of the enemy from the approach of Gen.
Sherman's troops above Chattanooga.

    Nov. 23, 9:30 p.m.

    Have just read rebel message from station on Mission Ridge, viz:
    "On whose left did Gen. S---- think the attack would be made?"

This message was sent from Gen. Bragg's' headquarters on Missionary
Ridge without address or signature. In the evening of the same day the
following message was secured from another source:--

    GEN. HARDEE:--I observed from the Point the movements of the enemy
    until dark. The object seemed to be to attract our attention. The
    troops in sight were formed from center to left. Those on the right
    moved to center. The troops from Raccoon were in full sight. If
    they intend to attack, my opinion is, it will be on our left. Both
    of their bridges are gone.

        (Signed) GEN. STEVENSON.

The troops from Raccoon referred to were Gen. Sherman's. From the summit
of Lookout Mountain and from Missionary Ridge the movements of the Union
army could easily be seen in the day time, but the Confederates seem to
have been surprised by the coming of Generals Hooker and Sherman. In
Gen. Longstreet's book, "From Manassas to Appomattox," in the month of
October he states: "Gen. Longstreet's command occupied Lookout Mountain
and the left of the Confederate army. Alexander's batteries occupied the
top of the mountain. Gen. Alexander managed to drop an occasional shell
about the enemy's lines by lifting the trails of his guns, but the fire
of other batteries was not effective." President Davis visited Gen.
Bragg's army Oct. 9, and viewed Chattanooga from Lookout Mountain. We on
Moccasin Point were informed of his presence and looked for him with our
glasses. He seemed to have been much encouraged by the view from Lookout
rock and predicted that the town would soon be again in his possession
with the Union army which surrounded it. The Union army was surrounded
on every side but one by the Confederates, occupying fortified positions
on summits which seemed naturally impregnable. The supplies of the army
had to be hauled from Bridgeport over a wagon road through the
Sequatchie valley, a hostile country, a distance of 60 miles, in some
places exposed to sharpshooters and the guns from Lookout Mountain, and
then must cross the Tennessee on a frail pontoon bridge. Gen. Longstreet
had established a signal station in observation of Bridgeport. He
writes:

"On Oct. 27 the signal party reported the enemy advancing from
Bridgeport in force, artillery and infantry, but the report was
discredited at Gen. Bragg's headquarters. On Oct. 28 Gen. Bragg while
laying his plans sitting on the point of Lookout rock, the battery from
Moccasin Point threw a shell which exploded about two hundred feet
below them. That angered Gen. Bragg and he ordered Gen. Alexander to
drop some of his shells about the enemy's heads. As this little
practice went on a dispatch messenger came bursting through the
brushwood asking for Gen. Longstreet, and reported the enemy marching
from Bridgeport along the base of the mountain, artillery and infantry.
Gen. Bragg denied the report and rebuked the soldier, but the soldier
said: 'General, if you will ride to a point on the west side of the
mountain, I will show them to you.' They did so and saw the 11th and
12th corps under Gen. Hooker marching quietly along the valley towards
Brown's Ferry. Gens. Bragg and Longstreet were surprised, but the
latter was surprised because Gen. Hooker did not march along the
mountain top instead of in the valley. They saw the enemy go into
bivouac with the rear guard of about 1500 men about three miles in the
rear and planned to capture it by a night attack."

Gen. Hooker left Bridgeport Oct. 27, and marching up the river left Gen.
Geary with the rear guard to protect Kelly's ford, and with the main
body of his troops proceeded to the vicinity of Brown's Ferry, a few
miles further up the river, where they went into camp. He wished to hold
both fords of the river. A desperate attempt was made to cut off Gen.
Geary in the night, but his men were not surprised and after a sharp
fight drove the enemy back. Gens. Howard and Schurz were sent to the
assistance of Geary and soon ran into the enemy, with whom they had a
severe fight, driving him up the mountain and taking many prisoners.
This was called the battle of Wauhatchie. The loss of Gen. Hooker was
383 in killed and wounded. The loss of the Confederates Gen. Longstreet
states was 408. 150 were found dead in front of Gen. Geary and over 100
prisoners were taken.

The capture of Brown's Ferry seems to have been a complete surprise. The
night of Oct. 27 was dark and the pontoons for the new bridge, loaded
with soldiers, which floated down the river from Chattanooga around
Moccasin Point to the ferry, a distance of nine miles, were not
perceived by the enemy until they reached the appointed place of
landing, when the pickets fired a few shots and fled. Troops which had
marched across Moccasin Point from Chattanooga were hurried across the
river in the boats, and in a short time the defenses were strong enough
to hold the new pontoon bridge, which was speedily completed.
Communication by river was now open between Bridgeport and Chattanooga,
so that supplies of provisions and stores were soon rushing to the army
of the Cumberland. Although Lookout valley seemed now lost to the
Confederates and Lookout Mountain was threatened, Gen. Bragg on Nov. 4
detached Gen. Longstreet with 15,000 men to attack Knoxville. The
situation of Gen. Burnside was precarious, as he was surrounded by the
enemy and in more need of supplies than the army of the Cumberland.

About 2 p.m. on Nov. 23, which was a cool and clear day, we noticed a
long line of troops in front of Fort Wood on the east side of
Chattanooga, as if for inspection or review; but as soon as they
commenced to move forward we concluded it was for a reconnoissance.
This proved to be the case, as deserters had reported that many of Gen.
Bragg's troops had gone away, some to intercept Gen. Sherman, who was
thought to be approaching by the way of Trenton and McLemore's Cove,
Georgia, on their left. The reconnoissance was made by the division of
Gen. Thos. J. Wood of the 4th corps, supported by Gen. Sheridan on the
right and Gen. Howard on the left. It was soon ascertained that the
Confederate intrenchments were still occupied, but by a rapid movement
of our troops they were carried with the capture of Orchard Knob, an
important elevation between Fort Wood and Missionary Ridge. The loss in
Gen. Wood's division was 190 killed and wounded. He took 174 prisoners
including eight officers and one stand of colors. The summit of Orchard
Knob was immediately occupied by Bridge's battery of six guns, four
3-inch Rodmans and two Napoleons. This advance was of great advantage
to the Union Army and caused Gen. Bragg to transfer Walker's division
from Lookout Mountain to sustain the right against what seemed to be a
most threatening demonstration.

During the 23d of November the pontoon bridge above Chattanooga parted,
leaving Gen. Osterhaus' division on the north bank of the Tennessee; but
as three of Gen. Sherman's divisions had already crossed, Gen. Grant
directed not to delay operations any longer. Gen. Thomas then advised
Gen. Hooker, if Gen. Osterhaus' division failed to cross, he should
endeavor with it and his own troops to take the point of Lookout
Mountain, and later he advised him that the mountain should be taken if
a demonstration should develop its practicability.

The morning of Nov. 24 was cool and cloudy, threatening rain. There was
a cloud about the summit of the mountain, and at no time during the day
was the top of the mountain clearly visible from Moccasin Point. A
little before 10 a.m. heavy firing was heard on the west side of the
mountain, gradually growing nearer. At 10:30 a.m. I received the
following message from Lookout valley by the way of Chattanooga:--

    COMMANDING OFFICER BATTERIES ON MOCCASIN POINT:--Gen. Hooker
    desires that you will keep a sharp lookout on the eastern slope of
    the nose of Lookout Mountain. If any of the enemy's troops go up
    there, shell them.

        (Signed) D. BUTTERFIELD, MAJ. GEN. AND CHIEF OF STAFF.

Not long after, suddenly, crowds of the enemy came rushing round the
western point of the mountain and filled the trenches and earthworks on
the northern slope close by. All the guns on Moccasin Point now opened
a destructive fire.

Gen. Hooker's command consisted of Gen. Geary's division of the 12th
corps, Gen. Osterhaus' division of the 15th, and two brigades of Gen.
Cruft's division of the 4th corps. He had sent Geary's division and
Whitaker's brigade of Cruft's division to Wauhatchie to cross Lookout
creek and then to sweep down the right bank, to clear it of the enemy
and cover the crossing of the remaining forces. He ordered Col. Grose to
seize the common road bridge just below the railroad bridge crossing and
repair it, and directed Gen. Charles R. Woods, then in command of Gen.
Osterhaus' division, to move his division to Brown's Ferry under cover
of the hills, to the crossing of Lookout creek and support the
batteries; one, battery K, 1st Ohio artillery, on a high hill a little
north of the stream; and the other battery K, 1st N.Y. artillery, on a
hill to the rear of the other. At 8 a.m. Gen. Geary crossed Lookout
creek, captured the enemy's pickets, and then ascended the mountain side
until his right touched the base of the palisades. The fog which
overhung the mountain top and upper steeps and the woods concealed the
movement. Then with the right clinging to the palisades he swept round
towards the mountain's point. Simultaneously with Gen. Geary's first
movement, Col. Grose attacked the enemy at the bridge and having driven
them back commenced to repair. The noise of the conflict called the
enemy's nearest forces from their camps. One detachment advanced to the
railroad embankment, which formed a good parapet and admitted a sweeping
fire upon the Union troops advancing from the bridge. To avoid loss of
life in a direct advance, Gen. Hooker directed Gen. Osterhaus, now
commanding his division, to send a brigade to prepare a crossing a half
mile further up the creek under cover of the woods. At 11 a.m. the
bridge was completed, and soon after Gen. Geary's division and
Whitaker's brigade in line, sweeping the mountain from base to
palisade, came abreast. The batteries then opened fire, and Woods and
Grose crossed the creek and aligned their brigades on Geary's left as
it swept down the valley. The troops of the enemy in the first
positions that escaped the artillery fire ran into the infantry lines
so quickly that overthrow occurred to all that had taken position in
the valley and near the western base of the mountain. Many were killed
and wounded and the remainder were captured. Then the line moved
onwards towards the mountain's front. As the increasing roar of
musketry indicated the sweep of the battle to the east, the anxiety for
its revelation on the open ground became intense. Soon could be seen
the routed enemy in rapid motion followed by Gen. Hooker's line with
its right under the palisades. With a plunging fire from above and
behind, they rolled up the enemy's lines and driving them from their
intrenchments, did not halt until the middle of the open ground was
gained. Here the enemy received reinforcements and a more determined
stand was made.

Gen. Cruft had been ordered to move south along the western base of the
mountain and charge up to the white house. Grose's brigade of his
division and Osterhaus' command, having gathered up the captured on the
lower ground, closed on the left and then the enemy was driven from his
defenses on the open ground and retreated up the mountain toward the
eastern slope. As Gen. Cruft's troops charged the last line of
intrenchments near the Craven house, the sun shone out for a few
minutes and the battle flags of both sides could be plainly seen from
Moccasin Point. It was a thrilling sight. Gen. Hooker was greatly
assisted by the batteries on Moccasin Point, which swept the northern
face of the mountain, pouring shot and shell into the enemy's lines
about the Craven house and the Summertown road.

At 12:50 p.m. I received the following message:--

    COMMANDING OFFICER MOCCASIN POINT:--Throw no more shells on this
    side of the mountain. You are throwing in the midst of our men.

        (Signed) HOOKER.

I immediately read the message to Capt. Naylor, who ordered his battery
to cease firing. I asked him if he could see the enemy and our troops
plainly, and he said he could. I then asked him if he was firing into
our men, and he replied he was not. I then ran with the message to the
commanding officer of the other battery to the right, who immediately
ordered his battery to cease firing, and asked him the same questions.
He denied that he was firing into our men or that he was firing on the
western side of the mountain. I had watched the firing of the batteries
and did not believe that they were firing into our own troops or that
any of the shells went on the western side of the mountain. I did not
think that Gen. Thomas would believe it, and as my messages went
through headquarters at Chattanooga, with the consent of Capt. Naylor,
whom I considered the commanding officer on the Point at that time, at
1:18 p.m. I sent the following message to Gen. Hooker:--

    CAPT. NAYLOR, MOCCASIN POINT, says he can see the enemy's flank
    plainly and requests permission to fire at them.

        (Signed) WOOD, CAPT. AND A.S.O.

At 2:35 p.m. I received the following message from headquarters at
Chattanooga.

    WOOD:--Gen. Thomas directs that the batteries on Point open on the
    Summertown road immediately.

        (Signed) MERRILL.

Capt. Jesse Merrill was chief signal officer of the army of the
Cumberland on Gen. Thomas' staff. About this time the mists descended
on the mountain and the troops were hidden from view and there was a
little rain. It did not become clear again until nearly dark, so that
the batteries did not begin firing again, but I read the message to the
commanding officers of the batteries and we considered it a sufficient
vindication that Gen. Thomas did not believe that they were firing into
Gen. Hooker's men. The musketry firing continued in the fog and the
enemy made a desperate stand behind a large rock to the left of the
Craven house and in defending the Summertown road on the eastern side
of the mountain. The heavy firing ceased about 2 p.m. Gen. Hooker's
troops had exhausted their ammunition and no ammunition trains could
now reach them. At 5 p.m. Gen. Carlin's brigade of the 1st division
14th corps crossed Chattanooga creek near its mouth and ascended the
mountain to Gen. Hooker's right. The troops of this brigade carried on
their persons ammunition for Hooker's skirmishers in addition to their
ordinary supply for themselves. As night settled down the skirmishing
continued very heavy, the flashes of the muskets on the side of the
mountain presenting a brilliant sight to the spectators. Under cover of
the skirmishing the mountain was evacuated and in the morning there
were no troops to be seen on the northern slope. The weather was a
little foggy, but as it gradually cleared, a line of troops without
colors displayed could be seen in the valley through an opening in the
trees, marching towards Missionary Ridge. Not being able to distinguish
whether they were the enemy's or our own, at 9:30 a.m. Nov. 25 I sent
the following message to Capt. Jesse Merrill at army headquarters:--

    Can see a long line of infantry on ridge beyond Chattanooga creek a
    little east of South. Are they our troops?

Not receiving an answer very promptly, I left a man to watch the
station on Cameron Hill with my marine glass, and unfastening my
telescope from the stake to which it was attached, hastened to the guns
on the point, and looking through it could see plainly by the gray and
jean uniforms, the slouched hats and the furled colors, that the troops
were Confederates, and asked Lt. Crosby to look at them and if he
thought he could reach them, but he said that he could not train his
guns upon them. At 10:10 a.m. I sent the following message to Capt.
Leonard:--

    Fifty degrees east of south and about two miles distant, a heavy
    column of rebels marching towards Mission Ridge.

Shortly after I received this answer to my message to Capt. Merrill:--

    I do not know.

Some daring soldiers of the 8th Kentucky were the first to scale the
palisades and unfurl the national flag on the summit of Lookout
Mountain. As the fog lifted it soon became apparent that the left flank
of the enemy had been turned and the forces which held the mountain had
been transferred to Missionary Ridge. In this battle Gen. Hooker had
two divisions and two brigades, seven brigades in all of 9680 men, and
in the evening was reinforced by the brigade of Gen. Carlin, three
regiments of which were engaged. Gen. Stevenson, the Confederate
general, commanded two divisions of six brigades on the mountain, and
another brigade was sent to reinforce him but too late to be of any
value. He reports that only four of his brigades were in action. The
casualties in a few of the regiments under Gen. Hooker were not
reported until after the fighting at Ringgold and Graysville, when the
total was given for the four days; but the loss at Lookout Mountain was
about 75 killed and 375 wounded, a total of 450. The loss of the enemy
in killed and wounded was about the same and Gen. Hooker captured
between 2000 and 3000 prisoners, five stand of colors, two pieces of
artillery and 5000 muskets, and 20,000 rations and camp and garrison
equipage for three brigades were abandoned on the summit of the
mountain.

Owing to bad weather and roads Gen. Sherman had been delayed in
crossing the Tennessee. Gen. Howard's corps had been detached from Gen.
Hooker and was formed in close column north and west of Fort Wood Nov.
23. The 4th and 14th corps extended from Citico creek north of
Chattanooga around Forts Wood and Negley, and Academy and Cameron
Hills. On the morning of the 24th Gen. Sherman was crossing the river
above Chattanooga. The utmost efforts had been made by Gen. W. F. Smith
to provide the pontoon bridges for Gen. Sherman's troops to cross the
river near the mouth of Chickamauga creek to attack the enemy's right
flank. The river at the point selected for the crossing was 1300 feet
wide, and two bridges were proposed, and one also for the mouth of South
Chickamauga 180 feet in length. As it was expected that the enemy would
contest the passage every precaution had been taken to keep the
projected bridges a profound secret. The pontoons had been hauled on
by-roads on the north side of the Tennessee to the North Chickamauga
creek, eight miles above Chattanooga, and there launched and concealed,
in readiness to be floated down to the place of crossing. At midnight
on Nov. 23d, 116 boats with a brigade left the North Chickamauga and
floated quietly to the place of crossing. They were landed above and
below the mouth of South Chickamauga and were first used to transport
troops from the opposite shore. By daylight two divisions were over and
the construction of the bridge was under vigorous prosecution. The
steamer Dunbar from Chattanooga, which had been captured in a disabled
condition and repaired by our soldiers, was also of great assistance in
transporting the troops, especially as on account of the rise in the
river from heavy rains, more pontoons were needed and but one bridge
could be thrown. Just as the last boat was connected Gen. Howard with
one brigade of infantry and a small cavalry escort arrived from
Chattanooga without having met with any resistance. Leaving his brigade
to skirmish on the right of Gen. Sherman's advance at his request, he
returned to Chattanooga with his escort. The bridge was finished at 11
a.m., and at 1 p.m. Gen. Sherman moved forward with three divisions in
echelon. He met with no serious resistance and at 4 p.m. occupied the
two northern summits of Missionary Ridge. There was still one summit
between Gen. Sherman and the tunnel. Gen. Grant had expected that he
would carry the ridge to the tunnel before the enemy could concentrate
against him; but the intervening hill was the one upon which Gen.
Bragg's right flank rested. The crest of Missionary Ridge is divided
into distinct summits throughout its whole length by numerous
depressions. The deepest of these between the Tennessee river and
Rossville separates the second summit, which Gen. Sherman had gained
from the third, which was the strongest position for lateral defense
within Gen. Bragg's lines. Here Gen. Cleburne's famous division was
placed. Heavy barricades constructed of logs and earth, covered the
troops on the first defensive line, while the higher ground to the
south gave room for successive supporting columns. A somewhat thickly
planted forest gave additional protection to the enemy. It was the
strength of this position that induced Gen. Bragg to yield the first
two hills to Gen. Sherman. Their abandonment shortened his line while
the depression on his right and the slopes east and west placed his
enemy under his guns on every practicable line of attack. Gen. Bragg
now had his entire army on the ridge. Cleburne's and Gist's divisions
were on the extreme right opposed to Gen. Sherman, his left was held by
Stewart's division, his center by Breckenridge's division and portions
of the commands of Buckner and Hindman under Gen. Anderson, and the
divisions of Cheatham and Stevenson from Lookout Mountain were in
motion toward the right. Gen. Sherman opened the battle of Nov. 25 soon
after sunrise by the advance of Gen. Corse's brigade from the right
center. Gen. Corse moved down the southern slope of the second hill
gained the night before and under a destructive fire ascended towards
Cleburne's fortified position. He gained a lateral elevation about
eighty yards distant from the enemy's defenses and held it firmly.
Advancing repeatedly from this position he was as often driven back and
in turn repulsed every attack of the enemy. In the meantime Gen. Morgan
L. Smith's division advanced along the eastern base of the hill and
Loomis' brigade supporting Corse on the left was sustained by the two
reserve brigades of Gen. John E. Smith's division. Gen. Morgan L. Smith
pressed his attack to the enemy's works but gained no permanent
lodgement. The character and issue of this contest was observed by Gen.
Grant from Orchard Knob.

Pending Gen. Sherman's series of attacks there had been some activity
on the right flank of the Union army. Early in the morning Gen. Thomas
had directed Gen. Hooker to move with his forces except two regiments
to hold the mountain on the road to Rossville. Later he had ordered him
to advance upon the enemy's works in conjunction with the 14th corps
under Gen. Palmer. Gen. Hooker advanced rapidly to Chattanooga creek,
but was there delayed to restore a bridge which the enemy had destroyed
in his retreat from the mountain. It was evident from the importance of
the position that Gen. Bragg would maintain his right if possible. Gen.
Sherman was threatening not only to turn that flank, but was also
menacing his rear and his depot of supplies at Chickamauga station. In
the mean time Gen. Hooker had attained position on the enemy's left
flank which caused him to retreat to Rossville. Gen. Hooker then
disposed his troops to sweep Missionary Ridge toward the north. He
directed Gen. Osterhaus to cross to the east side, Gen. Cruft to
advance on the summit and Gen. Geary on the western slope and edge of
the valley. Gen. Grant had waited for Gen. Sherman's success in turning
the enemy's right flank since early morning, and during the afternoon
he had waited for Gen. Hooker to engage his left. The day was now
nearly gone and some new measure was necessary or the sun would set
with Gen. Bragg in possession of Missionary Ridge. Four divisions were
in front of Gen. Bragg's center, now held by less than four divisions,
as a portion of Stewart's on the extreme left, under the direction of
Gen. Breckenridge, had been sent against Gen. Hooker. From 11 a.m.
until after 3 p.m. Confederate troops were plainly seen on the crest of
the ridge marching past Gen. Bragg's headquarters to reinforce his
right. In order to relieve the pressure on Gen. Sherman, Gen. Grant
ordered Gen. Thomas to advance with the army of the Cumberland and
attack Gen. Bragg's center. The order required that the enemy should
be dislodged from the rifle-pits and intrenchments at the base of
Missionary Ridge. His four divisions from right to left were Johnson's,
Sheridan's, Woods' and Baird's, consisting of eleven brigades of about
20,000 men. Two lines of skirmishers covered the battle front and such
troops as were designated as reserves were massed in rear of their
respective organizations. Gen. Thomas' line was more than a mile long.
Most of the houses between the lines had been destroyed and the trees
cut down and used for fuel. To the east and south of Fort Wood the
plain was barren. At five minutes past 4 p.m. six successive cannon
shots from the battery on Orchard Knob gave the signal for the advance.
At the sixth discharge the line moved forward in splendid array with
colors flying and bayonets fixed. The batteries of the enemy on the
ridge immediately opened upon them with great activity. Gen. Brannan's
heavy guns in Forts Wood, Negley, Sheridan and Rosseau and four light
batteries on the intermediate hills gave emphatic response. Their fire
was at first directed to the enemy's inferior intrenchments, and when
that endangered the advancing lines, their missiles were thrown upon
the summit of Missionary Ridge. The change of direction was soon
necessary, as the troops in rapid movement first met the enemy's
pickets and their reserves, and then his stronger line in his lower
intrenchments, and drove all in confusion to the crest of the ridge.
The advance of the Union troops had been so rapid that the forces which
had so often repeated their furious assaults at Chickamauga lost
courage and made no soldierly efforts to maintain their positions,
though supported by at least fifty guns which at short range were fast
decimating the assaulting columns. Having executed their orders holding
the enemy's lower defenses, the four divisions stood under his
batteries while the troops they had routed threw themselves behind the
stronger intrenchments on the summit. To stand still was death, to fall
back was not compassed by orders and was forbidden by every impulse of
the brave men who with no stragglers had moved so boldly and so
successfully upon the foe.

Missionary Ridge rises to a height of between 400 and 500 feet. The
trees had been cut down and the slope was rough and uneven, in places
rocky and covered with trunks and stumps of trees. There were
rifle-pits half way up and just below the crest a strong line of
intrenchments. While looking through my telescope at the lower line
almost directly in front of Gen. Bragg's headquarters, in less than a
minute after they had been taken and before the enemy who were driven
out had reached the crest, I saw a few of our men start up the hill in
pursuit. The movement extended first to the left and afterwards to the
right. I exclaimed, "They are going up the hill, may God help them,"
and some one standing near by said, "Amen." We did not expect it and it
looked like a forlorn hope. The cannonade was terrific. Sometimes our
men would halt for a few seconds until others came up, but none went
back. The enthusiasm spread and our men kept advancing, inclining a
little to the right, taking advantage of what cover there was or
stopping to reload, though there was not much firing on their part.
During the assault a caisson on the crest a little to the north of Gen.
Bragg's headquarters was struck by a shell, probably from Fort Wood,
and exploded with great effect, a column of smoke rising high in the
air; and not long after another exploded further to the north in a
similar manner. Just before our line of troops appeared on the crest I
saw a group of men run a gun from the intrenchment to the top of the
ridge, fire it to the south along the line of intrenchments and then
turn it around and fire it at the fleeing enemy on the other side of
the ridge. Capt. McMahon of the 41st Ohio writes: "His regiment was on
the right of the first line of Gen. Hazen's brigade. The right company
of the regiment captured a section of artillery on the crest, turned
the guns, enfiladed the crest and drove the enemy in Gen. Sheridan's
front into a precipitate retreat." In a few moments more the crest of
the ridge was occupied all along the front of the army of the
Cumberland and Gen. Bragg's center was routed. Gen. Hooker soon after
swept the ridge northward from Rossville connecting with Gen. Johnson's
right. Gen. Hardee's forces opposite Gen. Sherman alone maintained
their position. From Gen. Bragg's own declaration and from the
observation of those occupying elevated positions, there is no room to
doubt that Gen. Thomas J. Wood's division first reached the summit.[1]
Gen. Sheridan's and Gen. Baird's, on the right and left, very soon
after gained the crest. Gen. Wood's troops enfiladed the enemy's line
to the right and left as soon as they broke through it. Many isolated
contests were conducted with spirit by the enemy but the fragments of
his line were speedily brushed away.

      [1] According to Confederate testimony, which in this case is
      impartial, the right of Willich's and left of Hazen's brigades,
      Wood's Division, were the first Union troops to reach the crest
      of the ridge. (See Obituary of Gen. Thos. J. Wood, Thirty-Fourth
      Reunion, Society of the Army of the Cumberland, October, 1906,
      page 98.)

About 6 p.m. I saw a signal flag on a hill in Chattanooga valley near
the ridge calling my station, and answering the call received the
following message which I forwarded to the Cameron Hill station.

    GEN. THOMAS:--I think we have got them, but I want a battery.

        (Signed) GEN. GRANGER.

The impulse to carry the summit of the ridge was seemingly spontaneous
and from different points several brigades passed beyond the limit
fixed by Gen. Grant's order before there was any concerted action
toward a general assault. Gens. Bragg, Hardee, Breckenridge and others
of inferior rank exerted themselves to prevent defeat, and Gen. Bragg
was nearly surrounded before he entirely despaired and abandoned the
field. Gen. Breckenridge resisted Gen. Hooker as he ascended the ridge
at Rossville, availing himself of the intrenchments which had been
constructed by the Union army after the battle of Chickamauga. His
first resistance was quickly overcome by Grose's brigade. Gen. Cruft's
division was then formed in four lines on the summit, and with the
lateral division abreast moved rapidly forward, driving the enemy in
turn from several positions. Many of his troops that fled east or west
were captured by Osterhaus or Geary, and those who tried to escape
northward fell into Johnson's hands. As soon as Gen. Hardee heard the
noise of battle to his left he hastened to join his troops under Gen.
Anderson on the right of their central line, but before he could cross
the chasm corresponding to the interval between Gen. Sherman's right
and Gen. Thomas' left, Anderson's command was thrown into a confused
retreat. He then hurried Cheatham's division from the vicinity of the
tunnel and formed it across the summit to resist Baird's division which
had advanced northward after carrying its entire front in the assault.
In a severe contest in which Col. Phelps, a brigade commander, fell,
Gen. Baird pressed this fresh division northward from several knolls,
but was finally compelled to abandon the conflict by the peculiar
strength of a new position and the approach of darkness. The victory
was gained too late in the day for a general pursuit. Gen. Sheridan's
division and Willich's brigade of Wood's division pursued the enemy for
a short distance down the eastern slope. Later Gen. Sheridan advanced
and drove the enemy from a strong position, captured two pieces of
artillery, numerous small arms and several wagons from a supply train.
Darkness was now fast coming on and the pursuit could no longer be
continued, so the troops bivouacked on the ridge for the night. Gen.
Cleburne on Gen. Bragg's right had been able to hold the bridge over
the Chickamauga on his right and when night fell Gen. Hardee withdrew
his troops from the position which was so persistently held against
Gen. Sherman, saving his arms and material.

Now that Gen. Bragg had been defeated, Gen. Grant, who had been very
anxious about Gen. Burnside, gave attention equally to the pursuit of
the routed enemy and the relief of Knoxville; and during the evening of
the 25th gave orders to Gen. Thomas to recall the 4th corps to prepare
for forced marches to Knoxville, and in conjunction with Gen. Sherman
to pursue the enemy with his available troops. Accordingly Gen. Thomas
ordered Wood's and Sheridan's divisions to return to Chattanooga and
Gens. Hooker and Palmer, the latter with two divisions, to move in
pursuit of the enemy. The generals moved on the morning of the 26th,
Hooker leading. The troops were delayed at West Chickamauga and Peavine
creek, where bridges had to be constructed. At 9 p.m. the enemy was
overtaken near Graysville, and on being attacked by Stoughton's brigade
fled in all directions. At 11 p.m. the enemy was again attacked and one
gun and a number of prisoners taken.

On the following day the columns advanced to Ringgold, where a stand
was made. Gen. Hooker was without artillery, but he determined to feel
the enemy at once. The skirmish line was driven back upon the main line
and the exact position of a battery was ascertained. The endeavor to
pick off the gunners provoked the enemy to advance against Gen. C. R.
Woods' line. His skirmishers fell back and the main line repulsed the
enemy handsomely and followed them into a gorge. Cleburne's division
was engaged and its dead and wounded were abandoned as it gave ground.
The enemy having been developed in force in a strong position, troops
were moved to support those who had been engaged and the action was
arrested in waiting for the artillery. Between 12 and 1 p.m. the guns
came upon the field and were put in position and the dispositions were
made to renew the attack; but the enemy having succeeded in delaying
pursuit withdrew, attempting to burn the bridges beyond the town. He
was so closely followed, however, that the bridges were saved. Gen.
Grant having reached the field gave orders to discontinue the pursuit,
but in the afternoon Col. Grose was sent forward with his brigade to
Tunnel Hill. Grose soon encountered the enemy's cavalry and drove them
upon the infantry. Ascertaining that there was a strong column in a
strong position, he returned to Ringgold. Gen. Hooker lost according to
his report 65 killed and 377 wounded. Col. Creighton and several
officers fell. The enemy left 130 dead on the field and 230 as
prisoners; his wounded was not known.

Very early in the morning of Nov. 26 Gen. Davis was ordered by Gen.
Sherman to cross his division on the pontoon bridge at the mouth of the
Chickamauga and pursue the enemy, and Gen. Howard was ordered to repair
a bridge two miles up the creek and follow. Davis in advance reached
Chickamauga Station at 11 a.m., in time to witness the burning of the
depot building and the greater portion of the supplies. A short
distance beyond, the enemy was found partially intrenched, but was
speedily forced to retreat. He was pursued and overtaken at dark, when
a sharp conflict ensued, but the darkness covered his escape. In the
morning Davis reached Graysville and found himself in the rear of
Hooker's command. Gen. Howard advanced through Parker's Gap further
east and detached a column to destroy railroad communication between
Bragg and Longstreet. These movements terminated the pursuit of the
enemy.

Gen. Burnside's condition was very critical and Gen. Grant deemed his
relief of more importance than the pursuit of Bragg. He therefore
directed Gen. Sherman to give his troops a rest of one day before
starting to raise the siege of Knoxville. In addition to his own three
divisions Gen. Grant gave him Howard's and Granger's corps and Davis'
division of the 14th corps. Gen. Hooker was ordered to remain at
Ringgold until Nov. 30, to cover Gen. Sherman's movement towards
Knoxville and keep up the semblance of pursuit.

It is probable that Gen. Grant had 60,000 men in action in the battle
of Chattanooga, and Gen. Bragg 40,000. The former had thirteen
divisions including two detached brigades, and the latter had eight
divisions. Gen. Bragg's loss in killed and wounded was between 2500 and
3000 men. He lost by capture 6142 men, forty-two guns, sixty-nine gun
carriages, and 7000 stand of small arms. His loss in material was
immense, part of which he destroyed in his flight, but a large portion
which was uninjured fell to the Union army. The aggregate losses of the
armies of the Cumberland and Tennessee were 753 killed, 4722 wounded,
and 349 missing, making a total of 5824. These losses were small
compared with those of other battles of similar proportions, and very
small in view of the fact that the enemy generally fought behind
intrenchments.

Chattanooga was a very important position for defense or aggression.
Fortified on its outer lines by ranges of mountains, after the battle
of Chickamauga it had been made strong by intrenchments, forts and
redoubts, and heavy guns. Situated at the confluence of several streams
and diverging valleys, and especially as the gateway of Georgia, it was
the natural base for an invasion of the Gulf states from the north.
This position had been the objective point of the army of the
Cumberland for a long time, and as a result of a battle compassing all
the elements of the most brilliant warfare, it fell into its possession
when the troops reached the crest of Missionary Ridge. The issue of the
battle produced a startling surprise throughout the South. Gen. Bragg
had said that the Ridge ought to have been held by a skirmish line
against an assaulting column, but no skirmish line could have held
Missionary Ridge against even a portion of the brave men who dashed up
its steep acclivity. The moral forces were with the assaulting columns.
The battle had been opened by the splendid charge of Wood's division
capturing Orchard Knob, and Lookout Mountain had been wrested from the
enemy by Gen. Hooker in such a way as to change the martial tone of
each army. Those assaulting Missionary Ridge had Chickamauga to avenge
and Lookout Mountain to surpass, and the firm and resolute sweep of the
charging column for more than a mile expressed in advance the
resistless character of the attack. When fifty battle flags forming the
foremost line approached the crest, the Confederate soldiers knew that
they would wave over their defenses or those who bore them, and many of
the 20,000 men who followed would fall. The men who fled had proved
themselves brave on other fields and were perhaps less to blame than
their impassive general, who had failed to perceive the ruling
conditions of the battle. The loss of more than 20 per cent in the two
central divisions in a contest of less than an hour shows that the
enemy did not yield his position without a struggle. There was a panic,
but its cause was not mere fear but the overwhelming impression that
resistance was useless.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The battle of Chickamauga was fought on Sept. 19 and 20, 1863. After
the battle of Chattanooga it was found that many of the Union dead were
left unburied on the field of Chickamauga, and on Nov. 27 the brigade
of Col. Wm. Grose of the 4th corps was detailed to proceed to that
field and bury the dead. Col. Grose found that on the left of the line
the dead had not been sufficiently covered, that toward the center and
right few of our dead were covered at all, and that west of the road
from Lee and Gordon's mills to Rossville but few burials had been made
of either party. All good clothing had been stripped from the bodies.
He buried 400 which had been the prey of animals for more than two
months. He had not time to examine the entire field.

The first permanent National Cemetery for soldiers established by
military order was the one founded by Gen. Geo. H. Thomas near
Chattanooga. During the battle a reserve force, in line over a hill
near the field position of Gen. Thomas, revealed its beautiful contour
and suggested its use as a National Cemetery. This hill is located
equidistant from Cameron Hill, which rises abruptly from the Tennessee
river where it turns towards Lookout Mountain and Missionary Ridge in
the east, and is central between Gen. Hooker's point of attack on the
mountain and Gen. Sherman's on the northern summit of Missionary Ridge.
During the war it was known as Bushey Knob.

On Dec. 25, 1863, Gen. Thomas issued a general order of which the
following is an extract:--

    (GENERAL ORDERS NO. 296)

    "It is ordered that a National Cemetery be founded at this place,
    in commemoration of the battle of Chattanooga fought Nov. 23, 24,
    25, 26 and 27, and to provide a proper resting place for the
    remains of the brave men who fell upon the fields fought over upon
    those days, and for the remains of such as may hereafter give up
    their lives in this region in defending their country against
    treason and rebellion."

The ground selected for the cemetery is the hill lying beyond the
Western and Atlantic railroad, in a southeasterly direction from the
town. The reservation consists of 128 acres. The cemetery proper
comprises the entire hill with an area of seventy-five and one-half
acres surrounded by a stone wall. The summit of the hill is
eighty-three feet above the level of the base. Since the war forest
trees two feet and over in diameter cover the ground. The number of
soldiers interred here up to April, 1903, was 13,364, and of this
number 8394 are known and 4970 unknown. The dead of Chickamauga, some
2000, were removed to this cemetery soon after the Union army gained
possession of the field. Of these 154 were identified and the balance
unknown. Each grave has a headstone which gives when known the name,
rank and state, but when unknown the number of the grave only. Quite a
number of private headstones have been erected but the only large
monuments are the Ohio monument to the Andrews Raiders and that of the
Fourth Army Corps. The Andrews monument consists of several blocks of
granite surmounted by a bronze locomotive, a peculiar emblem of peace
amid so many signs of war, but this monument commemorates the names of
a few brave men who lost their lives for taking part in a very daring
though unsuccessful raid within the enemy's lines.

The entrance to the cemetery has a handsome arch erected by the
Government. The grounds have been adorned and made beautiful with
trees, shrubs and flowers, and are carefully kept by the
superintendent. Few cities add to such wealth of scenic and historic
attractions such a site in the midst of the highways of trade as
Chattanooga, such store of coal, iron and timber, such busy industry.
The first charter of the town was given Dec. 20, 1839. By the second
charter passed in November, 1851, the town became officially the city
of Chattanooga. In the spring of 1862 the city was occupied by the
Confederates. On the 21st of August, 1863, a few shells from Wilder's
guns on Stringer's Ridge on the north side of the Tennessee came into
the city, and on the 19th of September the last troopers in gray rode
out and the men in blue came in, and the stars and stripes went up on
the Crutchfield House. By the census of 1860 Chattanooga had a
population of 2545. At the close of the Civil War there was less than
that number, which soon grew by the return of refugees and by the
addition of new citizens. The geographical situation attracted new
railroads, among them the Alabama Great Southern; Central Georgia;
Chattanooga Southern; Cincinnati Southern; Southern Railway, Memphis,
Knoxville and Atlanta Divisions; Nashville, Chattanooga and St. Louis;
and Western and Atlantic. The Tennessee river is navigable from
Knoxville to its junction with the Ohio at Paducah in Western Kentucky.
The population in 1905 including suburbs was estimated from 64,000 to
70,000. The city has six libraries, the Public Library being a Carnegie
building. It contains two hospitals and five homes for the needy. It
has 111 church organizations, seven banking institutions, and 258
factories, employing in 1904, 10,487 hands.

In the Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park many grand
and beautiful monuments have been erected by several of the states of
the North and South in honor of their fallen soldiers. The Park
contains 6965 acres, mostly at Chickamauga, but also at Orchard Knob,
at different points on Missionary Ridge, at the battlefield on the
slope of Lookout Mountain, at the Point Park on the summit, in Lookout
valley and at Ringgold, Georgia. It contains one of the finest cavalry
posts in the United States: Fort Oglethorpe. The improved roads in the
Park are eighty miles in extent. On the Chickamauga battlefield are 170
monuments erected by different states and 323 markers, and in the
National Park outside of this battlefield 51 monuments and 113 markers,
among these seven monuments by the state of New York. Besides these
there are many shell and marble monuments erected by military
organizations and private individuals. In addition fifty-five Union
batteries with 135 guns, and sixty Confederate batteries with 141 guns
have been mounted, some of them outside the Park. All the Confederate
batteries which were faced in storming Missionary Ridge are again in
position.

Point Park on the summit of Lookout Mountain includes eleven and
eight-tenths acres and here are placed cannon of the Confederate
artillery of the war time. In this Park the state of New York is
erecting a monument which will be the largest and most costly of any in
the National Park. It is to be of granite and bronze, rising to the
height of about 100 feet, the lower part in the form of a Grecian
temple. On its tablets will be information about both armies. On a
clear day seven states are within the range of vision from Point Rock;
Alabama, Georgia, and Tennessee are close at hand, to the east are the
mountains of North and South Carolina, and to the north the mountains
about Cumberland Gap in Kentucky and Virginia. The fine monument
erected on Orchard Knob by the state of Maryland is dedicated to the
memory of her sons of the Blue and the Gray. The beautiful monument in
Chickamauga Park near the La Fayette road, erected by the state of
Kentucky in memory of her sons of both armies who fell on that field,
bears these patriotic words: "As we are united in life and they united
in death, let one monument perpetuate their deeds, and one people
forgetful of all asperities forever hold in grateful remembrance all
the glories of that terrible conflict which made all men free and
retained every star in the Nation's flag."

    The neighing steed, the Bashing blade,
      The trumpet's stirring blast,
    The charge, the dreadful cannonade,
      The din and shout are past;
    No war's wild note, nor glory's peal.
      Shall thrill with fierce delight
    Those breasts that nevermore shall feel
      The rapture of the fight.

    Yon marble minstrel's voiceless stone
      In deathless songs shall tell,
    When many a vanished age hath flown,
      The story how ye fell;
    Nor wreck, nor change, nor winter's blight.
      Nor Time's remorseless doom,
    Shall dim one ray of holy light
      That gilds your glorious tomb.

Many brave and gallant generals of the Civil War took part in the
battle of Chattanooga. On the side of the Union we might mention the
names of Generals Grant, Sherman, Thomas, Hooker, Granger, Palmer,
Howard, Slocum, Geary, J. J. Remolds, W. F. Smith. Butterfield, Cruft,
T. J. Wood, Sheridan, Davis, Baird, Johnson, M. L. Smith, J. E. Smith,
Osterhaus, Brannan, Corse, C. R. Woods, Loomis, Beatty, Harker, Hazen,
Wagner, Willich, Von Steinwehr, Ruger, Turchin, D. McCook and Rosseau;
and among the Confederate Generals, Bragg, Hardee, Breckenridge,
Cleburne, Hindman, Buckner, Stewart, Cheatham, Walker, Stevenson.
Armstrong, Jackson, Anderson, Walthall, Wright, Moore, Polk, Gist,
Vaughan, Reynolds, Adams, Bate, Cumming, Clayton, Brown, Pettus,
Strahl, Lewis, Wade, Grigsby, Lidell, Stowell, M. Smith, Manigault and
Tyler.

To Gen. Ulysses S. Grant, to whom all plans were submitted, upon whom
rested the greatest responsibility, and who gave the final and decisive
orders, should be given the greatest credit for the victory; but I
should like to say a few words in honor of another great general who
took a prominent part in this battle and whose presence gave promise of
success. I refer to Maj.-Gen. George H. Thomas. Gen. Thomas was of
Welsh and English descent on his father's side, and French Huguenot on
his mother's. His ancestors settled in southeastern Virginia in the
early days of that colony. He was born in Southampton county on the
31st of July, 1816, in a happy country home. He entered West Point in
1836 and graduated in 1840, the 12th in a class of forty-two. He was
assigned to the 3d Artillery. He served in the Florida War 1840-42, the
Mexican War 1846-48 and the Seminole War 1849-50; was instructor of
artillery and cavalry at West Point 1851-1854 and on frontier duty in
Texas and California in 1860. He was brevetted several times for
gallant and meritorious conduct and in 1855 was made a major in the 2d
Cavalry, which he commanded for three years. He was wounded in a fight
with the Indians at the head waters of the Brazos river in August,
1860, and on the following November was east on leave of absence.
Three-fourths of the officers of his regiment were from the slave
States. Albert Sidney Johnston was its colonel, Robert E. Lee
lieut.-colonel, and W. J. Hardee the senior major. Among the captains
and lieutenants were Van Dorn, Kirby Smith, Jenifers, Hood and Fitzhugh
Lee. More than one-third of its officers became Confederate generals.
Social and family influences bound Gen. Thomas to his native state, but
his wife was a patriotic Northern lady. Gen. Thomas never wavered in
his loyalty to the government, and when the first gun was fired on Fort
Sumter he relinquished the remainder of his leave of absence and
reported for duty at Carlisle Barracks, Pa., on the 14th of April,
1861. With but two exceptions all the officers of the 2d Cavalry from
the seceded states joined the rebellion. Thomas was one of the two. His
family, friends, and State summoned him to join the South. He answered
by leaving Carlisle Barracks on May 27 and leading a brigade from
Chambersburg across Maryland to Williamsport, and on June 16 rode
across the Potomac to invade Virginia and fight his old commanders. A
few days later he led the right wing of Gen. Patterson's army in the
battle of Falling Waters, where the rebels under Stonewall Jackson were
defeated. The fame of Gen. Thomas as a soldier is linked forever with
the history of the army of the Cumberland. In 1861 he organized and
mustered in its first brigade, and in 1865 at Nashville, the scene of
his greatest victory, he passed in farewell review and mustered out of
the service more than 130,000 of its war-worn veterans.

During the Civil War the army of the Cumberland held the center of the
line, which was in many respects the most difficult of all. From the
30th of November, 1861, to 30th of September, 1862, Gen. Thomas
commanded a division of Gen. Buell's army. He won the battle of Mill
Springs on Jan. 19, 1862, which was the most important military success
that had yet been achieved west of Virginia. On the 30th of September,
1862, he was appointed second in command of the army of the Ohio, and
served as such until after the battle of Perryville. Gen. Rosecrans,
who succeeded Gen. Buell, reorganized the army then known as the 14th
Corps into three distinct commands, right, left, and center, and
assigned Gen. Thomas to the center, which consisted of five divisions.
He held this command in the battle of Stone River, and until Jan. 9,
1863, when by order of the War Department three divisions of the army
were made army corps. One of them, the 14th, Gen. Thomas commanded
during the campaigns of Middle Tennessee and Chickamauga, which
resulted in driving the Confederates beyond the Tennessee and gaining
possession of Chattanooga. On the 19th of October, 1863, in obedience
to orders from the War Department, he relieved Gen. Rosecrans and
assumed command of the Army of the Cumberland. Soon afterward two other
armies, Sherman's and Hooker's, were brought to Chattanooga, the three
forming a grand army under Gen. Grant. The army of the Cumberland,
consisting of four corps, formed the center and right of the grand
army. In this position Gen. Thomas commanded it at the storming of
Missionary Ridge.

On Sept. 27, 1864, Gen. Thomas was ordered to Tennessee to protect the
department against the invasion of Hood. While in this command he
conducted the operations which resulted in the combats along the Duck
river, the battle of Franklin Nov. 30, and the battle of Nashville and
destruction of Hood's army on Dec. 15 and 16, 1864, and finally the
capture of Jefferson Davis in May, 1865. From June, 1865 to May, 1869
he commanded most of the territory which had been the theatre of his
service during the war. On the 15th of May, 1869, he started for San
Francisco, where he remained in command of the Military Division of the
Pacific until the date of his death March 28, 1870. He was
appointed-brigadier general of volunteers Aug. 17, 1861, major-general
of volunteers April 25, 1862; Brigadier General in the Regular Army
Oct, 27. 1863, and Major General Dec. 15, 1864. His career was not only
great and complete, but, what is more significant, was in an eminent
degree the work of his own hands. It was not the result of accident or
chance. Every step was marked by the most loyal and unhesitating
obedience to law--to the laws of his government and the commands of his
superiors. His influence over his troops grew steadily and constantly.
He gradually filled them with his own spirit, until their confidence in
him knew no bounds. It was reserved for the last day of Chickamauga to
exhibit in one supreme example the vast sources of his great strength.
After a day of heavy fighting and a night of anxious preparation, Gen.
Rosecrans had established his lines for the purpose of holding the road
to Chattanooga. If our army failed to hold it, not only was the
campaign a failure but the army was in danger of destruction. Gen.
Thomas commanded the left and center of our army. From early morning he
withstood the furious and repeated attacks of the enemy, who constantly
reinforced his assaults on our left. About noon the whole right wing
was broken and driven from the field. Gen. Rosecrans was himself swept
away in the tide of retreat. The forces of Longstreet, which had broken
our right, now forming in heavy columns assaulted the right flank of
Thomas with fury. Seeing the approaching danger he threw back his
exposed flank and met the new peril. With but 25,000 men formed in a
semi-circle, of which he himself was the center and soul, he
successfully resisted for more than five hours the repeated assaults of
an army of 65,000 men flushed with victory and bent on his
annihilation. On a portion of his line the last assault was repelled by
the bayonet and several hundred of the enemy were captured. When night
had closed over the combatants the last sound of battle was the booming
of Gen. Thomas' guns. He held the road to Chattanooga and the army of
the Cumberland was saved from destruction.

Gen. Thomas resembled Washington in the gravity and dignity of his
character, in the solidity of his judgment, in the careful accuracy of
all his transactions, in his incorruptible integrity, and his extreme
but unaffected modesty. Large and powerful, his movements were easy and
quiet. He was resolute, unyielding, with a fortitude incapable of
intimidation or dismay, and yet without pretension, boasting or
self-assertion. He was altogether free from affectation or envy. He was
never coarse or vulgar. He was genial and frank in communication, yet
reticent and self-contained as to all that related to himself, neither
inviting nor volunteering confidence. He was a model soldier. Arms was
his profession. He recognized but one path to glory--the path of duty.
His reason told him where his duty lay, his conscience bade him follow
it. His plans of battle were carefully prepared, and then when all
things were ready he launched the dread thunder-bolt of power, and with
one stroke dealt the destruction he had devised. Mill Spring and
Nashville--his first and last battles in the West--are capital
illustrations of his military character. In reference to the battle of
Nashville, the impatience of his superiors at a distance too great to
appreciate the difficulties of the situation provoked from him no
complaint. He telegraphed to the lieutenant-general: "I can only say
that I have done all in my power to prepare, and if you should deem it
necessary to relieve me, I shall submit without a murmur." When the
time arrived for the delivery of the meditated blow, and its complete
and thorough success was known, he received ample compensation for the
temporary distrust in hearty and ungrudging congratulations from the
president, secretary of war, and lieutenant-general as creditable to
them as they were gratifying and just to him confirmed as they were by
the thanks of Congress for the skill and dauntless courage by which the
rebel army under Gen. Hood was signally defeated and driven from the
State of Tennessee. A generation in Virginia will yet arise who will
learn and confess the truth, that George H. Thomas, when he lifted his
sword to bar the pathway of her secession, loved her as well as those
who joined the cause of the South, and he served her better.

One day in September, 1863, while looking for Gen. A. McD. McCook in
Chattanooga valley, I saw a signal flag waving not far away, and riding
up to the signal station found Lieut. Wm. Quinton, signal officer on
Gen. Thomas' staff, in communication with a signal station on Lookout
Mountain. He could not tell me where to find Gen. McCook, but was very
anxious to be relieved in order that he might ride on towards
Chickamauga with Gen. Thomas, and asked me if I would not relieve him.
As it seemed important to keep the line open, I agreed to take his
place while the Twentieth Corps, which was to follow the Fourteenth,
was passing. After we had made the necessary arrangements, Lieut.
Quinton said to me: "Lieutenant, I would like to introduce you to
General Thomas. He is one of the kindest men that ever lived, and his
staff look on him more as a father than their general." So we rode up
to a slight elevation where Gen. Thomas and his staff were watching his
troops as they were marching along the road to Chickamauga. The general
received us very cordially, paid a high compliment to the signal corps,
said his signal officers were all gentlemen upon whom he felt he could
always rely, and he thought the signal corps would be better
appreciated in the West as the different generals became more familiar
with it. While we were conversing a staff officer galloped up, saluted
and announced to the general that Chattanooga had been evacuated by the
enemy and occupied by the brigade of Gen. Harker. Gen. Thomas said that
"he was very glad to hear it and he hoped Gen. Harker would see that
all public and private property was protected; he understood that there
was a large supply of hospital stores there, including considerable
wine, and he wanted them all carefully saved for the benefit of his own
wounded and those of the enemy." The staff officer said "he was sure
that Gen. Harker would do it, and that guards were being established
when he left." As we rode away Lieut. Quinton remarked "That was just
like Gen. Thomas, that is the way he is always looking after the wants
of his men."

The final obsequies in honor of Gen. Thomas took place on the 8th of
April, 1870, in St. Paul's Episcopal church, Troy, N.Y., attended by
President Grant, the judges of the Supreme Court of the United States,
senators and representatives of Congress, officers of the army and
navy, and many veterans of the army of the Cumberland and the Civil
War. The pall bearers were Generals Meade, Scofield, Hooker, Rosecrans,
Hazen, Granger, Newton and McKay. The religious services were conducted
by Bishop Doane of Albany and the Rev. Doctors Cort, Potter, Walsh and
Reese, and the body was followed to the grave in the beautiful cemetery
of Oakwood by his comrades and old soldiers, where it was buried beside
his Northern wife.

    Mild in manner; fair in favor;
      Kind in temper; fierce in fight;
    Warrior nobler, gentler, braver,
      Never will behold the light!







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHATTANOOGA OR LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN AND MISSIONARY RIDGE FROM MOCCASIN POINT ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

