(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/American Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/diaryofbatteryaf00reic


Transcriber's note:

      Text in italics is enclosed by underscores (_italics_).

      The original text does not contain a Table of Contents. The
      Table of Contents included near the beginnning of this file
      was created by the transcriber as an aid for the reader.

      A list of corrections is at the end of the e-book.





DIARY OF BATTERY A, FIRST REGIMENT
RHODE ISLAND LIGHT ARTILLERY.

by

THEODORE REICHARDT.

Written in The Field.







Providence:
N. Bangs Williams, Publisher.
1865.




CONTENTS

   PREFACE.
   DIARY.
      1861.
      1862.
      1863.
      1864.
   Roster of Battery A.
   REMARKS.




PREFACE.


COMRADES OF BATTERY A:--The time for the fulfilment of my promise to you,
has arrived. The days of our trials, hardships and sufferings are past,
and it but remains to memorize the period during which we were battling
for the sacred cause of the Union. Although we have not seen the closing
contest of this sanguinary strife, yet I feel confident that we have done
our share towards securing a good end, and nobly has the old battery
sustained the honor and name of Rhode Island. Of all the light batteries
Little Rhody sent to the seat of war, none was ever equal to the old
Second, or Battery A, in efficiency, endurance, and the intelligence of
the men. Truly did an officer remark: "My men can fight without officers."

It is no easy task to give a true and satisfactory record of our three
years service;--only the entreaties of my comrades induced me to undertake
it. It is a natural wish to possess a copy of the records, to refer in
future days to those of the past; it will not only be of interest to the
members of the battery, but also to their friends and relatives.

Hardly had the first call for three months men been responded to, by
sending the First Regiment, Col. Burnside, along with the First Battery,
Capt. Charles H. Tompkins, before the military authorities of Rhode Island
contemplated to organize another regiment of infantry and a second
battery. Enrollments progressed rapidly, and but a few days after, not
less than four hundred men were desirous of linking their fortunes with
the battery; the armory on Benefit street was the rendezvous of men from
sunrise till late in the night, eager to acquire the most indispensable
knowledge of military tactics, foot drill, and manual of the piece, as
speedily as possible. Some men were so anxious as to come before daylight,
and would not leave in the evening until the armorer persuaded them to. We
expected to get mustered into the three months service; but the federal
government, by issuing a call for 75,000 men for not less than three
years, left no other alternative but to serve the said term. Messrs.
Parkhurst and Albert Munroe were untiring in their exertions to complete
the efficiency of the battery. At last the day that was to transform us
from citizens into soldiers, arrived, the requisite number to man the
battery being selected out of four hundred, by Surgeon Wheaton. On the
fifth day of June, 1861, at five o'clock, P. M., we were mustered into the
service of the United States for three years, unless sooner discharged. A
few days afterwards, the battery, together with the Second Regiment,
infantry, marched to Dexter Training Ground. Tents were pitched, and the
people of Providence enjoyed the unusual spectacle of a field-camp, of
reveilles, dress-parades, firing of artillery by sunrise and sunset, of
tattoo and taps. The unusual sight attracted multitudes of men, women and
children, day after day. While in camp, mounted battery drills wore away
the hours of impatience; men in those days were eager for the fray. During
our stay on Dexter Ground, all of our battery carriages were exchanged for
new ones, (the pieces were James' brass rifle guns,) which we hailed as a
sign of our early departure. Ammunition arrived on the evening of the 18th
of June, and the limber chests being filled during the night, the rising
sun of the 19th witnessed our leave of friends and dear ones, perhaps
never to be seen again. Only those who have experienced such emotions
themselves, can imagine the sad feeling, to leave whatever is dear to the
heart, for three long years. But the time is past; the little band that
was spared from carnage and disease has returned; they will forget all
sorrow amidst the joyous welcome of their friends. Yet all joy is mingled
with sadness. Some will look in vain for familiar faces. Let there be a
lasting place in our memory for those who sleep forever on the
blood-stained fields of Virginia, Maryland and Pennsylvania.




DIARY.


_Wednesday, June 19, 1861._--Embarkation of the Second Battery on the
steamer Kill Von Kull, and of the Second Rhode Island Infantry, on the
State of Maine.

Early in the morning the tents were struck, everything packed up, order
was given to mount, and by nine o'clock we commenced our march through
Westminster street; from thence, through South Main street, to India
Point, where the steamers lay, and started by about four o'clock in the
afternoon. The docks were crowded immensely during the day; the fair sex,
especially, was strongly represented. Amid the pealing of cannon and the
farewell cheers of the multitude, we gradually distanced the shore. Those
present will well remember that memorable day. Gov. Sprague and the
patriotic Bishop Clark accompanied the Second Regiment, infantry, on the
State of Maine. On our approaching Fort Adams, we were saluted by the
artillery there. By nightfall, we were made acquainted with the first
government ration--pilot bread, the so-called salt-junk, and a cup of
coffee. The meat was of a rather poor quality, although it was served out
with good grace by our respected captain, W. H. Reynolds.

_Thursday, June 20._--We steamed past Fort Schuyler, Hurl Gate, New York
city, crossed the bay, and landed at Elizabethport, by ten o'clock A. M.
After a delay of several hours at the railroad depot, the train started
off. Much sympathy was displayed by the people of New Brunswick, Trenton,
Easton and other places we passed through. Loud cheering hailed us at
every station; strawberries, pies, &c., were freely handed in the cars.

_Friday, June 21._--Arrived at Harrisburg early in the morning. Coffee,
bread and pies were given to us by inhabitants of that place. After a
short halt, we resumed our journey, crossed the Susquehanna river, passed
Little York, and arrived at Baltimore by eight o'clock in the evening. Our
battery was immediately loaded on flats, drawn by horses to the top of the
hill, the horses unhitched then, and the cars rolled down the other side
to the Washington depot. Order was given not to accept of any refreshments
from the citizens. No demonstration was made, the throwing of a few bricks
on the cars, in the neighborhood of the depot, excepted. Started for
Washington by ten o'clock.

_Saturday, June 22._--Arrival at the National Capital. By daylight the
cupola of the Capitol greeted our eyes, a reviving sight after three
sleepless nights. Col. Ambrose E. Burnside and Capt. Chas. H. Tompkins had
a breakfast prepared for us, consisting of roast beef, soft bread and
coffee. After unloading battery, we marched towards Camp Sprague, and
established our quarters on the left of those of the First R. I. infantry
regiment and battery. Our camp was named "Camp Clark," in honor of the
celebrated Bishop Clark, of Rhode Island, the model of a Christian
minister and true patriot.

_Sunday, June 23._--The sanctity of the day was well observed throughout
the camp, and increased by an impressive sermon, preached by Bishop Clark.
In the afternoon, passes were given to the men to visit the city. The day
closed with a dress parade, President Lincoln and other functionaries
being present.

_Monday, June 24._--Grand review of the Rhode Island troops by President
Lincoln and Gen. Scott. Marched in front of the White House and through
the principal streets of Washington.

From this time up to the 4th of July, nothing of importance occurred;
everything went on quiet and pleasant; battery drills and manual of the
piece were the usual occupation. Sometimes the long roll would be beat
during the night, or guards would fire at some imaginary object of
suspicion. On such an occasion a cow was shot.

_Thursday, July 4._--The day was duly celebrated in camp. Rhode Island
furnished her troops with a good dinner. Prof. Sweet treated the multitude
with a tight rope performance. The day passed off smoothly, with the
exception of a strange display of authority by a few corporals, laboring
under the idea that their dignity was injured by the men not paying enough
respect to them. In those days gunners and caisson corporals played
gentlemen. They not only expected to be saluted by privates, but induced
the men of their respective detachments to hire negroes to black the boots
for all the men, while actually it was only to wait on the corporals; yet
they did not want to stand the expense alone. Let it be said in our honor,
we allowed this humbug to be of but short duration. I cannot help
mentioning the names of the men of the fourth detachment, not because the
men were any better than others, but because it furnished the most
commissioned and non-commissioned officers of any other in the battery.
Corporals, Charles H. Clark and Harry C. Cushing. Privates, Wm. Drape,
George Greenleaf, John H. Lawrence, Ben. S. Monroe, Richard Percival,
Theodore Reichardt, Robert Rowbottom, Robert Raynor, Charles V. Scott, and
Arnold A. Walker.

_Tuesday, July 9._--A sad accident occurred to-day. At section drill,
through some unknown cause, a limber-chest of Lieut. Vaughan's section,
filled with cartridges, exploded, while the gunner Morse, and privates
Bourne and Freeman were mounted. They were thrown some twenty feet up in
the air. Morse and Bourne died within the space of an hour. Freeman, being
badly injured, recovered after a lingering sickness. Two drivers were
slightly wounded, and two horses injured. We escorted the bodies of Morse
and Bourne to the depot, to be sent to Rhode Island.

_Thursday, July 11._--Grand review before President Lincoln, Gens. Scott
and Fremont. Salutes were fired.

_Monday, July 15._--Great excitement in camp; order was received to get
ready for a forward movement; ammunition packed; haversacks and canteens
were issued.

_Tuesday, July 16._--The morning of that day found us marching across the
Long Bridge, directly through Fort Runyon, on the Virginia side; did not
march over seven miles; after which we formed in line of battle and
prepared to camp for the night, this being the first night in the open
air. All quiet during the night.

_Wednesday, July 17._--Resumed our march soon after break of day, and
entered Fairfax Court House, contrary to our expectations, towards one
o'clock, at mid-day, the rebels having evacuated the town shortly before
our entrance. Their rear guard could be plainly seen some distance off.
Our battery formed in park near the court house. Some of the boys were
very lucky in finding a good dinner served on a table in one of the
houses, besides some articles of value, undoubtedly belonging to some
confederate officers. Some picket firing during the night.

_Thursday, July 18._--Advance at daylight. A part of the Union army, Gen.
Tyler's troops, engaged. This conflict the rebels call battle of Bull Run.
While the contest was raging, our division halted two miles to the left of
Fairfax Court House, at a place called Germantown. We could plainly hear
the distant booming of artillery, and were impatiently waiting for the
order, "forward." Towards four o'clock P. M., we advanced again;
preparations were made to get in action; sponge buckets filled with water,
and equipments distributed among the cannoniers. But when we approached
Centreville, intelligence came that our troops got worsted and the contest
was given up. Our division went to camp within a mile and a half of
Centreville. Strong picket lines were drawn up.

_Friday, July 19._--Camp near Centreville. The troops remained quiet all
day. Fresh beef as rations.

_Saturday, July 20._--Quiet during the day. About six o'clock in the
evening the army got ready to advance; but after council of war was held
by the chief commanders, they concluded to wait till the next day.

_Sunday, July 21._--Battle of Manassas Plains. This battle will always
occupy a prominent place in the memory of every man of the battery. They
all expected to find a disorganized mob, that would disperse at our mere
appearance; while, to the general surprise, they not only were better
disciplined, but also better officered than our troops. We started by two
o'clock in the morning, but proceeded very slowly. Passed Centreville
before break-of-day. When the sun rose in all its glory, illuminating the
splendid scenery of the Blue Ridge mountains, though no sun of Austerlitz
to us, we crossed the bridge over the Cub Run. By this time, the report
of the 30-pounder Parrott gun belonging to Schenck's command, who had met
the enemy, was heard. Our division turned off to the right, and marched
some miles through dense woodland, to the Warrenton road. Towards ten
o'clock, nothing could be seen of the enemy yet, and the belief found
circulation that the enemy had fallen back. Experience proved that, had we
remained at Centreville, the rebel army would undoubtedly have attacked
us; but hearing of our advance they only had to lay in ambush, ready to
receive us. At the aforesaid time, the Second Rhode Island infantry
deployed as skirmishers. We advanced steadily, till arriving at the Bull
Run and Sudley's church, a halt was ordered to rest the men and the
horses. But it should not be; the brave Second R. I. Regiment, coming up
to the enemy, who was concealed in the woods, their situation was getting
critical. The report of cannon and musketry followed in rapid succession.
Our battery, after passing Sudley's church, commenced to trot in great
haste to the place of combat. At this moment Gen. McDowell rode up in
great excitement, shouting to Capt. Reynolds: "Forward with your light
battery." This was entirely needless, as we were going at high speed, for
all were anxious to come to the rescue of our Second regiment. In quick
time we arrived in the open space where the conflict was raging already in
its greatest fury. The guns were unlimbered, with or without command; no
matter, it was done, and never did better music sound to the ears of the
Second Regiment, than the quick reports of our guns, driving back the
advancing foe. For nearly forty minutes our battery and the Second
Regiment, defended that ground before any other troops were brought into
action. Then the First Rhode Island, Seventy-first New York, and Second
New Hampshire, with two Dahlgren howitzers, appeared, forming on the right
and left. The enemy was driven successfully in our immediate front. Our
battery opened on one of the enemy's light batteries to our right, which
left after a short but spirited engagement, in a rather demoralized state.
Griffith's, Ayer's and Rickett's batteries coming up, prospects really
looked promising, and victory seemed certain. The rebel line gradually
giving way. Gen. McDowell, seeing the explosion of perhaps a magazine or a
caisson, raised his cap, shouting, "Soldiers, this is the great explosion
of Manassas," and seemed to be highly pleased with the work done by our
battery. Owing to different orders, the battery, towards afternoon, was
split into sections. Capt. Reynolds, with Lieuts. Tompkins and Weeden, off
to the right, while the two pieces of the left section, to the left;
Lieuts. Vaughan and Munroe remaining with the last mentioned. Firing was
kept up incessantly, until the arrival of confederate reinforcements,
coming down from Manassas Junction, unfurling the stars and stripes,
whereby our officers were deceived to such a degree as to give the order,
"Cease firing." This cessation of our artillery fire proved, no doubt,
disastrous. It was the turning point of the battle. Our lines began to
waver after receiving the volleys of the disguised columns. The setting
sun found the fragments of our army not only in full retreat but in a
complete rout, leaving most of the artillery in the hands of the enemy.
Our battery happened to be the only six gun volunteer battery, carrying
all the guns off the battle-field, two pieces in a disabled condition. A
battery-wagon and forge were lost on the field. Retreating the same road
we advanced on in the morning. All of a sudden the cry arose, "The Black
Horse Cavalry is coming." The alarm proved to be false; yet it had the
effect upon many soldiers to throw away their arms. But the fears of many
soldiers that the enemy would try to cut off our retreat, were partly
realized. Our column having reached Cub Run bridge, was at once furiously
attacked on our right by artillery and cavalry. Unfortunately, the bridge
being blocked up, the confusion increased. All discipline was gone. Here
our battery was lost, all but one gun, that of the second detachment,
which was carried through the creek. It is kept at the armory of the
Marine Artillery, in Providence. At the present time, guns, under such
circumstances, would not be left to the enemy without the most strenuous
efforts being made to save them. We assembled at the very same camp we
left in the morning. Credit is due to Capt. Reynolds, for doing everything
possible for the comfort of his men. At midnight the defeated army took
up its retreat towards Washington. Our battery consisting of one gun, and
the six-horse team, drove by Samuel Warden.

_Monday, July 22._--Arrived at, and effected our passage across the Long
Bridge, by ten o'clock, and found ourselves once more at Camp Clark, where
we had a day of rest after our _debut_ on the battle-field yesterday,
under the scorching sun of Virginia.

_Wednesday, July 24._--Lieut. Albert Munroe addressed the battery in
regard to the battle, and attributed our defeat to the want of discipline.
The men felt very indignant at his remarks. "We had to come down to
regulations, the same as in the regular army, and should consider
ourselves almost as State prison convicts." We have since seen that he
meant no insult towards the battery; but have found out to our
satisfaction that he spoke the truth, for we have seen the time that put
us almost on the same level with convicts.

_Thursday, July 25._--Received the first government pay in gold. The First
Regiment left Camp Sprague for home, marching by our camp. Capt. Reynolds
proposed cheers for every company, which was spontaneously replied to.

_Saturday, July 27._--Men of every detachment were selected to accompany
an expedition on board a steamer towards Aquia Creek, to try one of James'
rifled guns of heavy calibre upon the rebel battery there. They all
returned in the evening without any disaster having occurred.

_Sunday, July 28._--The Second Battery left Camp Clark by four o'clock P.
M., for Harper's Ferry, to receive the guns of the First Battery, whose
term of service had expired. Gov. Sprague made a short speech to the men.
The battery travelled by way of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, via
Annapolis Junction and the Relay House.

_Monday, July 29._--Arrived at Sandy Hook by two o'clock P. M. Relieved
the First Battery, the pieces being turned over to us. They started for
home in the evening. Our camp is one mile from Weavertown. The right
section under Lieut. Vaughan, took position on Maryland Heights, which
command Loudon Heights and Harper's Ferry. Gen. Banks is in command of
this department. From this time, up to the thirteenth of August, nothing
exciting occurred. Battery drill in the morning and the manual of the
piece in the afternoon. Extremely hot weather during daytime. Capt.
Reynolds went home on a furlough.

_Tuesday, August 13._--News arrived towards evening that the rebels were
making a demonstration at Berlin and Point of Rocks. Lieut. Vaughan's
section left Maryland Heights, going directly towards Berlin by eight
o'clock. The other sections, commanded by Lieut. Munroe, left Sandy Hook
for Point of Rocks, marched all night, and arrived at said place the next
morning, by seven o'clock.

_Wednesday, August 14._--The Twenty-eighth Pennsylvania, commanded by Col.
Geary, occupied the town. We established our camp about five o'clock, P.
M., close to that of the Twenty-eighth Pennsylvania Volunteers.

_Thursday, August 15._--Witnessed the drumming out of a soldier of the
Twenty-eighth Pennsylvania for stealing from his comrades.

_Friday, August 16._--Return of Capt. Reynolds, with the Third Battery,
afterwards Battery B, Rhode Island Light Artillery, and some recruits for
ours. The newly raised battery should have relieved us, and taken our
pieces, as we had the promise of entirely new ones. We all expected to
return to Washington; but Col. Geary, being in the immediate neighborhood
of rebel troops, remonstrated against our departure, saying he would not
rely on a new battery at such a critical moment. Owing to this, the Third
Battery returned to Washington the same evening, in command of Lieut.
Vaughan, he being promoted to Captain. Sergeant-Major Randolph was
promoted to Lieutenant. All quiet up to

_Wednesday, August 21._--The Twenty-eighth Pennsylvania received two guns
for their own use. Signs of a demonstration show themselves this evening.
All our baggage was sent off; the tents only left standing, ready to be
burnt in case we had to leave.

_Thursday, August 22._--The right section left Berlin and went towards
Frederick City.

_Friday, August 23._--Rebel cavalry plainly to be seen on the other side
of the Potomac.

_Saturday, August 24, and Sunday, August 25._--Quiet. Great slaughter
amongst turkeys and chickens!

_Monday, August 26._--Great excitement. Reports of artillery firing in the
direction of Edwards Ferry, created considerable stir. Capt. Reynolds,
with two pieces, started towards Edwards Ferry. We changed our camp out of
the enemy's sight. Nothing of interest from this time up to

_Sunday, September 1._--Col. Geary received three hundred additional men
for his regiment.

_Monday, August 2._--Orders arrived for our remaining section to unite
forthwith with the rest of the battery at Darnestown. The morning was
beautiful. The battery got ready to march. Col. Geary had his regiment
drawn up in line. The whole regiment presented arms as we passed by, they
being greatly attached to us, while we gave nine cheers and a Narragansett
for Col. Geary and his brave regiment. This day's march will always be a
pleasant recollection for the surviving. Our road was leading through the
most beautiful parts of Maryland. Late in the afternoon we arrived at
Darnestown, and united once more with the rest of the battery, after
having been parted for three weeks. Gen. Banks' headquarters are there,
and all the troops of his command, lying around the town. We had a very
pleasant camp, but should not enjoy it long.

_Wednesday, September 4._--After returning from a battery drill, orders
awaited our section, in command of Lieut. J. A. Tompkins. We left
Darnestown at five o'clock P. M., going at a fast rate towards Great
Falls, a distance of ten miles. At our arrival we found the Seventh
Pennsylvania Regiment, commanded by Col. Harvey. During the day the enemy
had some pieces of artillery in position, to bear on the water-works at
Great Falls, and on the Seventh Pennsylvania Volunteers, firing a hundred
rounds. Only one man was wounded. Col. Harvey guided our battery through
the woods at midnight. Our section took position on the edge of a knoll,
while the Seventh fortified our guns. It rained during the night.

_Thursday, September 5._--At dawn of day, contrary to our expectations,
the enemy did not open on us again. Having had no food since the day
before, some of us went to the town, and as fortune would have it, found
bread, molasses, and that renowned coffee kettle, the fourth detachment
will well remember. We enjoyed a good soldiers' breakfast. Lieut.
Tompkins, behaving towards the men like a gentleman, they would have done
most anything for him. In several cases he relieved our wants, out of his
own purse. Late in the afternoon we left Great Falls, marching towards
Seneca Mills, as the enemy made various demonstrations up and down the
Potomac. Rain falling incessantly, and passing through dense woods
marching became a matter of impossibility, and it was decided to halt by
the roadside until daylight. An unoccupied house being close by, we all
took possession of it, and found ourselves quite comfortable.

_Friday, September 6._--A bright morning greeted our eyes. The clear sky
promised a pleasant day. We discovered an orchard near by, which furnished
us with a variety of the most beautiful peaches. After taking a good
supply of them, marching was resumed. Arrived by nine o'clock A. M. at
Camp Jackson, occupied by the Thirty-fourth Regiment New York Volunteers,
Col. LaDue. We were well received. Towards evening, the Colonel and Lieut.
Tompkins took the fifth piece along, in the direction of the Potomac,
getting the gun in position close to the canal, after masking it. All
quiet during the night.

_Sunday, September 8._--A few shots were fired into the Old Dominion,
without any response by the enemy.

_Monday, September 9._--Major Charles H. Tompkins, in company with Col.
Wheaton, of the Second Rhode Island Regiment, tried a few shots, without
reply.

_Tuesday, September 10._--Gov. Sprague, Col. Wheaton, Major Tompkins, and
Capt. Reynolds, visited the section on picket. Quiet up to

_Monday, September 16._--In the evening, some of the Thirty-fourth New
York Regiment crossed the river, had a skirmish with the rebels, and
returned with the loss of four men. Capt. Reynolds being promoted to
Major, left the battery. So did Lieut. Albert Munroe, promoted to
Captain. Lieut. Tompkins, also promoted, took command of our battery.

_Tuesday, September 17._--Our piece kept on firing at an imaginary enemy
for a whole hour; the Major of the Thirty-fourth being present. Nothing
remarkable up to

_Sunday, September 22._--Squads of cavalry and infantry visible on the
Virginia shore. Great changes took place during this period. Orderly J. H.
Newton being promoted to Lieutenant, took command of the left section.
Sergeants Owen and Randolph, after having been promoted to Lieutenants,
left the battery, and were transferred to other Rhode Island batteries.
The State having organized a regiment of light artillery, on the
thirteenth of August, we were no longer called the Second Battery, but
Battery A.

_Monday, September 23._--Orders came to leave the picket line at dark, and
return to Camp Jackson.

_Tuesday, September 24._--We were paid off in gold for two months service.
Quiet in Camp Jackson up to

_Monday, September 30._--The section returned to Darnestown, and the
battery was once more together.

_Tuesday, October 1._--One o'clock A. M. Orders arrived to return
immediately to Seneca Mills. The left section marched at once, arriving
towards daybreak. At sunrise, the fifth gun went on picket duty once
more. Lieut. Newton, Sergeants Hammond and Read, were with the left
section. Commenced to throw up intrenchments during the night.

_Thursday, October 3._--Left the picket line again, returned to Camp
Jackson, started for Darnestown by six o'clock, and arrived there by eight
o'clock P. M. Thus ended our stay at Seneca Mills, the most pleasant
period of our three years service. Vegetables and fruit, chickens and
pigs, were plenty, for we owned the whole plantation of that old rebel
Peters, who was sent to Fort Lafayette for treason. The Thirty-fourth New
York, having the picket line on the river, always proved good companions.
The view of the surrounding country is really imposing, including Sugar
Loaf Mountain, the natural observatory of the signal corps. Some
remarkable items must not be forgotten--for instance, novel songs of "The
Nice Legs;" "Jimmy Nutt's Measuring the Guard Time by the Moon;"
"Griffin's Apple Sauce," and "Doughnuts for Horses."

_Sunday, October 6._--Camp at Darnestown. The battery received three new
guns in the afternoon. Lieut. J. G. Hassard, having joined our battery, at
Darnestown, commanded the right section as First Lieutenant. Company
cooking was introduced by him. Before that, every detachment done its own
cooking. The enterprise itself, of cooking for the whole company, and the
selling of a part of the rations, for raising a company fund, would have
been well enough, but the management was extremely poor. Some days we
fared well; on other days there would be no dinner, but a detestable bacon
soup, hardly fit for hogs. We were told that the government rations would
not admit of a dinner every day. But what good did it do then to sell
rations, under the pretext of raising a company fund? This is a question
which never could nor never will be satisfactorily explained by those who
started it.

_Monday, October 7._--Capt. Tompkins very suddenly marched off to Harper's
Ferry, with the right section. Thunder storm in the evening.

_Friday, October 11._--A new lieutenant for our battery arrived to-day.
Jeffrey Hassard, our First Lieutenant's brother.

_Sunday, October 13._--Gov. Sprague visited the camp. Private Benedict
deserted.

_Tuesday, October 15._--Parade drill of the battery, in presence of Gov.
Sprague, and Col. Tompkins, the drill proving very satisfactory. Capt.
Vaughan visited us the same evening, and addressed us as follows: "Boys, I
deserve to be kicked for ever leaving this battery, because, by right, it
is my battery, and I should be with you." (Vociferous cheering, and cries,
"Give us our old officers, and we will show you that we can drill.") Capt.
Vaughan, mounting his horse, appeared very much affected. Turning round
once more, he said, "I am hanging around; it is hard for me to leave
you." Answer of the men: "We know it. You are a man every inch of you."
Nine cheers for Capt. Vaughan, our old First Lieutenant, vibrated through
the air.

_Wednesday, October 16._--Battery drill, and speech by our First
Lieutenant. Gen. Banks visited our camp this evening. Nothing important up
to

_Saturday, October 19._--Gen. Banks and staff honored our battery drill
with their presence. Col. Geary of the Twenty-eighth Pennsylvania, and
Capt. Tompkins, with the right section, had a fight with the rebels at
Harper's Ferry and Bolivar Heights. Our right section, occupying Maryland
Heights, fired into Bolivar and on a rebel battery on Loudon Heights. Even
the drivers served an old iron gun. Col. Geary's troops, crossing the
river in scows, carried the fight to Bolivar Heights. No loss of men in
the right section.

_Monday, October 21._--Battle of Ball's Bluff. Gen. Stone crossed the
Potomac near Conrad's Ferry, across Harrison's Island, with Col. Baker's
brigade, this morning. (Forty-second New York, Fifteenth and Twentieth
Massachusetts Regiments, and a piece of artillery, of Capt. Vaughan's
battery. The rest of the battery stayed on Harrison Island.) By seven
o'clock in the evening, the whole division of Gen. Banks left Darnestown,
going to Edwards Ferry. Our battery started about nine o'clock. Arriving
at Poolesville, we heard of the disastrous result. Our troops had
withdrawn from Ball's Bluff. Col. Baker's corpse was brought into town.

_Tuesday, October 22._--Arrived at Edwards Ferry by six o'clock A. M. Two
thousand men were already landed on the Virginia shore, opposite the
ferry, others were continually crossing on canal boats. Since daylight,
rain fell incessantly. On the Virginia side, skirmishing was going on all
day. At five o'clock both lines of battle advanced. A brisk fight
commenced. Two brass howitzers of Rickett's battery, First United States
Artillery, did good execution, being in position on the Virginia shore.
While the fight continued, the Twenty-eighth Pennsylvania, Col. Geary, the
Twenty-ninth, Col. Mury, and Van Allen's cavalry, were sent as
reinforcements across the Potomac. Fighting ceased an hour afterwards.
Capt. Vaughan went to the enemy's lines, under a flag of truce, to see
about some of his wounded men in the hands of the rebels. Gen. McClellan
arrived at night.

_Wednesday, October 23._--A clear day. The enemy in great force around
Leesburg. We can see the church steeples of that place. Skirmishing kept
up all day. In the evening our battery received orders to embark and cross
the river,--Capt. Tompkins, having come back from Harper's Ferry, with the
right section, the evening before,--three guns were already loaded on a
canal boat, together with Company C, First Maryland Regiment, and started;
but the current of the stream being too strong, and losing half of the
oars, they had to return again. Orders awaited us already to disembark
immediately, and return to camp. All the troops withdrew from the Virginia
shore before daylight,--eight thousand men in all.

_Thursday, October 24._--After all the troops had been withdrawn, the
rebel pickets held the line close to the river, and fired a shot once in a
while. Rickett's, ours, and Captain Bess' batteries, were drawn up in one
line. Our battery is detached to General Williams' brigade.

_Friday, October 25._--Remained the same, at Edwards Ferry.

_Saturday, October 26._--General Williams' brigade and our battery marched
off to Muddy Branch in the morning. Arrived there, in camp of the
Twenty-eighth New York, in the afternoon.

_Sunday, October 27._--Established our camp.

_Monday, October 28._--Commenced to build a stable for horses, three
hundred feet long. Captain Bess, our chief of artillery. Our battery
remained at Muddy Branch up to the twenty-seventh of November. Little is
to be said of this period. Drill as usual. Received the news of the taking
of Beaufort, South Carolina, and the capture of Slidell and Mason. Captain
Reynolds visited the battery for the last time, having been promoted to
Lieutenant Colonel of the Rhode Island artillery, and transferred to
another department.

_Wednesday, November 27._--The battery left Muddy Branch, with the
understanding to go into winter-quarters near Poolesville. We were told
that we should have many drills together with Battery B, no longer Captain
Vaughan's battery, who, having had disagreements, left the service. We
marched by nine o'clock in the morning. The weather was very unpleasant,
raining and freezing all day. Passed through Poolesville at four o'clock,
and commenced to pitch tents by five o'clock. Our camp is next to Battery
B's, commanded by Lieutenant Perry. We had a good reception by the men,
who treated all of us to coffee.

_Thursday, November 28._--Thanksgiving day. Governor Sprague furnished
twenty turkeys for us.

_Friday, 29th, and Saturday, November 30._--A stable for the horses
commenced on.

_Sunday, December 1, to Tuesday the 10th._--Nothing of any consequence
happened. Camp wore a wintry aspect. The time was mostly occupied in
building stables for the horses. Colonel Tompkins, now on General Stone's
staff, arrived at Poolesville; we did no longer belong to General Banks'
division, but to General Stone's.

_Tuesday, December 10._--Our division had quite an interesting sham-fight
at Poolesville, four regiments of infantry, three batteries, and Van
Allen's cavalry partaking in it. We fired blank cartridges. Van Allen's
cavalry had several men injured in charging.

_Wednesday, December 11._--While going to a drill, through Poolesville, on
trot, Corporal Burrows was thrown off the limber-chest, and his leg
broken by a wheel passing over him.

_Thursday, December 12._--Great artillery manoeuvre.

_Friday, December 13._--Batteries A and B were ordered to report near
Conrad's Ferry, where we arrived before sunrise, it being only five miles
from our camp. While going through the woods, orders were given not to
talk loud, the distance between us and the enemy being not more than three
miles at the time. The enemy's position, which was a fortified one,
consisting of two forts, called Beauregard and Johnson, had already been
reconnoitred from a balloon, the day before. At our arrival, we found
General Stone and Colonel Tompkins, with two companies of Van Allen's
cavalry, two companies of the Thirty-fourth New York, and two of the First
Minnesota, already there. We opened on the two forts, without much effect.
Lieutenant Perry was more successful, with his Parrott guns. The enemy
could be seen standing in squads by his artillery, yet no reply was made.
By four o'clock we all withdrew, except the Parrott guns of Battery B,
doing picket duty. The old members will remember, when returning to camp,
Lieutenant Perry rode that nigger down. Quiet up to

_Wednesday, December 18._--The right section went to Conrad's Ferry, but
returned in the evening.

_Wednesday, December 25._--Christmas. Our officers presented the company
with a barrel of beer.

_Thursday, December 26._--The project was started to build huts for
winter-quarters. Details were made every day, to cut heavy timber, which
was done for a week. But luckily, it failed completely, as it would have
taken at least four months to get ready, by the plan worked on. Officers
quarters had to be built first, then non-commissioned officers, and last,
the poor privates. In fact, a great nuisance in the army, is the illegal
using of soldiers for manual service for the benefit of commissioned
officers, which is altogether contrary to army regulations. It is
revolting to the mind, to see men, who perhaps never have been anything at
home, make slaves of their equals, just because they happen to be in
command of them, and this, they give the wrong name of discipline.

_Friday, December 27._--Arrival of Battery B, Pennsylvania artillery,
coming from McCall's division, after having participated in the battle of
Drainesville.

_Monday, December 30._--The centre section, commanded by Lieutenant
Jeffrey Hassard, relieved the section of Battery B, on picket at Conrad's
Ferry. Our detachment accidentally changed its position in the battery--we
were transferred to the centre section, being the fourth piece, sixth
detachment. We arrived at the ferry by one o'clock P. M., and took up our
quarters in a deserted nigger-shanty. Splendid view of the Potomac and
Blue Ridge Mountains. At night, the camp-fires of the rebels were
visible.

_Tuesday, December 31._--On picket, at Conrad's Ferry. The rebel camp
plainly to be seen. Infantry and cavalry drilling outside the forts.

END OF THE YEAR 1861.




1862.

_Our Campaigns in the year 1862: The campaign to Winchester, under General
Banks. The great Peninsular campaign, under General McClellan. The
campaign in Maryland under the same; and Burnside's campaign on the
Rappahannock, ending with the battle of Fredericksburg._


_Wednesday, January 1._--Battery in camp near Poolesville; we, the centre
section, on picket at Conrad's Ferry. Our picket duty, at this place, has
been a very pleasant one, being very light, except the guard duty. Firing
of videttes was very frequent during the night. But never did either party
disturb the other with artillery practice during our stay. Sometimes
signal rockets were sent up on the Maryland side, by rebel sympathizers,
which were generally answered from the Virginia shore. General Stone had
strong block-houses, of solid oak-timber, built on the line from Muddy
Branch to Conrad's Ferry, for the defence of the Maryland side, large
enough to hold three hundred men each. May it be remembered, pigs had to
suffer in our neighborhood. The weather, having been pleasant for weeks,
became very wintry after the first of January.

_Sunday, January 5._--Battery G, Captain Owen, Rhode Island, (four
twenty-pound Parrott guns and two howitzers,) arrived at Poolesville.

_Tuesday, January 7._--Great liveliness in the rebel forts,--bands playing
and soldiers strengthening the fortifications.

_Thursday, January 9._--Severe cold since yesterday. The Potomac froze
to-day. A steam tug coming up the river, was a rare sight to both sides.

_Friday, January 10._--An officer of the First Minnesota Regiment appeared
at our quarters, communicating that rebel pickets occupied Harrison's
Island.

_Saturday, January 11._--Nothing stirring.

_Sunday, January 12._--Considerable picket firing. Nothing important up to

_Monday, January 20._--The centre section was relieved from picket at
Conrad's Ferry, by the left section, under Lieut. Newton. The guns of the
former remained there to be taken by the left section.

_Wednesday, January 22._--Received two months pay. News arrived in the
evening of the Union victory at Springfield, Kentucky, and death of the
rebel General Zollicoffer, in honor of which a national salute of
thirty-four guns was fired. Quiet in camp, the latter part of January.

_Saturday, February 1._--During the past month the right section done
picket duty once on the Potomac.

_Monday, February 3._--The left section relieved the right section to-day.

_Friday, February 7._--Received the news of the surrender of Fort Henry.

_Saturday, February 8._--General Stone was arrested to-day. General
Sedgwick takes his command.

_Monday, February 10._--The centre section relieved the left section at
Conrad's Ferry.

_Thursday, February 13._--Considerable picket firing. Captain Owen opened
with his twenty-pound Parrott guns, from Edwards Ferry, on Fort
Beauregard. Kept up firing for an hour. Four negroes crossed the river,
bringing two horses along. Owen's Battery opened a second time in the
afternoon.

_Friday, February 14._--One of the pickets of the Thirty-fourth New York,
shot the rebel officer of the day, passing the picket line alongside the
river.

_Saturday, February 15._--Heavy firing in the direction of Drainesville.
Snow-storm.

_Sunday, February 16._--Official news of the taking of Fort Donelson.

_Monday, February 17._--We (centre section) were relieved from picket duty
by the right section, Lieutenant J. G. Hassard.

_Saturday, February 22._--Camp Wilkes. The rebels fired salutes in honor
of Washington's birth-day.

_Sunday, February 23._--The rebels opened with their artillery, the first
time during the winter, demolishing a government wagon.

_Monday, February 24._--Orders came in the afternoon to get ready to march
the coming day. New knapsacks were issued, and rations kept ready for
three days. Great times in camp, especially in the sixth detachment, all
the rations on hand being sold to Benson's for whiskey. Who would not
remember S. that evening, the stove, and O! Su!

_Tuesday, February 25._--Sedgwick's division left Poolesville at eight
o'clock, A. M. Marched through Barnesville, and after several unsuccessful
attempts to get the artillery across the Sugar Loaf Mountain, stopped over
night at the foot of the mountain. A very cold night. No tents.

_Wednesday, February 26._--Marched at seven o'clock A. M. Arrived at
Adamstown by eleven o'clock A. M. General Banks was at Harper's Ferry
already. Troops were passing by railroad, en route for Harper's Ferry, all
the time. Our battery went in park, for the rest of the day, close to the
railroad. General McClellan passed through in a special train. Rain all
night.

_Thursday, February 27._--The battery was loaded on cars in the morning.
The baggage teams, and the drivers with the battery-horses, went on the
turnpike road, through Jefferson City, Petersville, Knoxville, and
Weavertown, and arrived at Sandy Hook by nightfall. The cannoniers, coming
by railroad, made a raid on a number of express boxes, after which,
eatables and all sorts of liquors being plenty, all night, the happiness
of the men reached such a degree, as to make it impossible to post a
guard,--Novel and Drape being the happiest men in the sixth detachment,
while Jim Lewes hallooed for Billy Knight all the time. The night was
extremely windy and cold.

_Friday, February 28._--The battery crossed the Potomac to Harper's Ferry
on a pontoon bridge. We occupy one of the government buildings on the
hill.

_Saturday, March 1._--Remained in our quarters up to

_Friday, March 7._--Left Harper's Ferry. Detached to General Gorman's
brigade. Marched till within a mile of Charlestown, Virginia, and went in
camp to the left of the road, close to the First Minnesota, Colonel Sully.

_Saturday, March 8._--Remained in camp near Charlestown, and received new
Sibly tents to-day.

_Monday, March 10._--Marched through Charlestown, and thence to
Berryville. On this occasion, something happened that wants mentioning.
When leaving Poolesville, Captain J. A. Tompkins ordered the men to carry
the knapsacks on the back. This is contrary to regulations. It created a
great deal of dissatisfaction. The lot of a soldier is hard enough,
without irritating him unreasonably. But, honor to the lamented hero,
General Sedgwick, who, riding by our battery, at Charlestown, peremptorily
ordered Captain Tompkins to have no more knapsacks carried by any of his
men. An engagement was anticipated. Rebels were seen beyond Ripton. By one
and a-half o'clock, our left section unlimbered, and fired two shells
towards Berryville. Van Allen's, and the Eighth Michigan cavalry, drove
the rebel cavalry, two hundred and fifty strong, out of the town. Our
battery followed closely--Gorman's brigade in our rear. The stars and bars
were lowered from the church steeple, and a substitute furnished in the
shape of the colors of the First Minnesota. The pieces of the battery were
brought in separate position by sections.

_Tuesday, March 11._--Halted at Berryville during daytime. In the evening,
the battery united outside the town, going in camp; but the guns in
position.

_Wednesday, March 12._--Some men of the First Minnesota, and Corporal
Butler, of our battery, took possession of Gregg's printing office, of
"The Berryville Observator," and published quite a number of copies of
said paper. News of McClellan's occupation of Manassas arrived, in
consequence of which, a salute of forty guns was fired. In the evening,
when Captain Tompkins rode into camp, the assembly was blown at once, and
he addressed the men as follows: "Boys, a fight is going on at Winchester,
and this battery must be there within twenty-five minutes." Camp was
struck, and the battery on the road, when the order was countermanded.

_Thursday, March 13._--At Berryville. Marched by eight o'clock A. M.
towards Winchester. When within two miles of the latter place, orders
arrived for our division to return to Harper's Ferry. General Banks'
troops were occupying Winchester already. Arrived at Berryville again by
four o'clock in the afternoon.

_Friday, March 14._--Marched to our old campground, beyond Charlestown.

_Saturday, March 15._--Marched to Harper's Ferry, and occupied the
government building, in which we were quartered before, again. A heavy
rain-storm to-day.

_Saturday, March 22._--We left Harper's Ferry in the morning. During the
afternoon, the battery was loaded on railroad cars at Sandy Hook. The
train started by seven o'clock in the evening, for Washington.

_Sunday, March 23._--Arrived at Washington by eleven o'clock A. M., and
unloaded the battery at once. Marched from the depot to the camp of the
New England cavalry. The guns were guarded near the depot. The horses,
under charge of Captain Tompkins, and Lieutenant J. G. Hassard, were
coming on the country road.

_Monday, March 24._--At Camp "Dunkins." Quiet.

_Tuesday, March 25._--The drivers arrived with the horses. In the
afternoon, our James' rifle guns were returned to the Washington Arsenal,
and those of Battery I, First United States regulars, given to us. They
consist of four Parrott guns and two brass howitzers.

_Wednesday, March 26._--Camp Dunkins. Nothing important.

_Thursday, March 27._--We are to join McClellan's army on the Peninsula.
Had battery drill in the afternoon, and directly after that marched to the
foot of G street to load the battery. Recruits arrived from Rhode
Island,--Joseph Brooks, who was taken prisoner at the Bull Run battle
amongst them.

_Friday, March 28._--The guns were loaded on board the propeller Novelty;
the horses on the barge Onrust. Those of the right section on the schooner
Charmer. The vessels started by twelve o'clock M. Dropped anchor in front
of Alexandria at six o'clock in the evening.

_Sunday, March 30._--On board the Onrust. Started again at daylight in tow
of the steamer Golden Gate, having four companies of the First Minnesota
aboard. Anchored near Port Tobacco in the evening.

_Monday March 31._--Steamed down the Chesapeake Bay, and dropped anchor
opposite Fortress Monroe.

_Tuesday, April 1._--Two French men-of-war and the Monitor, close to the
Onrust. Eighteen men from the centre section were sent to Hampton Roads in
a small boat, in the afternoon, to unload the battery from the Novelty.
Some of the other sections arrived there before us. At dark the centre
section was sent back to the schooner; but, unable to find it in the dark,
had to go aboard of one of the schooners occupied by Battery B.

_Wednesday, April 2._--Returned to Hampton at daylight. The battery and
horses were unloaded at once. General Sedgwick ordered the battery to go
to camp outside of Hampton, which was done in the afternoon.

_Thursday, April 3._--Hampton Roads. Great concentration of McClellan's
army. Our battery has to give up the tents.

_Friday, April 4._--The Second Corps on the move. Started by eight o'clock
A. M.; by four o'clock we went into park at Big Bethel, to camp for the
night.

_Saturday, April 5._--Marched at daybreak. Cannonading going on in front
of Yorktown. General McClellan passed the line amidst great cheering of
the troops. Strong intrenchments were found near Howard's Mills. At six
o'clock P. M. we went to camp three miles from Yorktown.

_Sunday, April 6._--Great scarcity of food. Our battery went on a
reconnoisance with General Burns' brigade. Only the pieces were taken
along, with eight horses to each. We are in plain sight of Yorktown. See
the rebel flag floating from the parapet. They fire very frequently at our
troops. After running suddenly against some of the enemy's batteries, we
returned to our former camp, "Winfield Scott."

_Monday, April 7._--Siege of Yorktown. The engineers at work. Heavy
ordnance on the way from Fortress Monroe.

_Tuesday, April 8._--All the provisions and forage has to be brought on
the backs of mules and horses from Shipping Point and Cheeseman's Creek,
the roads being impassable for wagons.

_Friday, April 11._--Our battery at rest since Tuesday. News of the battle
of Pittsburg Landing.

_Sunday, April 13._--Governor Sprague, General Barry, and Lieutenant
Colonel Reynolds in our camp to-day.

_Wednesday, April 16._--An engagement going on near Warwick Creek. Our
division is ordered forward. We advanced to within two miles of the
rebels' first line. The battery went to camp. Battery B was in action.

_Thursday, April 17._--Our two howitzers go to the front. Considerable
fighting was going on during the night. Our four Parrott guns ready to
march at a minute's notice.

_Friday, April 18._--At three o'clock P. M., orders came for our Parrott
guns to advance to within a mile of the enemy; when, getting in sight of
the rebels, we were saluted by a twelve-pound shot, the only fired at us
this day. The sections divided, the guns were unlimbered. We kept up a
desultory fire until sunset. The guns were sighted for the night. The
order given to fire one gun every thirty minutes at the enemy's works,
which was carried out.

_Saturday, April 19._--A brisk cannonade, kept up since daylight from our
side, without response from the enemy. By six o'clock P. M. the enemy
fired three times at Carlile's battery. Heavy picket firing at ten o'clock
in the night.

_Sunday, April 20._--The rebel infantry fired several heavy volleys into
our lines, doing no damage however. Generals Sumner, Sedgwick and Gorman
inspected the line. Our battery fired steadily all the morning. We were
relieved at four o'clock by Battery B, and went back to camp.

_Monday, April 21._--Camp Scott. The Vermont brigade, under General Smith,
was defeated at Warwick Creek. Temporary suspension of beating drums,
sounding the bugle, and playing of musicians.

_Tuesday, April 22._--At nine o'clock A. M. we went to the front. The
enemy fired twice at our arrival. We did not respond. In the evening we
fell back to the woods, covered by the Fifteenth Massachusetts regiment. A
siege gun was fired during the night.

_Wednesday, April 23._--At the front. The enemy fired twice in the
morning, and several times in the evening. Fire returned in both cases. At
dark we fell back again, in reserve.

_Thursday, April 24._--At the front. We were relieved at nine o'clock A.
M., by Battery B. News arrived of McDowell's occupation of Fredericksburg.
Heavy cannonade in the night.

_Saturday, April 26._--Fighting going on. Our battery was ordered to the
front. At our arrival, fighting closed, and we went back to camp.

_Monday, April 28._--Going to the front. At ten o'clock P. M., General
Sedgwick ordered Captain Tompkins to take his battery to the Redoubt No.
7, to cover the finishing of Battery No. 8. The rebels commenced heavy
shelling, to which we replied vigorously. Sections of Batteries B and G
were also engaged in it. They returned to their camps at nightfall. We
fell back in reserve, supported by the Fifteenth Regiment Massachusetts
volunteers.

_Tuesday, April 29._--At daylight we took position in Battery No. 8,
supported by one company of telescope-rifle sharp-shooters. The rebels
kept up a heavy fire all day. We went back in reserve at dark.

_Wednesday, April 30._--Battery No. 8. We were relieved in the morning by
Battery B. Heavy cannonading in the night.

_Thursday, May 1._--News of the capture of New Orleans.

_Friday, May 2._--Camp "Winfield Scott." Steady cannonading all day.

_Saturday, May 3._--The rebels are preparing to evacuate Yorktown. Heavy
firing, day and night.

_Sunday, May 4._--Evacuation of Yorktown. Our lines advanced at daybreak,
and found the fortifications deserted by the rebels, leaving most of the
siege-guns behind. Stoneman's cavalry is following up the enemy's
rear-guard. Our whole army ready to march.

_Monday, May 5._--A battle going on at Williamsburgh since morning. Our
division marched into Yorktown towards afternoon, under a heavy rain.
Explosions of torpedoes very frequent. We commenced to camp inside the
fortifications, but we were ordered to march towards Williamsburgh
immediately. The column started; halted shortly after on the turnpike
road, and remained during the night, under an incessant rain. This was one
of the most horrid nights we ever saw in the service. At two o'clock in
the morning orders came for us to retire to our camps to rest.

_Tuesday, May 6._--Our battery moved to the river, close to Yorktown,
ready to be shipped. General Franklin's corps is embarking already. We
loaded ammunition all day.

_Wednesday, May 7._--Our guns were put aboard the steamer Delaware. We
started for West Point, at the mouths of the Pamunkey and Mattapony
rivers. Arrived there at five o'clock P. M., and dropped anchor for the
night. General Franklin's corps had a fight with the enemy's rear-guard.

_Thursday, May 8._--Captain Arnold, of the regular artillery, inspected
the unloading of our battery. We camp close to the Pamunkey.

_Saturday, May 10._--West Point. The horses were landed to-day. By five
o'clock P. M., we marched two miles, and camped at Elkhorn, on the
Pamunkey.

_Sunday, May 11._--General McClellan arrived here to-day. He brought the
news of the destruction of the Merrimac.

_Monday, May 12._--At Elkhorn. Inspection of the division.

_Thursday, May 15._--Marched towards New Kent Court House, fifteen miles
from Elkhorn. Our camp five miles from Cumberland Landing.

_Friday, May 16._--Camp Stumps, near New Kent Court House.

_Sunday, May 18._--Marched through the last mentioned place, and went to
camp after having proceeded two miles. Remained there till

_Wednesday, May 21._--Marched at six o'clock A. M. Passed the Savage
House, at the Baltimore cross-roads, (headquarters of McClellan,) St.
Peter's Church, where Washington was married to Mrs. Custis, and went to
camp a few miles from Bottoms' Bridge. General McClellan issued two
rations of whiskey to the soldiers.

_Thursday, May 22._--Remained in camp near Bottoms' Bridge, on the York
River Railroad. During the afternoon, a heavy hailstorm occurred. Pieces
of ice, two inches in diameter, were found.

_Friday, May 23._--We marched across the railroad to Coal Harbor, to camp.
We seem to be held as a reserve corps, ready to reinforce both wings of
the army.

_Saturday, May 24._--Camp at Coal Harbor. Fighting is going on near the
Chickahominy. The balloon is up.

_Sunday, May 25._--At Coal Harbor. All quiet.

_Monday, May 26._--Orders came to be ready to march. Everything was packed
up; but we remained.

_Tuesday, May 27._--Coal Harbor. Fitz John Porter's corps, fighting near
Hanover Court House. Great excitement amongst the troops.

_Wednesday, May 28._--The Second corps marched four miles this morning, to
support Fitz John Porter's corps, near Mechanicsville. Went in line of
battle near New Bridge, and remained there all day.

_Thursday, May 29._--Our corps returned to Coal Harbor by four o'clock P.
M. Seven hundred prisoners were brought in.

_Friday, May 30._--Near Coal Harbor. Heavy rain.

_Saturday, May 31._--Commencement of the battles of the Seven Pines and
Fair Oaks. At two o'clock P. M., the battle began on the south side of the
Chickahominy. The enemy attacked Casey's division. The Second corps got
ready immediately, the Second division, General Sedgwick, leading to the
Chickahominy. We crossed at Grape Vine Bridge, built by the First
Minnesota, Colonel Sully, Battery I, First United States Regulars, being
the first artillery to cross, under great difficulties, the guns sinking
in up to the axle. Our battery followed next. Great excitement seemed to
prevail about getting artillery forward. But for the timely arrival of the
Second and Thirty-fourth New York, Fifteenth Massachusetts, and First
Minnesota Regiments, the day would have been lost--especially, the two New
York regiments, fought with great determination. Not until night set in,
the battle ceased. Our battery stood in the middle of the road all night.
The order was to be in line of battle by two o'clock A. M.

_Sunday, June 1._--Battle of Fair Oaks. Long before daylight our battery
was brought in line of battle in front of the house in which General
Sumner afterwards established his headquarters. The First Minnesota
supported us. The battle reopened at daylight, with great fury, the enemy
having been reinforced all night. Artillery was not used a great deal in
this battle, but the musketry fire exceeded any ever heard during the war.
In spite of the enemy's efforts, he was completely repulsed by ten o'clock
A. M., retreating to Richmond. General McClellan appeared in front of the
line of battle, encouraging the troops for the coming struggle.

_Monday, June 2._--Fair Oaks. In line of battle since two o'clock A. M.
The First Minnesota is fortifying our position. Cannonading going on near
Mechanicsville, in the afternoon. The enemy is shelling our line on the
railroad. Trains are arriving at the station with supplies. A heavy
shower.

_Tuesday, June 3._--The army is fortifying its line.

_Wednesday, June 4._--Heavy rain storm. All the bridges over the
Chickahominy destroyed.

_Thursday, June 5._--Brisk fighting near Mechanicsville all day.

_Friday, June 6._--Fair Oaks. Expiration of our first year in the service.
Very quiet on the line.

_Saturday, June 7._--General Burns' brigade made a reconnoisance, in
consequence of which a short fight took place.

_Sunday, June 8._--The enemy made a severe attack on our position this
morning. Bad conduct of Baxter's Zouaves. Generals Sedgwick and Gorman
forced them to return to the front. Visit of General McClellan, Duc de
Chartres, the Count of Paris, Prince de Joinville, the Spanish Generals
Prim and Milano del Bosch, Senor Justo San Miguel, Colonel Denteure,
Colonel Cordazo, Senor de Sales, and Senor Perez Caloo, Spanish historian.
They remained fifteen minutes at the headquarters of General Sumner, and
made quite a show.

_Monday, June 9._--Fair Oaks. The rebels open on General Gorman's picket
line, without inflicting any damage.

_Tuesday, June 10._--Fair Oaks. Heavy rain. The enemy opened with
artillery on General Smith's division, towards evening.

_Wednesday, June 11._--Fair Oaks. In line of battle since two o'clock A.
M. An attack expected every moment.

_Thursday, June 12._--Fair Oaks. Our whole line is fortifying stronger.
Baxter's Zouaves are building breastworks of solid timber. Splendid moon
nights.

_Friday, June 13._--Fair Oaks. We are in line of battle since three
o'clock A. M. At five o'clock the enemy opened on our line with two
Parrott guns, two Napoleons, and a howitzer, killing a man of Company I,
First Minnesota, and wounding one of the Thirty-fourth New York Regiment.
General McClellan inspected the whole line of Sumner's corps. Orders were
given to strengthen the breastworks. Generals Sumner and Sedgwick change
their headquarters, their former quarters being too much under fire.

_Saturday, June 14._--Fair Oaks. The First Minnesota were intrenching all
day. Very quiet along the line. Great raid of Stuart's cavalry at White
House Landing.

_Sunday, June 15._--Fair Oaks. Heavy firing in the direction of Fort
Darling.

_Monday, June 16._--Fair Oaks. General Sickles' brigade had a short
engagement with the rebels. General McClellan passed the line towards
evening. Heavy firing on both wings of the army.

_Tuesday, June 17._--Heavy cannonading in the direction of Fort Darling.

_Wednesday, June 18._--Fair Oaks. General Porter's artillery had quite an
engagement. In the afternoon the whole of the Second corps got ready for
action. Our battery was harnessed up. The infantry of Richardson's
division advanced under cover of two light batteries. The engagement was
of short duration. Our loss, one hundred and seventy, killed and wounded,
all of Richardson's division. General McClellan was present.

_Thursday, June 19._--Fair Oaks. The enemy lost nearly four hundred men in
yesterday's engagement.

_Friday, June 20._--Fair Oaks. Heavy skirmishing along the whole line.

_Saturday, June 21._--Fair Oaks. The whiskey rations are countermanded
to-day. During the night we were called under arms five times, the rebels
making repeated attacks on the railroad.

_Sunday, June 22._--Quiet along the line.

_Monday, June 23._--Fair Oaks. Short engagement on the railroad. Thunder
shower at night.

_Tuesday, June 24._--Fair Oaks. The enemy attacked at two o'clock A. M.

_Wednesday, June 25._--Heavy engagement near Old Church, lasting all day.
Heintzleman's corps engaged. Our loss, one thousand men.

_Thursday, June 26._--Fair Oaks. Battle of Gaines' Farm. General Fitz John
Porter was attacked on the north side of the Chickahominy this morning.
The battle was going on till nine o'clock P. M., with great fury, when
General Porter drove the enemy, as could be seen from our position. The
peal of artillery was terrible, and the sky at night in a constant blaze.
Great cheering along our line at ten o'clock in the night. All the bands
playing national airs.

_Friday, June 27._--Fair Oaks. Battle of Gaines' Mills. Stonewall Jackson
opened the battle this morning with overpowering numbers against General
Porter. We could see from our position how the rebels drove Porter's
troops from one position to the other. They are already fighting near Coal
Harbor. General McClellan ordered General Sumner to hold his position at
all hazards. By twelve o'clock A. M. we were attacked by the rebels with
great determination. Four batteries opened on our centre and Smith's
division, but were finally repulsed. General Porter is utterly defeated.
Meagher's Irish brigade went to cover his retreat. Troops are marching and
counter-marching all night. Great cheering within the rebel lines.

_Saturday, June 28._--Fair Oaks. Our centre was attacked again this
morning at ten o'clock. The enemy was handsomely repulsed, leaving one
hundred and fifty, killed and wounded, inside our lines,--Colonel Lamar,
of Georgia, among the latter. Our situation is very critical, our right
flank being turned. General Porter lost nine thousand men and twenty-four
guns, and is crossing Bottoms' Bridge. The rebels occupy White House
Landing. Towards evening, all the baggage teams were sent away, and all
surplus ammunition, arms and commissary stores destroyed. The army is
preparing to retreat. A part of the Second corps had already left, when
orders arrived that our position must be held. A deep gloom is prevailing
over the whole army.

_Sunday, June 29._--Evacuation of Fair Oaks. At three o'clock A. M. orders
came for us to leave as quick as possible. Smith's division had already
fallen back two miles, which movement completely exposed our right flank.
The rebels followed at our very heels. After marching a mile, General
Sumner hastily formed a line of battle, crossing the railroad. We were
not held long in inactivity. The rebels, in command of Magruder, soon
attacked with three brigades of infantry and three batteries. This fight
bears the name of battle of Peach Orchard. Our battery was in close
action, supported by General French's brigade. Pettit's New York eight gun
battery, was sent to our assistance towards three o'clock P. M. By General
Sumner's skilful manoeuvring we were enabled to fall back to Savage
Station, leaving the dead and wounded behind. At the latter place, half of
the Potomac army was drawn up in line of battle. The quantity of
ammunition and stores at that place was immense. (Who would not remember
the great explosion of the railroad train at Bottoms' Bridge.) About five
o'clock P. M., the battle of Savage Station commenced, and kept on until
late at night with great desperation. Our battery was within dangerous
range of the enemy's fire, but not engaged. About nine o'clock, we fell
back to the White Oak Swamp, arriving there at midnight.

_Monday, June 30._--Battle of Glendale Farm. This battle is known by five
different names: White Oak Swamp, Glendale Farm, Golding's Farm, Turkey
Bend, and of Charles City Road. At daybreak we formed in line of battle.
The enemy appeared shortly after. The battle opened at different points.
(Every one recollects the delay of our retreat on that day, in covering
our extensive trains, which occupied seventeen miles length of road.) At
three o'clock P. M. the rear of the trains passed by, just in time, as we
were attacked immediately after. The battle lasted until night. Sergeant
Hammond, Seidlinger, and Slocum were wounded. Battery B, Pennsylvania
Artillery, was taken by the rebels, right in our front. The gunboats
participated in the battle. We fell back at midnight, leaving our dead and
wounded on the field. Our battery carried their wounded off, but left one
caisson behind, a lynch-pin giving way. No other could be found during the
excitement.

_Tuesday, July 1._--Battle of Malvern Hill. We arrived at that place by
two o'clock A. M. The Potomac army occupied a splendid position. Prepared
for the expected enemy. The rear-guard came up at daylight, amidst
cheering and the playing of the bands. Our battery filled ammunition, but
during the whole day had the good fortune to be kept constantly in
reserve. Still, we were under fire constantly. Captain Coleman, of Rhode
Island, collected letters and moneys from those who wanted to send them to
their friends at home, before the battle commenced. Private Cooper was
shot in the leg, by one of our own men; also a horse of Captain Tompkins.
About ten o'clock the great battle commenced, artillery being used mostly.
Never was such heavy cannonading heard on this continent before that. The
gunboats threw shells at four miles distance. Weeden's Rhode Island
battery lost seven men by one of the gunboat shells. The battle raged
until late in the night, ending with the repulse of the rebel army. Every
one expected an advance on the enemy the coming morning; but in vain.

_Wednesday, July 2._--Malvern Hill. After a few hours rest, orders were
given at two o'clock A. M. to get ready,--to our astonishment,--to fall
back to Harrison Landing. The rain fell in torrents. The troops were
completely demoralized; every man was going on his own hook. A great many
threw away their arms without any reason. Order was given to abandon at
once any piece of artillery that should get stuck. Soldiers fired their
guns off in all directions. Not less than forty men were killed by such
careless practice. Harrison Landing is only six miles from Malvern Hill.
The whole army was crowded in a complete mud-hole. The spirit of the men
is very low. Our wounded, left in Malvern Hill hospital, had to foot their
way to Harrison Landing in the best manner they could. In spite of the
mud, we all enjoyed the first good night's rest for some weeks past.

_Thursday, July 3._--Harrison Landing. The enemy brought artillery to bear
upon our camps this morning; but their guns were taken by the Fourteenth
Indiana, of General Shields' division. At one time, all of our troops were
drawn up in line of battle. The gunboats fired some shots.

_Friday, July 4._--The army spread out in different camps this morning.
The Second corps moved at least a mile away from the landing. The day was
duly celebrated by firing salutes and playing of bands. General McClellan
reviewed the troops.

_Monday, July 7._--We changed our location this morning and established a
new camp in the woods. The rebel gunboat "Teazer" was captured by the
Monitor. President Lincoln visited the army. The troops passed review
before him. Kirby's battery fired a salute. Our battery cheered for
General Sumner.

_Tuesday, July 8._--Intensely hot weather. The army is fortifying the
outer lines, facing towards Malvern Hill.

_Sunday, July 13._--Camp near Harrison Landing. Sergeant Budlong was
reduced to the ranks for insubordination and insulting language towards
Lieutenant John G. Hassard.

_Monday, July 14._--Near Harrison Landing. Secretary Stanton visited the
army.

_Tuesday, July 15._--Near Harrison Landing. Notice was given by the
Sanitary Commission to-day to send a number of men to receive the
delicacies destined for us, (Battery A,) which was done accordingly. But
we never enjoyed the benefit of it, as everything disappeared in the
officers' quarters. My comrades in Providence can testify to this
statement. Heavy shower in the evening.

_Sunday, July 20._--Near Harrison Landing. Mounted inspection.

_Tuesday, July 22._--Near Harrison Landing. Great review of the Second
corps by General McClellan. The troops presented a splendid appearance,
considering the hardships endured. Our battery fired a salute.

_Wednesday, July 23._--Harrison Landing. We changed camp again, inside of
the woods.

_Thursday, July 24._--Harrison Landing. Very severe heat.

_Friday, July 25._--Our battery was taken to the James River, to clean the
carriages.

_Saturday, July 26._--Harrison Landing. Heavy shower.

_Sunday, July 27._--Harrison Landing. Mounted inspection.

_Monday, July 28._--Harrison Landing. Our two howitzers were exchanged for
Parrott guns from Battery G, New York volunteers, Captain Frank.

_Tuesday, July 29._--Harrison Landing. Jimmy Nutts was disabled while
dismounting from a limber-chest.

_Friday, August 1._--The rebels opened on us with a battery last night,
from the south side of the James River, killing seven men, and damaging
several transports. Our gunboats silenced them soon after.

_Monday, August 4._--Harrison Landing. Reconnoisance in force. Sedgwick's
and Richardson's divisions, besides other bodies of troops, cavalry, and
horse artillery, under command of General Joe Hooker, assembled by four
o'clock P. M., and left our line of fortifications at sunset. We marched
all night, in the direction of Charles City Court House. About one
o'clock in the night the column halted.

_Tuesday, August 5._--About four o'clock A. M., our column advanced,
throwing out skirmishers. By five o'clock the gunboats were heard firing
in the direction of Malvern Hill. At this time we were marching in the
neighborhood of the White Oak Swamp, on the Charles City road, the same
one we retreated by after the seven days' battles. General Hooker's force,
amounting to twenty thousand men, advanced rapidly on to Malvern Hill. A
small engagement took place between our cavalry and horse artillery, and
the enemy. But the plan of capturing the rebel force, consisting of but
twelve hundred men, failed entirely. They escaped, leaving only two dead
and fifty prisoners in our hands. Our loss was four killed and twelve
wounded. Captain Benson, of the regular horse artillery, was killed. The
Lieutenant Colonel of the Eighth Illinois cavalry, mortally wounded. The
cause of the enemy's escape was attributed to Brigadier General Frank
Patterson, son of General Patterson of Bull Run notoriety. General
McClellan appeared in the afternoon, in high glee. We remained on the spot
all day. In the evening our battery was brought in position, facing White
Oak Swamp. Beautiful moon night. We slept once more on the great
battle-field.

_Wednesday, August 6._--On Malvern Hill. Stayed all day, and expected to
stay all night. Tents were pitched, with a view to remain longer; but
about nine o'clock P. M., picket firing commenced, and at midnight, very
suddenly, orders were given to get ready to march back to Harrison
Landing. The report circulated that the enemy was advancing with superior
numbers. About half ways, we were met by the greater part of the Army of
the Potomac, covering our retreat.

_Thursday, August 7._--Arrived at Harrison Landing at three and a half
o'clock A. M., and went back to our old camp.

_Friday, August 8._--Harrison Landing. The rebels occupy Malvern Hill
again. Intensely hot weather--113° in the shade.

_Saturday, August 9._--Our battery was cleaned to-day. Splendid moon
night.

_Monday, August 11._--Harrison Landing. Preparations to evacuate the
place. All the baggage to be sent away by transports, and rations for six
days to be kept on hand.

_Tuesday, August 12._--Harrison Landing. Fitz John Porter's corps started
to-day.

_Wednesday, August 13._--Harrison Landing. News of General Pope's battle
at Cedar Mountain.

_Friday, August 15._--Harrison Landing. Everything is packed, and the
battery hitched up. Troops were marching by all night. Sumner's corps to
be the rear-guard.

_Saturday, August 16._--Left Harrison Landing at three o'clock A. M.
Marched on the river road and halted at dark, in line of battle.

_Sunday, August 17._--March through Charles City Court House. To-day's
march was one of the most disagreeable ever made, being very hot, and so
dusty as to make all the trees look white. Plenty of dead horses and mules
on the road. Arrived at the Chickahominy river at midnight. All the
artillery crossed over the large pontoon bridge, of ninety-seven boats,
during the night.

_Monday, August 18._--The infantry crossed since daybreak, followed by the
cavalry and horse artillery. One gunboat is close to the bridge. The
rebels showed themselves, without molesting our rear-guard. One of our
batteries opened on them. By ten o'clock we resumed our march. Our corps
went to camp in the afternoon.

_Tuesday, August 19._--March through Williamsburg. Some dismounted guns,
from the battle in May, were still standing in the streets. We passed Fort
Magruder, and went to camp two miles from the latter.

_Wednesday, August 20._--Marched at six o'clock A. M., and went to camp a
mile from Yorktown.

_Thursday, August 21._--Tedious march through Yorktown, Howard's Mills,
over Shipping Point to Hampton Roads, where we arrived by five o'clock P.
M., having marched twenty-two miles to-day. The infantry has gone to
Newport News.

_Friday, August 22._--Hampton Roads. Heavy rain.

_Saturday, August 23._--Hampton Roads. Troops are continuously shipped.

_Sunday, August 24._--Hampton Roads. Heavy rain. Kirby's and our battery
marched to the landing. Both batteries were loaded on board the
ferry-boat Jefferson. Men and horses remained ashore for the night.

_Tuesday, August 26._--Hampton Roads. Men and horses were shipped on board
the schooners Buena Vista and Clara Belle. The schooners were taken by
tug-boat to Fortress Monroe, waiting for further orders. At six o'clock P.
M., the steamer "Forrest City," having the Second United States cavalry on
board, attached our schooner in tow, and started for Alexandria. In
consideration of having the troops rested from their tedious marching
across the Peninsula, contrabands were engaged by the government to load
the vessels. An overseer of such a working party reported to our battery.
But Lieutenant J. Hassard suggested that he would rather have the men of
the battery do the work, as they had not done anything lately. I owe it to
the members of Battery A, to mention those facts.

_Wednesday, August 27._--In sight of Aquia Creek. Received orders to
proceed to Alexandria the next morning.

_Thursday, August 28._--Left Aquia Creek at four o'clock A. M. Passed
Mount Vernon by seven, Fort Washington by eight, and arrived at Alexandria
by ten o'clock. Both batteries, horses and all, were unloaded by five
o'clock P. M. Marched through Alexandria at once, and went to camp outside
the city.

_Friday, August 29._--Alexandria. Our battery, accompanied by the Seventh
Michigan Regiment, and Fifty-ninth New York, left this morning, going
towards the Chain Bridge, on which an attack was anticipated. We passed
through Fort Runyon, on the road leading to Manassas, turning off to Fort
Ethan Allen, covering the Chain Bridge. The fort was occupied by the One
Hundred and Twenty-third Pennsylvania, Seventy-first New York, and
Eleventh New Jersey regiments. We took position one mile in front of it.

_Saturday, August 30._--Near Fort Ethan Allen. Heavy cannonading in the
direction of Manassas Junction. Two regiments of cavalry are making a
reconnoissance towards Leesburg. At five o'clock P. M. we went to Fort
Ethan Allen, crossed the Potomac over Chain Bridge, and marched until
eight o'clock. Coming up to General Dana's brigade, we halted for the
night.

_Sunday, August 31._--At three o'clock in the morning, all the troops of
our corps marched through Georgetown, crossed the Potomac, over the
Aqueduct Bridge, and proceeded on the road to Fairfax Court House. After
sunrise it commenced to rain. Paroled prisoners, captured from Stonewall
Jackson, passing us on the road, gave us no bright picture of the second
battle of Bull Run. We halted at one o'clock, about four miles from the
Court House. About seven o'clock P. M., order arrived from General
Sedgwick, to take up our march. After various marching and
counter-marching, we arrived at the Court House by one o'clock in the
night.

_Monday, September 1._--Fairfax Court House. At seven o'clock A. M. we
proceeded to Germantown, going in position, facing Chantilly. Troops were
coming in from Centreville all day. General McDowell's corps, who lost
nearly all their artillery, amongst them. An engagement, lasting from five
o'clock P. M. till dark, was going on at Chantilly amidst a heavy thunder
shower. Generals Kearney and Stevens were killed. About six o'clock P. M.
we fell back to Fairfax Court House, camping on the same spot we occupied
a year ago, while under Captain Reynolds, previous to the first battle of
Bull Run.

_Tuesday, September 2._--Fairfax Court House. During the whole night,
troops were marching to the defences of Washington. Pope's and McClellan's
armies are rapidly falling back, Sumner's corps covering the retreat, as
usual. We left the Court House at eight o'clock A. M., forming a line of
battle on Flint Hill. Heavy clouds of dust, from the rebel columns,
marching towards the Potomac, could be seen in the distance. Not being
attacked, our line of march was resumed; but shortly afterwards, a rebel
battery opened on our rear, directly from the town. General Sumner ordered
one section of our battery, and the First Minnesota infantry, to take
position, planting the two guns of the right section, one on each side of
the road. Shortly after dark the enemy appeared. We could hear the
unlimbering of the artillery. At that moment we opened lively with shell
and canister, while Colonel Sully threw his regiment across the road, and
kept up a brisk musketry fire on the advancing cavalry of the enemy. Being
unable to use their artillery, the rebels retreated instantly. Seven men
of the First Minnesota were killed and wounded. One of our limber-chests
was upset, the pole being broken by the horses, injuring John Setton,
driver, and one horse. Colonel Sully, anxious to fall back, advised
Captain Tompkins not to lose any time, and if needs be, to abandon the
gun. Captain Tompkins replied, he would carry the gun along or share the
fate of it. We all went to work, tying the two guns and limbers together
with ropes and straps. In the vicinity of Vienna, a body of cavalry made a
charge on our column, firing at us with pistols and carbines. The First
Maryland Cavalry, and Company I, First Minnesota, left us without offering
any resistance to them. The greatest excitement prevailed for some time.
General Sumner gave credit to our battery for not having left the guns.
Some said the charge was made by a party of our own cavalry by mistake;
but the dead and wounded, found in rebel uniform, contradicted that. After
a weary march, we arrived near Fort Ethan Allen, at three o'clock A. M.

_Wednesday, September 3._--Sumner's corps marched across the Chain Bridge
to Tenallytown, and went to camp.

_Thursday, September 4._--Tenallytown, Maryland. Heavy cannonade on the
upper Potomac.

_Friday, September 5._--Tenallytown. The rebel army has crossed the
Potomac. We left Tenallytown this morning. Marched to Rockville, twelve
miles from Washington, and went to camp three miles from that place. New
clothes were issued to-night.

_Saturday, September 6._--Near Rockville. This morning the cavalry and our
battery advanced several miles, going in position on a hill. Thirty
cavalrymen were captured last night. Scouts coming in the afternoon
informed of the enemy's presence, only four miles from us. We fell back
until, to our surprise, we found the whole of the Second corps in line of
battle. Our battery took position immediately. The whole road was covered
by our artillery.

_Sunday, September 7._--Near Rockville. The rebel army occupies Frederick
City. Our cavalry dashed into Poolesville. We marched only six miles
to-day.

_Tuesday, September 9._--We started by ten o'clock, A. M., and marched
seven miles. Our cavalry had a fight at Barnesville.

_Wednesday, September 10._--March to Clarksburg. Our advance is getting
very slow.

_Thursday, September 11._--March to Hyattstown, eight miles from
Frederick. We formed in line of battle on a hill in front of the town. Our
skirmishers advanced, but could not find the enemy.

_Friday, September 12._--Left Hyattstown at nine o'clock A. M., marched
only five miles and went to camp. Eight thousand men, cavalry and horse
artillery, passed by this afternoon. Signal lights can be seen on Sugar
Loaf Mountain.

_Saturday, September 13._--Early in the morning, we marched through
Urbana. General McClellan passed by at ten o'clock, crossing the Monocacy
river. Triumphant entrance into Frederick City. The houses and inhabitants
of the city presented a good appearance. Flags were floating all over.
General McClellan was surrounded by all of his corps and division
commanders, on the roadside. The troops cheered while marching by. Our
cavalry and horse artillery drove the rebel rear-guard out of the city,
and are chasing them up the South Mountain Pass, the smoke of the
artillery is plainly to be seen. The engine house in Frederick City is
full of prisoners.

_Sunday, September 14._--Battle of South Mountain. General Burnside,
marching all of last night, attacked the enemy, near Berkley, early this
morning. Our corps left Frederick by eight o'clock A. M., marching towards
the mountain. Considerable time was lost by getting on the wrong road. We
arrived on the top of the first range of mountains by three o'clock P. M.,
and witnessed one of the grandest scenes ever seen during the war,--the
contest for the possession of South Mountain Pass. At five o'clock P. M.
the pass was forced on the point of the bayonet, by the troops under
General Reno, who fell during the charge. We arrived at Berkley by ten
o'clock at night.

_Monday, September 15._--March through South Mountain Pass. The
battle-field gives evidence of the desperate fighting of yesterday. Our
advance guard is pressing the rear of the enemy through Boonesboro, where
we passed through at eleven o'clock A. M. The church and barns are full of
wounded and rebel prisoners. The inhabitants seem to be elated at our
entrance. After going two miles further, we halted four hours. Skirmishing
was going on near Kettysville. After dark we marched through the town.

_Tuesday, September 16._--Battle of Antietam. The battle commenced about
eight o'clock, opening with heavy cannonading. Our division changed
position during the afternoon, going from the centre to the right, passing
through Kettysville, and crossed Antietam Creek before dark. We were not
engaged to-day.

_Wednesday, September 17._--Battle of Antietam and Sharpsburg. Since four
o'clock A. M., the battle is raging furiously. Joe Hooker gained some
ground early in the morning, but was wounded soon after the beginning. Our
battery was ordered to take position close to Hooker's line. The
battle-field wore a terrific aspect, at our arrival. Before reaching the
designated position, we had to pass through the enemy's artillery fire for
nearly a mile. Two men of our battery, Fred. Phillips and Patrick Larkins,
were wounded, before getting in position. Marching through a cornfield, we
saw one of our batteries, entirely demolished, and hundreds of dead and
wounded lying around. Crossing the fields, we were heartily cheered by our
famous old Sedgwick's division, which was advancing on the enemy like
veterans. We took our position near a cemetery and in front of a burning
farm-house, a place already fought for all the morning, as could be seen
by the dead and wounded strewn around. We relieved a battery of Hooker's
command, and were supported by but two companies of the Twenty-eighth
Pennsylvania infantry, commanded by a sergeant. Here we fought, repeatedly
against artillery and infantry, for four hours and a half. At one time our
situation was very critical. The enemy, after driving Gorman's brigade, on
our right, came charging from that direction. We used double charges of
canister. There was a time when half of the battery was compelled to cease
firing. The order, "limber to the rear," was given; but, fortunately, not
heard, as it would have resulted in the certain capture of the battery. At
that critical turn, Captain Tompkins called on our infantry support to
advance and do their duty, which they did, enabling us to load again. The
enemy, after failing to take the battery, retreated slowly, leaving his
battle-flag behind, which, by right, should have been given to the
battery, as it fell before the infantry support advanced. Our ammunition
giving away, Captain Tompkins sent word to be relieved. John Leech
deserves due mentioning here, for carrying notice through the hottest
fire, regardless of his personal safety, to bring rescue to his comrades.
Shortly afterwards, Battery G, Rhode Island, came to relieve us. We left
the field under a heavy fire of the enemy's batteries, leaving our dead
and wounded behind. Battery G fired only a few rounds, and left the
position we held for four hours and a half. The ground was taken by the
enemy. We returned to our former rendezvous, near Hoffman's farm, and
received a written compliment from General Sumner for our good behavior.
Our loss was: Killed--Sergeant Reed, John Lawrence, Joe Bosworth, Stone.
Wounded--Budlong, John Church, Robert Raynor, F. C. Preston, Sherman
Larkin, Zimmerli, Corporal Childs, Fred. Phillips, Francis Phillips,
Cargill, Abner Wilder, and Theodore Reichardt. We lost nine horses. During
the afternoon, we loaded ammunition. The battle raged till night set in,
principally near Sharpsburg. Colonel Miles surrendered Harper's Ferry,
with eleven thousand five hundred men, to Stonewall Jackson.

_Thursday, September 18._--Antietam. Both armies are skirmishing briskly
since daylight. Our battery left Hoffman's farm in the morning, and went a
little nearer to the battle-field. Lieutenant Jeffrey Hassard started,
with eight selected men, to obtain the bodies of our dead, but was not
able to accomplish it, the enemy's sharpshooters firing on our approach.
During the afternoon a truce was concluded between the two armies, for the
purpose of burying the fallen. The remains of Sergeant Reed, John
Lawrence, Joe Bosworth and Ed. Stone, were recovered in a mutilated
state, and interred in the evening in the presence of the battery.

_Friday, September 19._--The enemy has fallen back to the Potomac.
Thousands of dead are covering the field yet. We remained quiet all day.

_Saturday, September 20._--Antietam. We exchanged three guns with Pettit's
New York battery. Our battery marched back to Boonsboro, close to
McClellan's headquarters, in the afternoon. Having settled down for the
night, we were suddenly aroused and ordered to march immediately to
Sharpsburg. An engagement was going on at Shepardstown, close to the
Potomac, ending to our disadvantage. We passed through Sharpsburg at two
o'clock in the night, and went into park outside of the town.

_Sunday, September 21._--Sharpsburg, McClellan's headquarters. Cannonading
still sounding from the Potomac. There is scarcely a house in Sharpsburg,
which shows no marks of our artillery fire. The inhabitants admit that
General Burnside gave them a right smart shelling.

_Monday, September 22._--Sharpsburg, headquarters of McClellan. Sumner's
corps marched to Harper's Ferry to-day; but we remained, receiving a new
battery of three-inch rifle guns.

_Tuesday, September 23._--Sharpsburg. We left the place at two o'clock P.
M. Crossed the Antietam, and marched to the foot of Maryland Heights,
going to camp for the night.

_Wednesday, September 24._--We arrived at Harper's Ferry at ten o'clock
A. M., and went to camp on Bolivar Heights.

_Sunday, September 28._--Bolivar. Mounted inspection.

_Wednesday, October 1._--President Lincoln visited the Army of the
Potomac. Our battery fired a salute of twenty-one guns.

_Friday, October 3._--Bolivar. Mounted inspection.

_Sunday, October 5._--Bolivar. Mounted inspection. The Seventh Regiment,
Rhode Island infantry, arrived at Sandy Hook, Maryland.

_Thursday, October 9._--Bolivar. We were paid off for five months service.

_Thursday, October 16._--Bolivar. Reconnoisance in force. Ten thousand men
started early in the morning under command of General Hancock. The enemy
was found near Charlestown, opening on us with artillery. Battery A,
Fourth Regular Artillery, went into action. Our battery supported the
Fourth regulars, and the enemy's battery left soon. Battery A, Fourth
regulars, had a caisson blown up, one man killed and four wounded. We
occupied Charlestown, going in position outside of the town, pointing to
Berryville and Smithfield. Heavy rain in the evening. The cars were
running between Harper's Ferry and Charlestown all night, carrying off
grain from the latter place to Harper's Ferry. The troops were in line of
battle during the night.

_Friday, October 17._--Charlestown, Virginia. In position. We left
Charlestown at two o'clock P. M. Marched back to Halltown. At that place
General Hancock formed a line of battle, an attack of the rebels being
anticipated. All the artillery went in position on high ground, while the
infantry formed below. We remained on the hill all night. It was very cold
during the night.

_Saturday, October 18._--We returned to Bolivar Heights early in the
morning, and went back to camp.

_Tuesday, October 21._--Battery drill in the morning.

_Sunday, October 26._--Captain Tompkins went off on a furlough.

_Monday, October 27._--Bolivar. General Burnside has crossed the Potomac
at Berlin.

_Wednesday, October 29._--Bolivar. We are under marching orders.

_Thursday, October 30._--Bolivar. Troops are crossing the Shenandoah river
all day. Our battery left Bolivar at two o'clock P. M. Marched through
Harper's Ferry and crossed the Shenandoah by way of pontoons. Advanced on
the Leesburg turnpike six miles. After sunset we went to camp for the
night.

_Friday, October 31._--Loudon Valley. We were mustered in for two months
pay; after that, changed camp, and remained quiet for the rest of the day.
Troops are passing by all day.

_Saturday, November 1._--Loudon Valley. We commenced marching at ten
o'clock in the direction of Snicker's Gap, passed Snickersville, and
formed in line of battle in the evening, near Wood Grove. Marched ten
miles to-day. A number of pigs were killed during the night.

_Sunday, November 2._--Wood Grove. Commenced marching at eight o'clock A.
M. A fight was in progress between Burnside's corps and the rebels. We
could see the firing of guns. Camped at seven o'clock P. M. Cold and rainy
weather.

_Monday, November 3._--Marched at ten o'clock A. M., towards Union and
Upperville. Firing was heard in the afternoon. Shortly afterwards we could
see Pleasanton's cavalry running close after the enemy's. We went to camp.
Splendid moon night. Great slaughter amongst pigs, sheep, and chickens.

_Tuesday, November 4._--Loudon Valley, Virginia. We marched through
Upperville about 1 o'clock P. M. General Burnside and staff passed by. At
three o'clock we came through Paris, at the foot of Ashby Gap. Occupied
the heights of Ashby Gap and went in position. A most splendid view
presented itself to our eyes. The whole Shenandoah Valley, Winchester,
Berryville, Bunker Hill, and other places could distinctly be seen. The
enemy's camp fires were visible on the other side of the Shenandoah river.
The weather is very cold.

_Wednesday, November 5._--Ashby Gap. Remained in position all day. Some of
us had quite a time, killing a young bull. A fearful cold night. Some snow
fell.

_Thursday, November 6._--We left Ashby Gap at eight o'clock A. M. Marched
seven miles, and went to camp near Cubb run.

_Friday, November 7._--We remained in camp to-day. The horses are in a bad
condition, and most of the men without shoes. Snow fell three inches deep.

_Saturday, November 8._--Marched in the morning with only four horses to a
gun. Passed through Salem and Rectortown. Generals McClellan, Burnside,
and Sumner, rode past the line. We went to camp at four o'clock P. M.

_Sunday, November 9._--Arrived at Warrenton at twelve o'clock M., and went
to camp outside of the town.

_Monday, November 10._--Warrenton. To the astonishment of the army, it was
announced to-day that General McClellan was to be removed from the Army of
the Potomac, and the command transferred to General Burnside. The troops
turned out on parade along the road. General McClellan and staff passed
by. He seemed to be greatly affected. The air rang with the cheers of the
troops for their old commander.

_Tuesday, November 11._--Warrenton. The army is poorly supplied with
provisions at present.

_Wednesday, November 12._--Warrenton. We received the first mail since the
twenty-first of October.

_Saturday, November 15._--Left Warrenton this morning. Marched nine miles
and went to camp.

_Sunday, November 16,_--Started at eight o'clock A. M. Marched fifteen
miles and went to camp.

_Monday, November 17._--Left at eight o'clock A. M. for Falmouth. Pettit's
Battery went in position on a hill opposite Fredericksburg, and had quite
an action with a rebel battery. Our battery advanced to support, but did
not fire. At five o'clock P. M. we retired and went to camp.

_Tuesday, November 18._--Camp near Falmouth. The Army of the Potomac is
divided in three grand divisions. Sumner commands the right, Franklin the
left, Joe Hooker the centre, and Sigel the reserve.

_Thursday, November 20._--We moved our camp closer to Falmouth. It rained
all day.

_Wednesday, November 26._--Near Falmouth. Lieutenant Henry Newton left the
battery and service to-day.

_Thursday, November 27._--Thanksgiving day, but a poor one for us. The
army lives on hard bread, pork and coffee.

_Sunday, November 30._--The railroad to Aquia Creek is in operation now.

_Monday, December 1._--The men of our battery cleaned up the camp of the
First Minnesota regiment. A guard was kept on the ground all night.

_Tuesday, December 2._--Near Falmouth. The battery moved on the new
ground.

_Wednesday, December 3._--A stable for the officers' horses in the course
of building.

_Monday, December 8._--Commenced to build a stable for the battery
horses.

_Wednesday, December 10._--New clothes were given out to-day. Everything
ready for an advance.

_Thursday, December 11._--Bombardment of Fredericksburg. Last night a
large part of the artillery was brought in position, close to the river,
and before daybreak, about one hundred and thirty guns were throwing shell
and shot in the city, without eliciting any reply, except from rebel
sharpshooters in the cellars on the river line, compelling the engineers
to give up the attempt of laying pontoons across the river. Fires broke
out in several places during the day. Towards evening, two companies, one
of the Seventy-first New York, (Tammany,) and one of the Seventh Michigan,
volunteered to cross the Rappahannock on scows, charged on the
sharpshooters, and took fifty prisoners, losing fifteen killed. The
pontoon bridge was completed shortly after, and three thousand men entered
the city before night. We remained this side of the Rappahannock. Our
battery was close to the river all day, but did not fire.

_Friday, December 12._--Troops are crossing over on the pontoons to
Fredericksburg. Our battery moved towards the river about eight o'clock A.
M. Near the bridge we were received by a tremendous fire from the enemy's
batteries on St. Mary's Heights, but, fortunately, sustained no loss. Not
so, Frank's New York battery, they having one man killed and several
wounded. One shot took effect in stopping one of their pieces. Without
delay we crossed the Rappahannock. Artillery, cavalry and infantry went
over all the morning. A new regiment crossed the bridge at four o'clock
P. M., their band playing the tune of "Bully for you." All of a sudden the
enemy's batteries opened on the regiment, which run back in bad order,
committing the mistake of running right in the enemy's fire. The troops
are committing depredations all over the town. The stores were completely
ransacked. Most every man had a lot of tobacco. In the evening, the
battery marched around the town, but returned again to our former place,
close to the river. The scenes in the streets were really picturesque.
Soldiers could be seen, sitting on splendid furniture, mixing dough for
flap-jacks. Most of our battery were cooking all night.

_Saturday, December 13._--The battle of Fredericksburg. Firing commenced
about eleven o'clock in the morning. Captain Tompkins left the battery
to-day, being promoted to Major. Making his farewell speech to us, he
introduced our new commander, Captain Arnold, who addressed the company,
also, saying, he understood we were a fighting set, and he would stick to
us to the last. Shortly after that the command, "forward," was given, and
we went to the outskirts of the town. Shell and shot were ploughing
through the streets already. Our battery went in action by sections,
posted at different roads leading to St. Mary's Heights. The battery kept
up a constant fire all the afternoon. Some of the nine months regiments
behaved very badly, leaving the field ingloriously, without orders.
Battery B, Rhode Island, Frank's New York battery, and Kirby's regular
artillery, smooth-bore guns, were ordered out to encourage the infantry,
while Humphrey's division of regular infantry, were in readiness as a
reserve. General Couch wanted our battery to advance to the extreme front;
but, thanks to Colonel Morgan, chief-of-artillery, who objected to that,
it was not done. Lieutenant Jacob Lamb made the most splendid shots during
the day. Owing to our being covered by houses, our loss was small. Henry
Hicks was shot through both heels by a musket ball, making the amputation
of both of his legs necessary. Captain Arnold's horse was shot. After the
action was over, we occupied the surrounding houses, which were found well
stocked with all sort of provisions. Cooking and eating was kept up all
night. The caissons recrossed the river during the night, for a new supply
of ammunition. The night was very cold, and the groans of the wounded on
the field of battle, sounded terrible.

_Sunday, December 14._--Fredericksburg. The rebel batteries opened early,
firing thirty-two pound shells. One shell took effect in the centre
section, tearing off the head of Sergeant Thompson's horse, splintering
the limber-chest, fracturing a heel of Charles Spencer, and wounding an
infantry man. Our pieces were instantly pulled out of sight. Our infantry
fortified during the night past. We expected another assault to be made
to-day; but General Sumner's advice, in the council of war, was against
it. The rebel sharpshooters kept up an incessant fire all day, killing
quite a number of our men that were exposing themselves. The day was
well-spent by the battery in cooking and baking, Jim Harrison and Stacy,
acting as cooks and bottle-washers.

_Monday, December 15._--Fredericksburg. The enemy's artillery and
sharpshooters were firing all day. Our guns were kept out of sight during
the afternoon. Generals Howard, Couch and Sully, inspected our lines, and
said they would send a brigade of infantry to fortify our position. The
men of our battery worked all day, throwing up breastworks behind a fence.
Once in a while the rebel batteries threw a shell at us. The weather has
been beautiful since we occupied the city. While we were sleeping by our
guns, orders came at eleven o'clock in the night, to pack up quietly and
get away as quick as possible, which was executed without the least noise,
every man being anxious to move away, but not without being loaded with
all sorts of provisions. We recrossed the Rappahannock at twelve o'clock
in the night. The whole army followed during the night under cover of the
batteries. We lay down to rest immediately after arriving on the other
side. One gun of the right section was dismounted, one limber and several
wheels disabled.

_Tuesday, December 16._--The rain commenced pouring down in streams since
four o'clock in the morning. A deep gloom spread all over the army in
consequence of our unsuccessful movement. At six o'clock A. M., our
battery returned to the old camp on the hill, which was no small
undertaking, the mud being a foot deep. At dark, Captain Arnold, with a
squad of men, went to the river to obtain the trail of the dismounted gun.

_Wednesday, December 17._--Camp near Falmouth. General Sigel's reserve
corps is camping around Falmouth. Our camp has its usual appearance. It is
cold, and snowing.

_Saturday, December 20._--The troops are building winter-quarters.

_Wednesday, December 24._--Great inspection in camp, by Generals Sumner,
Howard, and Sully, and their staffs. They all expressed their satisfaction
with the appearance of the battery. This was the last visit of the
venerable hero, General Sumner, to our battery.

_Friday, December 26._--The pontoons were sent to Belle Plains.

_Wednesday, December 31._--Quiet in camp.




1863.


_Thursday, January 1._--Camp near Falmouth. The army is very poorly
provisioned.

_Monday, January 5._--A new stable for the battery horses commenced, below
the ravine.

_Tuesday, January 6._--The news of the battle of Murfreesboro arrived.

_Thursday, January 15._--Our camp was partly burned down to-day, through a
fire in the camp of the Thirty-fourth Regiment New York volunteers.

_Friday, January 16._--A severe storm. Rations are to be cooked for three
days. We are kept in uneasiness all the time, about moving.

_Saturday, January 17._--Great review of the army by General Burnside.

_Sunday, January 18._--The coldest day we have had this winter.

_Tuesday, January 20._--The Army of the Potomac commenced another move
to-day. Troops are marching by, towards United States Ford. The weather is
of the poorest kind, raining and snowing.

_Wednesday, January 21._--Our corps is retained in camp yet. Quite a
miracle.

_Thursday, January 22._--A heavy storm.

_Friday, January 23._--Franklin's corps is marching back to the
winter-quarters. The great forward movement is given up. The troops are
returning in disgust. Some of the artillery left their guns sticking in
the mud. Bodies of soldiers were found dead in the woods, having perished
from exposure.

_Saturday, January 24._--Stragglers are coming in yet.

_Monday, January 26._--We were paid off for two months.

_Tuesday, January 27._--Heavy rain.

_Wednesday, January 28._--Severe snow-storm.

_Thursday, January 29._--Generals Burnside, Sumner and Franklin left the
army to-day. Joe Hooker is in command now.

_Sunday, February 1._--Mounted and foot inspection.

_Monday, February 2._--Mounted inspection.

_Tuesday, February 3._--Captain Arnold was thrown from his horse, and left
on furlough.

_Wednesday, February 4._--The battery commences to build chimneys and
fire-places.

_Thursday, February 5._--Received the first soft bread since we left
Harper's Ferry.

_Sunday, February 22._--Heavy snow-storm. Washington's birth-day. Our
battery fired thirty-four guns. Ours and the rebel batteries fired in
honor of the day.

_Saturday, February 28._--Robert Raynor, wounded at the battle of
Antietam, returned from the Baltimore hospital.

_Thursday, March 5._--General Joe Hooker is reviewing the Army of the
Potomac.

_Friday, March 6._--The first battery drill this year.

_Tuesday, March 10._--Snow to-day.

_Thursday, March 12._--A part of the army was kept under arms all night,
the enemy being reported about to make a demonstration in our rear.

_Friday, March 13._--The cavalry is reconnoitering to-day.

_Tuesday, March 17._--St. Patrick's day. Great horse-race at the
headquarters of Generals Meagher and Sickles. During the afternoon,
cannonading was heard in the direction of Stafford Court House. The
long-roll sounded in all the camps, but the troops were not to be
surprised. The demonstration did not amount to much.

_Wednesday, March 18._--The enemy attacked our lines at Rappahannock
Station yesterday.

_Friday, March 20._--Snow-storm.

_Saturday, March 21._--Snow-storm.

_Monday, March 23._--The death of General Sumner was read to the troops
to-day.

_Wednesday, March 25._--The cavalry has crossed the Rappahannock.

_Monday, March 30._--Inspection of our baggage. Three spare wheels were
taken from the battery by general order.

_Tuesday, March 31._--Snow-storm.

_Wednesday, April 1._--At two o'clock in the morning we were aroused by
Colonel Morgan, chief-of-artillery. Order was given to hitch up, and be
ready to move, on account of the rebel cavalry crossing United States
ford. After sunrise the horses were unhitched again and everything was
quiet.

_Friday, April 3._--Review of the Second division by General Gibbons, near
Falmouth.

_Sunday, April 5._--Snow-storm.

_Wednesday, April 8._--President Lincoln and family at Joe Hooker's
headquarters.

_Friday, April 10._--Muster, in the Army of the Potomac.

_Saturday, April 11._--Battery drill in the morning.

_Tuesday, April 14._--The army under marching orders. Eight days' rations
to be kept on hand.

_Saturday, April 18._--Grain is already kept on caissons and limbers, and
one bag on top of the gun.

_Monday, April 20._--Secretary Stanton at the headquarters.

_Wednesday, April 22._--Our battery was paid off for four months service
by Major King.

_Thursday, April 23._--A heavy rain.

_Monday, April 27._--Received orders at eight o'clock P. M., to march in
the morning.

_Tuesday, April 28._--Reveille at two o'clock in the morning. Left camp at
six o'clock A. M. We were attached to the Third division under General
French. The Second remained behind. We marched six miles towards the
Rappahannock; halted at mid-day, and camped in the woods. The pontoon
train passed by in the evening.

_Wednesday, April 29._--Marched again at two o'clock P. M., and went to
camp at dark three miles from the river. Rainy weather.

_Thursday, April 30._--Our cavalry has crossed the Rappahannock without
opposition. The pontoons were laid. Before crossing an address of General
Hooker was read in line, to the effect that the Twelfth and Fifth corps
had turned the enemy's left flank, by crossing the Rapidan at Germania
Ford, compelling the enemy to fight us on our own ground. Our battery
crossed at five o'clock P. M. After marching four miles further towards
Chancellorsville, one hundred and sixty prisoners passed by. The troops
were highly elated at crossing the Rappahannock so easy, as the shore was
strongly fortified, and by nature well-adapted for defence. While marching
to Chancellorsville in the moonlight, Joe Hooker and staff passed by, and
the rumor circulated, all at once, that Fredericksburg was taken, and the
rebel army in full retreat towards Gordonsville.

_Friday, May 1._--The battle opened about ten o'clock A. M., near the
Chancellorsville and Fredericksburg Plank-road. The First and Second
divisions of the Second corps, commanded by General Couch, formed at two
o'clock P. M. Our battery advanced about a mile. Going down a hill we were
suddenly received by one of the enemy's batteries, whereupon we
countermarched to the top of the hill, going in position immediately.
General Sykes' division of regulars fought bravely in front of us, till
they had to fall back on our battery, we kept up firing for some time,
until General Hancock arrived, informing General Couch that his position
was completely outflanked, and that he had better withdraw. The very
minute our pieces were reversed, the command, "fix bayonets," could
plainly be heard from the rebel line of infantry in the woods. We left at
double quick. Our whole line fell back to the tavern. At that moment, the
Third corps, under command of General Daniel Sickles, advanced in line of
battle, doing good service. Our battery retired to our former place of
rendezvous. The fight continued until seven o'clock P. M. Splendid
moonlight night.

_Saturday, May 2._--Battle of Chancellorsville. At four o'clock P. M., the
battle reopened with great fury. General Stonewall Jackson, massing his
forces against our right, completely surprised the Eleventh corps, driving
them in great confusion. The roaring of artillery, and the musketry fire,
were really terrific. After sunset, the fire slackened a little; but at
moonrise, raged again in all its fury, till late in the night. Our
artillery suffered heavily during to-day's battle. Some of it was captured
by the rebels. A new line of battle was formed at eleven o'clock in the
night. The situation of our battery was anything but pleasant. Having long
range guns, and our position being close to the woods, nothing could be
used, with any effect, but canister. Our line of battle is getting
shorter.

_Sunday, May 3._--Battle of Chancellorsville. Our battery was ordered to
fall back to the Rappahannock at daylight. Marching back, the First corps,
commanded by General Reynolds, passed us, going to the front. Arriving at
the brick house, near the river, we found some batteries posted there
already,--Kirby's amongst them. Our line of battle fell back to the
rifle-pits we occupied last night. The enemy holds the plank-road and
tavern. The battle is raging again since six o'clock A. M. About ten
o'clock A. M., Lieutenant Kirby ordered his and our battery to the front
again, on his own responsibility. We marched back, but very unwillingly.
On the way, a division of the Third corps met us, marching back to the
river, with a rebel colonel and half of his regiment, as prisoners, and
carrying four rebel battle-flags as trophies. Arriving at the front, to
our pleasant surprise, we found out that our battery was not wanted at
all. Colonel Morgan appeared to be very angry, as there was no use of any
rifled batteries. Kirby's battery went in action. Lieutenant Kirby was
mortally wounded shortly after arriving in the line of battle. We returned
to the brick house, near the river, sending back our horses and limbers to
carry the guns of the Fifth Maine Battery off the battle-field. This
battery sustained a heavy loss. Their guns were saved by Meagher's Irish
brigade. We heard to-day that General Sedgwick, commanding the Sixth
corps, and the Second division of the Second, carried St. Mary's Heights
by storm, but had to give them up again the next day. Sedgwick is fighting
hard near Banks' Ford, being pressed towards the Rappahannock. Some of our
cavalry and horse artillery have gone to form a junction with him.
Fighting was kept up most of the night. Our battery enjoyed a good night's
rest. The horses were unharnessed.

_Monday, May 4._--General Sedgwick's corps is fighting ever since
daybreak. Little fighting was done near Chancellorsville. The battle is
evidently over. We all know that our army, though superior in numbers, has
been defeated by the rebels. We remained all day and night at the
brick-house, close to the river.

_Tuesday, May 5._--Firing is heard on our left since daybreak. Orders came
for ours, Pettit's, and Thomas' New York batteries, to recross the
Rappahannock forthwith. We crossed at United States Ford, going in
position on the surrounding heights, which enfilade the other side. A
heavy shower in the evening.

_Wednesday, May 6._--Our whole force has retreated across the river during
the night. The rear guard crossed at eight o'clock this morning. Eight
batteries are in position to cover the retreat. The engineers commenced to
break off the pontoons. Some of the rebel skirmishers appeared, but
retreated as soon as our batteries opened on them. Captain Thomas' battery
had quite an action with a rebel battery, losing two men killed and
several wounded. The action was kept up until a rebel caisson was blown
up, whereon firing ceased. The pontoon train got in motion at three
o'clock P. M., and the artillery at four o'clock. The roads were in a
horrible condition. It rained at intervals during the day. In the evening
a heavy rain set in, making it disagreeable beyond description. Our
battery was stuck in the woods several times, till at last we were
compelled to stop for the night. Quite a number of our battery's men
travelled on their own hook, that night. Discipline was getting very
loose. This night will never be forgotten by any man in the battery.

_Thursday, May 7._--The weather cleared off in the morning. We resumed our
march at eight o'clock, arriving in camp at ten.

_Friday, May 8._--Camp near Falmouth. General Sedgwick's corps came in
from Banks' Ford. This corps suffered a heavy loss. At five o'clock P. M.
our battery was ordered to report near the Lacy House. We arrived there at
dark, going in camp close to the Thirty-fourth New York regiment.

_Saturday, May 9._--Opposite Fredericksburg. This morning we placed our
guns in position behind breastworks, occupied by a German battery from New
York, before we came. We are close to the railroad bridge. The Second
division is camping around us again. Stonewall Jackson, having
accidentally been wounded by some of his own men, died to-day. The
Thirty-fourth New York regiment changed camp this afternoon.

_Sunday, May 10._--The weather is pleasant. The ringing of bells, and the
singing in the churches of Fredericksburg, can be heard plainly on this
side of the river. People are walking in the streets just as usual. We
are exchanging words with the rebel videttes across the river.

_Monday, May 11._--Opposite Fredericksburg. Bands are playing in the rebel
camps. Some of their regiments are in parade line,--having muster by all
appearances.

_Thursday, May 14._--Corporals Stephen M. Greene and William Rider left on
ten days furlough. A one hundred pounder Parrott gun arrived from
Washington, by way of Aquia Creek. A heavy thunder-shower.

_Friday, May 15._--The battery received a number of recruits from Battery
G, Rhode Island, and from some of the infantry regiments.

_Monday, May 18._--Opposite Fredericksburg. We commenced to build summer
shades.

_Wednesday, May 20._--We had to furnish one corporal and three privates as
headquarters guard for the artillery brigade, to-day.

_Sunday, May 24._--The news of General Grant's victory on the Big Black
river in Mississippi, were read in line.

_Monday, May 25._--Corporals Greene and Rider returned from Rhode Island.

_Tuesday, May 26._--Bill Drape mistook this day for Thanksgiving, living
in such grand style.

_Wednesday, May 27._--French's division marched to Kelly's Ford in great
haste.

_Saturday, May 30._--We were paid off for two months service.

_Sunday, May 31._--Great excitement prevailed this morning. We were roused
at half-past three o'clock, and the battery hitched up. Battery A, Fourth
Regulars, went in position instantly. The Thirty-fourth New York infantry
formed as support for our battery. But nothing happened; everything quiet
in the afternoon.

_Monday, June 1._--At four o'clock P. M. the battery had to be hitched up
again.

_Tuesday, June 2._--New shelter tents were distributed. This afternoon we
had division drill, under Generals Hancock and Gibbons.

_Thursday, June 4._--Order to be ready to march at a minute's notice.

_Friday, June 5._--Left our camp near the river, establishing another near
General Hancock's headquarters, two miles from the depot. Five o'clock P.
M.--a fight is going on near the Lacy gas works. Our battery opened on
Fredericksburg. The Sixth corps crossed the river on pontoons, and took
the first line of rifle-pits, making some prisoners. Fighting kept on till
seven o'clock, P. M. From our camp the flash of the batteries could
plainly be seen.

_Saturday, June 6._--Expiration of our second year of service. Artillery
firing going on at intervals between Sedgwick's corps and the rebels. A
heavy shower in the evening.

_Sunday, Jane 7._--We got ready to march during the day.

_Tuesday, June 9._--Changed camp again, but moving a short distance only.
The Thirty-fourth New York regiment started for home, their time of
service having expired. A heavy cavalry fight occurred at Beaver Ford,
between Pleasanton, Gregg, and Dufour, and Stuart and Fitz Hugh Lee. The
latter was taken prisoner.

_Thursday, June 11._--The rebel batteries opened on Sedgwick's corps.

_Friday, June 12._--The rebels fired at our balloon near Banks' Ford. The
Twenty-fourth regiment, New Jersey nine months men, went home to-day,
their time being out. We lost five men by it, who were on detached duty in
the battery--honest John amongst them.

_Saturday, June 13._--Our army begins to leave the Rappahannock. The
supplies at the depot are carried to Aquia Creek with the most possible
speed. The First, Third, Fifth, Eleventh and Twelfth corps started towards
Warrenton. All the pontoon trains, but General Sedgwick's, have gone. The
one hundred pounder Parrott gun was brought in position to-day, and fired
once by Major Tompkins, after which the gun rolled off the platform. The
Second and Sixth corps comprise all the troops that are left in front of
Fredericksburg. At seven o'clock P. M. a heavy shower set in. Our battery
was ordered to proceed to the Lacy House. Sedgwick's corps is recrossing
the river. We left camp in a heavy rain, at ten o'clock in the night,
arrived near the river at twelve, and got in position. The thirty-pounder
Parrott gun battery, (Connecticut,) left at once. The one hundred pounder
Parrott gun was taken to the railroad. The Sixth corps passed by all
night. The pontoon train and heavy artillery left at four o'clock A. M. on

_Sunday, June 14._--Opposite Fredericksburg, in position, behind redoubts.
Only the Second corps is remaining yet. The rebels were quite surprised to
find our troops across the river. They walked around their rifle-pits in
squads, and fired at us and our infantry pickets on the shore; but the
general commanding threatened to open on them with artillery, if they did
not stop it. During the afternoon the rebel troops lying around St. Mary's
heights, marched and countermarched. Towards evening, we could see the
cannoniers pull their guns by hand outside of the redoubts, and march off
in the direction of Culpepper. We had orders to leave fifteen minutes
after dark. A deserter swam across the river into our lines about seven
o'clock. Nine o'clock P. M.--leaving the Rappahannock. The guns were
limbered up quietly. We started on the telegraph road, crossed Stoneman's
Switch, and marched all night.

_Monday, June 15._--Arrived at Stafford Court House about seven o'clock A.
M. We found a part of the Sixth corps in line of battle. The Second corps
went in line of battle instantly. The balloon went up for the last time, a
good sign of better prospects, for the balloon never brought luck to our
army. At eleven o'clock, marching was resumed. We crossed Aquia Creek at
three o'clock P. M., going in position near by, and remained there for
the rest of the day and night. The day was terribly hot,--110° in the
shade. Eighteen men died from the effects of the heat. A man of the
Twenty-eighth Massachusetts regiment broke his neck, falling over a stump
of a tree. We marched seventeen miles since leaving Falmouth. Reports of
artillery firing can be heard all day.

_Tuesday, June 16._--The column got in motion at three o'clock in the
morning. Heavy cannonade in the direction of the Blue Ridge Mountains. We
arrived at Dumfries about ten o'clock A. M. Rations were issued there, and
our march resumed at noon. The right section of our battery, under
Lieutenant Peter Hunt, was acting rear-guard to-day. We passed Wolf's run
at seven o'clock, and went to camp for the night, after having marched
twenty miles. The strong fortifications at Wolf Run Shoals, are counted to
the defences of Washington.

_Wednesday, June 17._--This morning we marched to Fairfax Station, (six
miles,) and formed in line of battle. Our corps numbers not more than
eight thousand effective men. The roads leading to Manassas are full of
the army trains, coming from Warrenton.

_Thursday, June 18._--Near Fairfax Station, in line of battle.

_Friday, June 19._--Near Fairfax Station. Marched at four o'clock P. M.,
and arrived at Centreville about six. Went in position in one of the
redoubts. A heavy shower in the night.

_Saturday, June 20._--Centreville. Great row between the Tammany regiment,
New York, and some of the new troops under General Hayes. We left
Centreville at one o'clock P. M., crossed the Cub Run, and marched over
the old battle-field of Bull Run at five o'clock, which awoke all the
bitter feelings of the troops, especially the sight of the skeletons of so
many brave soldiers lying around. It is a shame to the country that the
remains of those men, who fell in the two battles, are not better taken
care of, as the ground lies within our lines. Arriving at Gainesville, the
First and Third divisions, and our battery went to camp. The Second
division marched to Thoroughfare Gap in the night.

_Sunday, June 21._--At Gainesville. A battle is going on between
Pleasanton's and Stuart's cavalry near Ashby Gap. Our cavalry pickets near
Gainesville, were driven in this afternoon. Three companies of infantry,
and the right section, got ready for support. About seven o'clock P. M.,
General Stahl's division of cavalry, with three rifled guns and a
four-pound howitzer, taken from Moseby, near Fairfax Court House, two
weeks ago, passed through, going to Warrenton. A dangerous experiment was
made by John Tyng this evening. Pounding on a round shell, lying there
since the second battle of Bull Run, the shell exploded amidst a crowd of
the battery, without hurting any one.

_Monday, June 22._--Gainesville. It was read in line that General
Pleasanton, supported by Barnard's division of infantry, Fifth corps,
gained a victory over Stuart's cavalry at Upperville and Ashby Gap, taking
two guns and a quantity of small arms.

_Tuesday, June 23._--Gainesville. Trains came up from Alexandria this
morning, bringing supplies. Stahl's cavalry came back from Warrenton.

_Thursday, June 25._--Gainesville. Orders came to pack up. Two trains
arrived from Alexandria, bringing supplies, and the news that the
telegraph line had been broken and several cars burned, between this place
and Fairfax Station, by guerillas. We left Gainesville at noon, crossed
the Bull Run, marched on the Winchester and Leesburg turnpike, passed
Sudley's church, taking the same route we did under McDowell, going to and
coming from the first Bull Run battle, until we turned off to Gum Spring,
halting for the night. Marched eighteen miles in all. Battery B, lost a
caisson and two men taken prisoners, coming from Thoroughfare Gap.

_Friday, June 26._--Gum Spring. Left at ten o'clock A. M., going to
Edward's Ferry, where we arrived by eight o'clock P. M.--ten miles march.
Two pontoon bridges are drawn across the Potomac. Troops are going over
all the time. We halted for the purpose of camping. Tents were pitched,
but the order came at ten o'clock P. M., that all the troops had to cross
before daylight. General Hayes' brigade of Heintzelman's corps, consisting
of the Thirty-ninth, One Hundred and Eleventh, One Hundred and
Twenty-fifth, and One Hundred and Twenty-sixth New York regiments, was
attached to the Second corps.

_Saturday, June 27._--Crossed the Potomac at two o'clock in the morning.
Went to rest a mile from the river. Remained until two o'clock P. M.
Resumed marching. Passed through Poolesville at four, Barnesville at nine,
and went to camp at the foot of Sugar Loaf Mountain at ten o'clock P. M.

_Sunday, June 28._--Resumed our march at six o'clock A. M., passed through
Urbana by one, and came in sight of Frederick at three o'clock P. M. We
went in position on a hill, five miles from the city, having marched nine
miles. Joe Hooker has been superseded by General Meade in the command of
the Army of the Potomac. The rebels occupied Carlisle, in Pennsylvania.

_Monday, June 29._--Marched at eight o'clock. Crossed the Monocacy river.
After passing through Frederick, we turned off to the Baltimore road,
crossing the Stone Bridge. We went through Mount Pleasant, Liberty, Union
Bridge and Uniontown. Cherries are plenty on the road. The people in
general are very patriotic, doing anything for the soldiers. This day's
march, thirty-five miles, is the longest ever made by the battery,
excepting that after the first Bull Run battle. We went to camp at ten
o'clock in the night.

_Tuesday, June 30._--Uniontown. Our corps is resting to-day. Whiskey is
very abundant round here. We have marched one hundred and thirty-nine
miles since the fourteenth of June.

_Wednesday, July 1._--Left Uniontown in the morning, passed through
Taneytown, and were two miles from Gettysburg at dark, having marched
fifteen miles. The First and Eleventh corps fought a battle to-day, losing
the town of Gettysburg. General Reynolds, of the First corps, was killed.

_Thursday, July 2._--Second day's battle of Gettysburg. In line of battle
since six o'clock in the morning. The First, Second, Third and Eleventh
corps in array. Skirmishers firing briskly. Artillery commenced to play.
Nothing of importance was done, until about half-past four, our left wing
advanced and opened the battle. The centre and left were soon hotly
engaged. Our battery was in action all the afternoon. The Third corps lost
ground towards evening, until General Hancock advanced with the First and
Second corps and decided the day. The enemy made another demonstration on
the right, without success. The battle raged until nine o'clock in the
night. One time it seemed as if we were all surrounded. Battery A, Fourth
regulars, reversed their pieces ready to fire to the rear. This battery
and ours fired canister in the evening. Our fourth piece was disabled
early in the action, and sent to the rear in charge of Corporal W. Drape.
One of the rear wheels of the fourth caisson, was shot away. When night
settled down upon the battle-field, each army rested for the final blow.

_Friday, July 3._--Third day's battle of Gettysburg. The enemy's batteries
on his right opened on us before daylight. Three limbers of Battery A,
Fourth regulars, were blown up early in the morning. Our caissons were
sent after ammunition several times. At eleven o'clock firing ceased,
rations were given out, and the men commenced cooking. At one o'clock, all
of a sudden, two signal guns were fired by the enemy, followed by the most
terrific cannonade of more than a hundred pieces of artillery, playing on
our centre. Our reply did not seem to make any impression at all. That
dreadful artillery fire seemed to paralyze our whole line for a spell.
Suddenly as it commenced it ceased, and three immense lines of infantry
advanced to take our almost annihilated batteries. Battery B, Rhode
Island, A, Fourth regulars, I, First regulars, and Pettit's New York
Battery, were taken, but not held by the rebels. Our battery withdrew
their guns with honor, leaving the dead, some of the wounded, and two
caissons behind. At the time of our leaving, the battle was at its turning
point. The most desperate fighting was done on Cemetery Hill and the
Emmettsburg road. The field presented a ghastly appearance. Our officers
behaved very well, especially Lieutenant Jacob Lamb, who, being wounded in
the hand, refused to leave the field, carried ammunition and encouraged
the men. Our loss was: Killed--Patrick Lannegan, first piece, shot in the
groin; John Zimmerli, fourth piece, head taken off by a cannon ball; Simon
Creamer, sixth piece, skull severed by a shell. Wounded--Lieutenant J.
Lamb, hand; Sergeant Benjamin Childs, shoulder; Corporal W. Rider, arm;
Corporal W. R. Calder, back; Corporal Shaw, shoulder; Privates--Grady, leg
off, died afterwards; Gil. Harrison, foot; Higgins, arm shot away, died
afterwards; Markey, shoulder; Curtis, foot, slightly; Googin, arm,
slightly; Cargill, leg; Byron Snow, back; Walter Arnold, leg; Wellman,
elbow, slightly; Morrissey, leg, badly; Hathaway, shoulder; Shampman, hip;
Tuttle, arm; Carlier, slightly; Middleton, leg, slightly; Dawson,
slightly; Tomdorf, leg, slightly; Oaks, slightly. Jack Hughes, and Long
Clark and his brother, ran away. Our battery went two miles to the rear,
in an exhausted condition. The Sixth corps reached the battle-field about
three o'clock P. M.

_Saturday, July 4._--Gettysburg. The battle is over. The skirmishers of
the two armies are yet still confronting each other. Three men of our
battery rode back to the battle-ground to inter our dead; but found them
already buried by Battery C, Rhode Island. Lannegan was buried near our
camp; also, Lieutenant Cushing, Battery A, Fourth Regulars--this battery
is to be consolidated with Battery I, First Regulars. The great artillery
assault on our centre, was the last effort of Lee's army to force our
lines from Cemetery Hill. The rebels' ammunition must have been nearly
expended after that. Our battery used as much as twenty-two hundred rounds
of ammunition, during the battle. The town of Gettysburg is occupied by
our forces. A heavy shower this evening.

_Sunday, July 5._--Battlefield of Gettysburg. Our army has taken twelve
thousand prisoners. The rebels are in full retreat. Pleasanton's cavalry
and the Sixth corps are in pursuit. Our battery will be consolidated with
Battery B, Rhode Island. We received a new supply of ammunition and
marched off on the Baltimore road, by seven o'clock P. M., going in camp
near Littletown, six miles from Gettysburg, by nine P. M. It rained during
the night.

_Monday, July 6._--Remained in camp near Littletown all day. General
French took a pontoon train from the rebels near Williamsport. The Potomac
reported to be very high.

_Tuesday, July 7._--Marched to Taneytown, seven miles, and went to camp,
on account of the infantry having been without rations for several days.
The Twelfth corps passed through this afternoon. The town is under
contribution of rations for the troops.

_Wednesday, July 8._--Left Taneytown early. Marched twenty-four miles
during a tremendous rain-storm. Passed through Woodsborough and
Walkersville, and went to camp in a field of oats, live miles from
Frederick City. The news of the surrender of Vicksburg were read in line
on the road.

_Thursday, July 9._--Marched at seven o'clock A. M. Passed through
Frederick City, which was guarded by the Seventh Regiment, New York
militia, and a new battery; Jefferson City and Perkinsville, crossed the
South Mountain and went to camp for the night, not far from Sharpsburg.
Near Frederick we saw the body of the spy Richardson, hung on a tree by
order of General Buford of the cavalry. Marched eighteen miles to-day.

_Friday, July 10._--Marched through Kettysville. The Third corps, General
French, was fighting yesterday, and cannonading is going on now. Passed
the battle-field of Antietam at twelve o'clock M., going to camp three
miles beyond. The Twelfth corps is camping close to us. The different
corps are fortifying their positions.

_Saturday, July 11._--Marched four miles. Passed through Tillmington. The
enemy was found in front. Our columns formed in line of battle.
Skirmishing was kept up briskly. The rebels fell back a little, as our
artillery opened on them. The cavalry advanced in a body at half-past four
o'clock, gaining some ground. At midnight, the infantry was ordered to
advance and take possession of the Hagerstown road. We remained all night.
We have marched two hundred and twenty-three miles since the fourteenth of
June.

_Sunday, July 12._--We advanced a short distance at eight o'clock A. M.
Our infantry is half a mile ahead. Skirmishing was going on all the
morning. Artillery is used once in a while. All the artillery of the Fifth
corps passed by between four and six o'clock P. M. A heavy shower this
afternoon. In the evening, we changed our position, advancing a quarter of
a mile nearer to the front.

_Monday, July 13._--Changed position in the morning, going a short
distance behind breastworks. Three fortified lines are already formed by
our army. A battle is expected. We remained in our new position all day.
It rained the whole evening and night.

_Tuesday, July 14._--Advance and reconnoissance of parts of the Second,
Fifth and Twelfth corps, cavalry ahead. Our battery marched on the
Williamsport turnpike. Cannonading and musketry fire could be heard at
mid-day. The roads are very muddy. Rebel caissons, full of ammunition, are
frequently found on the roadside. Lee's army is crossing the Potomac at
Falling Waters. General Kilpatrick charged through Williamsport, capturing
the rear guard, consisting of eight hundred men. On our approach, a short
but desperate fight was going on at one of the redoubts, close to the
river. A brigade, in command of General Pettigrew, defending the redoubt,
hoisted the white flag. Forty men of the Eighth Michigan cavalry,
charging, in good faith of their surrender, were all slaughtered after
going in the trap. The redoubt was carried by the infantry shortly after;
but General Pettigrew and most of his men escaped. We had a heavy shower
this evening.

_Wednesday, July 15._--The greater part of the army is marching towards
Sharpsburg. Our battery returned to its former position. We were told to
rest until one o'clock P. M., as we had to do some marching yet. About
three o'clock we started, passed through Sharpsburg at five o'clock, and
marched halfway to Maryland Heights, going to camp late at night. The
Second and Twelfth corps occupy the place.

_Thursday, July 16._--The battery followed the canal road, passed Harper's
Ferry, Sandy Hook, and went to camp in Pleasant Valley. All these places
are full of our troops. Marched two hundred and fifty-six miles since the
fourteenth of June. The engineers are laying pontoons at Berlin and
Harper's Ferry. Iron-clad cars, with a howitzer in each, are running
between Washington and Harper's Ferry. News of the surrender of Port
Hudson, and the occupation of Morris Island, near Charleston, by our
troops.

_Friday, July 17._--Camp in Pleasant Valley. At rest for the day.

_Saturday, July 18._--Left Pleasant Valley at six o'clock A. M. The Second
and Third corps crossed the Potomac to Harper's Ferry on pontoons, and the
Shenandoah river on the trestlework bridge. Marched eight miles into
Loudon Valley, going in camp.

_Sunday, July 19._--Loudon Valley. New clothes were issued to the battery.
We started at six o'clock A. M., marching only four miles. The country
abounds in delicious blackberries.

_Monday, July 20._--Marched ten miles on the Leesburg turnpike, and camped
outside of Bloomfield.

_Tuesday, July 21._--Camp at Bloomfield. Captain McMahon is to be shot
to-morrow for killing Captain McManners.

_Wednesday, July 22._--Bloomfield, Virginia. Started by one o'clock P. M.
Marched through Upperville by six, and Paris by seven o'clock in the
evening, going to camp at the foot of Ashby Gap. Marched eight miles
to-day. Captain McMahon's sentence to be shot, has been changed by
President Lincoln to ten years in the State Prison. The Fifth Regular
cavalry met the rebels at Manassas Gap.

_Thursday, July 23._--Left Ashby Gap early, marching on the mountain road,
leading to Front Royal. Arrived at Markham's Station, on the Manassas Gap
Railroad, by three o'clock P. M. Passed Linden at five. The Stone Church
there is full of our wounded from the engagement two days previous. The
Third corps engaged the enemy during the day. We went to park at eight
o'clock P. M., in Manassas Gap, near the village of Petersburg. The Fifth
corps is ahead of the Second. We marched twelve miles to-day.

_Friday, July 24._--A desperate fight took place on Wapping Heights
yesterday. Our infantry under General Spinola charged the enemy three
times. Lee's army is marching towards Culpepper Court House. Their long
line of trains are visible on the other side of the Shenandoah river. Our
troops are in want of rations, and the horses need forage. The army left
Manassas Gap at one o'clock P. M. Our corps went to camp outside of
Markham's Station, for the night.

_Saturday, July 25._--Started at six o'clock A. M. We had a very difficult
march over the mountains, in intensely hot weather. Lost several horses
during the day. Passed through Rectortown. Our rear was once attacked by
guerillas. Arrived at White Plains by three o'clock P. M. Our battery
parked near the woods. Rations were given out. A heavy rain fell this
evening.

_Sunday, July 26._--Left White Plains at five o'clock, A. M., taking the
course of the Manassas Gap Railroad, turning off to New Baltimore, from
there to Warrenton, arriving at noon. The battery rested until half-past
one o'clock, and marched to Warrenton Junction. The weather was intensely
hot. Dead and dying soldiers were lying along the roadside. Our battery
lost six horses. We marched twenty-four miles to-day. The troops camped
half a mile from the railroad. A shower fell in the night.

_Monday, July 27._--Camp near Warrenton Junction. We have marched three
hundred and thirty-four miles since the fourteenth of June. A heavy fall
of rain in the night.

_Tuesday, July 28._--Camp near Warrenton Junction. We remained quiet. A
shower in the night.

_Wednesday, July 29._--Camp near Warrenton Junction. Remained quiet. A
fall of rain in the evening.

_Thursday, July 30._--Camp near Warrenton Junction. At six o'clock in the
evening, we were ordered to march, going only six miles further and went
to camp at Elktown.

_Friday, July 31._--Went six miles further, towards Morrisville, going in
camp. Clothes were issued this evening.

_Saturday, August 1._--The third division of the Second corps, and our
battery, marched back to Elktown. Our camp is very pleasantly situated
near the woods.

_Sunday, August 2._--Camp at Elktown. The weather is very hot.

_Monday, August 3._--The battery was paid off for two months service.

_Tuesday, August 4._--Camp at Elktown. Cannonade in the direction of the
Rappahannock.

_Friday, August 7._--Battery B drew horses to-day.

_Saturday, August 8._--Elktown. Battery B separated from Battery A,
(ours,) getting a new set of guns at Morrisville.

_Thursday, August 13._--A heavy fall of rain to-day.

_Saturday, August 15._--Elktown. Troops are going to Alexandria.

_Thursday, August 20._--The rebels made a demonstration from the vicinity
of Dumfries.

_Saturday, August 22._--General Warren took command of the Second corps.
He inspected our battery to-day. Hot weather.

_Monday, August 31._--Elktown. Reconnoisance of the Second corps.
Intelligence was brought that Wade Hampton's cavalry had crossed over to
the northside of the Rappahannock on a raid. Our cavalry is to follow
them up, while infantry and artillery are guarding the different fords on
the river. We marched by daybreak, going fifteen miles, and went in park
one mile from United States Ford.

_Friday, September 4._--Return from the Rappahannock. The battery left at
six o'clock P. M., followed by the First division. We did not go back to
Elktown, but were ordered to report at Morrisville. Kilpatrick's cavalry
returned, having destroyed the gunboat taken by the rebels.

_Wednesday, September 9._--Morrisville. Mounted drill.

_Thursday, September 10._--Mounted drill.

_Friday, September 11._--Cannonading heard in the direction of the
Rappahannock.

_Saturday, September 12._--Morrisville. The Second corps left camp at ten
o'clock A. M., marched to Bealton Station, from there to Rappahannock
Station, going in camp for the night. The First and Fifth corps are
camping near the fords. Our cavalry has crossed the river, and is
skirmishing with the rebels; We marched ten miles to-day.

_Sunday, September 13._--At Rappahannock Ford. The whole cavalry corps is
across the river. The Second corps crossed about eight o'clock A. M., on a
pontoon bridge. The cavalry and horse artillery are already fighting
between Brandy Station and Culpepper Court House. We halted for an hour at
Brandy Station, on the road to Culpepper. Three rebel guns, and twenty
artillerymen, who were Maryland rebels, and well dressed, captured by
Kilpatrick's cavalry, were carried by. We arrived in Culpepper at six
o'clock P. M. The view of the surrounding country is splendid. Our cavalry
drove Stuart's cavalry clear to Cedar Mountain, occasionally firing a gun
at them. We were in line of battle, the artillery on the hills, and a part
of the infantry around Culpepper Court House. Rain fell during the night.

_Monday, September 14._--In line of battle at Culpepper Court House. The
cavalry still fighting near the Rapidan.

_Tuesday, September 15._--Culpepper Court House. Cannonading going on
since morning.

_Wednesday, September 16._--Culpepper Court House. At nine o'clock A. M.,
orders came for the Third division, our battery and Battery B, to advance.
We marched through the town to Cedar Mountain, General Pope's battle
ground, and occupied the hill during the evening and night, in line of
battle. We could see the rebel artillery fire on our cavalry at Raccoon
Ford. Marched eight miles to-day. A very cold night.

_Thursday, September 17._--Cedar Mountain. Left at ten o'clock, A. M.,
marching only three miles. Heavy skirmishing was going on during the
afternoon at Robinson's Creek. The rebels are in strong force on the
Rapidan. Our battery went to camp near the woods in the evening. A heavy
fall of rain all night.

_Friday, September 18._--Near Robinson's Creek. Two deserters, of the
Fourteenth Connecticut regiment, were shot to-day, in presence of the
Third division, Batteries A and B, Rhode Island. At the same time a fight
was going on near the Rapidan.

_Saturday, September 19._--Near Robinson's Creek. We changed camp. The
battery was hitched up until four o'clock P. M. Quiet until

_Tuesday, September 22._--A cavalry fight took place on the other side of
Robinson's Creek.

_Wednesday, September 23._--Robinson's Creek. Fighting going on all the
afternoon. We can see the troops manoeuvring on the other side of the
creek. Artillery was firing rapidly. Afterwards we found out that
Kilpatrick's cavalry returned from a reconnoissance, the enemy disputing
his passage fiercely.

_Thursday, September 24._--Robinson's Creek. The battery was paid off for
two months service. New clothes were issued in the afternoon.

_Sunday, September 27._--The Eleventh and Twelfth corps are leaving the
Army of the Potomac, going to join the Western army.

_Tuesday, September 29._--Our battery, without the caissons, turned out
this afternoon under cover of the woods, to Robinson's Creek, to support
the cavalry, they making a dash on the rebel picket lines towards evening,
which was done in good style. We did not fire, and returned to camp at
dark.

_Friday, October 2._--It rained all day. A deserter was shot in the First
division.

_Saturday, October 3._--Robinson's Creek. The Third brigade of the Third
division, Second corps, under General Paddy Owen, came to camp this
evening, close to our battery.

_Sunday, October 4._--Mounted inspection.

_Monday, October 5._--The Sixth corps arrived to-day to relieve ours, (the
Second.)

_Tuesday, October 6._--The Second corps left Robinson's Creek, at seven
o'clock, A. M., returning to Culpepper. The main body of the army camps
around Culpepper. The town presents a lively aspect.

_Friday, October 9._--Lee's army reported to operate on our flank.

_Saturday, October 10._--Culpepper Court House. The army is in line of
battle around Culpepper. A battle expected. Our battery marched three
miles to the right of Culpepper, going in position in the woods at night.
The engineers of the Second division were cutting trees all night. The
position of our battery is very poor, as manoeuvring is absolutely
impossible in these woods. Lee's whole army is in motion on our right
flank.

_Sunday, October 11._--Our corps fell back to Culpepper at two o'clock in
the morning, halting there until daybreak, when we marched back to
Rappahannock Station, the Sixth corps in our rear. The whole army is
falling back. Infantry are busy levelling the redoubts that cover the
ford. The battery went to Bealton Station, going in park.

_Monday, October 12._--Bealton Station. Heavy fighting going; on between
Kilpatrick's and Stuart's cavalry. At twelve o'clock the Second and Sixth
corps received orders to recross the Rappahannock. Arriving there in quick
time, we crossed immediately, and formed in line of battle. The two corps,
drawn up in a straight line, half-way between Brandy Station and the
Rappahannock, presented a splendid sight. The enemy fell back to Culpepper
after sunset. General Gregg's cavalry was defeated at White Sulphur
Springs to-day. Orders came suddenly, at twelve o'clock in the night, to
fall back across the Rappahannock.

_Tuesday, October 18._--We arrived at Bealton Station before daybreak, and
were immediately ordered to White Sulphur Springs, to support Gregg; but
the order was countermanded when we were within a few miles from there. We
marched at once in the direction of Warrenton Junction, and halted at
dark, on account of the Third corps trains. Marched twenty-five miles
since last night.

_Wednesday, October 14._--Action on Coffee Hill and at Bristow Station.
The Second corps was in motion at three o'clock in the morning. Large
fires were burning all along the roadside. Near daybreak, one of our
caissons and one of Battery B's, were upset in crossing a stream. Reports
of carbines greeted our ears, astonishing everybody, as no attack from the
enemy was expected. Great excitement prevailed at first. Several men of
the First division were killed and wounded, the rebels opening furiously
on a hill where the infantry were busy cooking coffee. The rebel force
consisted of cavalry and horse-artillery. Our battery took position on the
hill, but changed front soon after, firing to the rear, facing a deep
creek below the hill. Generals Warren and Caldwell were present. General
Warren ordered General Hayes to march his division directly to Manassas
Junction, and if opposed by the enemy, to charge with the bayonet at once.
A short time after a battery appeared in our front. Captain Arnold wished
to open fire; but, incredible as it sounds, yet true, General Caldwell
would not allow it, taking the rebels for our own troops. They unlimbered,
and opened a well-directed fire on our battery, which had a very exposed
position. Our fire did not seem to have much effect. General Caldwell did
not remain after finding out his mistake. Our battery was compelled to
withdraw. A section of regular artillery tried to get in position, but was
unable to do so. The line of march was taken up immediately, cavalry and
horse-artillery marching on both flanks. We were not disturbed any more
until four o'clock P. M., our troops suddenly met the enemy on the
railroad at Bristow Station. Only four guns of our battery were at hand,
the right section acting as rear guard. We were opposed by a six gun
battery, having mostly white horses. A desperate engagement followed,
lasting one hour. We fired point blank most of the time. The rebel
battery was nearly annihilated, and five of their guns carried away by
our infantry; but our battery deserves due credit for the capture of the
rebels. The right section arrived after the engagement was over, taking up
its position instantly. At dark the enemy suddenly attacked us on our left
flank, bringing a battery to bear on us from the other side of the
railroad; but the dam being too high, they could not fire with accuracy.
We changed front at once, opening fire, and silencing the battery shortly
after, ending the engagement thereby. Hill's corps and Stewart's cavalry
were the opposing forces. The Second corps captured five guns and nearly a
thousand prisoners. We all crossed Kettle Run, late in the night, marched
to Centreville via Manassas Junction, arriving there in a tired-out
condition. Our loss at Bristow Station was: Killed--Philip Crayton.
Wounded--John Moran, died afterwards; M. Desmond, James Gardner, Patrick
Healey, and Theodore Reichardt.

_Thursday, October 15._--Centreville. The battery is refilling ammunition.

_Friday, October 16._--A heavy rain. The battery advanced in front of Cub
Run.

_Saturday, October 17._--Cub Run. Cannonading is going on near Bull Run.
The left section received new guns. During the afternoon the engineers
laid a pontoon bridge across Cub Run, without meeting any opposition. The
battery turned out to support, while a brigade of cavalry and some horse
artillery, crossed the Run to reconnoitre.

_Sunday, October 18._--Cub Run. The cavalry is fighting on the way from
Manassas Junction to Bristow Station.

_Monday, October 19._--A heavy fall of rain at four o'clock in the
morning. The Second and Third corps crossed Cub Run by daybreak, marched
over Bull Run and Manassas Junction, and went to camp two miles from
Bristow Station. The infantry carries rations for ten days. We marched
eight miles to-day. The rebels have broken up the Orange and Alexandria
railroad.

_Tuesday, October 20._--Marched over the battle-field at Bristow Station
and through Greenwich, going in position on Coffee Hill at dark. Marched
eighteen miles to-day.

_Wednesday, October 21._--Remained on Coffee Hill all day. The remains of
the soldiers who fell here on the fourteenth were buried by our troops.
The Third corps advanced further.

_Thursday, October 22._--Coffee Hill. Changed camp this afternoon.

_Friday, October 23._--Marched to within two miles of Warrenton Junction,
going in camp.

_Saturday, October 24._--Camp near Warrenton Junction.

_Monday, October 26._--Cannonading going on, some distance off. All the
artillery of our corps was packed up until half-past six o'clock.

_Wednesday, October 28._--Skirmishing going on at Bealton Station.

_Saturday, October 31._--Camp near Warrenton. The battery was mustered in
for two months service, by Captain Hassard, of Battery B. Mounted
inspection at eleven o'clock A. M., by Lieutenant Colonel Munroe,
Chief-of-Artillery of the Second corps, our former lieutenant.

_Friday, November 6._--Review of the artillery of the Second corps, by
Lieutenant Colonel Munroe.

_Saturday, November 7._--The army in motion. All the corps are marching
towards the Rappahannock. Forced march to Bealton Station. Our corps took
the road towards Kelly's Ford. The Sixth corps surprised the rebels
completely at Rappahannock Ford, charged on their works, and captured four
guns, four colors, and eight hundred prisoners--four colonels and three
lieutenant colonels amongst them. The Third corps took four hundred
prisoners. After arriving at Kelly's Ford, our corps went to camp for the
night.

_Sunday, November 8._--At Kelly's Ford. The Second and Third corps crossed
the river at half-past six o'clock A. M., on pontoons, forming in line of
battle. No opposition was met with when we advanced. Ewell's corps seemed
to have occupied the ford, winter quarters having been built already. The
different corps advanced two miles further from the river. Our corps
camped on Colonel Thomas' plantation in the evening.

_Monday, November 9._--Camp on Colonel Thomas' plantation. The first snow
fell. All remains quiet.

_Wednesday, November 11._--The battery changed camp. All the artillery of
the Second corps is forming one camp. The enemy is on the other side of
the Rapidan.

_Thursday, November 12._--We were paid off for two months service.

_Saturday, November 14._--A heavy shower fell about nine o'clock in the
evening.

_Sunday, November 15._--Our battery was packed up, ready to march, all the
morning. Heavy cannonading going on at the Rapidan. The order to march was
countermanded in the afternoon. It rained all day.

_Monday, November 16._--Mounted inspection by Lieutenant Colonel Munroe in
the afternoon. The first train of cars crossed the bridge over
Rappahannock Ford.

_Wednesday, November 18._--Review, in honor of some English officers. Our
battery was harnessed up, but did not turn out.

_Saturday, November 21._--It rained all day.

_Sunday, November 22._--New clothes were issued to the battery.

_Thursday, November 26._--Thanksgiving day. The army is advancing again.
The Second and Fifth corps marched by daybreak. Before marching, it was
announced to the troops, that the western army, at Chattanooga, achieved a
great victory over Bragg's forces. Arriving at Germania Ford, most of the
artillery, our battery amongst it, was brought in position, while the
cavalry charged across the Rapidan. Approaching the enemy's works, they
were found deserted. A pontoon bridge was immediately laid for the
infantry. The artillery had to ford the river. We marched on the
plank-road, leading to the Wilderness, until seven o'clock P. M., going in
position by eight. All the troops are in line of battle. A severely cold
night.

_Friday, November 27._--Resumed our march on the plank-road, turning off
to the Orange Court House road by nine o'clock A. M. Our skirmishers met
the enemy at the Red Tavern. Brisk skirmishing commenced, and some of the
short range artillery went in action. We remained on the roadside until
five o'clock P. M., going in park then. A large quantity of rails were
secured by the battery boys to keep large fires burning all night.

_Saturday, November 28._--The order was to be awake by three o'clock in
the morning. At daybreak our lines advanced, but the enemy fell back some
distance. Our line of battle followed rapidly until ten o'clock A. M.,
when suddenly our advance was checked in front of Mine Run. Finding the
rebel army in battle array, presenting a formidable line, our battery was
brought in position at once; but, shortly afterwards, ordered to advance
and open fire on them. Our unexpected firing broke the front line of
infantry very soon; but two batteries taking the position, opened a
terrible fire on our battery. Owing to our exposed position, we had to
withdraw our guns by hand to the rear, where the ground formed a sort of
ravine. At this time, Rickett's Pennsylvania battery, and Ames' New York
battery, opened from our left. Our battery fired sixty rounds. We had one
man wounded, Burrill,--a detached infantry man,--a cannon ball breaking
his arm. Shortly after we retired to our former position. All hands went
to digging until eleven o'clock in the night. About midnight we were
ordered to fall back on Red Tavern. The roads are in a horrid condition.
Rain set in early in the morning.

_Sunday, November 29._--Red Tavern. March of the Second corps and a
division of the Sixth to the left flank, at seven o'clock A. M. All the
rear boxes of the caissons were left behind, so as not to impede the march
on the muddy roads. We turned off to the Gordonsville plank-road. Our
cavalry was skirmishing all the time. Passing through the woods, the
enemy's batteries opened a heavy fire, but were responded to by our horse
artillery. A line of battle was formed at once. Our battery went in
position on a knoll, close to the woods. The enemy ceased firing at dark,
and the glare of both armies camp-fires was soon visible. The night was
very cold. We are only three miles from Orange Court House.

_Monday, November 30._--Most of the infantry of the Second corps, and the
division of the Sixth, advanced before daylight, with the intention to
take the enemy's works by assault. It was understood that we should open
fire at an elevation of nine degrees, by the first bugle sound. The
second signal of a bugle should be for the infantry to storm the works.
But we waited in vain for any signal, General Warren stating the works
could not be taken without immense loss of life; the main works being
built of solid logs, two feet thick, the breastworks eleven feet high and
six feet thick, mounted with eighteen guns. Our battery opened several
times on the enemy, who was endeavoring to carry artillery by our front.
Sergeant Olney made a splendid shot during the morning. Heavy cannonading
was kept up on the right the whole forenoon; but neither army seemed to be
very anxious to open the battle. Horse artillery fired on our position
several times, without doing any damage. During the afternoon the right
section took position ahead of us, a little to our right, firing some. Our
whole line was fortified during the day. At dark, our battery was ordered
to fall back to the rear, which was gladly responded to. Going about two
miles, we went in park close to the Fredericksburg plank-road.

_Tuesday, December 1._--All the trains are going towards the Rapidan.
Troops were marching back all the afternoon. The right section of our
battery, under Lieutenant Hunt, was sent back to the front to guard the
Orange road, but returned again in the evening. At eleven o'clock in the
night, the Second corps commenced marching to the rear, on the
Fredericksburg plank-road. Our battery was the last of the corps. The
night was cold but clear. The moon shone. We travelled very fast. A
division of cavalry and some horse artillery concluded the rear-guard. We
marched all night. Large fires were burning on both sides of the road.
Sometimes the woods were all on fire. On this march we were undergoing
great sufferings, many of us having no overcoats.

_Wednesday, December 2._--We crossed the Rapidan at Culpepper Ford, early
in the morning. All the troops went over at once; the cavalry cutting off
on a shorter route. The pontoons were taken off immediately, while the
troops halted to rest on the other side of the Rapidan. The rebel
van-guard made its appearance, but were shelled by our horse artillery,
dispersing them soon. We marched until eight o'clock P. M., when we
reached our old camp on Colonel Thomas' plantation. The mansion was
destroyed entirely by our troops during the seven days campaign across the
Rapidan. This is the first night for some time, we rest again in peace.

_Friday, December 4._--All the artillery changed camp.

_Saturday, December 5._--Left at eight o'clock A. M., and went to camp
near Stevensburg, five miles from Culpepper; the poorest place that could
be selected in winter time, as there is no firewood near at hand.

_Sunday, December 6._--Camp near Stevensburg. Lieutenant Lamb left the
battery, going to Battery C, Rhode Island. Lieutenant Blake, formerly
orderly sergeant of Battery B, took his place.

_Monday, December 7._--Camp near Stevensburg. The infantry of the Second
corps marched to the woods to build winter-quarters.

_Tuesday, December 8._--Camp near Stevensburg. The artillery brigade left
camp, going to winter-quarters within one and a-half miles of Brandy
Station.

_Wednesday, December 9._--Camp near Mountain Run. Everybody is cutting
wood for winter-quarters. A battalion of engineers are building a bridge
over the Mountain Run. Lieutenant Colewell arrived for our battery.

_Thursday, December 10._--The artillery brigade changed camp, going across
Mountain Run at noon, and again by four o'clock P. M.

_Friday, December 11._--It is now decided to remain here for the winter,
and orders were given to build winter-quarters. A general order was read
in line, to the effect that veterans, wishing to re-enlist, would get
eight hundred dollars bounty and a furlough of thirty days.

_Saturday, December 12._--It was announced that soldiers could obtain
furloughs for ten days. The building of winter-quarters is progressing. It
rained to-day.

_Wednesday, December 16._--Mounted inspection by Lieutenant Colonel
Munroe. Orderly Sergeant Thompson went home on a furlough.

_Thursday, December 17._--Captain Arnold left on a furlough of ten days.

_Friday, December 18._--Private Bontemps arrived in the battery after
seven months absence. Raid of guerillas on the Orange and Alexandria
Railroad.

_Sunday, December 20._--Mounted inspection.

_Tuesday, December 22._--Commenced building stables for the horses.

_Thursday, December 24._--Cold weather.

_Saturday, December 26._--Orderly Sergeant Thompson returned from home.

_Sunday, 27_, _Monday, 28_, _Tuesday, 29_, _Wednesday, 30_, _and Thursday,
December 31._--Rainy weather all this time.




1864.


_Friday, January 1._--Winter-quarters at Mountain Run. Cold weather.

_Saturday, January 2._--Many horses die from the cold.

_Wednesday, January 6._--Cold weather.

_Thursday, January 7._--Mountain Run. Snow storm.

_Monday, January 11._--The use of countersigns commenced again from this
day.

_Friday, January 15._--Mounted inspection.

_Monday, January 18._--Rain.

_Thursday, January 21._--Mrs. Captain Arnold arrived in camp.

_Sunday, January 24._--Mounted inspection.

_Friday, January 29._--Mounted drill before General Hayes.

_Tuesday, February 2._--First thunder-shower.

_Friday, February 5._--The First Minnesota regiment marched off at
daybreak, going home to reorganize.

_Saturday, February 6._--Reveille at four o'clock in the morning. We had
orders to march by six o'clock A. M., with a blanket and rations for three
days. The infantry of the Second corps, and all the long range artillery,
marched through Stevensburg to the Rapidan. Arriving at Morton's Ford,
skirmishing commenced between ours and the rebel infantry. A rebel battery
on a hill opened on our battery, while going in position close to the
river. We did not open immediately, as the rebel battery fired but a few
rounds. The Third division, under General Hayes, forded the stream. At
four o'clock in the afternoon, General Webb, of the Second division,
ordered the infantry to advance, and our battery to fire. We used
twenty-four rounds. The infantry pushed on, half-way up the hill, but had
to retire at dark. Our battery fired fifteen more rounds, by Lieutenant
Colonel Munroe's order. The infantry kept on fighting until seven o'clock
in the evening. It rained all day.

_Sunday, February 7._--In line of battle at Morton's Ford. All of our
infantry recrossed last night. The rebel sharpshooters advanced to their
rifle-pits, firing on us. We remained quiet nearly all day. At dark we
returned to camp, arriving about ten o'clock P. M. The roads were in a
floating condition. The loss of our corps amounts to three hundred men.

_Friday, February 12._--Sergeant Greene and Eugene Googins, went to Rhode
Island for the purpose of recruiting. Mounted drill.

_Sunday, February 14._--Mounted inspection.

_Tuesday, February 16._--Monthly mounted inspection, by Captain Thompson,
acting chief-of-artillery.

_Wednesday, February 17._--The battery was paid off for two months
service. Some of the men received clothing money.

_Friday, February 19._--Review of the artillery of the Second corps by
General Warren.

_Sunday, February 21._--Mounted inspection.

_Monday, February 22._--Washington's birthday. Battalion drill of the
artillery of the Second corps, by Captain Thompson.

_Tuesday, February 23._--Review of the Second corps and General
Kilpatrick's cavalry division. The review was held between Stevensburg and
Pony Mountain. The weather was splendid. The troops presented a good
appearance. Generals Meade and Warren, Senator Sprague, and many ladies
were present.

_Saturday, February 27._--The Sixth corps is going towards the Rapidan, on
a reconnoissance. We have orders to keep three days rations on hand, and
be ready to march.

_Tuesday, March 1._--A heavy fall of rain.

_Saturday, March 5._--Rain.

_Sunday, March 6._--Mounted inspection.

_Thursday, March 17._--St. Patrick's day. Monthly inspection by Captain
Thompson.

_Friday, March 18._--One section of each battery in the corps had to turn
out for target-shooting in the afternoon.

_Saturday, March 19._--All the artillery had to go in position on the
hill, but returned soon to the camp again.

_Tuesday, March 22._--We were paid off for two months service. Snow-storm.

_Friday, March 25._--The Army of the Potomac is to be divided in three
corps. The Second will be consolidated with the Third corps, and commanded
by General Hancock; the Fifth corps commanded by General Warren; The First
and Sixth corps by General Sedgwick.

_Saturday, March 26._--Lieutenant General Grant arrived at Brandy Station.

_Sunday, March 27._--Mounted inspection.

_Tuesday, March 29._--A heavy rain.

_Wednesday, March 30._--Rickett's Pennsylvania battery changed camp, going
on top of the hill on the other side of Mountain Run.

_Friday, April 1._--Rain.

_Saturday, April 2._--Rain.

_Sunday, April 3._--We exchanged ammunition with Thompson's Pennsylvania
battery.

_Monday, April 4._--Captain Thompson's battery left for Washington.

_Tuesday, April 5, and Saturday, April 9._--A heavy fall of rain on both
days.

_Monday, April 11._--Mounted inspection by the new chief-of-artillery,
Colonel Tidball, of the Fourth Heavy Artillery, New York.

_Tuesday, April 12._--Eugene Googins and Bill Taylor returned from
Providence.

_Thursday, April 14._--Fred Frown, promoted to captain, arrived to-day,
and was presented with a sabre, in presence of Colonel Tompkins and
Lieutenant Colonel Munroe, by Battery B, his new command.

_Sunday, April 17._--Lieutenant Colewell left the battery to-day, being
discharged on his application.

_Tuesday, April 19._--The artillery practised target-shooting in the
morning.

_Wednesday, April 20._--Review of the artillery of the Second corps, by
General Hancock. The corps has eight batteries now.

_Friday, April 22._--Review of the Second corps, numbering nearly forty
thousand men, by General Grant.

_Sunday, April 24._--Mounted inspection.

_Monday, April 25._--This afternoon, a private of the Nineteenth
Massachusetts regiment was hung for violating a woman eighty years old.

_Wednesday, April 27._--The battery broke up winter-quarters this morning,
and went to camp between Stevensburg and Pony Mountain. Sergeant Greene
returned from recruiting.

_Friday, April 29._--The battery changed camp again, moving close to the
infantry.

_Saturday, April 30._--We were mustered in for two months service.

_Sunday, May 1._--Mounted inspection. Burnside's corps arrived at
Warrenton Junction.

_Tuesday, May 3._--The Army of the Potomac commences the great campaign
against Richmond. General Grant is with the army. Our battery left camp at
eight o'clock in the evening, and marched all night.

_Wednesday, May 4._--Arriving at the Rapidan, we halted but a few minutes.
Our cavalry was already across. About six o'clock A. M., we forded the
river at Ely's Ford. The infantry crossed on a pontoon bridge. We marched
directly towards the Wilderness, and arrived at Chancellorsville at noon.
One division of the Second corps formed in line of battle, facing
Fredericksburg, and remained there all day and night.

_Thursday, May 5._--Battle in the Wilderness. At seven o'clock in the
morning, the army was in motion, on the road leading to Spottsylvania. The
Sixth corps was in possession of Mine Run. Fighting commenced on our right
about one o'clock P. M. The First division, Batteries A and B, Rhode
Island, turned to the left at four o'clock P. M. Parts of our corps were
hotly engaged near sunset. Our battery went in position near a farm house,
and commenced to fortify immediately. So did the infantry on our left. The
troops on our left were to be withdrawn, but suddenly ordered to halt as
the rebel cavalry was reported to attack our left. In the night, our
battery withdrew some distance to the rear, going in park. General Hayes
was killed to-day.

_Friday, May 6._--Battle in the Wilderness. The troops were awake at three
o'clock in the morning. Our battery returned to its position at daybreak,
and was strengthening the fortifications. Incessant musketry fire was
going on from five o'clock until ten o'clock A. M. Most of the fighting
took place in the woods. Very little artillery had been used so far. The
right section of our battery went to the rear to guard a road against the
rebel cavalry. The enemy opened on our left with artillery, but was
vigorously replied to by the Tenth Massachusetts battery. Heavy
cannonading was going on on the extreme right. One gun of Rickett's
Pennsylvania battery bursted. A general attack from the rebels was
expected in the evening; but all remained, quiet during the night. We
stayed within our fortifications all night, laying alongside of our guns.

_Saturday, May 7._--Battle in the Wilderness. We were fortifying our
position stronger yet. Little fighting was done in our front to-day. The
woods are on fire, exposing the wounded to a horrible death. General
Sheridan's cavalry has been fighting hard all day, near Todd's Tavern. Our
battery went to the rear at eight o'clock in the evening; but was kept in
readiness for marching all night.

_Sunday, May 8._--Battle in the Wilderness. Fredericksburg is in our
possession. All of our wounded are sent there. The Second corps advanced
as far as Todd's Tavern, forming in line of battle, the cavalry on the
flanks. Fighting was kept on until night, mostly in the woods. Artillery
not much used. General Grant and staff passed by. The infantry was
fortifying all night.

_Monday, May 9._--Battle in the Wilderness. Line of battle at Todd's
Tavern. Before break of day, our battery took position behind breastworks,
built by the Thirty-ninth New York Regiment. But no engagement took place
at this point. We left the position at noon, marching to the right. About
three o'clock we got sight of the enemy's trains on the other side of the
Po Creek. The right section, under Lieutenant Hunt, and one of Battery B,
went in action, shelling the rebel trains. An hour afterwards, the rebels
brought four pieces of horse artillery to bear on the two sections, but
were silenced in twenty minutes. Walter Arnold, of our battery, was
slightly wounded. Battery B had two men killed. The Second corps crossed
the Po Creek at dark. Our battery went to park at ten o'clock P. M.
General Sedgwick was killed by a sharpshooter. Picket firing all night.

_Tuesday, May 10._--Near Spottsylvania Court House. Fighting commenced all
along the line. A report of the fall of Petersburg was read to all the
troops. Our battery went a few rods to the rear, to be out of the way. The
right section started off, and had an action of half an hour's duration,
coming very near being flanked. At eleven o'clock, our whole battery went
to the rear, which was threatened by the enemy. We went in action on the
roadside, firing for half an hour. The rebels evidently drove our
infantry. The battery changed position, having the open field in the front
and the woods in the rear and no road left to retreat but one, which was
already endangered by the enemy. General Barlow, commanded our troops at
this point. It was decided now to withdraw the right and centre sections,
leaving the left section to cover the retreat, without any support at all,
to oppose the enemy, who was massing three formidable lines of infantry
against us. Captain Arnold and Lieutenant Blake remained with the left
section, giving orders to load and lay down until the enemy should be very
near. This was done accordingly. At command of Captain Arnold, the pieces
were fired with good effect, and two of the rebel guns soon silenced. The
left section fired point blank during this action. Four lines of rebel
infantry advanced on the left, throwing back our line of infantry across
the only remaining road. Captain Arnold ordered our two guns to be brought
to the rear by hand, limbering up from the rear, and try to make through
the woods. The sixth piece escaped; but not the fifth, the wheels getting
stuck between trees. The enemy being very close upon us, opened such a
terrific musketry fire on the piece as to make the horses unmanageable.
Besides that, the cannoniers being all new men, left. Nobody remained but
Captain Arnold, Lieutenant Blake, Sergeant Calder, myself and the
drivers. We found it impossible to remove the gun, and had to abandon it
therefore, and crossed the Po Creek, the best way we could. The batteries
on the other side of the creek, opened furiously on the victorious enemy.
The remainder of our line of infantry fell back across the creek; but over
one thousand men were taken prisoners. Two men of our left section were
wounded--Reynolds and Willy of the fifth piece. The latter had to be left
on the field. Arriving at the battery, our comrades rejoiced to see us
come back safe. We were engaged all the afternoon, setting fire to several
shanties which served as rendezvous for sharpshooters. In the evening, we
blew up a caisson of a rebel battery, which rode up at full speed, trying
to get in action, causing them to withdraw immediately. We were in
position all night.

_Wednesday, May 11._--Battle near Spottsylvania. Our battery fortified
before daybreak. Heavy skirmishing, and some firing of artillery, was kept
up all day. A heavy shower fell in the evening. Our horses were
unharnessed and sent to the rear of the woods. At ten o'clock in the night
our corps received orders to leave. We marched all night.

_Thursday, May 12._--Battle of Spottsylvania Court House. Great assault of
Hancock's corps, supported by the Sixth. Near daybreak we arrived on the
extreme left of our army. The infantry, was already formed in line, ready
for an impetuous onset. General Hancock and his division commanders rode
up in front of the lines harranguing the troops. The long line advanced
suddenly, soon disappearing in the fog that hung over the ground. After a
short but desperate engagement, the works were carried, and two Generals,
Stewart and Johnson, eighteen pieces of artillery, seven colors, and three
thousand men, captured. Our battery changed position three times while in
action. When in the second position, our horses were unhitched to carry
the captured rebel artillery to the rear. Our third position was close to
the line of works taken from the enemy. We were hotly engaged for two
hours. The rebels concentrated all their forces towards this point. Our
ammunition giving away, we were compelled to withdraw. The musketry fire
was so severe that, had we remained a few minutes longer, we would
undoubtedly have lost half of our men. Battery C, Fifth Regulars, occupied
our position afterwards, but had to leave, and abandon two guns. The
battle raged all day, and the loss of both armies was very heavy. Our army
took eight thousand prisoners. During the day, our battery returned to the
position held first, remaining there the rest of the day and night.

_Friday, May 13._--Near Spottsylvania Court House. Skirmishing continued.
Our battery changed position twice in the afternoon, going in park at
last, unhitched and unharnessed. According to an official announcement to
the army we captured two generals, eight thousand men, eighteen guns, and
twenty-seven colors from the rebels. Our loss since we entered the
Wilderness is estimated at forty thousand men in all. The rebels held
their position all day, making the line of works taken yesterday, very
uncomfortable. Picket-firing was kept up all night. One of our battery, by
the name of Hoyle, a recruit, was shot in the foot while going near to the
outer line.

_Saturday, May 14._--The rebels are falling back. General Sheridan's
cavalry has done great damage in their rear. Our fourth detachment
received a rebel gun to-day, in place of the one lost on the tenth of May.
Two more guns and caissons were taken from the enemy to-day. A mortar
battery was playing on the enemy's lines all day. Rainy weather.

_Sunday, May 15._--Our battery left at half-past one o'clock in the
morning, marching but a few miles. The Second corps was relieved by the
Eighth, General Augur, being in reserve for a few days. We rested all day.
A heavy shower fell in the evening.

_Monday, May 16._--Remained quiet all day. It was read in line that
twenty-three thousand men, reinforcements, were on the way.

_Tuesday, May 17._--All the batteries were reduced to four guns. The guns
of our left section were sent to Belle Plain, by way of Fredericksburg. We
changed camp at four o'clock P. M., and again about six, and marched off
about ten o'clock in the night, going to the right of the line.

_Wednesday, May 18._--At daybreak, heavy fighting commenced on the right.
Our battery was in position, but as reserve. Generals Grant and Meade were
in front of our battery, watching the progress of the contest, which was
fought almost precisely where the great assault of the twelfth instant
took place. Battery B, Rhode Island, was in action. Many of the new
troops, the Corcoran Legion amongst them, took part in this fight. We
returned to our camping-place in the afternoon.

_Thursday, May 19._--Near Spottsylvania Court House. We changed camp at
eleven o'clock A. M., going in front of the army headquarters, and were
pleasantly situated on the edge of the woods. A little after three o'clock
P. M., great excitement prevailed on the line, the rebels being reported
to have made an attack on the Fredericksburg road. Our battery was ordered
out, going two miles. The fight was nearly over at our arrival, the enemy
being driven back. We returned to the camp with orders to be ready to
march at eleven o'clock P. M. The battery remained packed up all night,
but did not leave.

_Friday, May 20._--Near Spottsylvania Court House. Quiet all day. Started
at eleven o'clock in the night. The battery wagons were all uncovered. We
marched all night.

_Saturday, May 21._--Forced march of the Second corps. Crossed the Mat
river at seven o'clock in the morning, struck the Fredericksburg and
Gordonsville Railroad, and entered Bowling Green at noon. A fair-looking
town. Nine thousand of our cavalry and horse artillery passed through
early in the morning, scattering the militia of the place. Marching
further, we arrived at Milford Station at five o'clock P. M. This is an
important railroad junction, with a good depot, and many dwelling houses.
Our cavalry and horse artillery occupied the surrounding farms. At six
o'clock P. M., we crossed the Mattapony river, over a stationary bridge,
going in park for the night. About seven o'clock the rebels ran out two
guns, firing on our camps for a short time. We marched twenty-five miles
to-day.

_Sunday, May 22._--On the Mattapony river. We advanced but one mile, at
seven o'clock A. M., taking our position in the line of battle, and
fortified at once; but, after finishing the works, we had to give them up
to another battery, and dug a new line of intrenchments about one hundred
yards off. This created great dissatisfaction among the men. Heavy firing
was going on to our right, some ten miles off. An attack from the enemy on
our corps was expected, but we were not disturbed.

_Monday, May 23._--The Second corps was in motion again at daybreak. After
marching ten miles, we crossed the Pole Cat Creek. About noon we arrived
in the vicinity of the North Anna River, the Fifth corps being there
already. After an hour's rest, our right section was ordered to advance,
taking position behind a narrow strip of woods, in front of the river. The
rest of the battery, and all the other batteries of the corps, came soon
after, and went in position. At three o'clock P. M., a desultory fire was
opened on the enemy's works, ceasing by five o'clock. The right section
was ordered to go in advance of the line of battle, in front of a strong
redoubt of the enemy, and to open furiously, and be a signal to all the
batteries of the corps. The enemy offered great resistance for some time.
If it had not been for a few very large trees in front of our position, we
would have lost a number of men. A heavy cannonade was kept up until dark,
when our assaulting columns carried the works at the point of the bayonet.
The right section having expended all ammunition, filled up at once and
crossed the Creek; being the first artillery on the other side of the
North Anna River. We went in position, fortifying during the night.

_Tuesday, May 24._--Battle on the North Anna River. There was more or less
fighting since daybreak. The enemy's artillery fired continuously on the
stationary bridge leading across the North Anna. Our sharpshooters and
infantry carried the bridge at ten o'clock A. M. Our battery was attached
to General Birney's division to-day, and ordered to the right of the
bridge to engage the enemy's battery shelling it. We engaged the battery
for an hour without any result at all, as they were strongly fortified.
Tom Steere was shot in the leg by a sharpshooter. We were relieved by
Battery K, Fourth Regulars, and returned to our first position. At four
o'clock P. M. we crossed the bridge over the North Anna river, under the
enemy's artillery fire. The cannoniers were told to scatter and go ahead
of the battery, as horses were likely to draw the enemy's fire. We
sustained no loss in this movement. Most of the infantry of the corps were
in line of battle on the south side of the river. Our battery took
position behind breastworks thrown up by our troops, and sheltered by a
Virginia mansion, instantly. A short engagement took place before dark;
but a heavy shower setting in, put an end to it.

_Wednesday, May 25._--Southside of the North Anna River. The battery was
ordered to advance at eight o'clock A. M. The cannoniers were sent ahead
with shovels and pick-axes, to fortify our position. Not much of any
consequence was done in our front during the day, some sharpshooting
excepted. The corps had three fortified lines of battle. Our battery was
in the first--skirmishers in front of us. The mortar-battery was playing
all the afternoon. Shower in evening.

_Thursday, May 26._--Southside of the North Anna river. The Ninth corps
was considerably engaged. We held our line all day. Shower in evening. Our
forces evacuated the southside of the North Anna River at ten o'clock in
the night, going back to where the first line of battle was formed during
the fight on the North Anna River, and rested until the next morning.

_Friday, May 27._--Flank march to the Pamunkey River. Sheridan's cavalry,
the Fifth and Sixth corps ahead; the Second and Ninth corps in the rear.
Started about noon, and halted at eight o'clock, P. M., having marched
fifteen miles. About eleven o'clock in the night we went three miles
further and rested in a ploughed field.

_Saturday, May 28._--Resumed marching at seven o'clock in the morning.
Crossed the Pamunkey River about four o'clock P. M., on a pontoon bridge.
General Meade's headquarters were on the southside of the river. Going a
mile further, our battery went to camp, unhitched and unharnessed. The
smoke of our gunboats on the Pamunkey River, was visible.

_Sunday, May 29._--Southside of the Pamunkey River. The battery was
hitched up at two o'clock in the morning. We remained until evening.
Marched off by seven o'clock, but returned soon after. We left camp again
at eleven o'clock in the night, marched on the Mechanicsville road, going
in park by one o'clock A. M., on

_Monday, May 30._--Within twenty miles of Richmond. The infantry was
fortifying all of last night. Before daybreak, our battery was ordered to
the extreme front, only one thousand yards from the enemy's works. We were
set to work digging; but ordered back to the rear, until the engineers had
thrown up breastworks. It was lucky for us that we could not be seen by
the enemy, on account of the fog, or else but few would have escaped. At
noon the battery returned, taking position behind the works. Shortly after
the enemy opened, concentrating a heavy artillery fire on our battery,
which was vigorously replied to by our four guns. Lieutenant Peter Hunt
was the only man hurt, a piece of a shell fracturing his right heel.
During the afternoon a twenty-four pounder mortar battery was posted
between our guns, keeping up a regular bombardment. Fighting lasted until
eight o'clock in the evening. At that time, five of our batteries were
playing on the enemy's works, which were considerably damaged. Our horses
were sent a half mile to the rear.

_Tuesday, May 31._--The rebels evacuated their line of intrenchments
during last night. We could hear the noise created by the removal of the
artillery, mistaking it for the arrival of reinforcements. General
Barlow's division occupied the works at ten o'clock A. M. A brass battery
was put in position, keeping up a steady fire on the retiring enemy.
Considerable fighting was going on along the whole line to-day. The rebel
sharpshooters were very troublesome, firing from high trees. Norris L.
Church was shot in the head at eleven o'clock A. M., and died ten minutes
afterwards. We changed position about eight o'clock in the evening, going
a-half mile to the right.

_Wednesday, June 1._--Heavy fighting was going on at Coal Harbor. The
Sixth corps, and the Eighteenth, General Baldy Smith, being engaged with
the rebels. Our battery was supported by two companies of the
Twenty-eighth Massachusetts regiment, but not engaged to-day. The Second
corps commenced moving at dark, and marched all night.

_Thursday, June 2._--Battle of Coal Harbor. We arrived at Coal Harbor
about ten o'clock in the morning. Fighting was still going on. The rebels
had attacked the Sixth and Eighteenth corps about two o'clock in the
morning, but were repulsed losing five hundred and twenty prisoners, who
passed by our battery. We were not in action to-day, but yet exposed to
the enemy's artillery fire. Our horses were unhitched and unharnessed for
the night.

_Friday, June 3._--Battle on Gaines' Farm. The battle began at four
o'clock in the morning. Our battery took position about eight o'clock A.
M., but changed it two hours after, going nearer to the front, and
engaging one of the enemy's batteries at once. The breastworks in our
front were of a very weak construction. During the afternoon the enemy
fired with solid shot. As soon as they struck our breastworks, they
stopped. It was only to ascertain the exact range. The use of
strengthening the breastworks was demonstrated to the men of the first
piece, but they did not feel disposed to work. At eight o'clock in the
evening, the enemy's batteries commenced a heavy cannonade on our lines.
Having gained the precise range of our battery, they fired very correct,
two shots passing clear through the breastworks, wounding five men of the
first piece: W. Sweet, in the face; Gileo, slightly, in the face; Swett,
in the back, badly; Coleman, in the groin; and Whitford, right arm shot
off. The engagement lasted a-half an hour. We were told afterwards, that
the firing of our battery caused great havoc amongst the rebels. Charles
Lake was badly wounded by a shell, during the day. In the night, Major
John G. Hassard brought orders for our battery to take an advanced
position in front of Gaines' Hill, before daybreak the next morning,
saying he would see to the erection of strong breastworks by the
engineers.

_Saturday, June 4._--Battle on Gaines' Farm. At the appointed time, we
went to take position on Gaines' Hill, but were disagreeably surprised to
find no fortifications at all. The Fourth Regiment, New York Heavy
Artillery, had just began to throw up a miserable frame of rotten rails.
Besides that, these men were scared to death, and, as soon as the
sharpshooters commenced to fire, could not be induced to work any longer.
We were compelled to lay down, the breastworks being so poor that we did
not dare to provoke the enemy's artillery fire, and standing by the guns
would have been sure death. It was clear to every one's mind that some
mean, malignant villain, not worthy of wearing shoulder-straps, had got
the battery in this dreadful position purposely, for our term of service
expired the next day, and we had long-range guns, while short range guns
were fired a quarter of a mile in our rear, the shells exploding over our
heads, instead of reaching the rebel works. Captain Arnold, sending word
to the commanding general, informing him of our dangerous situation,
engineers were set to work in our rear, throwing up strong works. After
their completion, prolongs were attached to each gun, and these pulled by
hand behind the works, without any loss at all. Shortly after that,
Captain Dow's Maine battery fired a signal, and all our batteries opened
on the long line of rebel works on Gaines' Hill, keeping up the
bombardment for two hours. At eight o'clock in the evening, the enemy
determined to open the fight again, provoked an artillery duel of
three-quarters of an hour's duration, ending the day's contest. Patrick
Murray was slightly wounded to-day.

_Sunday, June 5._--On Gaines' Hill. The enemy's sharpshooters kept up a
deadly fire on our lines all day. Captain Arnold called on General Hancock
to have our battery relieved, our time being out. Major Hassard appeared
shortly afterwards, bringing orders that we were to be relieved by Captain
Ames' New York battery. Just as we were getting ready to go to the rear,
the enemy opened with artillery, and the _old battery_ replied once more,
keeping up fire until nine o'clock in the night, fighting three hours
beyond our time of service. On the appearance of Captain Ames' battery, we
quietly withdrew our guns, and marched to the rear, being cheered by all
the troops we passed, as the services of the battery were well known in
the Second corps, General Hancock saying himself, he was sorry to lose the
battery, as it was the best one in the whole corps. Arriving in the rear,
we joined our battery-wagon, forge and caissons.

_Monday, June 6._--On Gaines' Farm. Captain Arnold is going home with the
old members of the battery. Lieutenant Gamaliel L. Dwight took command of
the remnants of Battery A. A number of non-commissioned officers went to
the quarters of Colonel Tompkins to obtain their warrants before going
home. We changed camp in the evening, but were still exposed to the
enemy's artillery fire.

_Tuesday, June 7._--On Gaines' Farm. The old members returned all articles
that go by the name of camp-equipage, to the battery; the non-commissioned
officers, their sabres and pistols. Some old member made the following
proposition: "Our time having expired, and yet being under the enemy's
fire, we should go a mile further to the rear, to sleep in the woods, as
it would be no honor to get killed or wounded now." The proposition was
readily accepted, and carried into effect.

_Wednesday, June 8._--Before break-of-day the old members assembled at the
camp of Battery A. Captain Arnold procured a mule team to carry our
baggage, and off we went at seven o'clock A. M. Never marched men with a
better will, the fifteen miles to White House Landing, where we arrived by
two o'clock P. M. Fortune smiled on us once more. We were put on board the
propeller New Jersey at four o'clock, steaming down the Pamunkey, and
dropping anchor opposite West Point about nine o'clock P. M.

_Thursday, June 9._--On board the New Jersey. The journey resumed at four
o'clock in the morning. Steamed down the York River, past Yorktown,
Gloucester Point, up the Chesapeake Bay, dropping anchor twenty miles from
Aquia Creek.

_Friday, June 10._--On board the New Jersey. Steamed up the Potomac early
in the morning. Most of the men were below deck to clean up and put their
new clothes on, reserved for this occasion by most of the old members,
when we laid in winter-quarters near Brandy Station. Our captain, and the
crew of the propeller, were quite astonished, seeing us come up in new
uniforms. At three o'clock P. M., the propeller stopped at the Washington
Navy Yard, landing eighty condemned horses. We left the vessel about four
o'clock, at the foot of Sixth street, proceeding to the Soldier's Home,
and remained at the barracks over night.

_Saturday, June 11._--Washington. We left at eleven o'clock A. M., in the
express train. Came through Baltimore and Philadelphia, arriving in New
York City by eleven o'clock in the night. We took up our quarters at the
Park Barracks.

_Sunday, June 12._--New York City. We were at liberty to go wherever we
pleased, until five o'clock P. M., leaving in the train for Rhode Island.
Arrived at Stonington by twelve o'clock P. M. Owing to some accident, we
had to stay there all night.

_Monday, June 13._--We left Stonington at daybreak, arriving in Providence
at six o'clock in the morning. It is unnecessary to give a description of
our reception in this book. I believe it is well remembered by the
inhabitants of Providence, and the old members of Battery A.

_On Saturday, the 18th of June_, we were mustered out of the United States
service, in Railroad Hall.

_On Monday, the 20th of June_, we attended the funeral of our lieutenant,
Peter Hunt, who died from the effects of his wounds.




Roster of Battery A, JUNE 6, 1861.


Captain.

  WILLIAM H. REYNOLDS.


First Lieutenants.

  THOMAS F. VAUGHAN,
  J. ALBERT MUNROE.


Second Lieutenants.

  JOHN A. TOMPKINS,
  WILLIAM B. WEEDEN.


Sergeants.

  George E. Randolph, Sergeant Major.
  Albert E. Adams, Quartermaster Sergeant.
  John H. Hammond, First Sergeant.
  William H. Walcott,
  G. Holmes Wilcox,
  Charles D. Owen,
  Francis A. Smith,
  Henry Newton.


Corporals.

  Charles M. Read,
  Charles H. Clark,
  Nathan T. Morse,
  Gamaliel L. Dwight,
  William A. Sabin,
  H. Vincent Butler,
  Albert Remington,
  James B. Buffum,
  Harry C. Cushing,
  George W. Field,
  T. Frederic Brown,
  Seabury S. Burroughs.


Artificers.

  Michael Grady,
  Daniel W. Marshall,
  Alexander K. Page,
  Dexter D. Pearce,
  James T. Rhodes,
  George A. Stetson.
  Nelson H. Arnold, Bugler.


Privates.

  Aldrich, Stephen W.
  Allen, George W. D.
  Adams, George A.
  Barker, William C.
  Byrne, George
  Byars, George
  Bennett, Henry H.
  Butler, Freeman
  Brown, Clavis G.
  Bup, Frederick
  Brown, Joshua
  Benedict, Frederick H.
  Bontems, Charles E.
  Brooks, Joseph
  Bourn, William E.
  Collins, Timothy
  Collins, James H.
  Cargill, Charles
  Child, Benjamin H.
  Cortell, Elmer D.
  Calder, Wesley R.
  Chaffee, George W.
  Chaffee, Charles E.
  Chester, George W.
  Curtis, Horace M.
  Carter, Frank
  Church, William
  Cooper, James
  Codding, Charles D.
  Crandall, Henry B.
  Church, John
  Drape, William
  Desmond, Michael
  Loughlin, Robert
  Lewis, James
  Lannegan, Patrick
  Luther, Hesekiel W.
  Luther, Levi
  Lawrence, John H.
  Lynott, John
  Lindsey, Benjamin F.
  McKay, John G.
  Messinger, Eli
  Messinger, George
  Munroe, Benjamin S.
  Moran, John
  Morrison, William
  McDonough, John
  Marcy, Albourne W.
  Mowry, Charles H.
  Martin, Benjamin F.
  McCannack, John O.
  Navin, John
  Olney, Amos M. C.
  Peck, William F.
  Percival, Richard
  Pearce, William B.
  Potter, Edward
  Phillips, Frederick A.
  Pratt, Henry L.
  Reichardt, Theodore
  Reichardt, Adolphus
  Rider, William H.
  Remington, Richard T.
  Rawbottom, Robert
  Raynor, Robert
  Day, Henry F.
  Donnegan, Patrick
  Franklin, George W.
  Freeman, Edward R.
  Fletcher, Calvin
  Flood, Thomas
  Googin, Eugene
  Gardner, James
  Greenleaf, George T.
  Griffin, John
  Griffin, John, 2d
  Gladding, Olney D.
  Goldsmith, James H.
  Griswold, George S.
  Greenhalgh, William T.
  Green, Stephen M.
  Graham, Henry T.
  Humphrey, Preston A.
  Harrison, Gilbert T.
  Haynes, William
  Hoit, Joseph S.
  Hicks, Henry F.
  Irons, Lewis W.
  Jenckes, Albert T.
  Jollie, Thomas
  Lake, Charles W.
  Shaw, Edward
  Sayles, Thomas W.
  Shepardson, George A.
  Slocum, George L.
  Scott, Charles V.
  Stanley, Milton
  Seddon, John
  Swain, Reuben C.
  Thornley, Richard
  Thompson, John B.
  Taylor, William H.
  Towle, Augustus S.
  Vose, Warren L.
  Wales, Joseph W.
  Weeks, Edwin E.
  Wild, John
  Weeden, Amos C.
  Warden, Wendell
  Warden, Samuel T.
  Walsh, John
  Walker, Stephen
  Walker, Arnold A.
  Watson, John T.
  Wellman, George A.
  Whalers, John
  Zimmerli, John




REMARKS.


Captain William H. Reynolds, promoted to lieutenant colonel at Darnestown,
Maryland.

First Lieutenant Thomas F. Vaughan, promoted to captain at Point of Rocks,
Maryland.

First Lieutenant J. Albert Munroe, promoted to captain at Darnestown,
Maryland.

Second Lieutenant John Tompkins, promoted to captain at Darnestown,
Maryland; promoted to major at Fredericksburg, Virginia.

Second Lieutenant Wm. B. Weeden, promoted to captain at Point of Rocks,
Maryland.

Sergeant Major George E. Randolph, promoted to lieutenant at Point of
Rocks, Maryland; promoted to captain at Darnestown, Maryland.

Quartermaster Sergeant Albert E. Adams, promoted to lieutenant at
Falmouth, Virginia.

Sergeant John H. Hammond, left the battery at Harrison Landing.
Transferred to Portsmouth Grove, Rhode Island, and made lieutenant in
Hospital Guard.

Sergeant William H. Walcott, promoted to lieutenant in the regular army,
at Point of Rocks, Maryland.

Sergeant G. Holmes Wilcox, left the battery at Harrison Landing, sick.

Sergeant Charles D. Owen, promoted to lieutenant at Point of Rocks,
Maryland; promoted to captain at Darnestown, Maryland.

Sergeant Francis A. Smith, promoted to lieutenant at Darnestown,
Maryland.

Sergeant Henry Newton, promoted to lieutenant at Darnestown, Maryland.
Left the battery at Falmouth, Virginia, sick.

Corporal Charles M. Read, promoted to sergeant; killed at Antietam,
Maryland.

Corporal Charles H. Clark, promoted to sergeant; promoted to lieutenant at
Darnestown, Maryland.

Corporal Nathan T. Morse, killed in Washington, D. C.

Corporal Gamaliel L. Dwight, promoted to sergeant; promoted to lieutenant
at Poolesville; promoted to captain at Coal Harbor, Virginia.

Corporal William A. Sabin, promoted to sergeant; promoted to lieutenant at
Poolesville, Maryland.

Corporal H. Vincent Butler, left the battery at Falmouth, Virginia, having
received a commission in the navy.

Corporal James B. Buffum, promoted to sergeant; left the battery at
Falmouth, Virginia, sick.

Corporal Harry L. Cushing, promoted to sergeant; promoted to lieutenant in
regular army.

Corporal George W. Field, promoted to first sergeant; to lieutenant at
Muddy Branch, Maryland.

Corporal T. Frederic Brown, promoted to sergeant; to lieutenant at
Harrison Landing; to captain at Brandy Station, Virginia.

Corporal Seabury S. Burroughs, disabled at Poolesville, Maryland. Left the
battery.

Michael Grady, returned home with battery, having served three years.

Daniel W. Marshall, left the battery at Falmouth, Virginia.

Alexander K. Page, returned home with battery, having served three years.

Dexter D. Pearce, returned home with battery, having served three years.

James P. Rhodes, promoted to lieutenant at Warrenton, Virginia. Left the
battery one year after, near the same place.

George A. Stetson, captured at first Bull Run.

Bugler Nelson A. Arnold, left the battery at Washington, D. C.

Private Stephen W. Aldrich, promoted to corporal; returned with battery,
having served three years.

Thomas M. Aldrich, returned with battery, having served three years.

George W. D. Allen, injured at first Bull Run. Left the battery at
Washington D. C.

George A. Adams, left the battery at Darnestown, Maryland.

William C. Barker, returned with battery, having served three years.

George Byrne, returned with battery, having served three years.

Joseph Byars, left at Poolesville, Maryland.

Henry H. Bennett, promoted corporal; returned with battery

Freeman Butler, left the battery at Washington, D. C.

Clavis G. Brown, left the battery at Washington, D. C.

Frederic Bup, killed at first Bull Run.

Joshua Brown, wounded and taken prisoner at first Bull Run.

Frederick H. Benedict, deserted at Darnestown, Maryland.

Charles E. Bontems, returned with battery.

Joseph E. Brooks, wounded and taken prisoner at first Bull Run. Returned
to battery at Washington, before going to Peninsula. Returned with
battery.

William E. Bourn, killed in Washington, D. C.

Timothy Collins, returned with battery.

James H. Collins, left the battery at Washington, D. C.

Charles Cargill, wounded at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.

Benjamin H. Child, promoted to corporal and sergeant; to lieutenant at
Brandy Station, Virginia.

Elmer L. Cortell, promoted to corporal; sergeant; lieutenant. Left the
battery at Point of Rocks, Maryland.

Wesley B. Calder, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

George W. Chaffee, promoted to corporal. Left the battery at Harrison
Landing. Afterwards died.

Charles E. Chaffee, promoted to corporal; sergeant; left the battery at
Warrenton, Virginia.

George N. Chester, returned with battery.

Horace M. Curtis, wounded, and left the battery at Gettysburg.

Frank Carter, returned with battery.

William C. M. Church, left the battery at Washington, D. C.

James Cooper, wounded, and left the battery at Malvern Hill.

Charles D. Codding, returned with battery.

Henry B. Crandall, returned with battery.

John Church, wounded at Antietam and left the battery.

William Drape, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

Michael Desmond, wounded at Bristow's Station, and left the battery.

Henry F. Day, left in Washington.

Patrick Donnegan, left the battery in Falmouth.

George W. Franklin, left the battery at Poolesville.

Edward R. Freeman, wounded at Washington, and left the battery.

Eugene Googins, returned with battery.

James Gardner, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

George J. Greenleaf, promoted to corporal; sergeant; quartermaster
sergeant. Returned with battery.

John Griffin, returned with battery.

Olney D. Gladding, wounded at Bull Run, and died in Georgetown, D. C.

George L. Griswold, left at Washington.

Stephen M. Greene, promoted to corporal; sergeant. Returned with battery.

Henry T. Graham, left the battery at Sandy Hook.

Preston A. Humphrey, returned with battery.

Gilbert F. Harrison, wounded, and left at Gettysburg.

William Haines, left at Washington.

Joseph S. Hoyt, left at Washington.

Henry F. Hicks, wounded at Fredericksburg, and left the battery.

Lewis W. Irons, returned with battery.

Albert J. Jenckes, left the battery at Berlin, Maryland.

Thomas Jollie, left the battery at Harrison Landing.

Charles W. Lake, wounded at Coal Harbor. Returned with battery.

Robert Laughlin, left the battery at Antietam.

James Lewis, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

Patrick Lannegan, killed at Antietam.

Hesekiel W. Luther, promoted to corporal. Left at Harrison Landing.

Levi Luther, left at Harrison Landing.

John H. Lawrence, killed at Antietam.

John Lynott, returned with battery.

Benjamin F. Lindsey, left the battery at Poolesville, Maryland.

John G. McKay, returned with battery.

Eli Messinger, detailed to hospital steward. Left the battery at
Poolesville, Maryland.

George Messinger, left the battery at Poolesville.

Benjamin S. Munroe, left the battery at Yorktown.

John Moran, wounded at Bristow Station, and died in hospital at
Alexandria.

William Morrison, returned with battery.

John McDonnough, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

Albourne W. Marcy, left the battery at Harrison Landing. Died on his way
home.

Charles H. Mowry, deserted at Warrenton, and turned guerilla.

Benjamin F. Martin, left the battery at Thom's Farm.

John O. McCannack, left the battery at Washington.

John Navin, promoted to corporal; sergeant. Returned with battery.

Amos M. C. Olney, promoted to corporal; sergeant. Re-enlisted.

Richard Percival, left at Harrison Landing.

Willard B. Pierce, promoted to corporal; first sergeant; promoted to
lieutenant at Elktown, Virginia.

Edward Potter, left the battery at Washington.

Frederick A. Phillips, wounded, and left at Antietam.

Henry A. Pratt, left at Washington.

Theodore Reichardt, promoted to corporal. Returned with the battery.

Adolphus Reichardt, wounded and left at Bull Run.

William H. Rider, promoted to corporal, and wounded and left at
Gettysburg.

Richard Remington, left at Poolesville.

Robert Rawbottom, promoted to corporal; sergeant. Returned with battery.

Robert Raynor, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

Edward Shaw, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

Thomas W. Sayles, left the battery at Yorktown.

George A. Shepardson, left the battery at Warrenton.

George L. Slocum, returned with battery.

Charles V. Scott, promoted to corporal; sergeant; to lieutenant at Brandy
Station, Virginia.

Milton Stanley, left the battery at Point of Rocks.

John Seddon, wounded at Flint Hill, and left the battery.

Reuben Swaine, left at Antietam.

Richard Thornley, promoted to corporal. Returned with battery.

John B. Thompson, promoted to corporal; sergeant; first sergeant. Returned
with battery.

William H. Taylor, re-enlisted.

Augustus S. Towle, promoted to corporal; sergeant. Returned with battery.

Warren L. Vose, wounded, taken prisoner and died at Bull Run.

Joseph Wales, returned with battery.

Edwin Weeks, wounded at Bull Run and left at Washington.

John Wild, returned with battery.

Amos A. Weeden, left at Point of Rocks.

Wendell Warden, left at Harper's Ferry.

Samuel P. Warden, left at Fortress Monroe.

John Walsh, returned with battery.

Stephen Walker, left at Harrison Landing.

Arnold A. Walker, promoted to corporal. Left at Falmouth. Died on his way
home.

George A. Wellman, deserted at Falmouth.

John Zimmerli, killed at Gettysburg.




  GENERAL AGENCY FOR
  Publishers, News Dealers and Booksellers.


  ESTABLISHED FEBRUARY 1, 1856.


  N. BANGS WILLIAMS,
  AMERICAN AND FOREIGN
  Newspaper and Periodical
  AGENCY,
  Nos. 113 and 115 Westminster Street,
  OPPOSITE THE ARCADE,
  PROVIDENCE, R. I.


  PLAIN AND FANCY STATIONERY
  AT WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.


  A GOOD ASSORTMENT OF BLANK BOOKS
  Always on hand and manufactured to order in any desired style.


  EVERY DESCRIPTION OF BOOK BINDING
  DONE AT SHORT NOTICE.



  N. BANGS WILLIAMS,
  WHOLESALE AND RETAIL DEALER IN
  American and Foreign Fancy Goods,
  AND YANKEE NOTIONS,
  Nos. 113 and 115 Westminster Street,
  PROVIDENCE, R. I.


  MEERSCHAUM AND BRUYERE PIPES,
  Cigar Tubes, Pipe Stems, Tobacco Boxes, Cigar Cases, Match Cases,
  WALKING CANES, LAMP LIGHTERS,
  TOBACCO POUCHES, PORTE MONNAIES, WALLETS,
  CHINA, CLAY, LAVA, AND WOOD PIPES,
  AND A
  Complete Stock of Smokers' Articles,
  INCLUDING A GREAT VARIETY OF
  SMOKING AND CHEWING TOBACCO,
  PERFUMERY, SOAPS, AND TOILET ARTICLES,
  BRUSHES, COMBS,
  Pocket Cutlery, Razors, Scissors, &c.




      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

The following typographical errors have been corrected:
  "gunnner" corrected to "gunner" (page 9)
  "we" corrected to "were" (page 11)
  "comissioned" corrected to "commissioned" (page 29)
  "dificulties" corrected to "difficulties" (page 44)
  "Augast" corrected to "August" (page 56)
  "Petit's" corrected to "Pettit's" (page 67)
  "Sedwick's" corrected to "Sedgwick's" (page 86)
  "regiiment" corrected to "regiment" (page 89)
  "cannnonade" corrected to "cannonade" (page 96)
  "reat" corrected to "great" (page 118)
  "o!cock" corrected to "o'clock" (page 134)

Other than the corrections listed above, inconsistencies in
spelling and hyphenation have been retained.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DIARY OF BATTERY A, FIRST REGIMENT RHODE ISLAND LIGHT ARTILLERY ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

