








======================================================================

The Wisdom of the East Series

EDITED BY

  L. CRANMER-BYNG
  Dr. S. A. KAPADIA


ARABIAN WISDOM

======================================================================




WISDOM OF THE EAST

ARABIAN WISDOM



SELECTIONS AND TRANSLATIONS FROM THE ARABIC


BY JOHN WORTABET, M.D.



THIRD IMPRESSION



LONDON

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET

1916




ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




TO

MY CHILDREN


  "What doth the Lord require of thee, but to
  do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
  with thy God!"--MICAH vi. 8.




CONTENTS


  INTRODUCTION
  THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE KORAN
  REPENTANCE
  A SINNER'S CRY UNTO GOD
  FORGIVING OTHERS
  FORBEARANCE
  HUMILITY
  TRUE NOBILITY
  SELF-RESPECT
  CHARACTER
  BENEVOLENCE
  GENEROSITY
  GRATITUDE
  RECOMPENSE
  FLAUNTING KINDNESS
  KNOWLEDGE
  SPECULATIVE STUDIES
  THOUGHTS, DOUBTS
  WISDOM
  IGNORANCE, FOLLY
  CONSULTATION
  SPEAKING, WRITING, BOOKS
  SILENCE
  TRUTHFULNESS
  TRUTHFULNESS TO PROMISES
  TRUTHFULNESS TO SECRETS
  DECEIT
  EXERTION
  OPPORTUNITIES
  ECONOMY
  VICISSITUDES OF FORTUNE
  PATIENCE
  CONTENTMENT
  CHEERFULNESS
  WAR
  ANGER
  HATRED, MALICE
  MURDER
  ENVY
  RASHNESS
  LAZINESS
  AVARICE
  COMPLAINT, BLAME
  MARRIAGE
  CHILDREN
  FILIAL DUTY
  BROTHERS
  FRIENDS
  NEIGHBOURS
  SALUTATION
  LOVE OF COUNTRY AND HOME
  TRAVELLING
  HEALTH
  YOUTH AND OLD AGE
  DEATH
  APPENDIX




EDITORIAL NOTE

The object of the editors of this series is a
very definite one.  They desire above all
things that, in their humble way, these books
shall be the ambassadors of good-will and
understanding between East and West, the old world
of Thought, and the new of Action.  In this
endeavour, and in their own sphere, they are but
followers of the highest example in the land.
They are confident that a deeper knowledge of
the great ideals and lofty philosophy of Oriental
thought may help to a revival of that true spirit
of Charity which neither despises nor fears the
nations of another creed and colour.

  L. CRANMER-BYNG.
  S. A. KAPADIA.

  NORTHBROOK SOCIETY,
  21, CROMWELL ROAD,
  KENSINGTON, S.W.




INTRODUCTION

The wise sayings and proverbs of ancient and modern times, and in all
the languages I know or to which I had access in translations, have
always had a great attraction for me.  Drawn from the experiences and
study of human life, they have been reduced by wise men to short, pithy
sentences, generally expressed in some quaint or striking form, for
conveying sound moral truths.  They are intended to be maxims of life,
or rules of conduct, chiefly for the young, but may be read with
pleasure and profit by both young and old.  It was with such an object
in view that the Editors of the _Wisdom of the East_ series have lately
issued a number of small books on this subject carefully translated by
competent specialists, and which have been highly appreciated by the
English press and public.  Their chief desire, however, appears to be
"that these books shall be the ambassadors of good-will and
understanding between East and West," and also that "the great ideals
and lofty philosophy of Oriental thought may help to a revival of that
true spirit of Charity which neither despises nor fears the nations of
another creed and colour."  (See Editorial Note.)

It was also from such motives, but long before I had seen these books,
that I have employed a part of my leisure hours in translating into
Arabic some of the best sayings of M. Aurelius, Shakespeare, Tennyson,
English and other proverbs, and, quite lately, selections from _The
Instruction of Ptah-Hotep_ and _Sadi's Scroll of Wisdom_.  They were
published in the best Arabic magazines, and have been read by many
Christians, Moslems, and Jews in Egypt, Syria, and other countries; and
I have been told by some of these Oriental readers that they found in
them much matter for thought and instruction, while their views of the
community and bonds of human nature among all nations, and in all parts
of the world, have been broadened and enlarged.

The Arabic language is particularly rich in this kind of literature,
and its proverbs are often appropriately introduced in conversation,
letters, and books, and add much force to what is said or written.
Many are light and colloquial, and bring a smile or laughter to both
speaker and hearer; but many also are distinguished by their classical
form and the serious weighty ideas which they convey or inculcate.  It
was easy, therefore, to find abundant material for this little book,
but it was somewhat difficult to make a wise selection, to classify the
different subjects under proper heads, and to translate Arabic idioms
into good English.  Other difficulties were when the proverb in Arabic
is formed of two parts which assonate or rhyme, when the piquancy of a
short sentence depends so much on the quaintness of its expression,
when an untranslatable pun or play upon words is used, or when the
phrase is too elliptical or too Oriental in its reference to be easily
understood by English readers.  The translation I have made is
generally literal, sometimes free, but always true to the original.
Some I have left in their Oriental form to show the Arabian bent of
thought and mode of life.  The renderings from the Koran are all mine,
and I alone am responsible for them.  All that I have tried to do was
for ordinary readers--and for them alone.

Many proverbs are common to all languages, and in them all--notably
among Semitic nations--there is often an exaggeration,[1] or a
one-sided view,[2] or a paradox,[3] which must be taken with some
latitude and with the natural limitations required by common sense.  It
will also be observed that many Arabic proverbs have a close
resemblance to the Proverbs of Solomon, and often assume that
rhetorical form or parallelism in which Hebrew poetry abounds when the
same idea is repeated in other words, or where its positive and
negative sides are put into contrast.  The following quotation, taken
from the eighth chapter of that book, may serve as an example of what
has just been said, and as an appropriate introduction to this little
book:

  "Doth not wisdom cry,
  And understanding put forth her voice?
  Unto you, O men, I call;
  And my voice is to the sons of men.
  For my mouth shall utter truth;
  And wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
  For whoso findeth me findeth life,
  And shall obtain favour of the Lord.
  But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul:
  All they that hate me love death."



[1] "A fool throws a stone into a well, and a thousand wise men cannot
get it out."

[2] "A man is safe when alone."  "Paradise without human companions is
not worth living in."

[3] "Do no good, and you will meet with no evil."




THE FIRST CHAPTER OF THE KORAN

In the name of God, who is abundant in mercy and compassion!  Praise be
to God, the Lord of the universe, the most merciful and compassionate,
the Sovereign of the day of judgment.  Thee alone we worship, and from
Thee alone we seek help.  Guide us to the right path--the path of them
to whom Thou hast been gracious--not of them with whom Thou art angry,
nor of them who have gone astray.  Amen.[1]


[1] This opening chapter of the Koran--very short as it is--contains
the fundamental principles of the whole book--the doctrine of God, His
infinite mercy, the immortality of the soul, the rewards and
punishments of the world to come, and the duty of prayer, and
thanksgiving, and adoration, and obedience.  It is a fair specimen of
all that is best in the "Revealed Book" of the Moslems, and is as
frequently repeated by them as the Lord's Prayer is by Christians.


REPENTANCE, AND GOD'S FORGIVING MERCY

_Koran_.  O ye who believe, repent unto God, for He loveth them who are
penitent.  O ye who believe in me, who by much sin have done a great
wrong to themselves, despair not of the mercy of God, for He forgiveth
all sins.  Verily He forgiveth and is merciful.

_Traditions_.  Sorrow for sin is repentance.  He who repents is like
him who has not sinned.

_Wise Sayings and Proverbs_.  No intercession succeeds so effectually
as repentance.

The most truthful man is he who is true to his repentance.

Two sins only God does not forgive--worship of false gods and injury to
men.


A SINNER'S CRY UNTO GOD[2]

[2] The original Arabic is in verse.

  O Thou who knowest every thought, and hearest every cry,
  Who art the source of all that is, or ever shall be,
  Who art the only hope in every trouble,
  The only help in every plaint and every woe,
  Whose treasures of bounty and word creative are one,
  God of all good, hear my prayer!

  One sole plea I have--my need of Thee;
  But needing Thee my need is filled.
  One only resource I have--to stand and knock;
  And if unheard at Thy mercy-gate, to whom shall I go?

  Whom shall I call, what Name shall I invoke,
  If Thy needy servant shall in vain Thy bounty seek?
  But far be it from Thee, God of grace, to refuse a sinner's cry.
  Too good and gracious art Thou to send me thus away.

  Contrite, I stand at Thy door,
  Believing that contrite prayer availeth much with Thee.
  Suppliant, I stretch forth my hands,
  And with all my soul look up to Thee.
  Save me, God, from every ill, and be Thy favour ever mine!


FORGIVING OTHERS

_Koran_.  God forgiveth past sins; let men forgive and pardon.  Forgive
freely.  Forgiving others is the nearest thing to piety.

_Traditions_.  He who forgiveth others, God forgiveth him.

Be merciful, and you will have mercy; forgive and you will be forgiven.

_Sayings and Proverbs_.  Of all things God loveth best forgiveness when
one is able to inflict harm, and forbearance when one is angry.

The pleasure of forgiving is sweeter than the pleasure of revenge.

Forgiveness is perfect when the sin is not remembered.

The most wicked of men is he who accepts no apology, covers no sin, and
forgives no fault.

Small men transgress, great men forgive.

A noble man condones and pardons, and when by chance he finds out a
sin, he conceals it.

A man said to another who had spoken evil of him: "If what you have
said be true, may God forgive me; and if false, may He forgive you."


CLEMENCY, FORBEARANCE, AND GENTLENESS

_Koran_.  Those who worship the Merciful One are they who walk on the
earth gently, and who, when fools speak to them, say "Peace."  (25, 64.)

_Traditions_.  Be friendly to him who would be unfriendly to you, give
him who will not give you, and forbear with him who would do you harm.

Next to faith in God, the chief duty of man is to treat his fellow men
with gentleness and courtesy.

_Sayings and Proverbs_.  Gentleness is one of the noblest traits in a
man's character.

A gentle man is a man of great beauty.

One of the surest evidences of gentleness is tenderness to fools.

The fierce anger of a foolish man is checked by gentleness as a fierce
fire is extinguished by water.

Gentleness is sometimes an humiliation, and he who is always forbearing
and patient may be trodden down by fools.

If you honour a vile man, you disgrace the code of honour.


HUMILITY

Humility is that line of conduct which is a mean between overbearing
pride on the one hand and abject servility on the other, as economy is
the middle term between extravagance and avarice.

Humility is the crown of nobility, a ladder to honour, and a means of
procuring love and esteem.

He who humbleth himself, God lifteth him up.

When Abu-Bekr, "the righteous" (the first Khalif), was praised, he used
to say: "O God, Thou knowest me better than I know myself, and I know
myself better than they know me.  Make me, I pray Thee, better than
they suppose; forgive me what they know not, and lay not to my account
what they say."

A wise man was once asked whether he knew of any good which is not
coveted, or any evil which deserves no mercy, and he said: "Yes, they
are humility and pride."

To despise a proud man is true humility.


TRUE NOBILITY

True nobility lies in high character and refined manners, not in noble
birth or ancient pedigree.

A noble man is he who aims at noble ends--not he who glories in an
ancestry mouldering in the dust.

A noble man is noble though he come to want, and a base man is base
though he walks on pearls.

A lion is a lion though his claws be clipped, and a dog is a dog though
he wear a collar of gold.

He who disregards his own honour gets no good from an honourable
lineage.

Learning and high principles take the place of noble birth, and cover
the shame of a low origin.

A branch tells of what stock it comes.


SELF-RESPECT, AND THE SENSE OF SHAME

Son of man, if you have no self-respect, do what you will.

Men see no fault in one who respects himself.

If you fear not the consequences of an evil life, and have no sense of
shame, you are free to do what you will.

No, by God, life has no worth, and this world has no happiness to a man
who has lost his self-respect and abandons himself to shamelessness.

There is no good in a man who is not ashamed of men.

He who has a brazen face has a craven heart.

To be ashamed before God is to obey His commandments and to avoid what
He has forbidden; to be ashamed before men is to avoid all harm to
them; and to be ashamed before one's self is to be chaste and clean
when one is alone.

Be ashamed in your own sight more than in the sight of men.

He who does a thing in secret of which he would be ashamed if done
openly, has no respect for himself.

He who respects not himself can have no respect for others.

I shall not kiss a hand which deserves to be cut off.


CHARACTER

A man is truly religious when he is truly good.

A good character is a great boon.

Kind words are the bonds of love.

A kind word is like an act of charity.

If you cannot help men with money, help them with a cheerful face and a
kindly bearing.

No man is entitled to consideration unless he has these three things,
or at least one of them: the fear of God to restrain him from evil,
forbearance with wicked men, and a good nature towards all.

There are cases where not kindness but severity is necessary.

Kindness increases the love of friends, and diminishes the hatred of
enemies.

Be firm after you have been kind.

God loves the man who is tender-hearted.

An evil nature is a calamity from which there is no escape.

If you hear that a mountain has moved from its place believe it, but if
you hear that a man has changed his character do not believe it, for he
will act only according to his nature.

An inherited quality may be traced back to the seventh grandfather.

There are four points in a good character from which all other good
traits take their origin--prudence, courage, continence, and justice.

When a woman has had more than one husband in this life, she will, in
the future state, be free to be the wife of him whose character she
esteemed the most.


BENEVOLENCE

_Koran_.  Do good unto others as God has done unto you.

Is the reward of kindness anything but kindness?

He who does a kindly act shall be recompensed tenfold.

Ye can never be righteous unless ye give away from that which ye love.

_Traditions_.  The upper hand [which giveth] is better than the lower
hand [which taketh].

God's creatures are the objects of His care, and He loveth best that
man who is most helpful to them.

_Proverbs_.  Do not be ashamed to give little, for it is less than
that, if you give nothing.

If you give, give freely, and if you strike, strike boldly.

He who soweth kindness shall reap thanks.

What a man does for God is never lost.

Be merciful to him who is beneath you, and you will have mercy from Him
who is above you.

The best kind of good is that which is done most speedily.

Inopportune kindness is injustice.

No true joy but in doing good and no true sorrow but in doing evil.

Cruelty to animals is forbidden by God.

A peacemaker gets two-thirds of the blows.


GENEROSITY

Generosity is to do a kindness before it is asked, and to pity and give
a man who asks.

A generous man is nigh unto God, nigh unto men, nigh unto paradise, far
from hell.

Overlook the faults of a generous man, for God helps him when he falls
and gives him when he is needy.

A man who doeth good does not fall, and if he fall he will find a
support.

Be not ashamed to give little--to refuse is less.


GRATITUDE

He is unthankful to God who is unthankful to man.

He who is unthankful for little is unthankful for much.

God continues His favours to him who is grateful.

He who is ungrateful for the good he receives deserves that it should
be withdrawn from him.

Man can be thankful to God only so far as he does good to his fellow
men.

If a man professes to thank God and his wealth decreases, his
thanksgiving must be vitiated by his neglect of the hungry and naked.

Be grateful to him who has done you good, and do good to him who is
grateful to you.

Gratitude takes three forms--a feeling in the heart, an expression in
words, and a giving in return.

The most worthless things on earth are these four--rain on a barren
soil, a lamp in sunshine, a beautiful woman given in marriage to a
blind man, and a good deed to one who is ungrateful.


RECOMPENSE

To recompense good for good is a duty.

Neglect of recompense is contemptible.

If a man do you a favour recompense him, and if you are unable to do
so, pray for him.

The worst kind of recompense is to requite evil for good.

Reproach faults by kindness, and requite evil by good.

There is no glory in revenge.

Meet insult by insult, and honour by honour.  Evil can be repelled only
by evil.

What you put into the pot you will take out in the ladle.

He who plays with a cat must bear its scratches.

He who lives in a house of glass should not throw stones at people.

Sins may lurk, but God deals heavy blows.


FLAUNTING KINDNESS

To carry a heavy rock to the summit of a mountain is easier than to
receive a kindness which is flaunted.

The bane of a generous action is to mention it.

It is better to refuse a kindness than to be reminded of it.

I would not accept the whole world if I were to suffer the humiliation
of being constantly reminded of the gift.

To bestow and flaunt a kindness, and to be stingy and refuse to do an
act of kindness, are equally bad.

When you do a kindness hide it, and when a kindness is done to you
proclaim it.

Do good, and throw it into the sea.


KNOWLEDGE

_Koran_.  O God, increase my knowledge.  Are they who know and they who
know not equal?

He who has been given wisdom has been given a great good.

What ye have been given of knowledge is only a small part.

Above a learned man there is one more learned.

_Traditions_.  Learned men are trustees to whom God has confided
mankind.

Stars are the beauty of the heavens, and learned men are the ornament
of a people.

Angels bend down their wings to a seeker of knowledge.

_Proverbs_.  The rank of the learned is the highest of all ranks.

If learning does not give wealth it will give esteem.

Knowledge increaseth the honour of a nobleman, and bringeth men of low
degree into the houses of kings.

A seat of learning is a garden of heaven.

Forgetfulness is the bane of knowledge.

It is difficult for a man to know himself.

Knowledge is a lamp from which men light their candles.

A mind without education is like a brave man without arms.

Kings govern men, and learned men govern kings.

That day in which I have learned nothing, and in which I have added
nothing to my knowledge, is no part of my life.

He who seeks learning without study will attain his end when the raven
becomes grey with age.

To every noble horse a stumble, and to every learned man an error.

Knowledge does not save from error, nor wealth from trouble.

The owner of the house knows best what is in it.


SPECULATIVE STUDIES

All speculative research ends in perplexing uncertainty.

I sought in the great sea of theoretical learning a bottom on which to
stand--and found nothing but one wave dashing me against another.

After a lifetime of research and learning, I amassed nothing but such
phrases as: "It is said," or "They say."

O erring reason, I am sick of thee!  I take a single step and thou
movest a whole mile away from me.

The object sought in abstruse study is either a truth which cannot be
known, or a vain thing which it is useless to know.


THOUGHTS, DOUBTS

Most thoughts are wishes.

The thoughts of the wise are more trustworthy than the convictions of
fools.

Do not confuse opinions with certainties.

If you are doubtful of a thing let it alone.

Remove doubts by enquiry.

A thing that is heard is not like a thing that is seen.

Do not believe all that you hear.

It is not wise to be sure of a thing only because you think so.

Where there is much difference of opinion it is difficult to know the
truth.

To think well of others is a religious duty.

He who thinks well of others is a happy man.

He who has an evil thing in him thinks all men are like him.

If a man think well of you, make his thought true.

A poet says: "It was my habit to think well of others until experience
taught me otherwise."

Be well with God and fear nothing.

Most men think well of themselves, and this is self-delusion.


WISDOM, PRUDENCE, EXPERIENCE

Reason is a light in the heart which distinguishes between truth and
error.

A wise man sees with his heart what a fool does not see with his eyes.

Men should be judged according to their lights (reason).

A wise man is not he who considers how he may get out of an evil, but
he who sees that he does not fall into it.

Actions are judged by their endings.  If you desire a thing, consider
its end.

A man cannot be wise without experience.

No wise man will be bitten twice from the same den.

No boon is so remunerative as reason.

Long experience is an addition to mind.

Consideration may take the place of experience.

A wise man is he who has been taught by experience.

One word is sufficient to the wise man.

A cheap offer makes a wise purchaser wary.

He who considers consequences will attain his object, and he who does
not carefully think on them, evil will be sure to overtake him.

Everything has need of reason, and reason has need of experience.

Mind and experience are like water and earth co-operating--neither of
which alone can bring forth a flower.

Reason and anxious thought are inseparable.

A wise man is never happy.  (For in much wisdom is much grief, and he
that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow.--ECCLES. i. 18.)


IGNORANCE, FOLLY

Ignorance is the greatest poverty.

Ignorance is death in life.

There is no evil so great as ignorance.

Folly is an incurable disease.

A foolish man is like an old garment, which if you patch it in one
place becomes rent in many other places.

It is just as allowable to blame a blind man for want of sight as to
blame a fool for his folly.

To bear the folly of a fool is indeed a great hardship.

The best way to treat a fool is to shun him.

The fool is an enemy to himself--how can he then be a friend to others?

An ignorant man is highly favoured, for he casts away the burden of
life, and does not vex his soul with thoughts of time and eternity.

The most effectual preacher to a man is himself.  A man never turns
away from his passions unless the rebuke comes from himself to himself.


CONSULTATION

If you consult a wise man, his wisdom becomes yours.

Confide your secret to one only, and hear the counsel of a thousand.
(In the multitude of counsellors there is safety.  PROV. xi. 14.)

A counsellor is a trusted man.

When men consult together, they are led by the wisest among them.

The knowledge of two is better than the knowledge of one.  Two heads
are better than one.

Let your counsellor be one who fears God.

Consult a man of experience, for he gives you what has cost him much,
and for which you give nothing.

A man who is older than yourself by a day is more experienced than you
by a year.

Consult an older man and a younger, then decide for yourself.

The wisest may need the advice of others.

He who is wise, and consults others, is a whole man; he who has a wise
opinion of his own, and seeks no counsel from others, is half a man;
and he who has no opinion of his own, and seeks no advice, is no man at
all.

No man can be sorry for seeking advice, or happy if he blindly follows
out his own thoughts.


SPEAKING, WRITING, BOOKS

If it were not for the faculty of speech, man would be nothing more
than a silent picture or a contemptible animal.

The tongue is the best part of man.

Man is hidden behind his tongue.

A man's talk shows what kind of mind he has.

What you write is the truest thing that can be said of you.

The words of eloquent men are like a mighty army, and their writings
like glittering swords.

Note down in writing what you learn.  All knowledge which is not
committed to writing is lost.

The best handwriting is that which is most easily read.

A bad pen is like an unruly, undutiful child.

If you value a book you will read it through.

If you write a book, be ready to encounter criticism.

A book is like a garden carried in the pocket.

A book is an eloquent, silent companion, or a speaking friend answering
and questioning you.

Books are the food of minds.

There is something wise in every proverb.

The tongues of men are the pens of truth.

Poets, love-stricken, ramble up and down in every valley.

Poetry is one of the musical instruments of Satan.


SILENCE, GUARDED SPEECH

Wise men are silent.

Silence is often more eloquent than words.

Be not hasty with your tongue.  If words are silver, silence is gold.

Not all that is known should be said.

Silence is a wise thing, but they who observe it are few.

When the mind becomes large speech becomes little.

Restrain your tongue from saying anything but what is good.

An unguarded word may do you great harm.

A man who talks much is open to much blame.

The most faulty of men are they that are most loquacious in matters
which do not concern them.

To guard his tongue is one of the best traits in a man's character.

Man is saved from much evil if he guard his tongue.

The tongue is a lion which must be chained, and a sharp sword which
must be sheathed.

Nothing on earth is so deserving of a long imprisonment as the tongue.

Beware of saying anything of which you may be ashamed.

It is better to regret a thing which you did not say than a thing which
you did say.

A slip of the foot is safer than a slip of the tongue.  A false step
may break a bone which can be set, but a slip of the tongue cannot be
undone.

A thrust of the tongue is sharper than the thrust of a lance.

A word may cause much trouble, destroy a home, or open a grave.

A great tree grows out of a small seed.

The difference between loquacity and silence is like the difference
between the noisy frog and the silent whale.

Wisdom is made up of ten parts--nine of which are silence, and the
tenth is brevity of language.

A man conceals his ignorance by his silence.

He who says what he should not say, will have to hear what he would not
like to hear.

He who talks much does little.

What is said at night the day blots out.


TRUTHFULNESS

_Koran_.  O ye that believe, fear God and be truthful!  Verily God
recompenseth the truthfulness of the truthful.

_Traditions_.  Be ever truthful, for truthfulness leads to
righteousness, and righteousness leads to heaven.

Veracity brings peace to the heart.

No man's religion can be right until his heart become right, nor can
his heart become right until his tongue is right.

Keep to the truth though it may harm thee, and keep away from falsehood
though it may profit thee.

A man can be perfect only when he speaks the truth and acts according
to the truth.

_Proverbs_.  Truth is the sword of God, which always cleaves when it
smites.

Truth is armed with horns.

By truth man is saved from evil.

If falsehood saves from trouble truth saves much more.

When thou speakest be truthful, and when thou actest be gentle.

An ignorant man who is true is better than a clever man who is false.

There are two kinds of truthfulness, and the greatest of them is that
which may do thee harm.

If truth and falsehood were pictured they would be represented by a
terrible lion and a cunning fox.

It is better to die a truthful man than to live the life of a liar.


TRUTHFULNESS TO PROMISES

_Koran_.  Be true to a covenant, for a covenant holds a man
responsible.  Be faithful to your pledged covenants and keep your oaths.

_Traditions_.  A man who keeps not his word has no religion.

A true man's word is like an oath.

Be truthful in what you say, faithful to your promise, and careful of
what is entrusted to you.

A pledged word is as if you had made the gift.

_Proverbs_.  A true man keeps his promise.

A pledged word has the same value as a debt.

The promise of a true man is a greater obligation than a debt.

That man is a hypocrite who prays and fasts, but is untruthful in what
he says, false to his word, and unfaithful in discharging a trust.

TRUTHFULNESS TO SECRETS

To keep a secret is a divine law.

A secret is a trust, and to betray it is perfidy.

The least of all noble traits is to keep a secret, and the greatest is
to forget it.

He controls himself most who hides a secret from his friends.

When a secret is known to more than two, it becomes public.

He who seeks a place to hide his secret reveals it.

Walls have ears.

It is unwise to confide a secret to two tongues and four ears.

Your secret is your captive, betray it and you become its captive.

A man should be a tomb in which a secret is deposited.

If you keep your secret you are safe, and it will be to your sorrow if
you reveal it.

Hearts are the depositaries of secrets, lips their locks, and tongues
their keys.

The hearts of the wise are the fortresses of secrets.


DECEIT

Deceit does more harm to the deceitful than to the deceived.

If a man commit these three things they will rise against him in
judgment and punishment--aggression, perfidy, and deceit.

To be true to the perfidious is perfidy, and to deceive the deceitful
is lawful.

In deceiving your neighbour be more wary than when he is trying to
deceive you.

When one would deceive you, and you feign to be deceived, you have
deceived him.

He who would deceive one who cannot be deceived is only deceiving
himself.

He who allows himself to be deceived by what his enemy says is the
greatest enemy to himself.

A wise man neither deceives nor is deceived.

If a man believe in a stone it will do him good.

Self-deception is one of the forms of folly.

Most men think well of themselves, and this is self-delusion.

Vain desires are rarely realised, but they may give comfort in sorrow
or pleasure in empty hope.


EXERTION, PERSEVERANCE, SUCCESS

A man obtains only what he strives for.

He who seeks and struggles shall find.

Struggles bring the most unlikely things within reach.

When a man makes up his mind to do a thing it becomes easy for him to
do it.

If you have a clear thought, be decided, and hesitate not--if you
decide, hesitate not, but carry it out speedily.

You must be ready to confront difficulties if you would realise your
hopes.

It is the part of man to strive, and not to rely on the favours of
Fortune.

Not every one who seeks shall find, nor every one who is indifferent be
denied.

Beware of giving up hope in what you earnestly seek.

A wise man perseveres, and is not easily turned away.

Not by fitful efforts, but by constancy, is an end secured.

The most profitable labour is that which is most persevering--though it
may not be strenuous.

A moderate success is better than overwhelming work.

Success comes to him who abjures procrastination.

The world is the booty of the skilful.

The most wonderful thing in the world is the success of a fool and the
failure of a wise man.

A pleasing manner is a great aid to success.

It is the duty of man to do his utmost, but he is not responsible for
success.

Do not undertake a work for which you are not competent.

What can a tirewoman do with an ugly face?


OPPORTUNITIES

Opportunities move like clouds, or pass rapidly like meteors.

Seize a thief before he seizes you.

Take advantage of the light of day before the night sets in.

Seize on opportunities, for they are either a spoil if improved, or a
grief if neglected.

Good judgment means a seizure of opportunities.

Keep quiet until the occasion presents itself.

An action may be good if done at a fitting season, or evil if done at
an improper time.

Procrastination means evil.

Put your bread into the oven while it is hot.

If you undertake a work do it speedily.

Profit by occasions when they turn up, and do not worry about an evil
which has not yet come.

Time is a sharp sword--strike with it before you are struck by it.

If you have not sown, and see a reaper in the field, you will regret a
lost opportunity.


ECONOMY

Economy saves half the cost of living.

The value of economy is equal to half of your profits.

Frugality saves a man from poverty.

Little with economy is better than much with waste.

Poverty with freedom from debt is great wealth.

If you count beforehand you will thrive.

The sea is made up of drops and the mountain of grains.

My son, take a middle course between stinginess and extravagance,
parsimony and prodigality.

Extravagance dissipates great riches, and economy increases them when
they are small.

Extravagance ever leads to misery and ruin.

Extravagance does as much harm to life as it adds to the pleasures of
living.

In all things take a middle course.

Charity lies between two charities--one to yourself, the other to your
needy fellow man.

If you are too soft you will be squeezed, and if you are too dry you
will be broken.

He who spends and reckons not, ends in ruin and knows not.

He who buys cheap meat will regret his purchase when it is served up.


VICISSITUDES OF FORTUNE

Man is like an ear of wheat shaken by the wind--sometimes up and
sometimes down.

Man is a target to the accidents of time.

One day for us, and one day against us.

With to-day there is to-morrow.

To every Moses there is a Pharaoh.

There is no day which has not its opposite.

The changes of fortune show what a man is made of.

There is no joy which is not followed by sorrow.

When Fortune brings a great good, she follows it by a great evil.

Fortune gives lavishly, and then turns round and takes away.

When a man has attained his highest hope, let him expect that its
downfall is near by.

When a thing waxes to perfection it begins rapidly to wane.

When distress reaches its utmost, relief is close at hand.

What is past is dead.

Every ascent has a descent, and every trouble has an end.

Do not worry--between one twinkle of the eye and that which follows it
things may change.

I have looked far and wide, and saw nothing on the faces of men but
looks of perplexity or regret.

To complain of one's grief, except to God, is an humiliation.

He who thinks that Fortune will always favour him is a fool.

Follow the tracks of the fortunate man and you will come to fortune.


PATIENCE

God is with them that are patient.  God loveth them that are patient
(_Koran_).

Patience is one-half of religious duty.

There are two kinds of patience--one is for something which you desire,
the other in something which you hate; and he is a strong man who can
combine them both.

Patience is mostly needed at the first shock.

Grief is dispelled by patience.

The device of a man who hath no device is patience.

So long as there is a claimant, no just case is ever lost.

Patience is a bitter cup, which the strong alone can drink.

A misfortune is one, but it becomes two to the impatient.

Patience is one of the gifts of heaven.

He who is impatient to hear one word will have to listen to many words.

Difficulties can be overcome only by patience.

It is a good omen when your messenger is delayed.

Rarely does a patient man fail in obtaining that which he seeks.

Be patient--every cloud dissipates, and every evil which does not
continue is a small thing.

He who receives the strokes is not like him who counts them.


CONTENTMENT

Contentment is to refrain from coveting what others have.

Contentment is a treasure which is inexhaustible.

The most thankful of men is he who is contented.

He who seeks riches must seek them in contentment.

Give freely, and be content with little.

A contented man is happy in life.

Life is a vanishing space of time, and he alone vanquishes its changing
fortunes who lives in contentment.

Be content with what God has given you, and you will be the richest of
men.

If you cannot have what you want, be content with what you have.

If all cannot be obtained, a part may be attained.

There is relief in despair.


CHEERFULNESS

God loves a cheerful man.

A main part of friendship is cheerfulness.

Cheerfulness denotes a generous nature, as a flower denotes fruit.

The first duty of a host is cheerfulness.

He who is sparing in cheerfulness is more sparing in doing a kindness.

A cheerful countenance is a presage of good.

A bright face and bright eyes are a greater boon than a rich
inheritance.

The expression of the eyes shows what is in the heart.

An expression of the face may be more eloquent than that of the tongue.

The face of an enemy betrays his secret thoughts.

No one has ever harboured a secret which may not be discovered by a
slip of the tongue or an expression of the face.

Hope for good from one who has a beautiful face.

A gloomy look is an omen of ill, and a bright face is good news.

Life has no cloud to an ignorant man, to one who heeds not past or
future events, and to him who deceives himself and constrains his soul
to seek and hope for what is impossible.


WAR

War is an evil thing to both victor and vanquished.

It is better to avoid than to make war.

The most honourable death is on the battlefield.

To die in battle from a thousand cuts of the sword is easier than to
die in bed.

He who incites soldiers to courage in action is of more value than a
thousand fighting men.

An army to a king is like wings to a bird.

To carry out a well-devised plan in war is more effectual than strokes
and thrusts.

A battle is fought by feints and stratagems.

What an easy thing is a battle to one who looks on at a distance!

Patient constancy is the key to victory.

Two wolves kill a lion.  Two weak men vanquish one that is strong.

Beware of aggression in war--for it can lead to no glory in victory.

To overcome the weak has all the shame of a defeat.

A butcher is not frightened at the sight of a multitude of sheep.

To retire from an unsuccessful battle is defeat.

Magnanimity to captives, and mercy to the fallen, are a hymn of praise
to God for victory.


ANGER

The first part of anger is madness and the second is regret.

Passion and blindness are inseparable mates.

Beware of anger, for it ends in the humiliation of apology.

Anger leads to all kinds of evil.

When you are angry be silent.

It is not a trait of noble character to be hasty either in anger or in
revenge.

The anger of a fool reveals itself in what he says, and the anger of a
wise man in what he does.

Quarrelsomeness is a contemptible habit.

Call not yourself a man so long as you are angry.


HATRED, MALICE

Of all men God abhors most an implacable enemy.

Of all things nothing is so bad as the making of enemies.

Of all evils nothing is so hard to be borne as the triumph of an enemy.

Rejoice not over a fallen man--he may rise and you may fall.

Despise no enemy, however insignificant he may be--see how the shadow
of the earth causes an eclipse of the moon, or how a midge brings a
tear to the eye of a lion.

He who makes enemies shall have many a restless night.

He who has many enemies, let him expect a downfall.

When anger is repressed by reason of inability to do immediate harm, it
retires into the heart in the form of malice and breeds these
vices--envy, triumph over the enemy's ill, repulsion of friendly
approaches, contempt, slander, derision, personal violence, and
injustice.


MURDER

The first thing which shall be taken up in the Day of Judgment is
murder.

Man is a building made by God, and he who destroys the building of God
shall be demolished.

Put no man to undeserved death, for God forbids murder.

Announce violent death to the murderer, and poverty to the adulterer,
though after a season.


ENVY

The difference between envy and emulation is, that in the first the
desire is for the cessation of a good enjoyed by another, and in the
second the desire is for the possession of a similar good.

An envious man is angry with God for His favours to other men.

Every favoured man is envied.

A lordly man is always an object of admiration or of envy.

Beware of envy, for it shows itself in you, not in him whom you envy.

Envy is a disease for which there is no cure.

Envy is a disease which does more harm to the envious than to the
envied.

All enmity may be overcome except that which comes from envy.

There can be no peace in the heart of an envious man.

A man cannot be happy if he be malicious, envious, or ill-tempered.

Keep your affairs to yourself, for every favoured man is an object of
envy.

Envy may be cured only by a sure knowledge that it is a cause of much
pain to you and no evil to him whom you envy--so you must shun it if
you would not be an enemy to yourself and a friend to your enemy.

Envy consumes man, as rust corrodes iron.

He who strains his neck to look at one above him gets nothing but pain.

Envy no man except him who is good.


RASHNESS

Beware of rashness, for it has well been called the Mother of Regrets.

He who acts hastily either makes a blunder, or comes very near it.

He who is deliberate is either right, or very nearly so.

A hasty act comes from the Evil One, and a deliberate act from God.

Haste is the resort of the weak.


LAZINESS

Hopes are never realised by sloth.

A lazy man can never succeed in life.

It is one of the signs of weakness to leave things to fate.

A lazy man loses what is due to him.

Weakness and sloth lead to ruin.

A man gets tired of having nothing to do, as he gets tired of work.

If work is hard, want of work is a great evil.

Youth, riches, and leisure are the great corrupters of life.

The head of an idle man is the workshop of Satan.


AVARICE, STINGINESS, GREED

Avarice and faith in God can never live together in the heart of man.

Avarice and ill-nature have no place in the heart of a good man.

Avarice is the parent of all evil dispositions.

The riches of an avaricious man go either to naught or to an heir.

He who is close-fisted shall be treated in a like manner.

A man who is miserly to himself cannot be generous to others.

An avaricious man is more lavish of his life than of his money.

A liberal man lives on his riches, a miser is eaten up by them.

A miser lives the life of a poor man in this world, and will be judged
as a rich man in the world to come.

He who makes his morsel large will be choked.

Avarice is the murderer of the miser.

Greed is the mate of sorrow.

Strong wine is not more destructive to reason than greed.

An old man continues to be young in two things--love of money and love
of life.


COMPLAINT, BLAME

To God alone I make my plaint of sorrow and grief (_Koran_ 12, 86).

To bewail grief, except to God, is an humiliation.

Lamentation is the weapon of the weak.

A good man sees his own faults and is blind to the faults of others.

Censure your friend by kindness, and return the evil which he may have
done to you by acts of favour.

To blame a friend is better than to lose him.

No man is free from faults.

If you count your friend's faults you will have no friend left.

An absent man has his apology with him.

He who compels you to blame him has made up his mind to forsake you.

Open blame is better than secret malice.

Blame not, nor boast, until a year and a half shall have passed away.

He who has a needle under his arm it will prick him.

There is no wood which has no smoke in it.

Among all snakes there is not one that is good.

You are your own enemy.


MARRIAGE

The advantages of marriage are purity of life, children, pleasures of
home, and the happiness of exertion for the comfort of wife and
children.

This life is a joy, and its greatest delight is a good wife.

An honourable marriage is a stepping-stone to honour.

Take a wife not for her beauty, but for her virtues.

Chastity united to beauty makes a wife perfect.

Three things contribute to long life--a large house, an obedient wife,
and a swift horse.

The violence of love vanishes soon after marriage.  If the love of
bride and bridegroom were to endure, the Resurrection Day would be at
hand.

A man has no portion in the love of women when he becomes grey, or when
he loses his fortune.

The lover's eye is blind.

The disgrace of a woman is abiding.

Take the high-road, though it turn; and marry a woman of good birth,
though she may have been passed by.

Women are the snares of Satan.

Happy is the woman who dies before her husband.

It is better to have a thousand enemies out of the house than one in it.

The girl who has many suitors, and makes no choice of one of them, is
doomed to become an old maid.


CHILDREN

Children are a gift from God.

A child is a flower which has come down from Paradise.

Nothing is dearer than a child, except a grandchild.

When your son is young, train him; when he is grown, make a brother of
him.

That child is loved most who is young until he is grown up, or sick
until he recovers, or absent until he returns home.

Your riches and your children are a temptation to you (_Koran_).

Happy is the woman who has first daughters, then sons.

If you do not train up your child, time will do it.

The training of children is like chewing stones.

Your riches and children are your enemies--beware of them (_Koran_).

The joy of parents in their children prolongs life.

Sorrow for a child is a burning fire in the heart.

He who is not tender to his child shall find no tenderness in God to
him.

Your children are not too many for Death, nor is your money too much
for a rapacious governor.


FILIAL DUTY

When your father and mother become old, and you take them into your
house, say not a word of impatience to them, nor rebuke them, but speak
graciously, and be humble to them, and say: "O my God, be merciful to
them, even as they tended me when I was young" (_Koran_).

Be dutiful to your father, and your son shall be dutiful to you.

He who is ill-mannered to his father will be ill-treated by his son.

The good-will of parents procures the good-will of God.

The central gate of heaven is open to the man who has been dutiful to
his parents.

Paradise is open at the command of mothers.

You, and all that you have, belong to your father.

A daughter is always proud of her father.

An unmarried daughter has a broken wing.


BROTHERS, RELATIONS

A man who has no brother is like one who has a left arm and no right.
A brother is a wing.

When evil befalls you, you will know the value of a brother.

Your brother is he who shares your distress.

The same regard is due to the eldest brother from the youngest as that
which is due to a parent from his child.

God helps him who helps his brother.  Who forsakes his brother will be
forsaken by God.

A man is a mirror in which his brother's likeness is seen.

The best man among you is he who is best to his relations.

Blood does not become water.

Honour your tribe, for they are the wing with which you fly.

The measure of a man's greatness is that of his tribe (clan, party).

Be friendly to your relations, but do not depend on your relationship.

If it were not for my own arm, my mouth would have nothing to eat.


FRIENDS, COMPANIONS

A friend is a second self and a third eye.

A true man is he who remembers his friend when he is absent, when he is
in distress, and when he dies.

A friend is known only in adversity.

If your friend is sweet, do not eat him up.

If you would keep a friend, do not lend him money nor borrow from him.

Keep to your old friends--your new friends will not be so constant.

You may find in a friend a brother who was not born of your mother.

The noblest man is he whose friendship may be easily obtained, and
whose enmity can be incurred only with difficulty.

He is a weak man who can make no friends, and still weaker is he who
loses them.

When my vine was laden with grapes, my friends were many; when the
grapes were finished, my friends disappeared.

Friendship may come down by inheritance from ancestors, and so may
hatred.

Nothing makes us feel so lonely as solitude, and nothing makes us so
cheerful as freedom from evil companions.

Without human companions, Paradise itself would be an undesirable place
to live in.

A man's character is judged by the character of his companions.

Smoke is no less an evidence of fire than that a man's character is
that of the character of his associates.

He who associates with a suspected person will himself be suspected.


NEIGHBOURS

He is a good man who is a good neighbour.

No man enters heaven who is a bad neighbour.

A good neighbour is he who is not only harmless, but bears harm with
patience.

Be friends, but do not become neighbours.

In social life be as friends, in business as strangers.

Prefer a near neighbour to a distant brother.


SALUTATION, VISITING

Return a salutation by something better, or at least by something as
good (_Koran_).

A warm greeting renews friendship.

Respect is due to a visitor.

The best of men is a rich man who visits the poor, and the worst is a
poor man who visits the rich.

Go a mile to see a sick man, go two miles to make peace between two
men, and go three miles to call on a friend.

Make your visits short, especially to the sick.

To visit too often is tiresome to your friends, and to visit too rarely
is less than what is due to friendship.

Your calls will be best appreciated when they are seasonable and not
too frequent.

Too much familiarity is a cause of coolness among friends.

Do not associate much with men; if you do, shut your eyes to their
faults, and bear consequent trouble.


LOVE OF COUNTRY AND HOME

Love of one's own country is a religious duty.

A true man yearns towards his native country, and longs for his home as
a lion longs for his lair.

It is a sign of sound judgment when the heart craves for country and
home.

He is better to suffer hardship in one's own country than to enjoy ease
in a foreign land.

God blesses the land which is loved by its people.

As a nurse who has brought you up, has a special claim on you, so has
your country.

He is an unwise man who alienates himself from his country and home.

If it were not for love of country, unhappy lands would be desolate.

It is an honour to you to love the land and house where you were born.

An old man is most comfortable in his own house.


TRAVELLING

In travelling you will find health and profit.

If water stagnates long it becomes foul.

A roaming dog is better than a couching lion.

During a journey a man's character is weighed and revealed.

The day on which a journey is begun is half the journey done.


HEALTH

Health is a crown on the head of the hale, invisible except to the sick.

Sound health is beyond all price.

The greatest gift to man is a long healthy life.

If there be anything more valuable than life, it is sound health.

It is wonderful that the envious see not the blessing of good health.

No man appreciates the worth of health until he is afflicted with
disease.

If your dinner is light, your dreams will be pleasant.

So long as the head is free from trouble, the body will be sound.


YOUTH AND OLD AGE

An old man among his people is like a prophet sent from God.

To venerate old age is to revere God.

Youth is a kind of madness.

The wisest young men are they who follow the good example of the old,
and the most foolish old men are they who follow the bad example of the
young.

It is the duty of every one to be tender to the young and respectful to
the old.

An old man should not give up his old habits, nor take to new ones.

An old man speaks of what he has seen, and a young man speaks of what
he has heard.

Grey hairs are a sign of wisdom, and are beautified by reverence.

A hoary head is a rich cream churned by long years.

Grey hairs are a message from the other world.

After old age there is nothing but infirmity or death.

An old man cries out, "O that youth would return for a day, that I
might relate to it what the roll of years has done to me!"

The hair often becomes white, not from the succession of years, but
from a succession of evils.

Life is a parting shadow and youth a departing guest.

When a young man says he is hungry, believe him; but when he says he is
tired, do not believe him.


DEATH

All life ends in death.

When I see all paths leading men unto death, and no paths leading from
death unto us--no traveller there ever returning--not one of ages past
ever remaining--I see that I also shall assuredly go where they have
gone.

If death be surely inevitable, be not a fool and die a coward's death.

Death is a cup which every man must drink, and the grave a door which
every man must enter.

If we are hastening to death, why all this impatience with the ills of
life?

This life is a sleep, the life to come is a wakening; the intermediate
step between them is death, and our life here is a disturbed dream.

He who dreads the causes of death, they will surely seize him--do what
he will to evade them.

Death, so far as one can see, strikes at random, killing the man whom
he hits, and leaving the man whom he misses to old age and decrepitude.

Death covers all faults.




APPENDIX


WHAT IS RIGHTEOUSNESS?

"Righteousness is not that ye turn your faces [in prayer] to the east
or west; but righteousness is to him who believeth in God and the Last
Day, and Angels, and Revealed Books, and Prophets; who giveth
cheerfully from his substance to kinsmen, orphans, the needy, the
wayfarer, and to them that ask; who freeth the prisoner and the slave;
who offereth prayers at their appointed times, and giveth the ordained
alms; to them who fulfil the covenants to which they have bound
themselves, and who are patient in times of distress, and pain, and
struggle: these are they who are sincere [in religion], and who fear to
do evil (_Koran_ 2, 172)."

This fine passage from the Koran is considered by Moslem commentators
as the most comprehensive statement of the duties of man: "Sound faith,
a good social life, and right culture of the soul" (El-Beidaway).

_Instructions of Ali Ibn-abi Talib, the first Khalif to his son_--"My
son, fear God both secretly and openly; speak the truth, whether you be
calm or angry; be economical, whether you be poor or rich; be just to
friend and foe; be resigned alike in times of adversity and prosperity.
My son, he who sees his own faults has no time to see the faults of
others; he who is satisfied with the allotments of Providence does not
regret the past; he who unsheaths the sword of aggression will be
killed by it; he who digs a pit for his brother will fall into it; he
who forgets his own sin makes much of the sin of another; he who takes
to evil ways will be despised; he who commits excesses will be known to
do them; he who associates with the base will be subject to constant
suspicion; he who remembers death will be content with little in this
world; he who boasts of his sins before men, God will bring him to
shame."


THE EXPERIENCES OF AN OLD MAN

"I have heard many sermons and had many counsels, but I have heard no
preacher so effective as my grey hairs, and no counsellor so effectual
as the voice of my own conscience.  I have eaten the most choice food,
and drunk the best kinds of wine, and enjoyed the love of the most
beautiful women; but I found no pleasure so great as that of sound
health.  I have swallowed the bitterest food and drink, but I found
nothing so bitter as poverty.  I have worked at iron and carried heavy
weights, but I found no burden so heavy as that of debt.  I have sought
wealth in all its forms, but found no riches so great as those of
contentment."


EIGHT MEN WHO DESERVE TO BE SLAPPED ON THE FACE

He who despises a man of power; he who enters a house uninvited and
unwelcomed; he who gives orders in a house not his own; he who takes a
seat above his position; he who speaks to one who does not listen to
him; he who intrudes on the conversation of others; he who seeks
favours from the ungenerous; and he who expects love from his enemies.


FORBEARANCE

The following story is related by Arabian authors of Ma'an Ibn-Zaidah,
who, from a humble origin, rose to be Governor of Irak.  The story is
probably not altogether historical, but it shows the high ideal of Arab
moralists as regards forbearance and gentleness.

An Arab of the desert, who had heard much of the great gentleness of
Ibn-Zaidah, came one day to try him.  Entering abruptly into his
presence he addressed him thus (in verse):

"Rememberest thou when thy bed-covering was a sheepskin and thy sandals
made of camel-skin?"

_Ma'an_ answers (in prose): Yes, I remember, and I have not forgotten
it.

_The Arab_.  Praise be to God, who hath given thee a great rule, and
taught thee how to sit on a throne!

_Ma'an_.  Yes, praise to Him in every condition of life!

_Arab_.  Never shall I greet Ma'an as an emir should be greeted!

_Ma'an_.  Greeting is an ordinance among Arabs in which you are free to
take what form you like.

_Arab_.  An Emir who eats sweet pastry in secret, and entertains his
guest with barley bread!

_Ma'an_.  The food is our own: we eat what we like and give others what
we like.

_Arab_.  I shall leave a land in which thou dwellest, and depart,
though the hand of Fortune is hard upon me.

_Ma'an_.  Brother Arab, if thou stay, thou art welcome; and if thou
depart, peace go with thee.

_Arab_.  Son of shame, give me something for my journey, for I have
decided to go.

_Ma'an_ (_to his treasurer_): Give him a thousand pieces of money.

_Arab_.  Noble prince, I have heard much of thy great forbearance, and
came only to try thee.  Thy gentleness is indeed very great, and has no
like among men.  I pray God that thy life may be long, and thy
forbearance be ever a noble example to which men may look up!


TRUTHFULNESS TO TRUST

The following historical incident is related by Arab authors as the
highest example of faithfulness to trust.  Al-Samau'al (Samuel) was the
emir of a Jewish tribe in Southern Arabia, shortly before the time of
Mohammed.  A friend of his, before setting out on a journey, left with
him some very fine mailed armour.  This friend was killed in a battle,
and one of the kings of Syria demanded the arms.  Al-Samau'al refused
to give them up except to the rightful heir, and the king laid siege to
him in one of his fortresses.  One day his son fell into the hands of
the enemy, and the king threatened to kill him if the arms were not
given up.  Again he refused, and from the turrets of the castle saw his
son put to death.  The siege was soon after raised, and the arms were
delivered to the heirs of his friend.


TRUTHFULNESS TO PLEDGE

The terms of surrender at the capture of Jerusalem by Saladin, in 1187,
were that the Crusaders should retire with their goods from that city
to one of the garrisoned ports which were held by the Franks, on the
payment of ten pieces of gold for each man.  As they were filing out of
the city, and handing in their ransom-money, Saladin and his generals
looked on, watching the proceedings.  The patriarch's turn came, and he
was followed by a number of mules laden with much treasure.  Saladin
made no sign, but his generals said: "Sire, the conditions of surrender
were for private property, not for such treasures of money, which we
urgently need for carrying on the war."  To this appeal he replied:
"No, I have pledged my word, and for the ten pieces of gold agreed upon
he shall be free."

But just as he was so strictly truthful to his word, he was equally
severe in exacting the same truthfulness from his foes.  Thus after the
great battle of Hittin, when the Crusading army was utterly crushed, a
large number of prisoners fell into his hands, including the King of
Jerusalem and Count Raymond de Chatillon, Governor of Kerak, to the
east of the Jordan.  The count was a bad, dishonourable man, and had
(not long before) shamelessly violated an armistice, and fallen on a
defenceless Moslem caravan which was passing through his province,
killing the men and seizing their property.  When Saladin heard of this
base breach of the laws of war he was furious, and vowed that if this
perfidious prince should ever fall into his power, he would kill him
with his own hand; and now the count was his prisoner.  The day of
battle, in the month of August, had been very hot, and the Crusaders,
with their heavy coats of mail, and without a drop of water to drink,
had suffered terribly from thirst.  The tents of Saladin were pitched
near the Lake of Tiberias, and when the king and the count were brought
in, the king asked for a drink of water--which Saladin at once ordered.
A large goblet of iced water was handed to him, and after quenching his
thirst he passed the cup to the count.  Saladin looked on, but said
nothing until the count had finished drinking, and he then said to him:
"I gave no orders for drink for you; if I had, your life would have
been safe by our laws of hospitality.  But you are a bad, faithless
man, who broke the terms of our truce, and you shall now suffer the
death which you deserve," and with one stroke of his scimitar he cut
off his head.  He then sent for the Knights of St. John, of whom there
were about a thousand prisoners, and said to them: "So far as you have
been brave warriors, and cost the Moslems many a man, I have nothing to
say; but you have not been fair and honourable in our wars, nor true to
your engagements, and I now offer you the option of Islam or death."
To a man they all chose death in preference to adopting a faith which
they hated; and so they were led to the shores of the lake and there
beheaded.

More than seven hundred years after these tragic events, William II.,
the present Emperor of Germany, who is a descendant of the Crusading
Princes, and a Knight of the Brandenburg branch of the order of St.
John, came to Damascus in 1898; and one of the first things he did
there was to visit the tomb of Saladin, and lay on it a wreath of
flowers.  It was a generous and beautiful and well-deserved tribute to
the memory of a truly great man, from whom the Christian nations of his
times learned much of their chivalry and truthfulness to their pledged
word.


A THANKFUL OLD MAN

Two old men, who had been friends in early youth, met after an interval
of many years.  A cordial greeting ensued, and then one of them asked
the other: "How old are you now?" He said: "Thank God, I am in good
health."  "Are you well-off in worldly goods?"  "Thank God, I am in
debt to no man."  "Have you any special trouble of mind?"  "Thank God,
I have no young children."  "Have you any enemies?"  "Thank God, I have
no near relations."


THE THREE SORTS OF HAPPY MEN

In two verses of poetry, Al-Mutanabbi, one of the greatest Arabian
poets and philosophers, reduces the number of happy men to three
classes.  They have been paraphrased and put into English verse by a
friend, as follows:

  To three life seems a summer sky:
  The first who has no mind to know
  The heights and depths of life below,
  Nor ever asks the reason why.

  The second he to whom life's sum
  Is self at ease; who never lets
  The past disturb with dark regrets,
  Nor hopes and fears from days to come.

  The third who, led by fancies crude,
  In scorn of truth, deceived at heart,
  Makes fruitless dreams his better part,
  And hollow hopes the highest good.


CYNICAL VIEWS OF LIFE

Abu'l-Ala was another great poet-philosopher.  He lost his sight from
small-pox early in life, was a cynic and pessimist, and may have often
been copied by Omar Khayyam.  He refers to his affliction and to the
fact that he lived and died an unmarried man (so as to have no
children) in a well-known verse:

  "Here am I--wronged by my father
  Who gave me birth--while I have done wrong to no one."


Some of his poetry has been put into English quatrains by Ameen F.
Rihany, in imitation of Omar Khayyam's _Rubaiyat_, and the following,
from the _Quatrains of Abu'l-Ala_, are a few striking examples:

  "What boots it, in my creed, that man should moan
  In Sorrow's Night, or sing in Pleasure's Dawn?
  In vain the doves all coo on yonder branch,
  In vain one sings or sobs: lo! he is gone.

  So solemnly the Funeral passes by!
  The march of Triumph, under this same sky.
  Trails in its course--both vanish into Night:
  To me are one, the Sob, the Joyous Cry.

  Many a grave embraces friend and foe,
  And grins in scorn at this most sorry show;
  A multitude of corses passed therein--
  Alas!  Time almost reaps e'er he doth sow!

  How oft around the Well my Soul would grope
  Athirst; but lo! my Pail was without Rope:
  I cried for Water, and the deep, dark Well
  Echoed my wailing cry, but not my hope.

  The door of What-May-Be none can unlock,
  But we can knock and guess, and guess and knock:
  Night sets her glittering sail, and glides along,
  Ship-like; but where, O Night-ship, is thy dock?

  Oh, when will Fate come forth with his decree,
  That I might clasp the cool clay, and be free?
  My Soul and Body, wedded for a while,
  Are sick, and would that separation be.

  If miracles were wrought in bygone years,
  Why not to-day, why not to-day, O seers?
  This Leprous Age most needs a healing hand,
  Oh, why not heed his cries, and dry his tears?"


MISCELLANEOUS PROVERBS

He who treats you as he treats himself does you no injustice.

He who lives on expectations dies in poverty.

Three things are no disgrace to man--to serve his guest, to serve his
horse, and to serve in his own house.

Extremes are a mistake--a middle course is the best.

When the cooks are many the food is spoiled.  When a ship has two
captains it will sink.

Tie the ass where his owner wants.

Be a slave to truth--the slave to truth is a freeman.

No bravery in war can withstand overwhelming numbers.

If God gives you, give you to others.

A horseman has ever an open grave before him.

Confide not in a friend until you have tried him, and fight no enemy
until you have sufficient power.

A prudent man is right though he perisheth, and a reckless man is wrong
though he cometh out safely.

Trust not in present prosperity, for it is a departing guest.

Reserve the white coin for the black day.

If it be in your power to do harm to your enemy--do it not, but forgive
him and win his thanks.

The eye cannot contend with pointed steel.

Be cautious even where you are most sure.

Poverty is a chain which restrains men from doing much evil.

If you would know what a man hath, look not to what he gains but to
what he spends.

Nothing can be concealed except that which is not.

The best friend is he who changeth not with the changes of time.

Every rule has exceptions.

The most unjust man to himself is he who humbles himself to one who
hates him, and he who praises one whom he does not know.

When you do a kindness, make a small thing of it, though it be a great;
and when you receive a kindness, make much of it, though it be small.

Idle hands are unclean.

This world is honey mixed with poison--a joy inseparable from sorrow.

If you are ignorant, inquire; if you stray, return; if you do wrong,
repent; and if you are angry, restrain yourself.




_Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury, England._












        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARABIAN WISDOM: SELECTIONS AND TRANSLATIONS FROM THE ARABIC ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

