








    _The_ CURLYTOPS
    _and_ THEIR PLAYMATES

    [Illustration]

    HOWARD R. GARIS




    [Illustration: LOOKING IN THROUGH THE WINDOW SHE SAW THE FACE OF
    A MAN. Page 160]


    THE CURLYTOPS
    AND
    THEIR PLAYMATES

    OR

    _Jolly Times Through the Holidays_

    BY

    HOWARD R. GARIS

    AUTHOR OF "THE CURLYTOPS SERIES," "UNCLE WIGGILY
    BEDTIME STORIES," "UNCLE WIGGILY
    ANIMAL STORIES," ETC.

    _Illustrations by
    JULIA GREENE_

    NEW YORK
    CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY


    COPYRIGHT, 1922,
    BY CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY

    THE CURLYTOPS AND THEIR PLAYMATES

    Printed in U. S. A.




CONTENTS


    CHAPTER                         PAGE

        I TROUBLE IN TROUBLE           1

       II THE POSTMAN'S WHISTLE       14

      III WHAT SHALL WE DO?           25

       IV UNCLE TOBY AGAIN            36

        V OFF TO THE COUNTRY          48

       VI A FLURRY OF SNOW            60

      VII IN THE STORM                70

     VIII A STALLED TRAIN             80

       IX NEW PLAYMATES               91

        X AMONG THE PETS             104

       XI WHERE DID TROUBLE GO?      115

      XII OFF TO CRYSTAL LAKE        128

     XIII THE LONELY CABIN           139

      XIV AT CRYSTAL LAKE            149

       XV ON THE SLIPPERY HILL       161

      XVI A REAL TOBOGGAN            174

     XVII THE SNOW HOUSE             184

    XVIII THANKSGIVING               197

      XIX SKYROCKET IS GONE          206

       XX TROUBLE IS MISSING         216

      XXI TROUBLE AND SKYROCKET      229

     XXII A HAPPY REUNION            238




THE CURLYTOPS AND THEIR PLAYMATES

CHAPTER I

TROUBLE IN TROUBLE


"When do you s'pose it'll come, Teddy?"

"Oh, pretty soon now, I guess. We're all ready for it when it does
come," and Ted Martin glanced from where he sat over toward a slanting
hill made of several long boards nailed to some tall packing boxes. The
boxes were piled high at one end, and on top was a little platform,
reached by some steps made of smaller boxes.

"It's a good while coming though, isn't it, Ted?" asked his sister
Janet, looking up toward the sky.

"Yes, I wish it would hurry," said the boy, giving his cap a twist,
thereby making more of a tangle than ever the curly, golden hair that
had given him and Janet the nicknames of "Curlytops."

The two children walked around the wooden structure which they had
built, with the help of Tom and Lola Taylor, their playmates, after much
hard work in hammering, pounding, and the straightening of crooked
nails. Now and then Ted and Janet turned their faces to the gray clouds
which floated above them.

"I wish it would hurry!" murmured Janet.

"So do I!" exclaimed Ted.

There was a sudden chorus of shouts and laughter coming from around the
corner of the house, and another boy and girl rushed up the path.

"What you looking for, Ted?" asked Tom. "An airship?" for Ted's eyes
were again turned toward the clouds.

"Or maybe birds," added Lola, with a laugh. "Are you watching to see
some of the birds fly south, because it's soon going to be winter? Are
you, Ted?"

"Nope!" as the answer. "I'm looking to see when it's going to snow.
Mother said a snowstorm was coming, and I'm watching for the first
flakes. What's the good of a toboggan slide when there isn't any snow?"

"That's right," chimed in Tom Taylor. "Now we have this toboggan slide
made, we want some snow or else we can't ride down on it."

That is what the wooden structure in the yard of the Curlytops was--a
toboggan slide. Tom and Ted, with the help of some other boys and the
aid of a few jolly girls, who brought up boards and boxes (though they
couldn't drive the nails straight) had, after much hard work, built up a
sort of toboggan slide.

Now all that was needed was snow so they could ride down it on their
sleds, for none of the children had toboggans--those queer, low, flat
sleds, all of wood, with the round curved piece in front.

A pile of big packing boxes fastened together made the high part of the
slide. To get to the top of this pile one had to climb on a number of
smaller boxes arranged in the form of steps--and crazy, tottering steps
they were, but the children didn't mind it. It was all the more fun when
they nearly fell down in climbing up.

From the top of the high pile of big boxes there sloped down a hill of
boards, nailed in some places and in others fastened together with ropes
to make an incline, or hill. This was about twenty feet long, and ended
in a little upturn so that a sled would shoot up with a jerk and come
down with a bang. More fun!

After several days of hard work the toboggan slide had been finished,
and now, as Ted remarked, all they needed was some snow to fall, to
cover the incline and make it slippery enough for the sleds to glide
down.

But where was the snow? The gray clouds floating high in the air seemed
to promise a fall of the white flakes, but though the Curlytops and
their playmates, the Taylor children, strained their eyes and made their
necks ache looking up, not a feathery crystal did they see.

"Maybe if we whistled it would do some good," said Janet, as all four
sat in rather gloomy silence.

"Whistle for what?" asked Ted, throwing a stick for Skyrocket, his dog,
to race after, a game that Skyrocket was very glad to play.

"Whistle for snow," went on Janet. "Didn't mother read us a story about
some sailors on a desert island whistling for snow?"

Ted and Tom both laughed, much to the surprise of Janet, who seemed a
little hurt at their chuckles.

"Well?" she asked. "What's the matter?"

"You don't whistle for _snow_!" shouted Ted. "You whistle for _wind_!
Ha! Ha!"

"She's got it twisted!" laughed Tom.

"I don't care!" exclaimed Janet, getting up and walking toward the
house. "What's the difference? Wind brings snow, and if you whistle for
wind, and it comes and brings snow, it's just the same as whistling for
snow."

"I think so, too," agreed Lola. "Smarty!" she exclaimed, thrusting her
tongue out at her brother and his chum.

"That's a good one--whistling for _snow_!" laughed Ted, clapping his
playmate on the back. "We'll tell the fellows!"

"If you do I'll never speak to you again!" cried Janet. "And if you want
to make any more of your old toboggan slides I won't help you. Will we,
Lola?"

"Nope, we won't at all! Let's go get our dolls!"

"You'll want to coast down this slide when the snow does come!" taunted
Ted. "And then we won't let you; will we, Tom?"

"Nope! And maybe it's going to snow pretty soon," added Tom, with
another squint at the sky. It was a very hopeful sort of look, but it
did not seem to bring down any of the swirling, white flakes.

The girls walked on toward the house. The boys were beginning to feel
rather disappointed. They had worked so hard to get the toboggan slide
finished, and now there was no snow so they could use it! Suddenly Tom
Taylor gave a cry, causing the girls to turn around and making Ted look
up from where he was playing with Skyrocket.

"What's the matter?" asked Lola.

"I've got an idea!" her brother answered.

"Tell us!" begged Ted.

"I know how we can have some toboggan rides without waiting for snow!"
exclaimed Tom.

"How? Make believe?" asked Janet. She was very fond of this game of
pretending.

"No, not make believe!" answered Tom. "Listen! Have you got any candles
in your house, Ted?"

"Candles? I guess we have some. I saw my mother rubbing one on a
flatiron the other day when she was ironing a dress for Jan. I don't
know why she rubbed the candle on the flatiron, but she did."

"She did it so the iron wouldn't stick to the starched dress," explained
Janet. "I should think anybody would know that! Wouldn't you, Lola?" she
asked in a rather "snippy" manner and with an upward turn of her little
nose.

"Of course!" agreed Lola. "Candles makes irons slippery."

"Well, if you've got some candles we can make our sled runners slippery
the same way, and we can toboggan even if there isn't any snow," went on
Tom. "I just happened to think I read a story once about some fellows
who put candle grease on their sleds and rode down a wooden hill like
this when there wasn't any snow. We can do like that! Get the candles,
Ted, and I'll go get my sled!"

"Oh, maybe we can have some fun!" cried Janet. "Come on, Lola, let's get
our sleds."

"You've got to grease your own runners," Ted warned the girls. "We
aren't going to do it for you."

"Oh, I guess we can do it," answered Lola. "Boys aren't so smart!"

Tom and Lola hastened back to their house to get their sleds, which they
had not brought over to the newly built toboggan slide, as there seemed
no use of doing this until snow came. Janet hastened after her sled, and
Ted went in the house to beg some candle ends of his mother.

"What are you going to do with them?" Mrs. Martin wanted to know. "You
mustn't play with lighted candles."

Teddy told about the new plan, and his mother said:

"Well, you must be careful. I believe the candles, rubbed on your sled
runners, will make them slippery enough to coast down the wooden hill.
But be careful. And don't make any noise, for I've just gotten William
to sleep."

"Don't let Trouble come out when we're on the toboggan," begged Ted. "He
might get hurt." Trouble was the pet name for William Anthony Martin,
the youngest member of the Martin family. And he was called "Trouble"
because he was in it so often--sometimes through his own fault, and
often because of Ted and Janet.

"Yes, I'll keep Trouble in," said Mrs. Martin, with a smile. "And here
are your candle ends," she added, giving Ted a handful. "Be careful."

Ted promised and ran out into the yard to meet his playmates. Tom had
also found some candle ends, and the boys and girls were soon busy
rubbing the paraffine on their sled runners. For the candles mostly sold
nowadays are made of paraffine, instead of beeswax or tallow, as
old-fashioned candles were made. Paraffine is made from crude oil, as is
kerosene and gasolene.

"Now we'll have some nifty fun!" cried Tom, as, having rubbed as much of
the candle on his sled runners as the steel would hold, he turned his
coaster over right side up.

"We'll have races!" cried Ted.

"But we have to take turns going down," said Janet. "The toboggan slide
isn't wide enough for two to go on at a time."

"We can have sorter--now--sorter races to see who can go the farthest,"
remarked Ted, stumbling over his words in his excitement.

"That'll be fun," agreed Lola. She and Janet were also greasing their
sled runners, all the little quarrels forgotten in the jolly good times
they were hoping to have.

"All ready now!" cried Tom, picking up his sled. "Who's going to have
the first coast?"

"I think Janet or Ted ought to have it, for they started the toboggan
and it's in their yard," said Lola.

"That's right!" agreed her brother.

"No, company ought to have the first ride!" decided Janet, who made up
her mind she would be as polite as her playmate.

"Jinks!" cried Tom, with a laugh. "Nobody'll ride if we keep on talking
like this! Come on, Ted!" he added. "Let's you and me go down together!"

"Oh, don't!" begged Janet. "'Tisn't wide enough, and you might get
hurt."

"Oh, we'll not!" insisted Tom. "And it'll be more fun that way. I guess
it's wide enough, Ted. Let's try, anyhow."

They found that there was just about room enough on the toboggan slide
for their sleds side by side. They climbed up the rickety stairs, made
of small boxes nailed one to the other, and soon the two boys stood on
the little platform at the top of the wooden slope. They had carried up
their sleds with them--the sleds with the candle-greased runners.

"Are you ready?" asked Ted of his playmate.

"All ready," answered Tom. "Let's start!"

They put down their sleds and stretched themselves out on the coasters.

"Wouldn't it be funny if they got stuck half way down?" giggled Lola,
who, with Janet, was waiting on the ground below off at one side to see
what luck the boys would have.

"Oh, we won't get stuck!" laughed Tom. "Come on now, Ted! Push!"

Together they pushed themselves from the level platform down the wooden
hill. The sleds hung on the brink for a moment and then went coasting
down as nicely as you please, and quite swiftly.

"Hurray!" cried Ted, as he felt himself gliding along, coasting almost
as well as if there had been snow on the wooden toboggan hill. "This is
nifty!"

"Great!" added Tom.

The boys were so surprised to find out how well they could coast without
snow that they forgot about having a race. As it was, they both came to
the end of the slope at the same time. The sleds shot up the little
incline and landed on the grass beyond with a bump. Teddy fell off his,
but only laughed.

"How is it?" asked Lola.

"Dandy!" cried her brother. "You girls take a ride now!"

Rather timidly at first, Janet and Lola went down the incline one at a
time, but they soon grew bolder and liked it as much as did the boys. It
really was lots of fun, and as the boards became more slippery when
partly covered with flakes of paraffine from the candles the coasting
was swifter.

"Now let's have a real race!" cried Ted, after they had been sliding for
some time. "I mean let's see who can go farthest from the end of the
slide."

They took turns at this, one at a time coasting down the wooden hill and
marking where the sleds landed on the grass. Tom and Ted seemed able to
make their sleds jump farther than did the girls.

"I beat!" cried Tom, pointing to the mark his sled had made on the
grass, after jumping up and away from the little end bump of the slide.

"You did not! My sled went farther!" shouted Ted. "Here, girls, I'll
leave it to you!"

The four were trying to decide who had won the race when Janet, glancing
back toward the toboggan slide, gave a cry of alarm.

"Look at Trouble!" she exclaimed.

There, on top of the pile of big boxes, having climbed to the platform
by means of the rickety steps, stood baby William.

"I s'ide down!" he cried, jumping up and down in delight. "I s'ide!"

"No! No! Don't! Stand still, Trouble! Don't move! I'll come and get
you!" shouted Ted.

He started on a run, but he was too late. A moment afterward Trouble was
in trouble, for the little fellow toddled toward the back edge of the
platform, which had no railing to guard it, and a second later he seemed
to topple off backward.




CHAPTER II

THE POSTMAN'S WHISTLE


"Oh, Trouble has fallen! Trouble has fallen!" screamed Jan, as she ran
around toward the back of the toboggan.

"Come on, Tom!" yelled Ted. "I guess my little brother's hurt!"

Lola followed the others, and as the four children raced to the aid of
baby William a shrill whistle was heard near the front of the house.

"Is that a policeman?" cried Tom to his chum.

"No, it's the postman," answered Ted. "He's taking a letter into our
house. Hey, Mr. Brennan!" he called, as he saw the gray-uniformed mail
carrier entering the yard. "My little brother's hurt!"

Screams coming from the mouth of William seemed to tell that he was
badly frightened, anyhow, and also hurt, very likely.

"Trouble hurt? I'm coming!" cried the postman dropping his bag of mail
and running around the side path.

Another moment and the Curlytops and their playmates had reached the
rear of the high pile of boxes from which the toboggan slide started.
They looked on the ground, expecting to see Trouble huddled there in a
crumpled heap.

But he wasn't there. His voice, however, could be heard crying lustily,
and it seemed to come from overhead. Yet the little boy was not on the
high platform, from which he had been seen to topple backward.

Where was Trouble?

This was the question the Curlytops asked themselves. And it was what
their playmates wanted to know, as did the postman.

But before we settle that question I want to answer several inquiries
that I feel sure some of my new readers are asking, and among these is
this:

"Who are the Curlytops?"

Those who have read the previous books of this series do not need to go
over this part I am writing now. They may skip it and get on with the
story. Others may wish to know something about Ted, Janet and Trouble.

"Curlytops" was not their right name. As you have noticed, it was
Martin. Theodore Baradale Martin was called Ted, or Teddy, and Janet's
name was more often shortened to Jan. William was called Trouble as I
have mentioned.

The name "Curlytops" was given the two older children because of their
curly, golden heads of hair. They lived with their father and mother,
Mr. and Mrs. Richard Martin in the city of Cresco, in one of our Eastern
states. Mr. Martin kept a store.

The Curlytops were introduced first in the book about Cherry Farm. After
that they had fun and adventures on Star Island, they were snowed in, as
the book of that name tells, and later they went to Uncle Frank's ranch
in the West. At Silver Lake they had fun on the water with Uncle Ben.

The book which was written just before this is called "The Curlytops and
their Pets," and tells how the children cared for some dogs, a cat, a
monkey, a parrot and an alligator that Uncle Toby left in their charge
when he thought he had to go to South America.

Instead of going there Uncle Toby went to Canada. And it was from some
of the stories he told of seeing toboggan slides there that the
Curlytops had made one in their yard. Then came trouble with Trouble.

"But where is your little brother?" asked the postman of Ted and Janet,
as he rushed around behind the high pile of boxes. "You say he fell off
the platform, but where is he?"

"I hear him crying!" exclaimed Lola.

"So do I," added her brother. The two Taylor children were among the
many playmates of the Curlytops.

"He didn't fall to the ground, that's sure, or else he'd be here now,"
declared the postman. "There isn't a sign of him. Maybe--"

But Mr. Brennan never finished what he started to say, for just then a
little voice, above the heads of the postman and the children, cried
out:

"Here I is!"

"Oh, look!" exclaimed Jan.

They all glanced up and saw the head of Trouble thrust out of one of the
big packing boxes which Ted and his friends had made into the highest
part of the toboggan slide.

The opening of this large packing box was toward the rear of the slide
and Trouble was in the box. How he got there could only be guessed, but
there he was, tears streaming down his little red face as he looked out.

"I--I wants to tum down!" he sobbed.

At times Trouble talked fairly well and plainly, but when he was
excited, as he was now, he said wrong words. Nobody minded that,
however.

"Don't jump, Trouble! Don't jump!" shouted the postman. "I'll get you
down all right. Is there a ladder anywhere around?" he asked the
children.

"There's a stepladder in the shed," answered Ted. "I'll get it."

"I'll help," offered Tom.

Away sped the boys, while Jan and Lola remained with Mr. Brennan looking
up at Trouble, who seemed like some little animal in a circus cage.

"How'd you get in there, William?" asked Jan. Whenever the name
"William" was used there was always more seriousness than when the
youngest Martin child had been called by his pet title.

"I--I falled in!" sobbed Trouble.

"We saw you tumble over backward," remarked Lola. "But how did you get
inside the box? Why didn't you fall all the way to the ground?"

"Suffin ketched me and I fell in here," was all Trouble could explain
about it.

"I guess part of his clothes caught on a nail, or a piece of wood that
was sticking out," said the postman, "and he was swung inside the box. A
good thing, too, for it saved him a bad fall. He didn't go far."

This was true enough, for Trouble had swung into an open packing box not
far from the top of the platform, so he had really only fallen a few
feet--not enough to harm such a fat, chubby little fellow as he was.

"Well, we'll soon have you down," said Mr. Brennan cheerfully. "Don't
cry any more, Trouble. Here come Ted and Tom with the ladder. I'll soon
get you down!"

As the boys were hastening up with the ladder toward the high part of
the toboggan slide, Mrs. Martin came running out of the back door of the
house.

"What's the matter? What has happened?" she asked.

"Nothing much, Mrs. Martin," answered the postman, with a laugh.
"Trouble is in trouble, and also in a packing box; that's all. I'll soon
have him out."

"In a packing box?" William's mother repeated.

"Yes, you can see him," and Mr. Brennan pointed to the head of William
thrust out from his "cage."

"Oh, the little tyke!" cried Mrs. Martin. "After he awakened from his
nap and went out to play, I told him to keep away from the toboggan
slide."

"Well, he went up on it when we weren't looking," explained Janet.

"And he fell off, only he didn't fall far and he swung into the box,"
added Ted.

"What a narrow escape!" exclaimed Mrs. Martin. "You children will either
have to take that slide down or watch William more carefully," she
added, as the postman put the ladder in place and began to climb up
after Trouble.

"Oh, we don't want to take the slide down!" cried Ted. "We haven't tried
it in the snow, yet. It'll be a lot more fun when it snows."

"We won't let Trouble get up on it again," added Janet.

By this time Mr. Brennan had climbed down with the little fellow in his
arms. William seemed to be over his fright, for he smiled and asked:

"Can I have a wide?"

"You'd better go in the house with mother," said Ted. "No rides for
you!"

"Oh, give him one ride! He's so cute!" begged Lola.

"We'll take care of him," went on Jan.

"Are you all right, darling? Are you hurt?" asked Mrs. Martin, looking
William over carefully. "It's a mercy you didn't have some bones
broken."

"I guess he would have had if he had fallen all the way," said Mr.
Brennan. "But his clothes caught on something and saved him. He just
swung into the open box like a piano being slung in a second story
window by the moving men. Well, as long as you're all right, Curlytops,
I'll be traveling on," he added, as he walked to where he had dropped
his bag of mail.

"We're ever so much obliged to you," said Mrs. Martin.

"Oh, yes! Thank you!" called Ted and Janet. They had almost forgotten
this in the excitement.

"All right!" laughed the postman, waving his hand to them, as he went
out of the gate.

"Now if I leave William with you, will you watch him carefully?" asked
Mrs. Martin, as she turned to go in the house.

"Oh, yes, Mother!" promised Ted and Janet in the same breath.

"We'll help!" offered Tom Taylor.

"I'll let him ride down on my sled," said Lola.

"I want to wide all alone!" declared Trouble.

"No, you can't do that!" his mother said.

The postman turned and came into the yard again.

"I forgot to give you this letter," he said, with a laugh. "So much
excitement made me nearly forget the mail. There you are, Mrs. Martin,"
and he handed her a letter.

The children played on the wooden toboggan slide the remainder of the
morning, having much fun, and the laughter and shouting of Trouble was
as loud as that of the Curlytops and their playmates. Trouble was not
exactly a curlytop, for his hair was not like the locks of Ted and
Janet.

"I hope it snows to-morrow," said Tom, as he and his sister went home to
dinner.

"So do I," added Ted. "It looks like it," he added, with a glance up at
the gray clouds.

"If we pack the slide with snow we'll coast lots better," declared Lola.

Ted and Janet, with Trouble, went in the house, having planned to do
more "dry" coasting after their meal.

Daddy Martin had come home to lunch from his store, and as the Curlytops
entered the dining room they saw their father and mother with serious
looks on their faces. Mr. Martin had just been reading a letter, the
same letter the postman had left after rescuing Trouble.

"Well," Mr. Martin was saying, "I think we'll both have to take that
trip, Mother, and see about this. Yes, we'll both have to go."

"Oh, are you going somewhere?" cried Ted.

"Take us!" begged Janet.

Mrs. Martin shook her head slowly. There was a worried look on her face.

"This isn't to be a pleasure trip," she said. "You children couldn't
possibly go. It's about business. Just daddy and I will go, if we have
to. But I don't want to go away with winter coming on."

"Why do you have to go?" Janet wanted to know.

"Because, unless we do, daddy may lose a lot of money," said Mrs. Martin
gravely. "We wouldn't want that to happen. If we go away we shall have
to leave you children behind, and I don't like to do that, however--"

Suddenly the bark of a dog sounded outside, and there came a ring at the
front door.

"Somebody's coming!" cried Ted, making a dash for the hall.




CHAPTER III

WHAT SHALL WE DO?


"Here, Teddy! Wait a minute!" called Mr. Martin, but Ted did not wait.
He was already at the front door. Trouble had started after his brother,
but Janet remained with her mother.

"I wonder who it can be, just at lunch time," said Mrs. Martin. She
glanced at the table to see if it were properly set, and began to think
rapidly whether there would be enough pie for dessert.

"Will you and daddy really have to go away, Mother?" asked Janet, as the
murmur of voices came from the front hall, whither Mr. Martin and
Trouble had followed Ted.

"I'm afraid so," was the answer. "Your father had a letter this morning
telling of some trouble about business, and unless he wishes to lose a
lot of money he and I will have to go and see about some property he
owns in a distant state."

"But I don't see why we couldn't go!" said Janet.

"Take you out of school, with the fall term just well started!"
exclaimed Mrs. Martin. "No, indeed! You must stay and study; that is,
all but William."

"But we don't want to stay here if you and daddy go away!" cried Janet,
almost on the verge of tears. "It won't be any fun here alone!"

"No, I suppose not," agreed Mrs. Martin. "And yet your father and I must
go. We can't afford to lose this money. I must make some plans. I hardly
know what to do. I wonder who came then?"

More talk and laughter sounded in the hall. Teddy came tramping back
into the dining room, carrying with him a little jacket belonging to his
brother William.

"Look, Mother!" cried Ted. "Skyrocket had dragged this over in Bob
Newton's yard. He was playing with Trouble's jacket--I mean our dog
was--and Bob saw him and took it away. Bob just brought it back. Look,
it's got a hole in it!" and Ted held up the little garment, torn by the
teeth of Skyrocket.

"Oh, what a bad dog!" cried Mrs. Martin.

"He didn't mean to!" said Ted quickly. "Bob said he was just shaking it
and playing with it."

"I--I--guess he was makin' believe it was a cat," explained Bob, another
of the playmates of the Curlytops. "I saw him come runnin' into my yard,
shakin' somethin', and first I thought it was a cat. But when I saw what
it was--Trouble's coat--I took it away from Skyrocket, and brought it
over here."

"We're much obliged to you, Bob," said Mrs. Martin. Mr. Martin, when he
found the visitor was not for him, began reading the troublesome letter
again.

"Where's Skyrocket?" asked Janet, not seeing the dog with which she and
Ted had so much fun.

"Oh, he ran off when I took the jacket away from him," answered Bob.

"I wonder how he got Trouble's jacket," mused Jan.

"I--I took it off when I climbed up on de boxes to slide," explained
William.

"That's right!" exclaimed Ted. "I saw it on the ground after Mr. Brennan
lifted him down with the stepladder. You brought him out his sweater,
Mother."

"Yes, so I did. I thought he had come out with nothing over his waist.
Well, I'll have to mend this jacket now. Trouble, why didn't you pick up
your jacket after you dropped it?"

"Oh--jest--'cause!" murmured the little fellow, and they all laughed
except Mr. Martin. He seemed too worried over the letter even to smile.

"Well, I must get back," said Bob, twisting his cap which he held in his
hands. "I--now--I've got to get back."

"Have you had your dinner, Bob?" asked Mrs. Martin.

"Part--part of it," Bob answered. "All but the fancy part."

"Oh, you mean the dessert?" asked the mother of the Curlytops.

"Yes'm, and there wasn't any to-day."

"Suppose you stay and have dessert with us," suggested Mrs. Martin, well
knowing how children like to eat away from home.

"Yes'm, I--I could do that," agreed Bob, his face brightening.

"Couldn't he have all dinner with us, and not just dessert?" suggested
Ted.

"Of course," his mother replied.

"Maybe Bob has eaten all he can," suggested Mr. Martin, folding the
letter and putting it in his pocket.

"Oh, no! I can eat a lot more!" quickly cried Bob. "You ought to see me
eat!"

"Well, we'll give you a chance," said Mr. Martin, and they all sat down
to the table.

The Curlytop children told Bob about the toboggan slide, which he had
not yet seen, as he lived several houses down the street and had had no
hand in building up the big pile of empty boxes.

"An' you ought to see me in the box!" cried Trouble, when he had a
chance to speak.

"Yes!" exclaimed Jan. "Oh, how he frightened us!"

While the children were thus talking Mr. and Mrs. Martin were conversing
in low tones. And once Ted heard his mother ask:

"What shall we do?"

"Something will have to be done," her husband answered. "We must find
some one to look after the children while we are away, for we shall
certainly have to go. I can't let this slip away from me."

"No, indeed!" agreed his wife, with a sigh. "And yet, with the
Christmas holidays coming on, it will be too bad to be away from the
children."

"Perhaps we may get back by Christmas," remarked her husband.

Ted did not listen to all this, but he heard words here and there, and
Christmas was one of them.

"How long to Christmas?" he asked.

"Quite a while," his mother replied. "It isn't Thanksgiving yet."

"How long before it will snow?" Janet wanted to know.

"That may happen any day now," replied her father, with a glance out of
the window. "It was getting colder as I came in. If you children go out
to play again you must wrap up warmly."

"We will!" promised Ted. "We're going to play toboggan again," he added.
"You can stay and play with us, Bob," he said.

"Thanks! That'll be fun. Oh, you have pie!" he added quickly, as he saw
Nora coming in with the dessert. "I like pie!" he frankly admitted.

"So do I," said Ted.

"An' I want two pieces!" declared Trouble.

"Hush, dear," cautioned his mother, in a low voice.

The meal over, the Curlytops prepared to go out in the yard again, to
have fun on their paraffine-greased sleds. Bob ran home after his,
promising to bring some candle ends, as those Mrs. Martin had found for
Ted had nearly all been used.

Such fun as the Curlytops and their playmates had in the yard after
dinner! Tom and Lola came back, with some other boys and girls, and they
coasted down the toboggan slide one after the other. Trouble was put to
bed for his afternoon nap, and so neither Ted nor Jan had to watch him,
which gave them more time for fun.

"Say, it's getting real cold!" exclaimed Bob, blowing on his red hands
after a coast down the wooden hill. "I guess maybe it will freeze
to-night."

"Do you think it will, Tom?" asked Ted of his best chum.

"Well, it's pretty cold," was the answer. "But I don't believe it will
freeze ice enough for skating."

"If it only freezes a little ice that would be enough," Ted declared.

"No, it wouldn't!" asserted Tom. "They won't let us skate on the pond
lessen the ice is real thick."

"I wasn't thinking of the pond," said Ted. "I have an idea! Come on over
here, Tom, and we'll talk about it. I'm sorter--now--tired of coasting
on a wooden hill. I'd like some snow."

"Maybe it'll snow and freeze, too," said Tom, as he and Ted walked off
by themselves to talk.

That evening, after an afternoon of fun on the toboggan, the Curlytops
sat in the living room reading on one side of the table, while Mr. and
Mrs. Martin were talking in low voices on the other side. Trouble had
been put to bed. It was Friday night. There had been no school that day
on account of an educational meeting which all the teachers had to
attend, and there was no home work for Ted and Janet to worry about. So
they could sit up and read until bedtime.

But, for some reason or other, Ted did not seem very intent on his book.
Every now and then he would look up from it and appear to be listening.

"What's the matter?" Janet asked him after one of these periods of
listening.

"Oh, nothing," her brother answered.

Janet, too, was not as much interested in her story as she ordinarily
was. What her mother had said that afternoon, about having to go away
with daddy leaving the children at home, was worrying the little girl
more than she liked to admit.

Mr. Martin was just saying something about getting ready to leave in
about a week, and Janet was going to ask who would come to keep house
and stay with them, when a shrill whistle sounded out in the street.

"There's Tom!" cried Ted, dropping his book and fairly jumping from his
chair.

"You aren't going out now!" said Mr. Martin. "It's after eight o'clock,
Ted."

"I'm just going out in the back yard a minute," Ted answered. "I
promised Tom I'd meet him there."

"All right, but don't go away," his mother said, and Ted promised.
Snatching his cap down off the nail, he hurried out, giving a shrill
whistle while still in the house in answer to another call from his
chum.

"Quiet, Ted! You'll awaken William!" exclaimed Mrs. Martin. "And don't
slam the door!"

But this warning came too late. The door was slammed, but Trouble seemed
to sleep on. He was tired from his day of play. Janet could hear Tom and
Ted talking on the side porch.

"I guess maybe they're going to toboggan a little by moonlight," thought
the girl. Then her mind went back to the letter of that afternoon, and
she remembered what her father had said about having to go away or else
lose a lot of money. Janet did not understand much about business--very
little, in fact--but she knew what it meant to lose money. Once she had
dropped five cents down a hole, and she never got it back. She always
remembered this.

"Who's going to stay with us, Mother?" Janet asked, after a pause.

"Stay with you when, dear?"

"When you and daddy go away."

"Well, we haven't decided that," her father answered. "In fact, it's
that which bothers us. We don't know just what to do. If it wasn't that
winter is coming we might take you along. But, as it is, we can't."

"We want somebody nice to stay with us," insisted Janet.

"Yes, of course, dear," agreed her mother. "We'll have to write to some
of our relatives and see who can come. I don't know just who would be
the best, or who could spare the time. And while I know you two
Curlytops will be all right, I shall be worried over William."

"Oh, I'll look after Trouble!" promised Jan.

"Yes, I know you'll do your best, dear. And now--"

But Mrs. Martin never finished that sentence. Suddenly, from the yard,
came loud shouts, a banging, rattling noise, and Ted's voice could be
heard yelling:

"Look out! Look out!"




CHAPTER IV

UNCLE TOBY AGAIN


Daddy and Mother Martin fairly jumped from their chairs and hastened to
the back door. Nora Jones, the jolly, good-natured cook, was before
them. She had just finished the kitchen work, and was on her way to her
room when she heard the shouts of Ted and Tom.

"Oh, Mrs. Martin! Something must have happened!" cried Nora.

"It sounds so," agreed Mrs. Martin.

"Oh, I hope they're not hurt!" murmured Jan.

Just then the shouts of the boys were mingled with laughter.

"It doesn't sound very serious," said Mr. Martin.

The back door was opened and the light from the kitchen shone on the
toboggan slide. The light also showed Tom and Ted in a mixed-up mass at
the bottom of the slide, each one holding a tin pail.

[Illustration: "WE BOTH WENT DOWN THE SLIDE TOGETHER WITH THE PAILS."
Page 38]

And as Mr. and Mrs. Martin and Janet and Nora hastened out they saw that
both boys were dripping wet, and as they untangled their legs from each
other and stood up, it could be seen that they were now shivering, for
the night was cold.

"What in the world has happened?" asked Mother Martin.

"And what in the world have you been doing?" asked Daddy Martin, rather
sternly.

It was very plain to be seen that Ted and Tom had been doing something.

"We--we--now--we were--" began Ted.

"Don't stand here to tell us! Get in the house and into dry clothes!"
cried Ted's mother. "You'll catch your deaths of colds out here! Get in
the house now and explain later! Are either of you hurt?" she asked, for
she noticed that each boy was limping.

"Not much," answered Tom, trying to smile. "We just tumbled down the
toboggan slide, that's all, and the water--"

"Never mind now; tell us later," said Mr. Martin.

And when Tom and Ted had taken off their wet clothes, Tom being given an
extra suit of Ted's, the two boys, sitting by the fire, told what had
happened.

"We wanted some real ice on the toboggan slide," explained Ted. "Rubbing
candles on your sled runners is all right, but we wanted some real ice.
It didn't snow, so I said, 'let's pour water on our slide and let it
freeze to-night, 'cause it's cold.'"

"And did you?" asked his father, trying not to smile.

"Yes, Daddy, we did. But I guess it isn't frozen yet," answered Ted. "We
were spilling pails of water down on the slide. We stood on the top
platform where Trouble fell off of, and then, all of a sudden, I
slipped, and--"

"Yes, and he grabbed hold of me, and then I slipped!" broke in Tom, with
a laugh. "And we both went down the slide together with the pails. It
was almost as slippery as if there was ice on it," he added.

"Yes, it was slippery all right," chuckled Ted. "And if it freezes
to-night we'll have packs of fun to-morrow."

The thought of the fun they might have seemed to make the boys forget
their present troubles.

"Well, I'm glad it isn't any worse," said Mrs. Martin. "You boys should
be careful on that slide. Just think! You might have been hurt!"

"Oh, you can't get hurt on that slide," declared Ted. "It's nice and
smooth. And, anyhow, I didn't mean to slip; I couldn't help it." He
laughed as he remembered it, and Jan laughed too. She wished she had
been there to see Tom and Ted toppling down the slide together with the
empty pails banging. It was this that had made the noise.

"It was like Jack and Jill, falling down the hill," laughed Janet.

"That's right," agreed Tom. "But I guess I'd better be going home," he
added. "Do you s'pose my things are dry yet?" he asked Mrs. Martin.

"Oh, mercy, no!" exclaimed the mother of the Curlytops. "They won't be
dry until to-morrow. I'll have Nora hang them in the kitchen by the
range."

"But I guess maybe--I'd like to, but--er--now--I don't guess my mother
would like me to stay here all night," said Tom hesitatingly.

"You don't have to stay here all night," Mrs. Martin said.

"Well, but if my things aren't dry--"

"Oh, wear those of Ted's that you have on," laughed Mrs. Martin. "I
didn't know what you meant. That's all right--wear those things of
Ted's. He has plenty more. Yours will be dry in the morning."

"And I hope there'll be ice on the toboggan slide in the morning!"
exclaimed Ted. "I wish you could stay all night, Tom. Couldn't he,
Mother?" he asked wistfully. "We'd be awful good and he could sleep with
me and we wouldn't pillow fight or anything. And Tom's better'n I am
about spilling things on the tablecloth at breakfast."

"Oh, it wasn't that I was thinking of," said Mrs. Martin. "I was
thinking his mother and father would want him home. It's getting late."

"But we don't have to get up early to-morrow. It's Saturday and there's
no school!" pleaded Ted, eagerly.

"My mother wouldn't care if I didn't come home, as long as I was over
here," said Tom, trying not to appear too eager, for that would have
been almost like asking to remain.

"Well, I suppose it would be best for you not to go out in the cold
again, after having been wet," said Mrs. Martin. "We could telephone to
your mother, Tom."

"All right!" he cried joyfully.

"Hurray!" shouted Ted.

"Be careful! Don't awaken Trouble!" cautioned Mrs. Martin.

Thereupon the boys quieted down, but they were still bubbling over with
mirth, talking about the fun they would have sleeping together and the
other fun they would have on the toboggan slide the next day.

Mr. Martin telephoned to the Taylor home, explaining about the little
accident that had happened to Tom, and suggesting that, if it was all
right, he should remain with the Curlytops that night. Mr. Taylor said
it would be all right, and thanked Mr. Martin for his kindness.

Janet remained up a little longer, listening to Tom and Ted telling over
again just how they had carried pails of water to the top of the wooden
slope, spilling down the sloping boards the liquid which swished its way
like rapids in a river. And then came the tumble and fall of the boys.

"Boys, as long as you are going to have good times to-morrow I suggest
that you go to bed now," said Mrs. Martin, when it was past nine
o'clock.

"I want to get a glass of water first," said Ted, going toward the
kitchen.

"You can get a drink up in the bathroom," his mother told him.

"I don't want this to drink," Ted explained. "I want to fill a glass
full of water and set it out on the steps."

"What for?" Janet wanted to know. "No birds will come to drink at
night," she added, for she and her brother had made a bird-feeding
station in their yard, and also a little shallow basin where the
feathered songsters could bathe and drink.

"This isn't for birds," Ted explained. "I just want to set a glass of
water outside and wait to see if it freezes. If it does, then we'll know
if there's going to be ice on our toboggan slide in the morning."

"Nonsense!" laughed his mother. "I can't let you stay up until you find
out if a glass of water will freeze. It would take too long."

"Not to see if just the top froze over," insisted Ted. "I don't mean
until the whole glass freezes solid. I know that would take a long
time."

"No, no!" laughed his mother, giving him a friendly little push from the
room. "Go to bed! I think it will be cold enough to make at least a skim
of ice on your toboggan slide. But not much more. So don't be
disappointed if you have to use candles on your sled runners to-morrow."

However, Ted, and Janet, and Tom went to bed filled with joyous hopes
for the next day. The boys were almost as good as they promised to be,
not having any pillow fight. But they did "cut up" a little, and had to
be told, more than once, to get quiet and go to sleep. And finally they
did.

In spite of the fact that the morning brought Saturday, with no school,
when the children might have slept later had they wished, Tom and Ted
were up earlier than usual. Hardly stopping to dress properly, the two
boys ran out into the yard and to the toboggan slide.

"Hurray!" cried Tom. "She froze!"

"Oh, what a nifty lot of ice!" exclaimed Ted.

And the sloping boards of the toboggan slide were covered with a film
that glistened and sparkled in the sun. The morning air was cold, too,
and the boys felt sure the ice that had formed from the water they
poured on would not soon melt.

"Come on, Janet!" cried Tom, after breakfast. "Now you can have a real
toboggan ride!"

"Me, too!" called Trouble, banging his oatmeal spoon on his plate.

"After a while, dear. You aren't dressed yet," his mother told the
little fellow.

Indeed the toboggan was a real hill of ice now, though the frozen
covering was thin. And the children had many fine coasts on it, for the
sleds went faster than when greased with candles.

Lola Taylor came over, and so did other playmates of the Curlytops, and
you can be sure that after this the thin coating of ice on the boards
did not last long. It began to wear off and wear thin, first in one
place and then in another, the rising sun helping to melt it. And before
noon there was no ice left.

However, the boys and girls had had lots of jolly good fun, and Trouble
also had his share. As the boards, once they were wet from the melting
ice, were too sticky for the candle-greased sleds to coast on, the fun
had to be given up just before noon.

But after dinner Tom and Ted found something else that gave them an
adventure. A little brook ran through a meadow, not far from the home of
the Curlytops, and on a part of this that was in the shadow from a hill
there was some ice that was quite thick, and it remained unmelted, as
the sun did not shine on it.

"Oh, look!" cried Ted, as the two chums, wandering through the meadow in
search of fun, saw the ice. "Look! We can have a slide!"

"Will it hold?" asked Tom.

"Sure! Look at Skyrocket!" answered Ted.

The dog had walked out on the thin ice which held him up. But the boys
did not stop to think that Skyrocket was not as heavy as either of them.
Also Skyrocket was on four feet, and his weight was more scattered,
being distributed over a larger surface than theirs would be. But Tom
and Ted never thought of this. Ice that would hold Skyrocket would hold
them, they thought.

In another instant they had walked out on it and were just going to run
and take a little slide when there was a cracking sound, and, before
they knew it, both lads had plunged into the brook at one of the deep
parts.

"Oh! Oh!" cried Tom and Ted together, for they were quite frightened.

Skyrocket barked and capered about. He did not know whether this was a
game the boys were playing, or whether their cries meant danger. To tell
the truth there was not really much danger, as the brook was not up to
the knees of the boys at this point.

They remained upright, floundering about and struggling in the cold
water amid chunks of thin ice. For the ice was really too thin to hold
them.

"Oh, what are we going to do?" cried Tom.

"I'm nearer shore than you are!" panted Ted. "Grab hold of my hand and
I'll help you out!"

But as the boys were struggling together they heard a voice shouting at
them from the far side of the meadow. They looked and saw a man running
toward them. He reached them before they had gotten to the bank where
Skyrocket was wildly barking, and, reaching his hands out to them, the
man pulled Tom and Ted to safety.

"What in the world are you lads up to?" the man asked.

Something in the voice caused Ted to look up, and he cried.

"Uncle Toby!"

"Yes, Uncle Toby!" admitted the man, with a laugh. "It's a good thing I
happened to take the short cut across lots from the railroad. Now tell
me why you chaps went in swimming on a day like this?" and he looked
first at Ted and then at Tom.




CHAPTER V

OFF TO THE COUNTRY


Skyrocket ran up to Uncle Toby, barking and sniffing around the legs of
the jolly man who had pulled the two boys from the ice-cold brook.

"So you remember me, don't you?" chuckled Uncle Toby, as he watched the
wagging tail of the dog.

"I do, too!" said Tom. "Have you got all your pets still?"

"Most of 'em!" answered Uncle Toby. "But we mustn't stand here talking,
with you boys wet through. Come on to the house. Run! That's the best
way to keep from taking a cold! Run!"

"We--we got--all wet--last night, too," Ted informed Uncle Toby, the
words being jerked out of him because of the jolting effect of the run.

"Were you in swimming last night?" Uncle Toby wanted to know.

"We were making a toboggan slide like those you told about seeing in
Canada," explained Ted.

"And we weren't in swimming now. We were sliding and the ice broke,"
explained Tom.

"Well, never mind about that now," said Uncle Toby. "Come on--run!" And
he ran so fast, half holding up the boys who trotted along on either
side of him, with Skyrocket leaping along behind, that by the time the
house was reached Ted and Tom each felt quite warm in spite of their icy
bath.

"Oh, my goodness! What'll your ma say?" cried Nora, as Uncle Toby rushed
the boys into the cozy kitchen.

"Get upstairs and bring them down some dry clothes. Let them undress and
dress here by the fire. The water won't hurt the kitchen floor," said
Uncle Toby.

In a little while Tom was again attired in his own suit, which was now
dry, and Ted had on an extra one of his own, while the wet garments were
taken down cellar to be hung near the furnace.

"I guess you boys had better stay in the house the rest of the day,"
said Mrs. Martin, when she had greeted Uncle Toby and had heard what
had happened.

"I have to go home," said Tom. "Thank you for drying my clothes, and I'm
sorry I got Ted's wet," he added.

"Well, be careful," cautioned Mrs. Martin, as Ted's playmate left,
promising to run all the way so he would not get a chill. But the day
was quite warm now, all the ice having been melted from the toboggan
slide, and even the water on it drying up.

"Well, what kindly fortune brings you here, Uncle Toby?" asked Mrs.
Martin, as soon as she could sit down for a chat.

"Oh, I came to ask a favor," went on the old gentleman, who had traveled
in many parts of the world and who had collected quite a few strange
pets, some of which he still kept at his home in Pocono. "But you look
worried, Ruth," he went on. "Has anything happened? Don't worry about
those boys. They won't take cold from a little dipping, even if the
weather is getting a bit frosty."

"I wasn't worrying about them," said Mother Martin, with a smile. "But
we have had some other troubles. Dick has had word that he is likely to
lose a lot of money, and he and I will have to take a trip to see about
some property. We'll have to go right away, or within a day or so, and
what to do about the children I don't know. We can't very well take them
with us. I was just thinking we might get some of our relations to come
and stay here while we're gone. Then you drop in. Have you come to tell
me that you are coming to pay a visit? I'd leave my Curlytops and
William with you and know they were safe."

"And I'd ask nothing better than to look after them," said Uncle Toby,
with a smile. "But I didn't come to tell you I was coming here. Instead
I came to invite you to my place in the country. I have a large cottage,
or camp, as you know, at Crystal Lake, just outside Pocono. I'm going to
have a sort of holiday party out there this winter, and I want you and
the Curlytops to come and spend some time with me. In fact I'll take
some of their playmates, if their folks will spare them. That's what I
came for--to invite you all out to my place to have jolly times through
the holidays."

"Oh, how lovely!" cried Janet, who heard what was being said.

"Could we have a toboggan slide there?" Ted wanted to know.

"Me tum?" lisped Trouble.

"Sure you'll come!" cried Uncle Toby, catching baby William up in his
arms and hugging and kissing him. "There wouldn't be any fun if we left
you behind. When can you get ready to come?" he asked Mrs. Martin.

"Why," answered the mother of the Curlytops slowly, "I don't see that
Dick and I can come at all. We must take this business trip or daddy
will lose a lot of money," she explained to the children. "But your
coming at this time is most fortunate, Uncle Toby. As long as you are
going to have a party out at your country cabin on Crystal Lake, it will
be just the thing for the children. They can go and stay with you while
Dick and I are away."

"Of course!" cried Uncle Toby. "Aunt Sallie--you remember her I guess?"
he went on--"she'll be there to cook for us and see that the children
don't get their feet wet."

"Aunt Sallie," remarked Mrs. Martin. "I don't seem to remember--"

"She's Mrs. Watson, the old lady who went away from my house the time I
started for South America, and left you my pets to look after," Uncle
Toby explained. "She's a distant relative of mine, and I call her Aunt
Sallie, though she isn't really my aunt. But she's come back to keep
house for me, and she'll go out to the camp with us. It will be just the
place for the older children, and they can go to school there. We've got
a good little country school not far from the lake. In fact they can
skate to school when the lake gets frozen over, and that will be soon if
this weather keeps up."

"Oh, what fun!" cried Ted.

"It will be just the thing for us," said Mrs. Martin. "It will take away
all our worries over what we were going to do about the children while
we were away."

"And did you say we could have some playmates out there?" asked Janet.

"Yes, bring along some boy or girl chum--one for each of you," replied
Uncle Toby.

"I'd like to have Tom!" exclaimed Ted.

"And I'll ask Lola," said Jan.

"All right," agreed Mr. Bardeen. "And they may find some other playmates
when they get out there," he added in a low voice.

"Do you mean new pets?" asked Ted, overhearing what Uncle Toby
remarked.

"That's a secret," was the smiling answer, and he made a sign to Mrs.
Martin that he would explain to her later. As for Ted and Jan they were
so excited over the prospect of going to spend the holidays in the
country cabin of Uncle Toby that they danced up and down and around the
room, swinging Trouble with them.

"I'm going over to tell Tom!" cried Ted.

"And I'll tell Lola," added his sister.

"Wait a while, Curlytops," advised Mrs. Martin. "Let's see what daddy
says."

The children felt that they never could wait until their father came
home from the store that evening. But he did arrive at last. Ted and
Janet were sure he was late, but, as a matter of fact, he was a little
ahead of his usual time, Mother Martin having telephoned to him about
the visit of Uncle Toby. The latter had come along suddenly, not even
writing to say that he was on his way.

"I just got the notion into my head that I wanted the Curlytops and some
of their playmates out at my place on a holiday visit," he explained,
"and so I packed up and come on. Didn't pack up much either," he said.
"Just a bag. And I left that at the station and took the short cut
across lots. Good thing I did," he concluded, winking at Teddy.

"You must never again go sliding on the ice until you are sure it will
hold you," said Mr. Martin to his son. "Just because it held up
Skyrocket doesn't prove that it will hold you. If you don't promise to
be careful I can't let you go to Crystal Lake!"

"Oh, we'll be careful!" promised Ted and Janet in one breath.

"I guess this means that you've made up your mind to let them come with
me, is that so?" asked Uncle Toby.

"I think it will be the best thing that could happen," answered Daddy
Martin. "Ruth and I must go to see about that property. It will take
both of us to clear matters up and save my money. I know the children
will be in good hands when they are with you and Aunt Sallie. So we'll
let them go."

"And can we take Skyrocket?" begged Jan.

"Oh, yes, I guess so," replied Uncle Toby. "My two dogs, Tip and Top,
have been sold. I haven't as many pets as I had, though Jack, the
monkey, Mr. Nip, the parrot, and Snuff, the cat, I have kept. I want
them for company."

"Then if we take our dog it will be just about right," decided Ted.
"We'll leave Turnover, our cat, here with Nora."

"Yes, she'll need company," said Mrs. Martin. "And do you really mean it
about taking some playmates for Ted and Janet, Uncle Toby?"

"Of course I do! Let Tom and Lola come!"

"I'll go tell them!" offered Ted.

"I'll come, too," added Jan.

Trouble wanted to follow, but as it was dark now, being after supper,
his mother decided the best place for him was in bed. And there he was
taken, after he had fallen asleep in Uncle Toby's arms.

"But what is this about some other children that are going to be at your
cabin?" asked Mrs. Martin, while Ted and Janet were still over at the
Taylor home.

"I'm going to take charge of two little Fresh Air children," explained
Uncle Toby. "You know I give money to some of the big societies in the
city, and these societies send out children to the country in the
summer. It isn't usual to send them out in the winter, but this is a
special case.

"Their mother, whom I knew when she was a girl, has to go to the
hospital for an operation, and she has no one with whom she can leave
Harry and Mary. So I agreed to take charge of them this winter, as their
mother may have to stay in the hospital a long time to get well and
strong."

"Where is their father--dead?" asked Mr. Martin.

"I'm afraid he is," answered Uncle Toby. "And yet it isn't known for
sure."

"What do you mean?" asked Mother Martin.

"You see it's this way," Uncle Toby explained. "Their father, Frank
Benton, went to the big war. He was heard of for a time and then all
trace of him was lost. I suppose he was killed in some battle and never
found until after the fighting was over. Anyhow his two children, who
are about as old as Ted and Janet, were left with their mother. She took
care of them as well as she could until she became ill.

"One of the Fresh Air Society ladies heard about their sad case and she
wrote to me. I said I'd keep the children all winter. And now when your
Curlytops come out with their friends Tom and Lola they'll find other
playmates, and I hope they'll all get along well together."

"I think they will," said Mr. Martin. "It is very kind of you to do
this."

"Oh, I like it!" declared Uncle Toby. "I like children and animals. The
more the merrier. And now let's plan how soon the children can come back
with me."

Ted and Jan returned a little later with word that Tom and Lola could
make the trip, and the next few days were busily spent in getting ready.
Mr. and Mrs. Martin made arrangements to go on their trip, to try to
save the money that Daddy Martin was in danger of losing.

Except for this there would have been no sadness when the time of
parting came. But the Curlytops could not help seeing that their father
and mother looked rather worried.

"I hope Dad doesn't lose that money," said Ted.

"So do I," echoed his sister, with a sigh.

But they were not sad for long. The day came when the children were to
depart for their holiday stay at Uncle Toby's cabin on the shore of
Crystal Lake.

"All aboard!" cried the jolly old gentleman, as the automobile drew up
in front of the house to take along the Curlytops, Trouble, Tom, Lola,
Uncle Toby himself, and Skyrocket. "All aboard!"

"Good-bye! Good-bye!" cried the children, as they piled in. The dog
barked his farewells.

"Have a good time!" said Mother Martin, and there was just a tear or two
in her eyes as she waved her hands.

"We'll have you all back again after Christmas!" said Daddy Martin.

"Oh, what fun we'll have at Christmas!" shouted Ted.

"All aboard!" called Uncle Toby again, and they were off on the first
part of their trip to the country for the holidays.




CHAPTER VI

A FLURRY OF SNOW


Uncle Toby drove the Martin automobile through the streets of Cresco.
The car was a large, comfortable, roomy one, all inclosed, so that the
cold weather would make no difference. There was even a small heating
apparatus, a sort of radiator kept warm by the muffler under the car, so
that the children would be cozy and warm even in a snow storm.

"There's Tommie Wilson!" called Ted, as he saw a boy walking along the
street. "He's got to go to school!"

"Yes, and there's Bob Newton," added Tom. "I guess they wish they were
like us, and didn't have to go to school!"

"Oh, you'll have to go to school as soon as we get out to Crystal Lake,"
declared Uncle Toby. "Don't imagine, because you are going to have
holiday fun, that you won't have to go to school."

"But it'll be more fun going to school out there than it will be here,"
said Tom.

"Sure it will!" agreed Ted.

Lola and Jan leaned over toward the side window of the auto to wave to
Jennie Jackson, a girl they both knew, and Jennie waved back, wonder
showing on her face at the appearance of the Curlytops and their
playmates going off in an automobile. And when the other children of
Cresco learned what had happened to Ted, Jan, Tom, and Lola there were
some sighs of disappointment that such good luck had not happened to
every boy and girl.

Skyrocket seemed to be enjoying himself very much. He was a well-behaved
dog and appeared to enjoy the ride in the automobile. He was perched on
the front seat, between Ted and Tom, who sat beside Uncle Toby. In the
back were the two girls and the baggage.

"Oh!" exclaimed Ted, when they had ridden on some little distance and
Uncle Toby had turned into the broad highway that led to Pocono, several
miles away. "Oh, I forgot all about it!"

"Forgot about what?" asked Uncle Toby, as he stopped his big automobile
to let a little car shoot out of a side street.

"I forgot to tell the fellows they could use our toboggan slide while
we're gone," explained Ted.

"That's right!" agreed Tom. "Bob Newton and some of the other boys could
have fun on it after the snow comes. We ought to have told 'em!"

"Shall we have one out at Crystal Lake, Uncle Toby?" asked Ted.

"I reckon we can rig up one," was the answer. "There is a man out there
who has a real toboggan, too, one he brought from Canada."

"Oh, that'll be great!" cried Tom.

On went the big car with the Curlytops and their playmates, bearing them
to the happy country where they hoped to have much fun over the
Christmas holidays that would soon be at hand. The children looked out
of the windows of the car. They had made an early start, soon after
sunrise, but now the sun had gone under clouds.

"Do you think it will snow?" Ted anxiously asked of Uncle Toby.

"I shouldn't wonder but what it might," was the answer. "Do you want it
to?"

"Sure we do!" cried all four children at once, and Trouble added:

"I make a snow man, I will!"

"Well, then I guess it will snow," chuckled Uncle Toby. "And I wouldn't
be a bit surprised if we should have a storm before we get to my place,"
he added.

"Do you mean before we get to Crystal Lake?" asked Janet.

"No, for we aren't going there direct," said Uncle Toby. "We are first
going to my place in Pocono, where we'll stay a few days. I have to get
some things there, and also take aboard two more children."

"Two more children?" cried Ted and Janet. Then Ted added:

"Who are they?"

"I hope they'll be playmates for you," answered Mr. Bardeen. "I'll tell
you about them later. Anyhow, first we'll go to Pocono, and later, in a
day or so, out to Crystal Lake. That will give you time to meet the pets
again."

"Are you going to take them out to the Lake with you?" asked Tom, who
knew about the different animals Uncle Toby was so fond of.

"Well, no, I hardly think so," was the answer. "It will be pretty cold
for my alligator, the monkey, and the parrot. Snuff, my cat, will be
better off if she stays at my house in Pocono. But you can take
Skyrocket out with you."

"That'll be all right," decided Ted. "But it would be a lot of fun if we
could have all the pets out at the Lake."

"I'm afraid you'll be so busy having good times out of doors, and going
to school, at least a little, that you wouldn't have much chance to play
with the pets," chuckled Uncle Toby. "And I wouldn't want any of them to
take cold. A dog is all right, romping out in the snow, but frost wasn't
meant for monkeys and parrots."

"Where will you get these two new children that are going to be our
playmates?" asked Jan.

"They are coming on a train. I expect they'll arrive at Pocono about a
week after we get there. I'll tell you about them later. They are poor
children, and they haven't had as many good times as you Curlytops have
had, so I hope you'll be kind to them."

"Oh, we will!" chorused all four.

"An' I tish 'em, dat's what I do!" declared Trouble.

"Yes, and I'll 'tish' you!" laughed Lola, as she kissed the little chap.

On and on rumbled the big auto, until it came to a small town, which, as
soon as they reached the center of it, Ted and Janet remembered.

"We stopped here for dinner when we were going out to your place this
summer!" cried Janet to Uncle Toby.

"Yes. And we're going to stop here for lunch again," said Uncle Toby.
"That is, if you are hungry," he added with a sly twinkle in his eyes.
"Of course if you'd rather not eat--"

"Oh, I want to eat all right!" shouted Tom and Ted and Janet and Lola,
all at one time.

"I wants pie!" burst out Trouble, and they all shouted with laughter.

A little later the car drew up in front of a restaurant.

"Why, it's the same one where we ate before!" exclaimed Jan, in
wonderment.

"Yes, your father told me you stopped here," said Uncle Toby.

As he was helping the children out of the car a ragged boy, with a
pinched and hungry face, stepped up, and, touching his cap, asked:

"Like to have me watch your machine, sir? There's been a lot of autos
stolen around here lately. I'll watch it good for a quarter."

"Will you?" asked Uncle Toby, with a kind smile. "And if a thief comes,
what would you do? You aren't very big?"

"I'd holler for a cop--I mean a policeman," was the boy's quick answer.
"I know the policeman on this beat."

"All right, I guess you can watch the machine," said Mr. Bardeen.
"Skyrocket will help you keep guard over it."

"Who's Skyrocket?"

"This dog," and Uncle Toby pointed. Skyrocket had been holding back, for
he did not like strangers, especially ragged ones, and this boy was
rather ragged. But when Uncle Toby made it plain that the boy was to be
regarded as a friend, the dog wagged his tail in welcome and curled up
on the front seat.

"What are you going to do with the quarter I'm to give you for watching
the car?" asked Uncle Toby.

"I'm going to get something to eat with part of it," was the answer.
"I'm hungry. The rest I'm going to turn in to my mother. She needs it."

"Hum," said Uncle Toby, thoughtfully. "That's stretching a quarter
rather too much, I think. Now you sit out here in the car, and I'll have
the waiter bring you something to eat on a tray. Oh, don't worry!" Mr.
Bardeen hastened to say, with a smile. "It won't come out of your
quarter. I'll put it on my bill. And I'm going to have a bone sent out
for Skyrocket. He'll keep you company."

"Yes, sir. I like dogs," said the boy, with a smile. "I'm much obliged
to you. I'll watch your car good."

"Yes. I think you will. Well, children, run in and get started on your
lunch. I don't want to get to Pocono after dark, and it looks as if we
might get caught in a snow storm, but it may hold off."

The Curlytops and their playmates were ushered to their seats by a
waiter who smiled at them.

"Do you remember us?" asked Ted, while Uncle Toby was giving orders to
another waiter about sending something to eat out to the boy, and also a
bone for Skyrocket.

"Of course I remember you," the waiter answered, as he pushed the chairs
under Janet and Lola. "And I haven't forgotten what that little chap
did," and he pointed to William, who was staring about the room as if
trying to remember where he had seen it before.

"What did Trouble do?" asked Lola.

"He turned the faucet of the water-cooler and let the ice water run all
over the floor," explained Janet with a laugh. "Mother's feet were in
the puddle of water before we knew what had happened."

"Oh, Trouble!" chided Lola. "Did you do that?"

"Well--well, I didn't do it on pur--now--on purspuss!" stammered
Trouble, as they all laughed.

Uncle Toby came and sat down at the table with the children, and the
waiter who remembered the Curlytop party from their other visit was soon
busy serving them. A good meal on a tray was taken out to the boy in the
automobile and a juicy bone was sent to Skyrocket.

"This is jolly good fun!" declared Tom, who had not traveled about as
much as had the Curlytops.

"Wait until we get out to Crystal Lake!" exclaimed Ted. "Then we'll have
more fun. I hope school won't be very hard," he added in a whisper to
his playmate.

"Oh, teachers aren't very strict around the holidays," answered Tom.

The meal was almost over when Lola, glancing out of the window, uttered
an exclamation and cried:

"It's snowing!"

Surely enough, a flurry of the white crystals was falling.

Uncle Toby looked a bit anxious.

"I don't want to hurry you children," he said. "But as soon as you have
finished we'd better be on our way. We don't want to be stuck in the
snow."

And as they went out to get in the automobile again the air was thick
with the white flakes.




CHAPTER VII

IN THE STORM


Seeing the Curlytops and their playmates coming from the restaurant with
Uncle Toby, the boy who had been watching the automobile got out,
followed by Skyrocket.

"Well, I see you didn't let any one take the car," said Uncle Toby with
a smile, as he paid the boy, giving him more money than the lad had
asked for.

"Oh, no! They couldn't take this car while I was in it," was the reply.
"Though I guess your dog would make a fuss, too, if anybody tried it.
Two or three men just sort of stepped up to look at the car, and
Firecracker growled."

"Firecracker?" exclaimed Ted, with a laugh.

"Yes. Isn't that the name you called your dog?" asked the boy.

"No; it's Skyrocket," answered Jan.

"Well, I knew it had something to do with fireworks," laughed the ragged
lad.

"But this is too much money," he said to Uncle Toby.

"That's all right, I guess you've earned it," was the reply. "Sitting in
a car doing nothing isn't much fun."

The snow flakes kept on sifting down, swirling faster and faster as the
automobile started off, the children calling their good-byes to the boy
who had watched the car. They had left him much better off than when
they first met him, for he had had a good meal and earned some money.

"Sit tight now, everybody!" ordered Uncle Toby, as they left the busier
part of the village where they had stopped for a meal, and drew near the
open country. "Sit tight, for I'm going to drive faster, and I don't
want you falling off the seats."

"What you goin' to drive fast for?" Trouble wanted to know. "Is you
goin' to have a race, Uncle Toby?"

"A sort of race, yes, Trouble," was the answer. "I'm going to race and
see if we can get home ahead of the big storm that I'm afraid is coming
down on us."

"Do you think it will be a very big storm?" asked Ted, and he looked
with laughing eyes at Tom.

"I shouldn't wonder," was the answer. "And, though we have a strong car
here, we don't want to get stuck in a snow drift and have to stay all
night."

"I should think that would be lots of fun," said Tom.

"What? With nothing to eat except a few chocolate cakes Jan and Lola
have in a bag?" exclaimed Uncle Toby. "That is if they have any of the
cakes left."

"Oh, yes, we have them," Jan hastened to say, for she and her girl chum
had bought some just before reaching the restaurant, and had not eaten
them.

"Well, that's all we'd have in the way of 'rations,' as the soldiers
call them, if we got stuck in the storm," declared Uncle Toby.

"Then we don't want to get stuck," decided Ted, and Tom agreed with him.
The boys were fond of eating. Most boys are, I believe.

What Uncle Toby said and feared about the storm seemed to be coming
true. Of course the automobile was very far from being caught in any
drift, for the snow had not yet begun to pile up very much. But the
flakes were coming down thicker and faster, and the wind was beginning
to blow. It did not blow inside the cozy car, which was warm and
comfortable, so that the boys and girls could unbutton their wraps. But
they could hear the wind swishing around outside, and they could see the
flakes of snow dashed against the glass windows.

After riding about an hour, the party was out in a country district
where the houses were few and far apart. It was rather lonesome, for
they went many miles without meeting another automobile. The snow was
deeper here, and, more than once, the wheels of the Martin car ran
through little piles of white crystals.

"They've had a storm here before this one that's blowing now," said
Uncle Toby, as he looked at what were really quite high drifts on some
parts of the road. "It may be worse farther on."

"Shall we get stuck?" Ted wanted to know.

"There's no telling," answered Uncle Toby.

Ted and Tom did not want to say they were glad of it, but they were
real boys and they felt that they would not a bit mind being caught in a
big drift so they would have to dig their way out. They forgot, for the
time, about having nothing to eat.

Passing through a small village, which was now thickly covered with snow
from the storm that was getting worse and worse all the while, Uncle
Toby drove the car once more out in the country. Suddenly he leaned
forward and shifted the gear lever.

"What's the matter?" asked Ted.

"I'm going into second speed," was the answer, and the boys knew what
this meant. "There's quite a hill ahead of us," Uncle Toby went on.
"Though I could take it on high if it wasn't for the snow, I can't do it
now. We'll try it on second, and if that won't bring us up we'll have to
go back into first speed."

"Shall we get to your house to-night?" asked Jan.

"Oh, yes," answered Uncle Toby. "Don't worry!"

But Jan could not help feeling a bit anxious. She was more worried over
what might happen to Trouble than herself, her other brother or her
playmates, for they were all older. But Trouble was used to his mother
at night.

How he would behave now, away from home for the first time, remained to
be seen. Jan wondered what her father and mother were doing now, and she
hoped Daddy Martin would not lose that money. She wondered if they would
be poor. That wouldn't be at all pleasant, she thought.

However, her ideas and those of the others were suddenly switched into
new places, for the big car gave a lurch to one side and came to a stop
with a jolt, awakening Trouble.

"What's matter?" he asked sleepily.

"I am afraid we are stuck," said Uncle Toby.

"There's a big drift right in front of us," announced Ted.

"Yes," agreed Mr. Bardeen. "I thought I could go through it but it's
deeper than I had any idea of. No you don't!" he quickly cried as the
automobile seemed about to slip backward. He put on both brakes and
brought the car to a stop.

"Oh, is anything going to happen?" asked Lola.

"No! No!" laughed Uncle Toby. "Don't be afraid. I didn't change into
first speed quickly enough and stalled, or stopped my engine. I'll start
up again in a minute. But I guess I'd better put some stones under the
wheels, to block them so they won't slide downhill as I start up again
with the brakes off."

"We'll get some stones!" cried Ted. "I know how to do that! I often do
it for dad on a hill. Come on, Tom!"

The two boys scrambled from the car out into the storm. As the door was
opened in came a swirl of white flakes, and Trouble tried to catch them
by sticking out his red tongue.

"I guess you'll have hard work to find any stones," said Uncle Toby,
looking at Tom and Ted floundering around in the snow. "But it won't be
safe to take the brakes off until we get something to block the wheels."

The reason for that was this. The car was now held from sliding backward
downhill because Uncle Toby had put on the brakes. But to start up
again, even in first or lowest speed, he would have to take off the
brakes, and the car might begin to slide down before the engine could
begin pulling it up. With stones blocked behind the rear wheels, this
would not happen.

"Oh, we'll find some stones!" cried Tom, kicking about in the snow,
moving his feet from side to side. Soon he felt something big and hard.
Reaching down with his hands, he began clearing away the snow and
discovered a stone. But it was frozen fast to the ground, and Tom could
not move it.

"I'll help you!" offered Ted, running over to his chum. Ted had not yet
found any stone.

As the boys kicked away at the stone, hoping to loosen it, Trouble
called out through the crack of the door:

"Is you playin' feetball?"

"It does look like it, doesn't it?" laughed Ted, and then, with a last
hard kick, he loosened the stone that Tom had found.

"Good boys!" cried Uncle Toby. "Put it back of the wheels and look for
another." He had to stay in the car lest the brakes might slip and let
it back down the hill.

Tom and Ted put this one stone behind the left wheel, and then began
kicking about in the snow to find another. This time Ted had the luck,
finding a larger stone than the one uncovered by his chum.

With hard kicks the two small chaps worked away at the frozen stone.
More than once they missed their aim, and they kicked up clouds of snow,
making Lola and Janet laugh, Trouble joining in. But at last the second
stone was loosened and placed behind the other wheel.

"Now I can take off the brakes and start up the hill," said Uncle Toby.
"Hop in, boys!"

Standing on the running board Ted and Tom knocked the snow from their
shoes and took their places inside the warm car. They were breathing
hard from their labors, and their cheeks were red with the cold, while
their coats and caps were covered with snow-flakes.

The engine had not stopped running, though it was out of gear. But now
Uncle Toby took off the brakes and began to go into first speed, and
slowly the car moved up the hill. The snow was very slippery and more
than once the hind wheels spun around uselessly.

"I'll put chains on when we get to the top of the hill," said Uncle
Toby. "I ought to have done it before."

Slowly the car went up through the storm, the children almost holding
their breaths, as if that would help. But finally the summit of the hill
was reached and the danger was over for the present.

"Now we can speed up, after I put on the chains," said Uncle Toby,
bringing the car to a stop beneath some overhanging evergreen trees that
grew on one side of the road. "Ch'is'mus twees," Trouble called them.

But as Mr. Bardeen was getting out Ted uttered a cry of alarm.

"Where's Skyrocket?" he asked.

Then, for the first time, every one noticed that the dog was not in the
car.

Where was Skyrocket?




CHAPTER VIII

A STALLED TRAIN


For a few moments the children could scarcely believe that Skyrocket was
not in the automobile with them. Janet and Lola had been so busy
watching the boys kick loose the stones, and Ted and Tom had been so
occupied in this work, that none of them had paid much attention to the
dog. Uncle Toby had also watched the boys, and as for Trouble, catching
an occasional snow-flake on his tongue gave him so much to do that he
did not look after Skyrocket.

"But where is our dog?" asked Ted, when it became certain that the pet
was not in the car.

"Maybe he's under the seat asleep," suggested Lola.

They looked, but Skyrocket was not there.

"He must have jumped out when the door was open," said Tom.

"I'll go back and look for him," offered Ted. He made a move to leave
the car, but Uncle Toby stopped him.

"If any one goes back after that dog, I'm going!" said the old sailor,
for that is what Uncle Toby had once been. "The snow is too deep for
your legs," he added, looking at Ted's short ones. "And you two lads
have already done work enough in getting the stones to block the wheels.
You know how fond I am of pets, so I'll go back and get Skyrocket. I
suppose he's looking for us all this while."

"You'll be sure to get him, won't you, Uncle Toby?" asked Jan.

"Of course I will; unless he's gone full speed ahead back home, and I
don't believe he has. Now you children stay here in this car until I
come back. And don't go outside. It's snowing harder and it is getting
colder. So stay inside."

The Curlytops and their playmates promised to do this, and then Uncle
Toby stepped out into the storm. He turned up his coat collar and
tramped off through the drifts, which were, each moment, getting deeper
and deeper. So fast was the snow coming down now that he could hardly
see the marks left by the wheels where he had driven up the hill.

The children looked out through the back window in the automobile and
watched Uncle Toby. He was soon out of sight below the top of the hill,
and all that Ted and the others could see was the cloud of swirling
flakes of white.

"I--I hope he finds Skyrocket," faltered Janet.

"I hope so, too," added Ted.

"He sure is a good dog!" declared Tom.

Then all the Curlytops could do was to wait for Uncle Toby to come back.

Meanwhile the old sailor was trudging back through the storm, going down
the hill up which he had lately driven the big car.

"It's easy now," thought Uncle Toby to himself, "but it won't be so easy
going back. I'll have the wind in my face and I'll have to go uphill.
But never mind! We'll have jolly good times--the children and I--when we
get to my cabin out at the Lake."

As he walked along through the storm Uncle Toby looked on each side of
the road for a sight of Skyrocket. But he did not see the dog. Nor was
there any answering bark in reply to the shrill whistles uttered by
Uncle Toby.

"Here, Sky! Here, Skyrocket!" the old sailor would call every now and
then, but no dog appeared.

"He must have jumped out away back where I stalled the car," thought
Uncle Toby. "Poor dog! He'll freeze if he has to stay out all night. And
I don't know what I'll do with those children if I don't find their pet
for them. Skyrocket, where are you?"

On and on went Uncle Toby, through the whirling snow. He was almost back
to where the car had stopped when suddenly he heard a series of barks
off to one side of the road, in a clump of trees.

"That sounds like him!" exclaimed the sailor. "Hello there, Skyrocket!"
he cried.

The barking became louder. Uncle Toby floundered through the drifts, off
the road and over toward the clump of evergreen trees. As he neared them
a dog came dashing out, capering about in the fluffy drifts.

"Hello, Skyrocket! I've found you all right!" said Uncle Toby. "But
what in the world are you doing back here? What made you jump out of the
car?"

All the answer Skyrocket made was to bark. He leaped about Uncle Toby
and seemed very glad to see him. But when the man started back toward
the road, thinking the dog would follow, Skyrocket only barked more
loudly and raced back toward the clump of trees.

"What's the matter? Is there some other dog back there you'd rather play
with than come to the Curlytops?" asked the old sailor. "What's the
idea?"

Skyrocket acted in such a queer way that Uncle Toby turned back to see
what the matter was. And this was just what the wise dog seemed to want,
for he wagged his tail joyfully and raced back ahead of Uncle Toby.

When the old sailor reached the clump of trees, under the heavy branches
of which the snow was not so thick, he heard a faint mewing sound.

"Bless my heart! A kitten!" cried Uncle Toby.

And a kitten it was! A dear, cute, little kitten, half way up one of
the trees, cuddled down in the thick, green branches.

"Well, no wonder you didn't want to come back and leave this poor little
kitten here in the cold and storm," said kind Uncle Toby. "You're a good
dog, Skyrocket!"

At this Skyrocket wagged his tail harder than ever, so it seemed a
wonder that it did not fly off, and his throat must have ached with all
the barking he did.

The kitten mewed and stood up when it saw Uncle Toby. It did not appear
to be afraid of Skyrocket, who was capering around on the ground under
the tree.

"I'll get you down and take you back with me," said the old sailor.
"Come on, pussy! I don't know where I am going to get any milk to give
you until we get to my place in Pocono. But I guess you'll stand it
until then. I wonder how you got out here in the woods all alone?"

There was no way of finding this out, and there was no house near from
which the little kitten might have wandered. Uncle Toby had an idea it
might have been lost out of some car in which some children, like the
Curlytops, had been riding. Then the little animal wandered into the
clump of evergreens for shelter, and Skyrocket had trailed it there. The
dog had probably discovered the pussy as he was racing around after he
had slipped out of the car, unseen by the children or Uncle Toby.

"But you'll be all right now," said the kind old sailor. "Come to me,
pussy!"

The kitten arched its back, seeming glad of a chance to stretch after
being cramped on the limb. Reaching up, Uncle Toby lifted it down and
put it snugly in the pocket of his big overcoat.

"Well, I wonder if you'll come back with me now?" asked Uncle Toby of
Skyrocket, when the kitten had been rescued.

Skyrocket seemed very willing, for he no longer hung back, but followed
with joyful barks and waggings of his tail as Uncle Toby strode through
the storm with the kitten he had rescued.

It was hard work tramping back up the hill through the storm and drifts
of snow with the wind blowing in his face, but the old sailor managed
it, and soon the Curlytops and their friends, who had been anxiously
watching through the back window, saw him looming into view.

"Here comes Uncle Toby!" cried Jan, who was the first to spy him.

"Has he got Skyrocket?" asked Ted.

"Yes, I see him!" said Tom. "He's got your dog all right."

A little later Uncle Toby was knocking the snow off his shoes on the
running board of the car, and soon he was safely inside with the dog.

"Where was he?" Ted wanted to know. "What were you doing back there,
Skyrocket?" he asked his pet.

"He was guarding this," said Uncle Toby, and out of his pocket came the
little kitten.

"Oh! Oh!" murmured Lola. "Isn't it a darling!"

"How cute! Oh, what a dear!" exclaimed Jan.

"My kitten! Mine!" cried Trouble, always ready to claim any new pet he
saw.

"Did you really find it?" asked Tom, as Jan took the kitten into her lap
while she and Lola rubbed it, Trouble getting an occasional finger or
two on the soft fur.

"Skyrocket found it, and I got it down out of the tree," explained the
old sailor, with a laugh. "Now I guess we can move along again. I wish
we had some milk for you," he went on, looking at the little cat. "But
we'll be home before dark--if we have good luck," he added, as he
glanced out into the storm.

Once again the automobile started, with a new passenger on board.
Skyrocket was used to cats, and after he had taken part in the rescue of
the kitten he paid no more attention to it but curled up and went to
sleep. As for the kitten, it did not seem to mind the dog in the least.

"I guess it isn't very hungry, Uncle Toby," said Jan in a low voice,
after they had ridden several miles. "See, it's going to sleep."

And the little kitten, with eyes closed, was curled contentedly in her
lap.

Uncle Toby's main thought now was to drive as fast as he could with
safety, so he would get the children to his home in Pocono before the
storm grew any worse and before night came.

Once in his house at Pocono they could remain until the weather cleared
before going out to the cabin at Crystal Lake to spend the holidays.

They passed through a small town, and Jan suggested they might stop and
get some milk for the kitten, which had awakened, and was mewing a
little.

"I think we'd better not stop now," said Mr. Bardeen. "It is better for
the pussy to be a little hungry for a time than for us to get stuck in
the snow with night coming on. We'd all be hungry then. We'll soon be
home."

They came to a railroad track, almost hidden under the snow, and Uncle
Toby stopped the automobile, and, opening the door a little way, seemed
to be listening.

"What's the matter?" asked Ted.

"I wanted to hear if the train was coming," was the answer. "One is due
here about now, and I didn't want to cross the tracks if it was too
near. But I guess it's late on account of the storm. It will be safe to
cross."

He drove over the tracks and was just speeding up again when they all
heard a distant whistle.

"There's the train!" exclaimed Tom.

Then came several more whistles, long toots and short toots in such a
queer combination that they all knew something must be the matter.

"Maybe there's been an accident," said Ted.

"Maybe," agreed Uncle Toby. "But I think that the train is stuck in a
deep cut not far from here. The cut may be filled with snow so the train
can't get through. It's probably stalled there."

"Will anybody be hurt?" asked Janet.

"No, only delayed for a while. Men will come with shovels to dig out the
train. We can soon see what has happened, for the auto road passes near
the railroad cut."

A little later they saw that what Uncle Toby had guessed at had come to
pass. The children saw a passenger train with the front part of the
engine buried deep in a pile of snow that filled a cut between two rocky
hills on either side of the track.

As the automobile came in sight of the train the engineer blew several
more shrill whistles, waking up Skyrocket, who began to bark loudly.




CHAPTER IX

NEW PLAYMATES


"Just hear him toot!" cried Jan, putting her hands over her ears, for
the automobile was now quite close to the train stuck in the big snow
drift. The drift was much deeper here than at any other point along the
railroad, because the narrow cut between the high rocks held the white
flakes tightly packed.

"Sounds as if it was calling us," said Lola.

"I believe it is!" exclaimed Ted, as the toots of the whistle kept up.
"Do you s'pose he could want us to help him, Uncle Toby?"

"How could an auto pull a stalled train out of a snowdrift?" asked Tom.

"Course we couldn't _pull_ the train," admitted Ted. "But we could sort
of--now--do _something_, couldn't we, Uncle Toby?" he asked.

"I believe we could, and I think that is what the engineer is trying to
signal us for," was the answer. "I know this railroad cut. It is a bad
place in a storm. Often trains have been stuck here for days. The engine
would ram its pilot, or cowcatcher, into a drift, then snow would pile
up behind the last car and the train couldn't go ahead or back up."

"Maybe that's happened now!" exclaimed Lola.

"I shouldn't be a bit surprised," said Uncle Toby.

"But what do the passengers do when the train is stuck, like this one is
now?" Tom wanted to know.

"Oh, sometimes they get out and walk, as it isn't very far to the
station. Or if they have something to eat, and can keep warm in the
cars, they stay there until men come with shovels to dig out the train.
I guess that's what this engineer wants me for--to go on to the station
and have a gang of men sent to dig out his train. We'll soon find out,"
Uncle Toby remarked.

The automobile road ran close to the tracks and near the deep cut which
was filled with snow. The storm was getting worse, but on the level
there was not yet enough snow to have stopped a train. It was only in
the cut that the drift was deep enough for this.

Uncle Toby stopped the automobile as near the stalled train as he could
go, and waited. Soon the engineer and a man with gold braid on his cap
came floundering through the deep snow at the side of the train until
they were within calling distance of Uncle Toby, who opened the car door
to listen.

"Could you oblige us by going to the next station and having the
telegraph operator send word to headquarters that we're stalled?" asked
the man with the gold braid on his cap. He was the conductor of the
train.

"Yes, I'll do that for you," said Uncle Toby. "I thought you were
whistling for help," he added to the engineer.

"That's what I was," came the answer. "I saw you just in time. 'Tisn't
often that an auto has to come to the help of a steam engine, but it
happened this time," he added, with a smile.

"Is there anything else I can do for you?" asked Uncle Toby, as he
prepared to start off again. The station was a little out of his way,
but he didn't mind that.

"Well, I don't know," replied the conductor slowly. "We haven't many
passengers on board, and all except a little boy and girl who are on
their way to Pocono will be all right. The way it is now we'll hardly
get there to-night, or anyhow, not until late, and they are traveling
alone. They expect to be met at Pocono by--let me see--I have his name
here somewhere," and he began searching among the papers in his pocket.
"The children are in my charge," he went on. "Their mother had to go to
a hospital and--"

"She did?" cried Uncle Toby so suddenly that the engineer and conductor
looked at him in surprise. "Is the name of the man who was to meet these
children Mr. Toby Bardeen?" went on the old sailor.

"Why, yes, that's his name. I have it here on a piece of paper," said
the conductor. "But how did you--"

"Are those children Harry and Mary Benton?" went on Uncle Toby.

"Those are their names, certainly," the conductor admitted. "But how in
the world--"

"I'm Mr. Toby Bardeen," interrupted the old sailor. "Uncle Toby is what
the Curlytops call me. I was expecting these children, but I had no idea
they'd arrive so soon. It's only by chance that I'm passing this way. I
didn't expect Mary and Harry for nearly a week."

"Well, the society that gave them in my charge, to see that they got
safely to Pocono and to Mr. Bardeen, told me their mother had to go to
the hospital sooner than she expected," reported the conductor. "I was
going to telegraph you when I got to the next station to make sure you'd
be on hand. They said--that is, the lady of the Fresh Air Society said
she'd written you to expect the children earlier."

"Well, I didn't get the letter, because I left home to go to visit the
Curlytops," said Uncle Toby. "However, it's all right now. I'll take the
children right into the auto with me and soon have them home. It's lucky
I met you."

"Very lucky, indeed!" agreed the conductor. "I'll go back and get the
children ready for you. Poor little things, they're quite sad and
forlorn. Their father was killed in the war, I understand."

"Yes," agreed Uncle Toby. "At least he's missing, and I guess he must be
killed or they'd have heard something from him by this time. However,
I'll take charge of the children. I used to know their mother many years
ago, but I haven't seen her for some time."

"If you'll drive along the road, around the cut, to the rear of the
train, the snow won't be so deep for the children," said the engineer.
"I'll help you carry them out," he added to the conductor.

The rocky cut, in which the train was stuck in the snow drift, was about
twice as long as the engine and cars, and in front of the cut, as well
as behind it, the snow was not very deep, though it was getting deeper
all the while as the white flakes came sifting down faster.

Uncle Toby started the automobile again, going to the rear of the train,
as near to it as he could get. A little later the conductor and engineer
came tramping through the drifts, each man carrying a child, the
conductor with the girl and the engineer with the boy. The children
were so wrapped up in shawls that it could scarcely be told which was
the boy and which was the girl.

"There you are, my dear!" said the conductor, as he set his passenger
down inside the automobile.

"And one more!" added the kind-faced but grimy engineer, putting the
little boy in next to his sister.

"Is this Pocono?" the boy asked freeing himself from the shawl that
wrapped him. "The lady said we weren't to get out except at Pocono."

"And we want Uncle Toby," added the girl.

"Bless your hearts, I'm Uncle Toby!" cried Mr. Bardeen. "This isn't
exactly Pocono, but you'd never get there to-night if you stayed on that
train. I'm going to take you off and drive you to my home in Pocono in
this auto. See, here are the Curlytops and some other playmates for
you," for now the two strangers could see the Curlytops and their
friends, Tom and Lola.

"Curlytops!" exclaimed Harry Benton, wonderingly.

"It's on account of our hair," explained Ted, taking off his cap.

"Oh, I see!" laughed Mary. "It's lovely hair! I wish mine curled."

"I'm glad mine doesn't," her brother exclaimed. "It's too hard to comb."

"It is hard," admitted Jan, while Trouble stared open-mouthed at the new
playmates.

"Is he a Curlytop, too?" asked Mary, looking at Baby William.

"He belongs to the family, but his hair doesn't curl," said Uncle Toby,
with a laugh. "But now that I have you children safe in here I'd better
be going," he added. "I'll tell the telegraph operator to send you help
as soon as he can," he added to the engineer and the conductor, who
started back to the stalled train.

"Please do," begged the conductor. "We'd like to get dug out of here
before night."

"Isn't it lovely in here, Harry?" asked Mary Benton, looking around
inside the comfortable automobile.

"I should say so!" he exclaimed. "I never was in a car like this
before."

The two children were poor--one need but look at their clothes to see
this. But they were clean and neat.

"And, oh, look! A dog!" cried Harry.

"That's Skyrocket! He likes you," said Ted, for the dog, after sniffing
at the two new playmates, wagged his tail in friendly fashion.

"I like him!" said Harry.

"And, oh, look at the kitten!" cried Mary, reaching her hand down to pat
the little bunch of fur that was purring on the seat between Lola and
Jan.

"Uncle Toby just found it in the woods," Jan explained.

"What's its name?" asked Mary.

"We haven't named it yet," Ted answered. "Skyrocket saw it up a tree and
barked."

"I think Fluff would be a nice name for the pussy," said Mary. "He's
such a fluffy ball of fur."

"Oh, that would be a lovely name!" cried Lola. "Why don't you call it
that?"

"I guess we will. You may name the kitten Fluff, Mary, and it'll be part
your cat."

"Oh, how nice!" murmured the poor little girl. "I never had even part of
a cat before."

"Uncle Toby has a cat and his name is Snuff!" said Trouble. "An' he's
got a monkey and a parrot!"

Mary and Harry looked as though they did not know whether or not to
believe this. Seeing the doubt on their faces Ted exclaimed:

"That's right! Uncle Toby has a lot of pets out at his place, and we're
going to take them to Crystal Lake with us, aren't we, Uncle Toby?"

"Oh, I guess if we take your dog that will be enough," chuckled the old
sailor. "The others will be better off in Pocono. But you'll have a
chance to see them," he added to the new children, noticing how
disappointed they looked. Then Harry and Mary smiled.

"Well, I must be getting on if I'm going to send help to the people on
the stalled train," remarked Uncle Toby, as he turned the automobile
around. "And then we'll go on to Pocono. Aunt Sallie will be getting
anxious about us."

"Is Aunt Sallie a monkey or a parrot?" Harry asked.

"Neither one!" answered Uncle Toby, with a laugh, in which the Curlytops
joined. "She's my housekeeper; and she'll go with us to Crystal Lake
for the holidays."

"What will you do with your pets?" asked Ted.

"I'll get some one to look after them. I haven't as many as when you
Curlytops played circus with them. But there's enough. Too many, so Aunt
Sallie thinks."

It was not a very long ride to the station from where word could be sent
that help was needed by the stalled train. The agent promised to
telegraph for snow shovelers at once.

Uncle Toby was about to drive on again when Janet stopped him by saying:

"Maybe the station agent could give us a little milk for the pussy."

"Maybe he could," agreed the old sailor. "I'll ask him."

As it happened, the agent kept a cat in the station on account of the
mice, and that day he had brought a little milk for his pet--more milk
than Choo-Choo, as he called his cat, wanted.

"I'll give you some for your pussy," said the agent, after he had
telegraphed for the snow shovelers.

I wish you could have seen Fluff lap up the milk, which was warmed for
him and put in a saucer on the floor of the automobile. He was
hungry--was the little stray kitten that had come down out of the
evergreen tree--and his little sides seemed to swell out like balloons
as he lapped up every drop of milk.

"I hope your cat Choo-Choo won't get hungry," said Jan, as the last of
the milk disappeared.

"I can get him some more," said the agent. "Anyhow, he isn't as hungry
as your pussy was."

"Good-bye!" called Uncle Toby, as he started off once more. "I hope the
stalled passengers will soon be shoveled out."

"I guess they will be," the agent said.

It was almost dark when the big automobile reached the village of Pocono
where Uncle Toby lived.

"Now we'll soon be snug and warm," he told the children. "I have more of
a load than when I started, but I'm glad I found you two," he said to
Mary and Harry. "You're going to have a good time with my Curlytops."

Harry and Mary, who had never had much of a good time in all their
lives, were beginning to be happy. They had been very small when their
father went off to war--they hardly remembered him, in fact. Mr. Benton
need not have gone, had he wished to stay at home, for he could have
been excused, or have done some other war work than fighting. But he was
a brave man and wanted to do his best for his country. So he had gone to
France. After awhile he was missing, and though his wife was helped by
her friends and by the government, still she had hard work to get along
and there was not much money with which to give Mary and Harry good
times. But happier days were ahead of them.

"There's Uncle Toby's house!" cried Ted, as the automobile turned into
the driveway.

"Oh, but something has happened!" exclaimed Jan. "Look! There's a crowd
out in front!"

And surely enough, a throng of people could be seen standing in the dusk
and storm in front of Uncle Toby's home.




CHAPTER X

AMONG THE PETS


As the automobile driven by Uncle Toby and containing the Curlytops and
their playmates came to a stop near the side entrance to Mr. Bardeen's
house, the door opened, letting out a stream of light on the white snow.

"Is that the police?" asked a voice which Ted remembered as that of Mrs.
Watson, or "Aunt Sallie," as Uncle Toby called her.

"No, this isn't the police," Uncle Toby answered, through the
half-opened door of the car that Ted had unlatched, ready to leap out.

Aunt Sallie did not seem to know Uncle Toby's voice, for she asked
another question.

"Is it the firemen then?"

"Good gracious!" cried Uncle Toby, opening the automobile door wider, so
that a swirl of snow drifted in. "What in the world is the matter? Why
do you want the firemen and policemen, Aunt Sallie?"

"Oh, thank goodness! It's you, is it, Uncle Toby?"

"Yes! Yes!" was the quick answer. "You stay in the car a moment,
children," said Mr. Bardeen, as he got out on the side of the steering
wheel. "Something must have happened. I'll see what it is."

Just then the crowd, which stood partly in the street and partly in the
yard of Uncle Toby's house, but up at the farther end, away from the
driveway, gave a shout.

"There he goes!" cried several voices.

"What can have happened?" exclaimed Janet, greatly excited.

"It's a fire, I guess," said Ted. "Aunt Sallie was asking for the
firemen."

"And she asked for the policemen, too," said Tom. "Maybe it's a burglar
up on the roof."

"That's right!" chimed in Harry, the new boy. "And maybe he's trying to
go down the chimney."

"Like Santa Claus," added his sister Mary, whom Jan and Lola had begun
to like very much.

"I want to see Santa C'aus!" cried Trouble, and he made a wiggle to get
out of the open door by which Uncle Toby had left.

"No! No!" cried Ted, catching hold of his little brother.

"Something has happened, anyhow," decided Tom. "This crowd wouldn't be
here for nothing. But I don't believe it's a fire, for there isn't any
smoke. I guess the reason Aunt Sallie wanted the firemen was because
they have ladders to get somebody down off the roof."

"Who could be up on the roof?" Jan wanted to know.

No one answered, but as both front doors of the closed automobile were
now open the children could hear what Uncle Toby and Aunt Sallie were
saying.

"What in the world has happened?" asked Uncle Toby.

"It's Jack, your monkey," was the answer. "He got loose a little while
ago and scrambled up on the roof. He's perched there now, near the
chimney. First I knew of it was when I saw a lot of boys in front of the
house, looking up. I thought the chimney was on fire."

"Was that why you wanted the firemen?" asked Uncle Toby.

"Partly," answered Aunt Sallie. "I telephoned for the fire department,
and when I heard your automobile in the side yard I thought it was the
firemen."

"But why did you send for the firemen when you found out the chimney
wasn't burning?" Uncle Toby asked.

"I thought they could get the monkey down with ladders," was the
housekeeper's reply.

"Then why did you send for the police?" went on Uncle Toby.

"To keep the crowd in order," sighed Aunt Sallie. "Oh, I've had such a
time! Some of the boys cut up so, and threw snowballs at Jack."

"My goodness! That's so, it is snowing!" cried Uncle Toby, as if, for
the time, he had forgotten all about it. "Poor Jack will catch his death
of cold up there on the roof in the storm. How did he get out? Never
mind; don't tell me now! I must get him down before he gets pneumonia.
Monkeys are very likely to get that if they get a chill."

"I don't believe he'll get cold," said Aunt Sallie. "He has a coat on."

"A coat on? Whose coat?"

"One of your old ones," answered Aunt Sallie. "He grabbed it up off the
rack as he scrambled out of the window and climbed the rain-water pipe
to the roof. If any one can get him down, you can, Uncle Toby."

"Yes, I guess I can. Jack always minds me. But it's hard to see him in
the dark."

"Oh, the electric light in front shines right on the roof," replied Aunt
Sallie. "And as the roof is white with snow, Jack shows quite plain. Do
get him down so the crowd will go away."

"Are the rest of the pets all right?" asked Mr. Bardeen.

"Yes," said Aunt Sallie, and the listening children were glad to hear
this.

"Come on in, Curlytops!" called Uncle Toby from the side porch. "There
isn't anything serious the matter. Jack has just gotten up on the roof,
that's all. It isn't the first time, for he often does it in summer, but
I never knew him to go out in the cold before. I guess he wants to show
that he'd be all right for taking out to Crystal Lake, but I'm not
going to humor him. Come on in Curlytops and the rest of you children!"

Out of the car scrambled the children, eager to see and hear all that
was going on. They had hardly more than reached the porch than out in
front of Uncle Toby's house sounded a rapidly clanging bell.

"Oh, here comes firemans! Here comes firemans!" shouted Trouble, jumping
up and down in delight.

And, surely enough, in the electrically lighted street could be seen the
glittering fire engine and the hook and ladder truck, with prancing
horses which seemed to delight being out in the storm.

There was a roaring murmur from the crowd, and Uncle Toby looked at Aunt
Sallie and shook his head.

"You surely have caused some excitement around here," he said, but he
could not help laughing.

"I go see fire engines!" cried Trouble. "I go!"

"You'll stay right here with me!" declared Jan, taking a firm hold of
her little brother's arm.

"No! Don't want to!" shouted Trouble. "Wants go see fire engines! I
'ikes fire engines!"

He squirmed and struggled so that it seemed as if he would break away
from Janet. Uncle Toby and Aunt Sallie had gone around to the front of
the house to meet some of the firemen who were asking where the blaze
was as they did not see any smoke.

"Be good, Trouble!" begged Lola, trying to help Janet manage the little
fellow, who was tired and cross from the long day's ride.

"Want to see fire engines!" he insisted, for the engine and truck were
now out of view from the side porch, having drawn up farther along the
street.

"Oh, maybe the police wagon will come and you can see it from here,"
added Mary, trying to do her best to aid in soothing William.

This seemed to quiet him at once. He was just a little afraid of a
policeman.

And, surely enough, just then the police patrol wagon, with its clanging
bell, not quite as loud as the fire engine, though, came up and a number
of officers jumped out. There was another roar from the crowd as this
added excitement was provided. Never had there been such an evening in
Pocono, with the big storm getting worse all the while.

But Uncle Toby took charge of matters. He explained to the police and
the firemen what had happened--that Aunt Sallie had become so excited
she had summoned more help than she had really needed.

"But is there really a monkey up on the roof?" asked a policeman.

"Yes, my monkey Jack is up there near the chimney," said Mr. Bardeen.
"You can see him. He's got on one of my coats."

Without a doubt there was Jack, sitting on the ridge of the roof, one
hairy paw thrust through an arm of the coat, clinging to the bricks of
the chimney.

"I'd like to get him down," said Uncle Toby, "for he is a valuable
animal, and he may take cold and get pneumonia even if he has on a
coat."

"Well, we're the boys to get him down," laughed one of the firemen. "But
will he bite?" he asked anxiously. "I don't know much about monkeys, but
I guess they can bite."

"Jack won't; that is, not after I speak to him," said Uncle Toby. "I'll
call him to come down, and you can go up on a ladder and get him if you
will."

"Oh, we'll do it all right," said the fireman. He and the police
officers knew and liked Uncle Toby.

Shortly afterward a ladder was raised to the roof, and a fireman went
up. He had to be careful on the sloping roof, on account of the slippery
snow that covered it. But another ladder, laid on the shingles, gave him
a firm footing.

Nearer and nearer he crawled to the crouching monkey. The crowd, which
had been laughing and joking, kept quiet now so Uncle Toby could talk to
Jack.

"Come on down, old fellow! Let the fireman bring you down. And don't
bite him!" called Uncle Toby to his pet.

Jack seemed to understand. He chattered a little, and then, when the
fireman was near enough, the monkey put his arms around the man's neck
and clung tightly.

"Now you're all right, old chap!" said the fireman, who was fond of
animals. "I've got you!"

A little later man and monkey were safe on the ground, while the crowd
cheered. Uncle Toby took Jack from the fireman, and the monkey nestled
in his master's arms, seemingly very glad to be down off the roof and
out of the storm.

"I must get him some hot milk to drink," said Uncle Toby, as the firemen
and police started back to their quarters. The crowd, seeing that there
was to be no more excitement, melted away out of the storm.

"Come, Curlytops, get in the house! All of you get in the house out of
the storm!" cried Uncle Toby, for the children had gone around to the
front to watch the rescue of Jack.

"Yes, yes! Come in!" cried Aunt Sallie. "You'll all get your deaths of
sneezes! Talk about hot milk for a monkey! I guess these children need
it more than Jack does!"

"We'll all have some hot milk!" declared Uncle Toby. "Here, Aunt Sallie,
you look after the Curlytops and their friends while I put the car away,
and then I'll come back and we'll have a cozy supper," went on Mr.
Bardeen. "I'll put Jack by the fire to thaw him out."

"I'm hungry!" announced Trouble.

"Bless your heart! you shall have something to eat as soon as I can get
it on the table," said Aunt Sallie. "That bad old Jack made a lot of
work!"

She shook a finger at the monkey, who whimpered a little.

"Oh, don't scold him!" begged Lola.

"Will he do tricks?" asked Tom.

"He's done enough tricks for one night," replied Aunt Sallie, as she
bustled about to get supper, while Uncle Toby put the car out of the
storm.

"Take off your hat, Mary," suggested Jan to the new girl, who stood
about a bit shyly.

Before the little girl could do this her hat was suddenly snatched from
her head, and a harsh voice cried:

"Eat 'em up! Eat 'em up! Eat 'em all up!"

"Oh! Oh!" screamed Mary. "What is it?"

"Don't be afraid!" laughed Ted. "You're just among Uncle Toby's pets!"




CHAPTER XI

WHERE DID TROUBLE GO?


Mary Benton, the little girl whose father had gone to the Big War and
had never been heard of since, was really frightened by the screeching
voice and by feeling her hat snatched off in that strange way. Even what
Ted said about being among Uncle Toby's pets did not seem to make her
feel any better.

She turned quickly around, and saw her hat that had been snatched off in
the black beak of a big red and green bird which was perched on the back
of a chair.

"Dat's Mr. Nip!" announced Trouble. He knew the parrot from the previous
summer.

"Eat 'em up! Eat 'em up! Eat 'em all up!" croaked Mr. Nip in his harsh
voice.

"Well, please don't eat Mary's hat up!" laughed Jan. "She'll want it to
wear when we go to Crystal Lake."

"Is that parrot going to the Lake with us?" asked Lola.

"If he does I'll have to be careful of my hat," added Mary, who was
getting over her fright. "It's a new one," she went on, and the other
girls rightly guessed that, being very poor, Mary did not have many
hats. Then and there Lola and Jan made up their minds to be kind to
Mary, whose mother was in the hospital and whose father--well, no one
knew what had happened to him.

"Here are some more pets!" cried jolly Uncle Toby, as he came in out of
the storm, having put the car in his barn. He was followed by Skyrocket,
who barked and leaped about, shaking snow-flakes all about. In his arms
Uncle Toby carried Fluff, the little kitten that had been rescued from a
"Ch'is'mus tree," as Trouble called the evergreen.

"Oh, we forgot all about him!" exclaimed Jan, as she took the little
stranger from Uncle Toby.

"It wouldn't be wonderful if you forgot even your names," laughed Uncle
Toby, "considering all the excitement that was going on when we got
here. But we're all right now, I guess."

[Illustration: SHE TURNED AND SAW HER HAT IN THE BEAK OF A BIG RED AND
GREEN BIRD. Page 115]

Skyrocket went over to sniff around Jack, the monkey, with which pet the
Curlytops' dog was well acquainted, so the two soon became friendly.

"I guess he misses Tip and Top," observed Ted, speaking of the two
valuable trick poodles, which had been sold since the children found
them in the show, after they had been stolen.

"Well, there are plenty of other animals," said Aunt Sallie, as she
finished setting the table and called to the children to take their
places.

Such a jolly time as followed! The Curlytops and their playmates, the
new as well as the old ones, were all hungry from their ride through the
cold. Even Trouble forgot about being sleepy while he ate, and if Mary
and Harry remembered about their mother in the hospital that thought did
not chase away the smiles from their faces.

At times, on the trip, Ted and Jan had given some thought to matters at
home, and had wondered if Daddy Martin would lose so much money as to
make the family poor. But now Ted and his sister were having a good time
with the others.

Jack, the monkey, seemed to have gotten over the slight shivering
caused by foolishly going up on the roof in the storm, and he and
Skyrocket ate their meal behind the warm stove on one side, while Snuff,
Uncle Toby's big cat, and Fluff, the new kitten, lapped warm milk from
the same saucer on the other side of the stove.

As for Mr. Nip, the parrot, he seemed satisfied after he had pulled off
Mary's hat, and he was now asleep with his head under his wing, perched
on his stand in one corner.

"How did Jack get out, Aunt Sallie?" asked Uncle Toby, as knives and
forks began to slow up a little in the supper race, the children
becoming less hungry the more they ate.

"I had left a window open, and he seemed to know it," was the answer. "I
never knew it to fail that if I left a window open so much as a crack
but what he'd find it. He's the smartest monkey I ever saw! But he's a
rascal just the same!"

"Well, you'll have a little rest from all the pets, except maybe
Skyrocket," said Uncle Toby. "We'll take him with us out to Crystal
Lake, but the other pets we'll leave here."

Uncle Toby's house was a large one and had plenty of beds in it for the
children. It was warm and cozy, and Aunt Sallie had seen to it that
everything should be comfortable for the Curlytops and their playmates.

"I thought you two were coming by train," she said to Mary and Harry,
when supper was over and the plans for the night began to be talked
about.

"They were on the train. But I took them off when it became stuck in the
snow," explained Uncle Toby. "I hope they have dug the engine out by
this time. If they haven't it may have to stay there a long time, for
this storm is getting worse."

The children thought so too, as they listened to the wind howling around
the corners of the house and down the chimney, while the hard flakes of
snow beat against the windows.

But they were snug and warm in Uncle Toby's house, and Jan and her
brother, with Lola and Tom, were so jolly, suggesting so many games to
play and talking about the good times to come at Crystal Lake, that
though Mary and Harry had begun to feel homesick this soon wore off, and
the strange playmates laughed with their new friends.

Trouble was to sleep in a big bed with Jan in a room next to Aunt
Sallie. And in the same room with Jan and her little brother, Mary and
Lola would sleep, but in separate beds.

The three older boys had a room to themselves, each with a single bed,
so they would not disturb one another.

"And mind!" cried Uncle Toby, when the time came to "turn in," as a
soldier or a sailor might say. "Mind! No pillow fights!"

"Oh, no!" cried Tom and Ted, winking at each other.

And I think Uncle Toby must have known that they would have a little fun
in this way. For he did not come up to stop them when they began tossing
about at each other the soft, fluffy pillows. At this game there was a
jolly good time for half an hour.

But even boys can get tired sometimes, and these boys had had a long
automobile ride that day. So they finally gave up tossing the pillows
about and settled down snugly in their beds. The girls and Trouble had
gone to sleep long before this.

"Well, you certainly have quite a houseful, Uncle Toby," said Aunt
Sallie that night, when locking-up time came, "with seven children, to
say nothing of the animals."

"Oh, I like 'em all!" exclaimed the old sailor, with a laugh. "And I
just had to take the Curlytops. There was no place for them to go when
their father and mother had to start off on that trip. As for Tom and
Lola, I wanted the Curlytops to have some playmates over the holidays.
And about Mary and Harry--well, I couldn't leave them in the big city
all alone, with their mother in the hospital."

"No, I suppose not. Poor children! Poor Mother! I hope she gets better!"

"I hope so, too," said Uncle Toby. "And I hope the Curlytops' father
doesn't lose his money."

Janet was awakened early the next morning by feeling something cold on
her face. She was dreaming that Jack, the monkey, was still up on the
roof, but that he had a long tail which reached all the way to the
ground. And she dreamed that Jack was dipping his tail in ice water and
tickling her on the cheek.

Something almost like this was happening as Janet opened her eyes, for
she saw Trouble bending over her with a lump of snow in his fist,
rubbing the cold stuff on her nose.

"Oh, Trouble! Stop it!" cried Janet, rolling over in bed and giving her
brother a little push. He dropped some of the cold snow down her neck.
"Oh!" screamed Jan. "You're freezing me!"

"You shouldn't have jiggled me!" complained Trouble, whose grasp on the
snowball had been loosened as his sister moved. "I wanted you open your
eyes," he added.

"I guess you made her open them all right," laughed Lola from her bed,
next to Janet's.

The talking aroused Mary, who sat up, rubbing her eyes.

"Oh, where am I?" she exclaimed. "I--Oh, I remember!" she said. "I was
dreaming I was back home!"

"And I was dreaming Jack was slapping me with his tail wet in ice
water," laughed Janet. "Then I wake up and find Trouble with a snowball.
Where did you get it?" she asked, tossing the half-melted lump into the
water basin near by.

"It blowed in the window," Trouble explained, pointing to more of the
white flakes on the sill. They had drifted in around a crack.

"You mustn't get out of bed and run around in your bare feet," said
Janet. "I wonder what sort of a day it is?" She slipped on her little
robe and slippers and went to the window, meanwhile covering Trouble
warmly in bed. "It's stopped snowing," she said, "and the sun is out. We
can make snowmen, big snowballs, and everything."

"Oh, what fun it will be!" cried Lola.

"Snow in the country is much nicer than in the city where I live," said
Mary. "It seems to stay clean longer out here."

Meanwhile Ted, Tom, and Harry had also discovered that there was a
chance for plenty of fun out of doors. They were soon up and getting
dressed, and when Aunt Sallie had seen that Trouble was washed and
dressed all the children went down to breakfast.

"Where are all the pets?" asked Mary, seeing only Mr. Nip perched on his
stand, cracking seeds in his strong beak.

"They're having their breakfasts out in their room," said Aunt Sallie,
for a special room had been provided for the animals.

A little later the Curlytops and their playmates were having fun in the
snow outside, Skyrocket romping around with them. There were sleds at
Uncle Toby's house, and not far from it a little hill, and on this the
children were soon coasting.

"It's more fun than our toboggan," cried Ted.

"Yes, it is. But the snow isn't going to last long," observed Tom. "It's
too warm."

"It's melting now," added Harry.

Indeed the warm sun would soon make short work of this first snow, which
had come much earlier than usual. The children made up their minds to
have as much fun as they could while it lasted.

So they coasted, they made snowmen, rolled big snowballs and the boys
even started to build a snow fort, for the white flakes were wet enough
to pack well and stay in place once they were piled up.

Trouble played with the others, sometimes getting in the way and
toppling down, to pick himself up again and fall down once more.

"I havin' 'ots of fun!" he laughed.

In fact all the children were--so much so that they hardly wanted to
come in to lunch. But playing out in the air made them hungry, and soon
they were eagerly eating.

"How soon are we going to Crystal Lake?" asked Ted of Uncle Toby, as the
Curlytops and the others prepared to rush out in the snow once more.

"Oh, we'll go in a few days," was the answer. "Might as well wait for
this snow to melt, as it's bound to if this weather keeps up. It will be
easier going for the auto then, as the roads to the Lake are rather
rough."

"Well, we're having fun here," chuckled Ted, as he ran out to join his
playmates.

"Let's make a big fort!" proposed Tom, for they had made a little one,
and trampled it down in having a "battle."

"All right," agreed the other boys.

"I he'p!" offered Trouble.

"No you'll only be in the way," Ted replied. "You go over and help
sister make a snowman," he added, for this is what Jan and the other two
girls were trying to do.

This was a bit selfish on Ted's part, for he must have known that
Trouble would annoy his sister as much as the little fellow would be in
the way of himself and his chums. But brothers are this way sometimes, I
suppose.

Anyhow, Trouble toddled off to see if he could not play with Jan, Lola,
and Mary. He saw them shaping the snowman.

"I he'p!" he offered, trying to put a little ball on the snowman's coat
to serve as a "button."

"Oh, Trouble! Don't!" begged Jan. "Go over and play with the boys!
You'll spoil our snowman!"

"Ted telled me come here!" announced William.

Poor Trouble! No one seemed to want him!

"Oh, let him stay," begged Mary, "I'll watch him."

"All right," sighed Jan. She was trying to make the snowman's face, and
it was not easy work.

Just how it happened no one seemed to know but the boys forgot all about
Trouble in the excitement of making their fort. And though Mary had
promised to keep watch over the little fellow she forgot when she went
to the shed to get two pieces of coal to make eyes for the snowman.

It was not until after the snowman was finished and Ted had shouted what
fun it would be if they could put him in the fort that Trouble was
missed.

"Where is he?" asked Janet, looking around the yard.

"He was here a little while ago," said Lola.

"I saw him too," added Tom.

But now Trouble was not in sight.

"Maybe he went into the house to get something to eat," suggested Mary.

Jan ran to the door and asked Aunt Sallie.

"Why, no," she answered. "Trouble didn't come in here!"

"Oh, where can Trouble be?" half sobbed Janet.




CHAPTER XII

OFF TO CRYSTAL LAKE


This was not the first time Trouble Martin had been lost or missing. It
happened more or less often at home in Cresco, and once when the
Curlytops had come to Uncle Toby's. But he had never before been lost
after a big snow storm--that is, as far as Janet or Teddy could
remember. What Janet was afraid of was that her little brother might
wander off and fall into some drift. For the snow was deep in places not
very far from Uncle Toby's house.

"Oh, we'll find him!" declared Ted. "He can't be far off. We didn't want
him playing around our fort for fear he'd spoil it."

"And I sent him away from our snowman on the same account," sighed
Janet. "I wish I had kept him by me."

Aunt Sallie came out of the house, her apron thrown over her head.

"Did you find Trouble?" she asked.

"No'm," chorused the children.

"Dear me!" exclaimed the old lady. "You must call Uncle Toby and tell
him. He's out in the barn working over the auto, getting ready for the
trip to Crystal Lake. Go tell him Trouble is missing."

Janet and the others thought this would be the best thing to do, and
Uncle Toby soon heard the latest happening regarding the Curlytops.

"If Trouble isn't in the house nor around where you are playing, he must
have wandered off down the street," said Uncle Toby. "The walks have
been pretty well cleaned off by this time. The snowplow has been along."
For in Pocono the street cleaning department sent out a big snowplow,
drawn by horses, after every big storm, and thus the sidewalks were made
easy to walk on without waiting for each householder to clean his own
space.

"But where would he go?" asked Janet, hardly able to keep back her
tears.

"That's what we must find out," said Uncle Toby. "Don't worry. We'll
find him. I'll ask the police if they've seen him. A little chap like
Trouble would be sure to be noticed."

"Unless maybe he fell in a snowdrift," suggested Janet.

"If he fell in he'd shout and cry until some of us came to help him
out," said Uncle Toby. "Now we'll start a searching party. I'll go with
you girls up the street, and the three boys can go down the street. Ask
every one you meet if they have seen Trouble."

"Only," suggested Jan, "we'd better give him his right name of William."

"That's so!" laughed Uncle Toby. "If we go along asking every one we
meet if they have seen Trouble, they'll think we are trying to make fun
of them. Yes, we must ask for news of a little boy named William."

So they started out, Ted, Tom and Harry going one way, and Uncle Toby
and the three girls the other way. Aunt Sallie remained behind in the
house, but she was very anxious, and she said she would call up police
headquarters, asking that each officer be told to be on the lookout.

At first the question asked by the searchers had no effect. No one
seemed to have noticed Trouble toddling along the streets, which, as
Uncle Toby had said, were now quite free from snow, which was piled
high on either side.

"Maybe he wandered off toward the woods," suggested Lola, for there was
a clump of trees, called "woods" not far from Uncle Toby's house.

"I don't believe so," was Mr. Bardeen's answer. "I think he wouldn't go
there alone. But here comes Policeman McCarthy. I'll ask him."

And, to the delight of the girls, Policeman McCarthy said he had seen a
little boy going along the street a few minutes before.

"I don't know what his name was," the officer said. "But he was dressed
just as you say. He seemed to know where he was going, so I didn't stop
him, though he was pretty little to be out alone."

"Where did he go?" asked Uncle Toby.

"Right down that way," answered the policeman, pointing. "He was
standing in front of that barber shop the last I saw him."

"Oh, now I know where he's gone!" suddenly cried Janet.

"Where?" asked Uncle Toby.

"In the barber shop," answered the little girl. "Trouble was in the
bathroom this morning, Uncle Toby, getting washed," Janet explained.
"He found some of your shaving soap, and he liked the smell of it. He
was rubbing it on his face when I stopped him. He asked me where you got
your soap and I told him in a barber shop, I thought. Then he wanted to
know what a barber shop was like, and I told him it was a place that had
a red, white, and blue pole in front of it. So that's where he's
gone--to the barber shop to get some of that nice smelling soap."

"I shouldn't wonder," agreed Uncle Toby. "I hope the barber kept him
there, if he went in."

They hurried to the shop in front of which was a gay red, white, and
blue pole, and there they found Trouble. But they found him more than
just inquiring for scented soap, for he was up in the chair, kept
specially for children.

In front of Trouble, draped around his neck, was a white apron, and the
barber, with comb and scissors, was just about to cut the little
fellow's long hair.

"Trouble! What are you doing?" cried Uncle Toby, his voice causing the
barber to turn around in surprise.

"I goin' get hair cut!" announced the little fellow.

"Oh, no! You mustn't!" exclaimed Jan.

"I wants hair cut an' nice smelly stuff on my face," announced the
little fellow, holding tightly to the arms of the barber's chair, lest
he be made to come out.

"No, no!" said Janet. "Not now, Trouble!"

"Didn't some of you send him to have his hair trimmed?" asked the
barber, in some surprise.

"No, indeed!" laughed Uncle Toby, who knew the barber quite well. "He
ran off by himself. I'm glad we reached here in time to stop you. He's a
little tyke; that's what he is!"

"Well, he came in here as bold as you please," said Mr. Miller, the
barber. "He climbed up in the chair himself, and though he didn't tell
me so exactly, I thought he wanted a hair cut, as it's pretty long. He
did say he wanted some nice perfume on him, but all the children say
that when they come in here. And I've often had them as young as he is
come in here alone. But of course their fathers or mothers sent 'em. And
you didn't send this little chap?" he asked, as he helped Trouble down
out of the chair, much to William's disgust.

"No, we didn't send him," chuckled Uncle Toby. "He just took the notion
himself. Tried some of my shaving soap this morning, so his sister says.
Well, I am glad he's found. We'd better take him back so the boys will
know we've come to the end of the search. You mustn't do anything like
this again, Trouble," said Uncle Toby, a bit sternly, shaking his finger
at William.

"Nope!" he readily promised. "Maybe I have some nice smelly stuff take
home?" he added hopefully.

"Here you are!" laughed the barber, and he gave Trouble a little cake of
scented soap.

"You gave us a big scare," said Janet, when they were on their way back
to Uncle Toby's house.

"You make big snowman?" asked Trouble, and that's about all he seemed to
care. Janet wanted to laugh, but she did not think it wise.

They met the boys coming back, Ted and the other two being anxious, as
of course they had heard no word about the missing wanderer. But they
saw William in Uncle Toby's arms, and knew everything was now all
right.

"I'll keep my eye on you after this," said Janet when the children were
once more playing in the snow around Uncle Toby's house.

But it was one thing to say she would keep watch over a little chap like
Trouble, and another thing actually to do it. And William made more
trouble before the day was over.

Evening came, when it was time to stop playing out of doors and come
into the house. And it was after supper when the children were sitting
in the living room, listening to Uncle Toby tell a story, that Aunt
Sallie came running in from the kitchen.

"Oh, Uncle Toby!" she cried. "There's a leak in one of the pipes.
There's a big puddle of water in the middle of the kitchen floor. It was
dry when I went up to see if the beds were ready, and when I came down,
just now, I found a lot of water there."

"A broken pipe? That's too bad!" exclaimed Uncle Toby. "I may be able to
fix it myself; but if I can't, we'll have hard work getting a plumber
this time of night. I can shut off the water in the cellar, though, I
suppose. However, I'll take a look."

The children followed Uncle Toby and Aunt Sallie out to the kitchen.
Surely enough there was a large puddle of water in the middle of the
oilcloth. Uncle Toby looked up and around, and said:

"I can't see what pipe has burst. If it was one in the kitchen the water
would be spurting out now. It seems to come from under the sink."

By this time Trouble was toddling across the room toward the sink, under
which was a sort of cupboard with two swinging doors. The little fellow
was trying to open one of these doors.

"Here, Trouble! Let Uncle Toby look!" said Ted.

"I wants get my snowball," announced William.

"Your snowball!" cried Jan.

"Yep! I put big snowball there when I comed in. Wants to get it now,"
and William tugged at the sink door.

"Ha! Maybe that's where the water came from!" cried Uncle Toby.

And it was. As the sink cupboard was opened more water was seen, and in
the midst of the puddle there floated what was left of a large ball of
snow. Trouble had brought it in, put it under the sink when no one was
looking, and there the warmth of the kitchen stove had slowly melted it,
causing the water to run out under the doors.

"What in the world made you put a snowball in there, Trouble?" asked
Ted, as Aunt Sallie mopped up the water.

"Maybe I wants make snowman in night," was Trouble's answer.

That may have been his reason--no one could tell. At any rate, no great
harm was done, as the snow water was clean and the oilcloth was soon
wiped dry.

"I guess you'd better go to bed before you get into any more mischief,"
said Janet.

And soon the Curlytops and their playmates were all sound asleep.

The next day it rained, and as the weather turned warm the snow was soon
nearly all melted or washed away.

"So much the better for making the trip to Crystal Lake," said Uncle
Toby. "I don't care what it does after we get there, but I like good
going though the woods."

"Oh, what fun we'll have at Crystal Lake!" cried the Curlytops and their
playmates.

They started three days later, in the big automobile. Uncle Toby, Aunt
Sallie, the children, and Skyrocket. Uncle Toby hired a colored man and
his wife to come and live in his house and look after the pets,
including the new kitten, Fluff, while he was at camp for the holidays.

"Hurray! Here we go!" cried Ted and the others, as Uncle Toby started
the automobile.

As they were turning out of the drive a boy came riding up the street on
a bicycle, waving a yellow envelope in his hand.

"Wait a minute! Wait a minute!" he shouted. "Here's a telegram!"




CHAPTER XIII

THE LONELY CABIN


Uncle Toby brought the automobile to a stop and looked at the boy.

"A telegram?" repeated Uncle Toby. "For whom is it?"

"You," answered the boy, and Ted and Jan wondered if it could be about
their father and mother. Suppose one of them were ill, or suppose Daddy
Martin had lost all his money, and Ted and Jan had to go back home? It
doesn't take much to worry children, just as it doesn't take much to
make them happy.

Tom and Lola, too, knew that telegrams often bring bad news, and as
Uncle Toby was opening the yellow envelope which the boy handed him,
these two playmates of the Curlytops thought perhaps something had
happened at their home.

And, in turn, Harry and Mary began to fear that the message might be bad
news about their mother in the hospital. A few tears began to form in
Mary's eyes, but they soon dried away when Uncle Toby, after reading the
message, gave a hearty laugh.

"Ha! Ha! Ha!" chuckled Uncle Toby. "This is funny! The idea of sending
me a message like this!"

"What is it?" asked Ted, while the messenger boy waited to see if Uncle
Toby wanted to send an answer to the telegram.

"Oh, it's from an old friend of mine, Hezekiah Armstrong. He says he has
a chance to buy an elephant cheap, and he telegraphs to ask me if I
don't want it."

"Want an elephant!" repeated Jan.

"Yes, for a pet, I suppose. It may be one of his jokes, or he may mean
it, but I certainly don't want an elephant, in winter time especially."

"Would you want one in summer?" asked Tom, with a laugh.

"Well, an elephant is easier to take care of in summer than in winter,"
answered Mr. Bardeen. "In warm weather I could turn the elephant out in
the meadow and let him eat grass. But in winter I'd have to keep him in
a barn and let him eat hay, and they eat a big lot of hay--enough to
keep me poor, I guess. So I'll just telegraph back to Hezekiah that I
don't want an elephant. We couldn't take it to Crystal Lake, anyhow.
Here you are, son!" he called pleasantly to the boy. "You take back this
message for me."

Uncle Toby wrote it on a blank of which the boy had a number in his
pocket. As Mr. Bardeen paid the lad and was about to start the
automobile again, the boy asked:

"Where you going?" He was acquainted with Mr. Bardeen.

"Out to Crystal Lake," answered Uncle Toby, and the children in the
automobile wondered if the messenger lad did not wish he were going.

"Crystal Lake!" exclaimed the boy. "Are you going out there to catch the
burglar?"

"Catch the burglar? What burglar?" asked Uncle Toby. "This is the first
I've heard a burglar was out there. What do you mean?"

"It was in the paper this morning," the boy went on. "It said some of
the cabins and camps out at the Lake had been broken into and robbed.
They haven't any police out there, so it said the police from Pocono
had been asked to see if they could catch the burglar. I thought maybe
that's why you were going out."

"Oh, no!" replied Uncle Toby. "I'm not a policeman. And though I
wouldn't want a burglar to get into my cabin, he wouldn't find very much
to take if he did get in. I guess, most likely, it's some tramp that has
broken into some of the cabins. We'll not worry about that, shall we,
Curlytops?" chuckled Uncle Toby. "If we find any burglars out there
we'll make Skyrocket bite 'em--sha'n't we, Trouble?" and he playfully
pinched William's cheek.

"We make elephant run after 'em!" laughed Trouble.

"That's right!" said Uncle Toby.

Once more they started off in the big comfortable car that so well kept
out the cold. Most of the snow from the recent storm was gone, though
Uncle Toby said there would probably be some left in the woods around
Crystal Lake, where it did not melt as fast as in Pocono.

"I'm glad that telegram wasn't bad news from home," said Ted. "It isn't
any good to get bad news just when you start to have fun."

"That's right," agreed Tom. "My father wasn't feeling very well when we
started, and I thought maybe the message was to say he was worse."

"Mary and I haven't any father to get messages from," said Harry, rather
sadly. "We hardly remember him, for we were little when he went away to
the war."

"And he never came back?" asked Jan softly.

"No, he never came back," repeated Mary, trying to keep the tears from
her eyes.

Uncle Toby saw that the children might be made sad by this sort of talk,
so, as they were passing a meat market on the edge of town, he stopped
the car and began to get out.

"What are you going to do?" asked Aunt Sallie. "I have everything we
need for getting supper out at the Lake, and we have our lunch with us."

"It isn't for us," said Uncle Toby. "It's for Skyrocket. I want to get
him a nice bone to gnaw. It will keep him quiet on the ride," he
explained. "I'm going to get a fine, juicy bone for Skyrocket."

This took the children's mind off what might have been a sad subject to
think about--the ill mother and missing father of Harry and Mary. And
when Uncle Toby made Skyrocket sit up in the automobile and "beg" for
the bone, the dog did it in such a funny way that the children all
laughed.

"Now they'll be all right," said Uncle Toby to himself, as he again sent
the big car forward.

Soon they were out in the country. The weather was pleasant after the
storm, though it was cold, and would soon be more frosty, for winter was
at hand, and the children had already begun to think of Christmas.

As Aunt Sallie had said, there had been placed in the automobile a
number of boxes of lunch to be eaten on the way, as it would be night,
or very near it, before the cabin in the woods could be reached. Uncle
Toby had written to a lumberman to build a fire in it so the place would
be warm for the children. It was a large roomy cabin, with many comforts
and conveniences. Having the lunch in the automobile, the next thing to
think about was the time to eat it.

Possibly the boys thought more about this than the girls; at any rate
that must have been the reason why Tom and Ted so often asked Uncle Toby
what time it was, for the clock on the instrument board of the
automobile was not going.

"Well, it will soon be eating time, if that's what you want to know,"
answered Uncle Toby, with a laugh, after this same question had been
asked many times. He seemed to be always laughing.

"In fact we may as well get the lunch out now, I guess, Aunt Sallie," he
went on. "We had an early breakfast and--"

He suddenly stopped talking, for there was a loud hissing sound from
beneath the automobile, as if a big snake had had its tail run over.

"Puncture!" cried Tom and Ted, for they knew enough about cars to tell
this.

"Well, I'm glad it isn't a blow-out!" Uncle Toby exclaimed. Had there
been a blow-out the noise would have been much louder, like the bang of
a gun. "As long as it's only a puncture we can easily mend it, and I'll
do that while the rest of you eat."

"Oh, let me help!" begged Ted. "I often help daddy when he has tire
trouble."

"I want to help, too," cried Tom.

"So do I," added Harry. "We never had an auto," he went on, "so I don't
know anything about them. But I'll do what I can."

"Well, you boys can hand me the tools," said Uncle Toby, "and I'll do
the hard work. This is a heavy car and I don't want you getting into any
danger around it. You can be getting out the lunch, Aunt Sallie. We'll
be ready to eat after we finish putting in a new rubber tube."

"We'll help," offered Jan and the other two girls, while Trouble cried:

"I want to see punchure! Want to see punchure!"

"No, you stay in here," said his sister, for she knew he would only get
in the way if allowed to run about. "I'll let you open some of the
boxes."

This satisfied Trouble, who was now content to stay in the big car.
Skyrocket, though, went out with the boys and nosed about in the woods
near which the stop had been made.

It did not take Uncle Toby long to jack up the car, take off the tire,
put in a new tube, and be ready to start again. But before doing that
they halted a bit longer to eat lunch. Hot chocolate had been brought
along in thermos bottles, and Uncle Toby thought the chocolate would
spill on the children if they tried to drink it while the automobile was
moving.

"There! I feel better!" exclaimed Ted, after the lunch.

"So do I!" cried Tom and Harry.

Once more they were on their way, journeying now along some country
road, and again through some lonely stretch of wood. They were almost at
Crystal Lake, and in another quarter of an hour would be at Uncle Toby's
cabin, when Mr. Bardeen began sniffing the air.

"The engine's getting too hot," he said, and then, as he noticed some
steam coming out of the radiator cap he added: "Water's getting low.
I'll have to stop and get some."

"Where can you get any water around here?" asked Ted.

"I'll try at that cabin," answered Uncle Toby, pointing to a lonely one
a short distance ahead on the road. "I guess it will be safe to run the
car that much farther."

"Who lives there?" asked Ted, as the automobile went along more slowly,
for Uncle Toby did not want to overheat it.

"Nobody lives there now," was the reply. "It's deserted. But there's a
well near it, and it's such a deep one I don't believe it will be
frozen. I can get some water from the well."

Uncle Toby stopped the car in front of the lonely cabin. He got out a
folding canvas pail from the tool-box, and was going toward the cabin
when Ted exclaimed:

"I thought you said nobody lived here, Uncle Toby!"

"So I did," was the answer. "No one has lived here for several years."

"Well, look at him!" cried the boy, and he pointed to a man running away
over the field from the back door of the lonely cottage.




CHAPTER XIV

AT CRYSTAL LAKE


Uncle Toby was much surprised at what Ted called to his attention.
Turning around, as he was going toward the well, Uncle Toby looked to
where the Curlytop boy pointed. He saw the form of a man vanishing from
sight over the top of a little hill just behind the lonely cabin.

"Hello there!" cried Uncle Toby, in such loud tones that Skyrocket began
to bark fiercely. "Hello there! Who are you? What are you doing?"

The man did not stop, turn around, nor answer. Instead he ran into a
little clump of trees and was soon lost to sight. With another loud bark
Skyrocket took after him.

"Oh, don't let our dog go!" cried Jan. "Make him come back, Uncle Toby.
That man might hurt him."

"Just what I think," said Uncle Toby. "Here, Sky!" he called, for
sometimes the Curlytops' dog was given that short name. "Here, Sky! Come
back. Come back!"

Skyrocket didn't want to. He dearly loved a chase, and this man seemed
willing to run. That the man was out of sight made no difference to the
dog. Skyrocket loved a game of hide and go seek, and perhaps he thought
that was what the stranger was playing.

"Come back here, Sky!" called Uncle Toby.

"Here, Skyrocket! Here!" shouted Ted.

Janet added her voice to that of her brother and Trouble chimed in.
Perhaps all these had an effect on the dog, or he might have thought
that Uncle Toby would punish him if he did not mind. At any rate, after
a few more barks and some growls, looking meanwhile toward the clump of
trees into which the man had disappeared, the dog came back, wagging his
tail and seeming a bit disappointed.

"Who was that man, Uncle Toby?" asked Janet.

"I don't know," was the answer. "No one has lived in that cabin for
years. I guess he is some tramp who didn't have any other place to
stay."

"He didn't look like a tramp," observed Tom.

"No, his clothes weren't ragged," added Ted.

"That's so," agreed Uncle Toby. "From the little look I had of him he
wasn't very ragged. But then maybe he hasn't been a tramp very long, and
it takes quite a while to make one's clothes ragged."

"It doesn't take Trouble long!" laughed Jan. "He can go out with a good
new suit on and come back in half an hour with it all full of cuts and
holes."

"Oh, well, Trouble is different," said Uncle Toby, with a chuckle.

Uncle Toby stood for a few moments looking toward the woods into which
the strange man had run, and then, going to the well, filled the pail
with water and put some in the radiator of the automobile. After that
Uncle Toby went around to the back of the old cabin.

"Are you going to see if anybody else is there?" asked Jan, while Lola
and Mary waited with curiosity for an answer.

"Let me come and help look!" cried Ted.

"So will I!" added Tom.

"If you fellows are going I might as well go, too," said Harry.

"No, you children stay where you are," called Uncle Toby. "I'm just
going to take a look around, and then we'll go on to Crystal Lake. Stay
where you are!"

Ted, Janet, and the others remained in the automobile, waiting for Uncle
Toby to come back. Aunt Sallie was almost ready to doze off in a little
sleep when Mr. Bardeen was seen coming around the corner of the cabin.
No one was with him, and there was no further sight of the man.

"Was anybody else in there?" asked Ted.

"No one," replied Uncle Toby. "The cabin was empty as far as I could
see. I guess the man just stopped in there for shelter, and when he saw
us he thought we owned the place and ran out."

"Who does own it?" asked Tom.

"It belongs to a lumberman named Newt Baker," answered Uncle Toby. "He
used to stay here in the summer, and sometimes part of the winter. But
he went away and since then no one has lived here--except that tramp,"
he added with a laugh. "Poor man," he went on, "I hope he finds some
place to stay this winter. It looks as if it might be a hard one from
the early snow we had."

Once more they started off; and a little later, nothing more having
happened, they arrived safely at Crystal Lake.

"Oh, what a fine place!" cried Tom Taylor, as he saw the big body of
water, on the shore of which was perched Uncle Toby's cottage. The lake
was not frozen, except with a "skim" of ice here and there in little
coves.

"It would be lovely in summer for picnics," said Lola. Neither she nor
her brother had been to Crystal Lake before, but the Curlytops had
visited it once or twice with Uncle Toby, though they had almost
forgotten.

"Well, here we are, children!" called Uncle Toby, as he stopped the
automobile near his "shack" as he often called it. "Now if you'll see
that they get safely inside, Aunt Sallie, I'll soon be with you and
we'll look after supper and get the beds ready."

"I not goin' to bed now!" cried Trouble. "I not goin' to bed now! I
goin' to stay up an' see--an' see--Santa C'aus!" he burst out, after a
moment of thought.

"Oh, you little tyke!" laughed Lola, catching him up in her arms. "Santa
Claus won't be here for over a month."

"And you don't have to go to bed right away," added Janet.

Out of the auto piled the boys and girls, Skyrocket scrambling ahead of
them to smell around and find out what sort of place this was that he
had been brought to.

As Aunt Sallie, the Curlytops and their playmates went toward the front
door of the cabin, the door was opened and a smiling man looked out.

"Hello, folks!" he called. "I've got it good and warm for you, though it
isn't as cold as it was." He was the man Uncle Toby had engaged to start
the fires and to have everything in readiness for the coming of the
Curlytops.

"Well, we're glad to get here, Jim Nelson," said Aunt Sallie, for she
knew the man.

Uncle Toby put the car in the barn and came in with some of the boxes
and bundles that had been piled in the automobile--bundles of clothes
and things for the children.

"Well, you got here all right, I see," remarked Jim Nelson. "Have any
trouble on the way?"

"Not to amount to anything," answered Uncle Toby. "Funny thing, though,
down at Newt Baker's cabin. I stopped there to get some water from his
deep well. And as I got near the cabin a man ran out and down the hill."

"A man!" exclaimed Mr. Nelson, while the children listened to the talk.
"I didn't know anybody was living there."

"There isn't--that is, not living there regularly," said Uncle Toby.
"But a man ran out. I took him for a tramp at first, only he wasn't
ragged. But after he ran away I went and looked in."

"What did you see?" asked Mr. Nelson, and this the Curlytops and others
wished to hear about.

"Well, it looked as if he'd been living there and doing his cooking for
some time," went on Uncle Toby. "There were a lot of tin cans and odds
and ends of loaves of bread, cracker crumbs, and the like on the table
in the kitchen. Looked to me as if this man had been camping out in Newt
Baker's shack."

"Very likely," said Mr. Nelson. "I don't like such characters hanging
around Crystal Lake. We'll have to keep watch for him. If there are
tramps around they may take things. As a matter of fact, food and little
comforts of small value have been taken from some of the cottages and
camps. Fred Tuller's son Tom wrote to the Pocono paper and made a whale
of a story out of it. But from what you say the matter may be of more
importance than we thought. At any rate, we'd better look into it."

"We'll keep a lookout, then," said Uncle Toby. "And I'll take another
run down to the cabin some day, after I get the Curlytops settled here
having fun," and he laughed at the boys and girls so they would not be
afraid of the talk of tramps and men who might take things.

Mr. Nelson left a little after this, promising to come over the next day
to see how they were.

Then came busy times in Uncle Toby's cabin at Crystal Lake. Aunt Sallie
and the three girls got ready the supper, while the boys opened boxes
and bundles. Skyrocket ran about here and there, poking his nose into
everything, and Trouble was almost as bad, for he, too, wanted to see
everything that was going on.

At last, however, things began to get "straightened out," as the
Curlytops' mother would have said, and they sat down to a fine supper.
Every one had a good appetite, even Skyrocket, who had gnawed clean the
bone Uncle Toby got him at the butcher shop.

"Let's play hide and go seek before we go to bed," proposed Jan, as they
sat about the open fireplace in the big living room after supper.

"Will it be all right?" asked Mary.

"Will what be all right?" Jan wanted to know.

"I mean won't your uncle be mad if we play in his house?" went on Mary.

"Oh, dear no!" laughed Jan. "That's what he brought us up here for;
didn't you, Uncle Toby?"

"Didn't I what, Jan?" he asked, for he had been talking to Aunt Sallie
about the beds.

"Didn't you bring us up here so we could have a good time?"

"Of course I did!" exclaimed Mr. Bardeen. "What do you want to do now?"

"Play hide and go seek. May we?"

"Yes, go ahead. Run about as much as you please, but don't get hurt.
There isn't any fancy furniture here to break."

This was true, for everything in the cabin at Crystal Lake was heavy and
strongly made to stand rough handling. So the children could do no harm
racing about the cabin.

Soon a merry game was in progress, even Trouble taking part, though he
could hardly be said to play it right. His idea was to hide and keep on
yelling for some one to come and find him, his voice easily telling
where he was. The only thing to be done in his case was to pretend not
to know where he was, even if one saw him. This always made Trouble
scream with delight, and he would say, over and over again:

"You couldn't find me, could you?"

And of course they always said they couldn't, though they could if they
had wished.

So the game went on, Trouble taking his part in it. Finally came the
turn of Mary to "blind," and as she covered her face and began to count
slowly, the others tiptoed into the different rooms to hide. The cabin
was built on the bungalow style, with a number of rooms on the first
floor, and there were many fine hiding places.

Janet went into a room at the far end of the cabin, a room that no one,
so far during the evening, had entered. It was where Uncle Toby was
going to sleep.

"No one will find me here," thought Janet, as she crouched down behind a
chair near one of the windows. She looked through the glass, and dimly
saw the dark forest all around the cabin. "No one will think of coming
here," said Janet to herself.

She cuddled herself into as small a nook as possible down behind the
chair, in a place where she could look out through the other rooms and
could see the lamplight and firelight in the big living apartment.

It was in this living apartment that Mary was counting with her eyes
shut and soon she would call: "Ready or not I'm coming!" Then she would
walk around and try to find the hiding ones.

"But she won't find me," thought Janet, "and I can get in home free."

From the distance Janet heard Mary say she was coming, and then suddenly
the little girl was startled by a tapping on the window just back of
the chair behind which she was hiding.

At first Janet thought it was the brushing of some tree branch against
the glass that had made the tapping sound. But when it came again,
several times, and very regular, the little girl knew some hand must be
doing it.

"Maybe Tom or Ted has gone outside and is trying to scare me," thought
Janet. "I'll take a peep and see."

Slowly she raised herself up from her crouching position behind the
chair. And then the tapping sound on the glass came again. Janet looked
out and gave a scream as, looking in through the window, she saw the
face of a man on which the moon faintly shone.




CHAPTER XV

ON THE SLIPPERY HILL


Janet Martin had only a glimpse of the face of the man looking in
through the window at her after he had tapped on the glass. As soon as
he saw some one peering out at him, and as soon as he heard Janet
scream--as he must have heard--the man sprang away.

He was soon lost to sight in the woods around the cabin. The moon shone
faintly--had it not been for this Jan would never have seen the man's
face--but it was not bright enough in the forest to see him after he
leaped away from the cabin.

"Oh! Oh! Oh!" screamed Janet. Her voice rang out in the empty room and
was heard by Uncle Toby, Aunt Sallie and the children playing hide and
go seek.

"What's the matter? What's the matter?" asked Uncle Toby, who was
putting wood in the fireplace.

"Oh, it's a man! A man!" cried Janet, running out from Uncle Toby's
bedroom into the living apartment where they were now all gathered. "A
man looked in the window at me and he tapped on the glass!"

"Who was he?" asked Uncle Toby, grasping a heavy stick of wood. Tom, Ted
and Harry at once began to think they had better take some sticks, too,
in case there might be a fight. "Was it Jim Nelson?" went on Uncle Toby.
"Sometimes he taps on my window when he comes around by the side path."

"I--I couldn't see who it was--except that he was a man," stammered
Janet. "As soon as he saw me looking at him he ran away."

"Jim Nelson wouldn't do that unless he was playing a trick," decided
Uncle Toby. "And Jim isn't that kind of a man. He wouldn't scare
children. I must see who this is!"

"Maybe he's the tramp we saw over at the place where you got the pail of
water this afternoon," said Ted.

"Maybe," agreed Uncle Toby. "Well, if he's a poor man and in trouble I'm
sorry for him. But he hasn't any right to come sneaking around my
cabin, tapping on the window. I'll see about this!"

Uncle Toby went outside, and the boys followed. Trouble wanted to go
with Ted, but Janet held back her little brother.

In the moonlight, which was brighter now, as the clouds had blown away,
Uncle Toby made a trip around the cabin, taking Skyrocket with him,
while the boys, each with a chunk of wood as a weapon, followed Mr.
Bardeen.

Uncle Toby called loudly to know who was in the woods, and the dog
barked, but no man answered.

"I can't find any one," Uncle Toby announced, coming back into the cabin
with the boys. "It's too dark to see if there are any strange footprints
in the snow, and I don't believe we could tell by them anyhow, as Jim
Nelson and some of his friends have been tramping around here the last
few days, bringing in wood and things. Are you sure you saw a man at the
window, Janet?"

"Sure, Uncle Toby. And I heard him tapping on the glass, too."

"Well, I don't believe he meant any harm. Maybe he was the tramp we saw
at the lonely cabin, or it may have been another. He may have wanted
shelter for the night, and something to eat. But when he heard you
scream it must have frightened him off, as he may have had an idea he'd
be scolded for frightening a little girl. Anyhow, no harm is done, and
there will be no danger. Go on with your game."

However, the children were too excited over what had happened to do
this. Janet was trembling, and the others wanted her to tell over again
just what had happened. And as Janet told and retold it she became less
frightened, until finally she was laughing as though it had been a joke.

"But if I'd 'a' got that man I'd 'a' hit him with a stick of wood!"
threatened Ted.

"So would I!" declared Tom and Harry.

"Perhaps it's just as well you didn't find him then," said Uncle Toby,
with a laugh.

After the children had gone to bed--and Uncle Toby said the look of them
all tucked in made him think of a boarding school--he and Aunt Sallie
sat up a bit longer.

"Do you really think Janet saw a man?" asked Aunt Sallie. "And if so,
who was he?"

"That's more than I can tell," Uncle Toby answered. "Janet isn't the
kind of girl to imagine things. I believe it was a man. Probably the
same fellow we saw running away from the lonely cabin. To-morrow I'll
take Jim Nelson and some of the men and we'll have a look around. I
don't want rough and strange men roaming these woods when I have a lot
of children out here for the holidays."

"I should say not!" exclaimed Aunt Sallie. "I wouldn't like it myself!
And maybe he's the man who's been taking things."

"Maybe," agreed Uncle Toby.

However, there were no more alarms nor any trouble that night, and after
a few minutes of lying awake Janet went to sleep as soundly as the other
children. They slept rather late the next morning, for they were tired
with the travel of the day before, and when Jan and Lola came down to
the kitchen they found Aunt Sallie getting breakfast.

"Oh, we said we'd get up and help!" exclaimed Jan. For she had promised
her mother, on leaving home to visit Uncle Toby and Aunt Sallie, that
she would help with the housework.

"And I used to get breakfast all alone," said Mary. "That is after
mother was sick," and she could not keep back a few tears, though she
turned her head away so the other girls would not see them.

"Never mind, my dear," said Aunt Sallie, with a laugh. "I didn't want
you to get up early. Uncle Toby told me to let you girls and the boys
sleep."

"Oh, aren't the boys up yet?" asked Jan, with a laugh.

"Don't tell me we've beaten!" added Lola, with a giggle.

"They said they were going to get up and see the sun rise," remarked
Mary.

"I guess they forgot it, or else they thought they could see the sun
some other morning," laughed Aunt Sallie. "For they aren't down yet,
though it's almost time to call them, for I'm going to start to bake the
pancakes soon."

"Oh, are you going to have pancakes?" cried Jan.

"Yes, and with maple syrup," Aunt Sallie answered.

"Oh, I love them!" exclaimed Lola. "Don't you, Mary?"

"I--I don't know," was the hesitating answer. "I--I guess I never had
any."

"Oh my, just--" but Lola stopped. She was going to say "just fancy a
girl never having eaten pancakes with maple syrup!" But she thought it
would not be polite to say that, so she changed it to:

"Just you wait until you try them! You'll love them!"

"I know Ted does, so I'm going to call him!" exclaimed Janet. "He
wouldn't want to keep on sleeping and miss the cakes."

"Tom wouldn't, either," declared Lola.

So they called the boys, who soon rushed downstairs, as hungry as ever
any boys were. And the girls were quite as hungry. As for Trouble, he
always thought he was hungry whether he was or not.

Uncle Toby came in, having been out to do the chores, he said. He had
also been over to Jim Nelson's cabin to talk about the man who had
tapped on the window, scaring Janet. But Uncle Toby said nothing about
this. Instead he said:

"Getting colder, boys and girls. Hope you brought your skates."

"Why," asked Ted, "is there skating?"

"No; but there will be. Shouldn't wonder but what part of the lake would
freeze over by to-morrow. But don't any of you go on until I try the
ice to see if it's safe."

"Guess there isn't any danger of me going on," remarked Harry Benton.

"Why not?" asked Ted. "Don't you like to skate?"

"Sure I do!" Harry answered. "But I haven't any skates."

"I brought some extra pairs along," remarked Uncle Toby. "I think I have
some that will fit you and Mary."

"Oh, goodie!" cried Mary, for she felt she could now have fun like the
other girls.

"But it hasn't frozen yet, though it soon will be," said Uncle Toby.
"Well, I'm going to leave you youngsters to amuse yourselves for a
while, as I have some things to look after."

Uncle Toby paused for a moment and then went on.

"Now about school."

"Yes," said Ted, in a low voice. "I s'pose we'll have to go," he added,
with a sigh.

"No!" exclaimed Uncle Toby. "That's the queer part of it. You can't go.
I told your folks you could, but you can't."

"Why not?" asked Jan, and neither she nor any of the others seemed
disappointed.

"The teacher they had here was taken sick, I've just heard, and they
can't get another until after the holidays. So it doesn't look as though
you could go to school. I'm sorry--"

"Oh, ho!" cried the Curlytops and their playmates. "No school! Hurray!"

"Now we'll go out and have some fun!" shouted Ted, as Uncle Toby left
the cabin.

"Me come!" cried Trouble.

"Yes, we'll take you," answered Lola.

"Take good care of Trouble!" called Aunt Sallie to the boys and girls as
they started from the cabin. They were warmly dressed, as it was getting
colder, just as Uncle Toby had declared.

"We'll watch him!" called back Jan.

Off through the trees, under which, here and there, were patches of
snow, wandered the Curlytops and their playmates. They laughed and
shouted, running here and there until they were nearly as warm as on a
summer's day. It was sheltered under the trees, but out in the open was
getting colder, and in places thin ice was forming on Crystal Lake.

They walked along, sometimes all together and again with the boys
running ahead of the girls, until they came to a little hill, covered
with pine trees. The wind had swept the ground bare of snow here, or
else it had melted, and in places were patches of the long, smooth and
slippery pine needles.

Tom, Ted, and Harry had run off to one side, for Skyrocket had scared up
a rabbit and the boys wanted to see the bunny, though they would not
have let the dog harm it. Trouble started to follow his brother and the
other two lads, but as he reached the top of the pine-needle-covered
hill Janet called him back.

"Trouble, come here!" she exclaimed.

"No!" he answered. "I go see bunny rabbit!"

"No, you must stay with me," said Janet, starting after him. Trouble
gathered himself to spring away on a run, but suddenly there was a queer
screeching call in a tree over his head, and a moment later the little
fellow went sliding and slipping down the hill and out of sight.

"Oh, dear!" cried Janet

"Was it an eagle that screamed?" asked Lola, who did not know much about
birds.

"Maybe the eagle carried him off," suggested Mary, who knew even less
about the creatures of the woods.

"There aren't any eagles around here, I hope," said Janet. "But
something happened to Trouble! I hope he isn't hurt!"

Again came that shrill, harsh call. It sounded like:

"Hay! Hay! Hay!"

"Somebody is laughing because Trouble fell downhill," said Lola. "I
wonder if it's that horrid old man?"

A moment later there was a rustling in the bushes, and a large bird with
bright blue feathers marked with patches of white flew up into a tree
harshly crying:

"Hay! Hay! Hay!"

"Oh, it's a blue jay!" exclaimed Janet, as she ran to the top of the
hill to see what had happened to William. It was nothing serious. He had
merely slid down on the smooth brown pine needles which covered the
ground and made it almost as slippery as a coasting hill. Perhaps the
sudden cry of the blue jay had made Trouble give a nervous jump and this
had thrown him off his balance, causing him to fall.

"Was that bird chase me?" he asked, as he heard the blue one cry and saw
it flitting about.

"Oh, no," answered Lola. "You chased yourself, I guess. Are you hurt?"

"I--I'm all--bumped," explained Trouble.

And this, really, was all that had happened to him. The pine hill was so
smooth that no one could have been hurt on it. The girls found it so
slippery that they could hardly stand up on it while helping Trouble up.

"Let's try--" began Mary. She was about to say "try a slide," when her
feet suddenly went from under her and she did as Trouble had done. She
burst out laughing, as did William and the other two girls, and the
woods echoed to the merry sound, bringing the boys over on the run. They
had not seen the rabbit after the first fleeting glimpse.

"What's the matter?" asked Ted.

"We've found a slippery place," answered his sister.

"Come on, let's try it!" suggested Tom.

They all did, making efforts to go down the slippery pine-needle hill
standing up. But every one toppled before reaching the bottom of the
hill. However, this was part of the fun, and Trouble enjoyed it with the
others.

Now and then the blue jay would flit to and fro, alighting on the trees
or bushes, and shrilly cry:

"Hay! Hay! Hay!"

"Maybe he wants to play, too," suggested Mary, who liked to look at one
of our most brilliantly colored winter birds.

"He's making enough fuss about it, anyhow," said Tom.

The children had lots of fun in the woods that day and the next. No more
tappings on the window were heard, and the Curlytops and their playmates
forgot all about the little scare. The weather grew colder and colder.
One morning Uncle Toby came in from the barn. He rubbed his red hands
before the fire and said:

"Lake's frozen over! Now you can go skating!"




CHAPTER XVI

A REAL TOBOGGAN


"Let's have a race!" cried Ted, as soon as his skates were fastened on
his shoes, for as soon as breakfast was over the children had gone out
on the ice with their skates.

"All right!" shouted Tom, who was quite ready for this sort of fun. "I
can beat you, Ted Martin!"

"And I can beat you, Tom Taylor!" exclaimed Lola, his sister, who was a
very good skater.

"Oh, wouldn't it be fun if we two could beat them?" suggested Jan to
Lola.

"We'll try," was the answer.

Meanwhile, though Mary and Harry had put on their skates, they took no
part in this talk and stood about on the ice as if they hardly knew what
to do.

"Will you join in the race?" asked Lola of Mary. "We three girls against
the boys."

"I don't believe I can skate well enough to race," Mary answered, and
her brother joined in with:

"You see we never had much chance to skate, and about all we can do is
to move along in a straight line." He laughed good-naturedly over his
own lack of skill.

"Oh, that's all right!" cried Ted, in jolly fashion. "We won't have any
race then--that is, until after you two get more used to your skates."

"Oh, don't let us stop you from having fun!" exclaimed Mary.

"We can have just as much fun not racing. I don't care much for it,
anyhow, do you, Jan?" said Lola.

"No, indeed!" answered the Curlytop girl. Thus did they try to make Mary
and Harry feel happier, and they succeeded.

"I tell you what we can do," suggested Tom Taylor. "Ted and I can show
you a few easy tricks on skates, Harry, and Jan and Lola can do the same
with Mary."

"That will be fine!" exclaimed Harry. "Then, when we know more about it,
we can have a race."

So it was decided, and then and there began lessons for the two poor
children whom Uncle Toby had brought to Crystal Lake so they might have
a good time over the holidays. Harry and Mary were quick to learn, and
though it would be some time before they could beat any of the other
four children in a race, they did very well for beginners.

"See if you can do this!" cried Ted, after having shown Harry how to
"grind the bar" backward, a trick Harry soon learned.

"Watch me!" cried Ted, as he began doing what he called a grapevine
twist. To do it he darted farther out from shore than any of them had
yet gone, and just as he was dong some fancy skating there was a loud
booming, cracking sound that sent a shiver all through the ice on which
the others were standing.

"Oh, come! Come back!" cried Jan to her brother. "The ice is going to
break! We'll fall in!"

"That's right!" yelled Tom. "Come on back, Ted!"

Ted needed no urging, but skated as fast as he could toward shore,
whither the others were fleeing as fast as they could strike out on
their skates. They reached land safely, and, to their surprise, no big
cracks or holes appeared in the ice. It seemed as solid as ever.

"I wonder what made that?" asked Janet, whose heart was beating fast.

"The ice broke somewhere," declared Lola.

"We'd better not go on it any more," said Mary.

"Well go up and ask Uncle Toby about it," suggested Ted. "I don't want
to stop skating."

As the children were about to take off their skates to go back to the
cabin, Aunt Sallie was seen coming down, dragging Trouble on a sled.
There were patches of snow here and there so it was not hard to pull the
sled along. And Trouble was not very heavy.

"Oh, Aunt Sallie, you ought to hear the ice crack!" called the children
in a chorus.

"Is it dangerous?" asked Mary.

Uncle Toby came out of the bungalow and heard what was asked.

"That rumbling, cracking sound isn't anything dangerous," he said. "The
ice often does that, and often big cracks come in it out in the middle
of the lake. But it is thick enough, and it won't break through with
you or I shouldn't have let you go skating. But, even with all I have
said, don't go too far out."

The children felt safer, now that Uncle Toby had told them this, and Ted
again started to show Harry how to do a grapevine twist. Aunt Sallie
gave the sled and Trouble over in charge of the girls, and they skated
up and down pulling William to and fro, to his great delight.

The boys, now that Harry felt more at home on his skates, began to try
to outdo each other in tricks, and when Harry said he would be the
judge, Tom and Ted had a race, Ted winning.

Once Jan and Lola skated so fast, pretending they were a team of horses
pulling Trouble on his sled, that Jan stumbled and fell down, also
tripping Lola. The girls were not hurt, and they slid along over the ice
laughing. But the sled was upset, Trouble fell off, and though he was so
bundled up that he didn't get hurt, he began to cry.

"I guess we'd better take him in," suggested Jan. "He may be cold.
Anyhow, I've had enough skating."

"So have I," said Mary and Lola.

They went up to the cabin, taking Trouble with them. But the boys
remained on the ice a while longer, and Harry was rapidly becoming a
good skater.

The three lads did not take off their skates until it was time for
dinner, and after the meal they went back on the frozen lake again,
though the girls stayed in to play with their dolls.

"Make the most of your skating," said Uncle Toby, as he watched the
three lads circling around on the ice.

"Why?" asked Tom.

"Because I think we are going to have another storm," was the answer.
"It is going to snow, and then all the ice will be covered. Of course
you can scrape clean a small place, but it will be hard work. So get all
the skating you can while it's good."

This the boys did, that day and the next. But the following morning,
when they awakened and looked from the windows, they saw the ground
white with snow, and more flakes coming down.

"Hurray!" cried Tom. "Now we can have fun coasting!"

"And maybe we can make a toboggan slide!" added Ted.

"I've seen them," remarked Harry, "but I was never on one."

"We had a wooden one in our yard, but we had to put candle grease on our
sled runners first," Ted explained. "It would be great if we could make
a regular toboggan slide."

"Let's ask Uncle Toby," suggested Janet.

Uncle Toby laughed in jolly fashion as the Curlytops and their playmates
swarmed around him in the cozy cabin.

"A toboggan slide, eh?" he cried. "Well, I don't see why you can't have
one, and you don't need to build it of wood, either, for there's a good
hill not far away. But how would you like to coast on a regular toboggan
instead of your sleds?"

"Oh, could we?" shouted Ted.

"I guess so," was the answer. "There's a French Canadian who lives not
far away, and he has a big toboggan. We'll go over in the auto and see
if he'll let us take it. I used to have one out here, but I find that
it's broken."

"Oh, what fun we'll have!" sang Janet, and the others joined in the
chorus of joy.

It kept on snowing, but they could journey out in the big, closed
automobile even with the storm all about, and this they soon did.

"But if we get the toboggan how can we get it in here? There isn't much
room," remarked Ted, for the children and Uncle Toby almost filled the
big machine.

"Oh, we'll tie it on behind and pull it over," said Uncle Toby. "A
toboggan can go faster than any auto."

"I ride on it!" said Trouble, and the others laughed, for of course he
didn't know what he was talking about.

The road to the cabin of the French Canadian lumberman who owned the big
toboggan ran past the lonely shack where Uncle Toby had once stopped for
water and from which the strange man had run away. As they neared this
cabin again Ted asked:

"I wonder if that man is in there now?"

"I don't know," said Uncle Toby. "But I think I'll take a look. Jim
Nelson and I meant to do it before this, but we haven't had a chance. We
don't want any tramps living in our woods."

He stopped the machine near the cabin and got out. The boys wanted to
follow him, but he told them to remain with the girls.

"I'm just going to look in the window," said Uncle Toby.

He did this, first at the front windows, and evidently saw nothing, for
he soon went around to the rear. And suddenly the children in the
automobile heard shouting, and the shouts came from inside the cabin.

"Somebody's there!" cried Ted, starting to get out.

"You stay here!" cried Janet, catching her brother by the coat. "Uncle
Toby told you to stay here!"

As Ted sank back in his seat they could all hear Uncle Toby saying:

"Who are you? What are you doing in there?"

The man in the lonely cabin answered, but what he said the Curlytops and
their playmates could not tell. There was more shouting to and fro
between Uncle Toby and the unknown man, and then Mr. Bardeen came around
to the front of the cabin.

"Is he there? Who is he? What does he want?" The children quickly asked
these questions.

"Oh, he's just a tramp I guess," answered Uncle Toby. "I couldn't make
much out of him. But I'll tell Jim Nelson and some of the lumbermen, and
we'll see what he's doing there. He can't do much harm, for there isn't
anything of value in the old shack. But it's just as well not to have a
tramp in there."

Once again Uncle Toby started the machine, and soon they were at the
cabin of the French Canadian.

"Could we borrow your toboggan, Jules?" asked Uncle Toby.

"Oh, of a sure yes!" was the answer, Jules doing his best to speak what
to him was a new language. "I bring she out to you!"

He ran around to the back of his shack, and soon came into view again
with a real toboggan, at the sight of which the children set up a joyous
shout.




CHAPTER XVII

THE SNOW HOUSE


The Frenchman's toboggan was a large one. It would hold all of the
Curlytops and their playmates, with room to spare. I suppose most of you
have seen toboggans, or pictures of them, and know what they are.
Instead of being made like a sled, with steel runners, a toboggan is
like a thin, flat board, with the front end curled up like the old
fashioned Dutch skates. Only instead of being made of one flat piece of
wood, a large toboggan is made of several strips fastened together so it
will not so easily break.

On the side of Jules's toboggan were hand rails, to which the riders
could hold. There was also a cushion on which to sit, and altogether it
was a very fine way of coasting downhill.

"Oh, what fun we'll have on this!" cried Jan.

"Will it go fast?" asked Lola.

"It'll go like an express train!" cried Ted.

"And we fellows will take turns sitting on the back and sticking our
feet out to steer," added Tom, for that is how a toboggan is guided, you
know.

"If it's going as fast as an express train I don't believe I want to
ride," said Mary, who was rather more timid than the other children.

"Don't let those boys scare you," advised Janet. "They're only talking
to hear themselves talk. Tom and Ted are always that way--aren't they,
Lola?"

"Yes," answered Tom's sister, with a laugh.

The boys were now clustered around the big toboggan, and Trouble had
taken his seat in the middle of the cushion.

"You give me wide!" he demanded of his brother.

"Not now--a little later," promised Ted. He wanted to listen to what the
Canadian was saying, telling Uncle Toby how the big toboggan was best
managed on a hill.

"I'll go down with the children the first few times," said Uncle Toby,
"to make sure it's all right. Our hill isn't so very steep, and I don't
believe there's much danger."

"On little hill not--no!" exclaimed Jules, with a smile that showed all
his white teeth. "But on big hill, steep so like roof of house, toboggan
her go like what you say--fifty-nine?"

"I guess you mean like sixty," laughed Uncle Toby.

"Mebby so. Her go very fast. I like for childrens to have good time, but
not too fast!"

"I'll see that they are careful," promised Uncle Toby.

After much teasing the three boys were allowed to sit on the toboggan
after it was tied to the rear of the automobile for the trip home.

"I won't go very fast," said Uncle Toby. "But if I should have to stop
you boys will need to stick your feet down in the snow suddenly to put
on the brakes, you know, or you'll bump into my rear wheels."

"We'll do that," promised Tom, Ted, and Harry.

Trouble wanted to ride with the boys on the toboggan as it was drawn
along over the snow behind the auto, but he was not allowed to do this,
as it was thought his brother and the other two lads would be so full of
fun that they would forget to watch him, and he might fall off and be
left behind.

The toboggan was made fast with a long rope, the boys took their places,
and with many thanks to Jules for his kindness, the trip home was begun.

"Hurray!" cried Ted. "Here we go!"

"Talk about fun!" shouted Tom. "We're having it all right!"

"I never had such a good time in my life," said Harry, his eyes shining
with pleasure. He wished his mother might have shared in some of his and
his sister's enjoyment, and how he wished that he had a father, such as
the other boys had, only he himself knew. But he said nothing of this.

"Hold on tightly now, boys!" called Uncle Toby.

"We will!" they answered, and away they went.

At first everything was all right. The road was slightly uphill and the
toboggan kept well back from the wheels of the automobile, so there was
no danger of bumping into them. But when the automobile started down
grade toward Uncle Toby's cabin, the wooden sled slid faster than the
automobile was pulling it.

"Put on brakes! Put on brakes!" shouted Ted.

"Stick your feet in the snow!" echoed Tom.

The three boys thrust their feet out on either side of the toboggan,
digging their heels into the snow, and in this way they made themselves
slow up, so they did not hit the wheels. Even if they had done so no
harm would have resulted, because the wheels had large rubber tires on
them, and the front of the toboggan came up in a big curve.

Soon they were going uphill again, and the boys did not have to "put on
brakes." But as Uncle Toby made the automobile go a bit faster, when
they were near his cabin, he and the girls suddenly heard laughing
shouts from the boys behind them.

"Oh, something has happened!" exclaimed Jan, looking out of the rear
window of the closed car.

"They've fallen off!" added Mary. "I hope they aren't hurt!"

"Can't be much hurt, falling off in the snow," laughed Uncle Toby, as
he brought the car to a stop, got out, and went back, followed by the
girls. The toboggan had turned upside down, but was not damaged. The
boys, laughing so joyously that they could hardly walk, were coming
along, covered with snow.

"What happened?" Uncle Toby wanted to know.

"Oh, the toboggan struck a big lump of snow in the middle of the road
and turned right over. It spilled us off!" explained Ted.

"But it was fun!" added Harry. And so it was.

"Well, we're almost there. Better walk the rest of the way," advised
Uncle Toby. "Take the toboggan off and pull it."

This was done, two of the boys taking turns pulling the third over the
short distance remaining.

"And now for some real tobogganing!" cried Ted, as the cabin was
reached.

Uncle Toby, however, would not let the children go down alone for the
first few times. He wanted to be sure the boys knew how to manage the
big sled, which, though large, was very light, as all toboggans are,
and thus are much safer than a sled with steel runners.

There was a long, but not too steep, hill near the cabin, and the
Curlytops and their playmates were soon at the top of this, with Uncle
Toby and the toboggan.

"All aboard!" called Mr. Bardeen, and they took their places on the
cushion, holding to the hand rails. Trouble was not allowed to go down
the first time, but Aunt Sallie had all she could do to keep him with
her as she stood at the top of the slope watching the coasting party.

"You shall soon have a ride, Trouble," Aunt Sallie promised. "As soon as
the hill is made a little smooth."

"All ready?" cried Uncle Toby.

"Let's go!" cried Ted.

Uncle Toby gave a push with his foot, which he had thrust out behind to
steer with, and down the snow-covered hill went the toboggan with its
happy load. They did not go very fast on this first trip, as the snow
needed to be packed down smooth and hard. But after the second or third
voyage the toboggan moved more swiftly.

"Do you like it Mary?" asked Janet.

"Oh, I just love it!" cried the other, with shining eyes.

Uncle Toby, finding that everything was safe, allowed the boys, one
after another, to try steering the light, wooden sled. Finding that they
could manage all right, he let them have charge of the toboggan, and at
last Trouble was allowed to coast down, sitting between Lola and Janet.

Of course Trouble wanted to take his turn at steering with the other
boys, but that was out of the question, even though he teased very much.
It would not have been safe, of course.

And such fun as the Curlytops and their playmates had! The toboggan was
much better than a sled, and safer, even though it went faster. It was
almost like flying with the snowbirds, Lola said.

Of course there were little accidents and upsets. Once, when Harry was
steering, the toboggan turned completely around when half way down the
hill and began sliding backward. And as the back end was blunt, having
no curve to slip easily over the snow, there was a turnover, and the
children were spilled all the way down the hill.

But they never minded that, only rolling over and over to the bottom, or
nearly there, laughing and shouting meanwhile. It was fun for Skyrocket,
too, the dog leaping here and there, barking and chasing snowballs which
the girls threw for him to race after.

Once they took Skyrocket down on the toboggan with them, or, rather,
they took him half way, for midway on the hill Skyrocket decided he
didn't like that way of traveling, and with a howl he leaped off. It was
too swift for him, I suppose.

But the children had great delight in it, and would have kept on with
the toboggan fun all day if Uncle Toby had let them. He did not want
them to get too tired, however, nor did Aunt Sallie want Trouble to stay
out in the cold too long, though he was a sturdy little chap.

After lunch, when Trouble was having his usual nap, Lola and Jan said
they would like to try steering the toboggan, and Uncle Toby said they
might.

"Well, we fellows won't ride if you girls steer," declared Ted. "You'd
upset us first shot."

"Pooh! You don't need to ride!" laughed Janet. "We can do better without
you."

The girls learned to steer, after a lesson or two from Uncle Toby. Even
timid Mary managed to do quite well, though Janet and Lola, being more
used to outdoor life in the country, did better than Mary. The girls had
their little accidents, too, upsetting more than once, but they did not
mind this.

For several days, while the snow lasted, the Curlytops and their friends
had fun in the snow. The weather was bright and sunny, and not too cold.
One day Janet, going out to the kitchen where Aunt Sallie was busy,
found the table covered with packages and bundles that Uncle Toby had
brought from the village store.

"What's going on?" asked Janet.

"Thanksgiving will soon be going on," answered Aunt Sallie. "I must get
my mincemeat made, and do a lot of planning for the big family I expect
to have at dinner."

"Oh, I didn't know Thanksgiving was so near!" exclaimed Janet. At first
she was joyous, and then a little feeling of sadness came to her. This
would be the first Thanksgiving she remembered when daddy and mother
were not present. The other children, too, when they were told about
the coming feast at Uncle Toby's cabin, looked a little serious when
they realized that none of their grown-ups would be with them. Of course
Mary and Harry did not expect this, for they knew their mother could not
come from the hospital for a long time, and as for their father--they
had given him up as dead, long ago.

"But maybe daddy and mother will be here for Christmas!" said Janet.

"Maybe!" agreed Ted.

"I'm going to write and ask our father and mother to come here for
Christmas. May I, Uncle Toby?" asked Lola, for in common with the
Curlytops she called Mr. Bardeen by this name.

"Of course!" Uncle Toby answered. "The more the merrier! And if your
mother is able to come from the hospital, we'll have her here for
Christmas," and he nodded at Mary and Harry. This made that boy and girl
very happy, for it is often happiness just to think of something
pleasant that may happen.

One morning, several days after the first of the toboggan riding, the
boys, who had gotten up ahead of the girls for once, began shouting
outside the cabin.

"What's going on, I wonder?" asked Janet.

"Oh, I guess they're just yelling for the fun of it," answered Lola.

"They're saying something about a house," said Mary.

Janet raised the window and listened. Just then Ted shouted:

"Come on out, girls, and help us build a snow house. We're going to make
the biggest snow house you ever saw!"

"And when it's finished you can have a tea party in it," added Tom.

"Oh, what lovely fun that will be!" cried Mary.

Soon the boys and girls, with Skyrocket frolicking around them, began
making the snow house. The sun had so warmed the snow that it packed
well.

First a number of big snowballs were rolled and placed one after the
other in the form of a square on the ground. This was to be the
foundation of the house.

Other snowballs were lifted on top of the first large ones, and snow
packed in the cracks until, when afternoon came, there were four walls
of snow, much higher than the heads of the children.

"It looks more like a fort than a snow house," said Lola.

"We've got to put the roof on," Tom answered. "How we going to do that,
Ted?"

"I don't know," was the reply. "I never made such a big snow house. If
we make the roof only of snow it will fall in on us."

"You'd better ask Uncle Toby," suggested Janet, and this they did.

"I'll show you how to make a good roof," Uncle Toby told the children.
"Just get me a lot of poles from that pile over there. I used them to
raise beans this summer. Bring me a lot of those long poles."

The children ran to carry them to him, wondering how Uncle Toby could
make a roof on a snow house out of poles.

[Illustration: OTHER SNOWBALLS WERE LIFTED ON TOP OF THE FIRST LARGE
ONES. Page 195]




CHAPTER XVIII

THANKSGIVING


Perhaps if the Curlytops and their playmates had thought about it a
little harder they might have guessed how Uncle Toby intended to make
the roof of their snow house with the bean poles. It was very simple.

When the boys and girls had brought a number of the long, thin poles to
him, Uncle Toby took the poles, one at a time, and laid them carefully
across the tops of the white walls. Each end of the pole rested on the
wall, and when all were in place, laid close together, there was the
beginning of the roof.

"But it's full of holes," objected Ted, as he went in through the
doorway that had been left, and, looking up, could see the sky in
between the spaces of the poles.

"Yes, of course it's full of holes," laughed Uncle Toby. "All you have
to do is to plaster some snow in the cracks, and then cover the poles
with more snow and you'll have a roof to your house that won't fall in
on you."

"Why, how easy!" cried Tom. "It's a wonder we didn't think of that
ourselves."

"You'll know how next time," replied Uncle Toby. "Bring a few more
poles."

This the children did, even Trouble dragging over some of the smallest
ones from the pile. Then the roof was ready for its coating of snow, and
the children began tossing it on with their hands and from shovels.

At first the snow dropped through some of the larger cracks between the
poles, but these were soon filled, and then a solid mass of white was
spread over the roof of the snow house.

"I'm going to see if I can't plaster some snow over the poles from
inside, so they won't show," decided Ted, when the outside top of the
roof was finished. "Then it will look like a solid snow roof."

The other boys helped with this, but it was not as easy as they had
thought it would be. For often after they had stuck a handful of snow
on the ceiling inside, it would fall down, once or twice right in their
faces.

But at last they had the inside poles pretty well plastered over with
snow, and the house was finished. There was a doorway, and two windows,
and over the door a blanket was hung. Uncle Toby put some sheets of ice
in the windows, and they looked just like glass.

"Oh, this is the nicest snow house I ever saw!" cried Janet.

"It's like a fairy one!" exclaimed Mary. "I never dreamed of one so nice
as this."

"It's the best one we ever made," said Ted, and the other boys agreed
with him.

But the fun was only beginning. The girls had been promised, if they
helped with the making of the snow house, that they could have a play
party in it for themselves and, if they chose, their dolls.

"We'll ask Aunt Sallie for something to eat and have the play party
now," decided Janet, when some boxes had been put in the snow house to
serve as tables and chairs.

"Will the dolls eat everything?" asked Tom, with a smile.

"What do you mean--eat everything?" his sister wanted to know.

"I mean will there be anything left for us?" and Tom winked at the other
boys.

"Oh, I guess Aunt Sallie will give enough for everybody," said Janet,
and Aunt Sallie did.

As she was getting ready for Thanksgiving, there was plenty to eat in
Uncle Toby's bungalow, and soon sandwiches and cake, and a tin pail full
of hot chocolate were carried out to the snow house.

"It's a regular picnic in the snow!" cried Mary, in delight. "I never
knew anything as nice as this."

The girls took their dolls out to the snow house, Mary having brought
hers from home with her, and though it was not as well dressed or as
costly as the dolls of Janet or Lola, still Mary loved her "child" just
as much.

Janet wanted to make Trouble a rag doll to play with, but he insisted
that he was an "Indian," for that is what the other boys were pretending
to be.

"An' Injuns don't have dolls!" declared Trouble, as he sat on a box in
the snow house and sipped his warm chocolate.

For two or three days the children played in the snow house, the
weather being mild, so that it was quite comfortable in the white
"igloo," as Uncle Toby called it. The children wanted to know where that
name came from, and he told them it was what the Eskimos of the Polar
regions called their egg-shape huts of ice and snow.

The pole roof was a great success, for it did not fall in on the heads
of the boys and girls. And there is nothing worse, when you are having
fun in a snow house, than to have the roof cave in on you.

Of course there were little accidents, caused by the snow which the boys
had plastered to the inside of the poles. More than once little chunks
of snow fell, but they were so light they did no harm, even when they
hit Janet or Lola on the head.

Once, however, just as Ted was lifting a cup of chocolate to his mouth,
a chunk of snow fell right into the cup, splashing the chocolate all
over the lad. Luckily it was not hot, though after the splashing was
over Ted looked as if he had colored himself to take part in a minstrel
show.

The other children laughed, and so did Ted, after his first surprise.

"To-morrow will be Thanksgiving!" exclaimed Lola one night, as they
hurried in from a long day of fun.

"And you ought to see the big pile of good things there are to eat!"
exclaimed Tom. "Oh, boys!"

"Aunt Sallie sure has cooked a lot!" cried Ted.

"The most I ever saw," added Harry. "And such a turkey!"

"And such cranberry sauce!" sighed his sister.

"An' there's candy an' nuts an'--an' lots of things!" added Trouble.
"It's mos' like Ch'is'mus!"

"Yes, it surely is," agreed Janet. "Only I hope by Christmas we'll have
daddy and mother here." A letter had come from Mr. and Mrs. Martin from
the distant city where they had gone to see about the money. In the
letter the parents of the Curlytops said they hoped to be with them at
Christmas.

The father and mother of Tom and Lola had also written, wishing the
children the joys of a happy Thanksgiving, and saying they would come up
at Christmas with Mr. and Mrs. Martin.

There was also a letter from Mrs. Benton, in which the poor woman said
that she had been operated on, and was much better, but added that she
would have to be under the doctor's care and in the hospital some time
yet.

"Anyhow, it's something to be thankful for," said Mary. Her brother
agreed with her. And if in their hearts there was a little sadness
because they had no father to share the joys of the holidays with them,
they kept it to themselves.

"We all have lots to be thankful for," said Aunt Sallie, when the feast
day came. "Yes, and you shall have something, too," she added to
Skyrocket, who was sniffing hungrily at the kitchen door.

After breakfast Uncle Toby took them all to the village church in the
automobile, though of course Skyrocket was left at the cabin. He did not
like it very much, either, and howled dismally after the Curlytops.

Home they drove, through the crisp air of the woods, to take part in the
bountiful feast that was ready all but the "finishing touches," as Aunt
Sallie called them.

And such a feast as it was! Never was there such a browned turkey! Never
such jolly red mounds of cranberry sauce, almost like jelly! Never such
crisp celery! And the gravy that covered the heaping plates that the
children had passed to them! Surely never was such gravy made!

"Oh, I don't believe I can ever eat another thing!" exclaimed Mary, when
Uncle Toby asked her to have another slice of turkey.

"Hasn't you got any room left?" asked Trouble, patting his own little
stomach. "I got some room. I saved it for the _ice-cream_!" he added,
hoarsely whispering the last word.

"Oh, is there ice-cream?" asked Janet. "I didn't know you'd made any,
Aunt Sallie."

"It isn't exactly ice-cream," answered Uncle Toby's housekeeper. "It's a
sort of snow-cream I made, but maybe you children will like it."

"Sure we will!" cried the boys.

"Will you have it now, or the plum pudding?" Aunt Sallie wanted to know.

"Oh, is there plum pudding, too?" Janet asked, in surprise.

"Yes," nodded Aunt Sallie. "Nice, hot plum pudding!"

"Let's have the pudding last," suggested Lola. "The snow-cream will make
us cold and the plum pudding will make us warm again."

"A good idea," said Uncle Toby, with a laugh. "I hope none of the
children gets ill," he thought to himself. "Their folks will say I gave
them too much Thanksgiving. But they look all right now," he added, as
he scanned the happy faces.

Aunt Sallie served the snow-cream. It was rather like a frozen pudding,
being made of clean snow beaten up with milk, eggs, sugar, and flavoring
extract.

The children made away with this, and then Aunt Sallie went to the
kitchen to get the hot plum pudding. She was gone a few minutes when she
came hurrying back into the dining room, a strange look on her face.

"It's gone!" she cried to Uncle Toby.

"What?" he asked.

"The plum pudding! Some one has taken it!"




CHAPTER XIX

SKYROCKET IS GONE


Uncle Toby first looked around the table at the double row of faces of
the children. All showed as much surprise as had Aunt Sallie when she
had come in with the news about the pudding being gone. At first Uncle
Toby had an idea that one of the boys had taken the dessert for a joke,
hiding it away in some nook. But one look at the faces of Tom, Ted, and
Harry showed Uncle Toby that this had not happened.

"Where did you put the pudding, Aunt Sallie?" Uncle Toby wanted to know.

"Right inside the kitchen pantry, on the back shelf near the window."

"Was the window open, Aunt Sallie?"

"Just a little crack, yes, Uncle Toby. I opened it when I set the
pudding near it so it would cool a little before the children ate it."

"That accounts for it then!" exclaimed Mr. Bardeen. "Skyrocket reached
in through the open window and took the pudding!"

There was a gasp of surprise from the children at this, and Ted
exclaimed:

"Oh, it couldn't have been our dog, Uncle Toby! He's been right here in
the room all the while."

"Yes, that's so," added Aunt Sallie. "And, anyhow, the window wasn't
open wide enough for Skyrocket to get his head in. He couldn't take the
pudding out in his paw as your monkey could do."

"Maybe not," agreed Uncle Toby. "Anyhow, I'm glad to know it wasn't
Skyrocket, for I like that dog. But some one must have taken the
pudding, Aunt Sallie. Unless it slipped out of the window itself, and
went off on the toboggan!"

The children laughed at this idea, but Aunt Sallie took it seriously,
for she said:

"Oh, it couldn't do that, Uncle Toby. I mean it couldn't slip out of the
window," she added, as the Curlytops laughed again. "I had it covered
with a tin pan, and that's on the shelf, but the pudding is gone from
under it."

"This is getting mysterious," said Uncle Toby. "We must take a look and
see about it."

"I'm so sorry, for I wanted the children to have some of my plum
pudding," went on Aunt Sallie.

"Oh, don't worry about it," said Lola. "We had plenty to eat."

"Too much, I'm afraid," chuckled Uncle Toby. "Maybe it's just as well
the pudding is missing. The children will sleep better without it, Aunt
Sallie."

"Oh, 'tisn't so much the _pudding_ that I am worried about," went on the
kindly housekeeper, in a whisper. "It is that some one may be sneaking
around here taking things."

"Do you think that happened?" asked Uncle Toby. The children had run
into the kitchen to look at the window through which the pudding had so
mysteriously disappeared, and Uncle Toby and Aunt Sallie could speak
freely.

"Yes, Uncle Toby, I think that is what happened," said the old lady.
"Some tramp, or somebody, must have been sneaking around your cabin.
They looked in the window, saw my pudding, and took it while we were
all in the dining room. 'Tisn't so much that I mind the pudding; that
is, if it was taken by some one really hungry. For this is Thanksgiving,
and I wouldn't want any one to go hungry. But if they had knocked at the
door and asked for something to eat I'd have given it to them, and then
the pudding would be safe. What are we going to do?"

"I don't know," answered Uncle Toby, as he and Aunt Sallie followed the
children. "We never had any tramps in these woods. Maybe it's that queer
man we saw over in Newt Baker's old shack. He may be a hungry tramp."

"Well, something ought to be done about it," declared Aunt Sallie. "I
won't feel safe with such people roaming the woods."

"Maybe when I look in the snow under the window I'll see the paw marks
of a bear," suggested Uncle Toby.

"What would that mean?" asked Aunt Sallie, rather startled.

"It would mean that a bear came up, put his paws in through the window,
knocked the pan cover off and took the pudding," was the answer.

"Well, I'm not so much afraid of bears as I am of tramps," said Aunt
Sallie, with a smile. "I almost wish it was a bear!"

But it was not. In the light covering of newly fallen snow under the
pantry window, through which the pudding had been taken, were the marks
of a man's feet. Big feet they were, with heavy shoes, for the prints of
the hob nails could be seen in the snow.

Uncle Toby looked at the marks for several minutes. He and Aunt Sallie
and the children could see where the man, whoever he was, had come out
of the woods, walked up to the open window, and, after standing about
and tramping to and fro, had marched back to the woods again.

"It looks as if he came here, looked in, saw the pudding, and started
away without taking it," said Uncle Toby, as he looked closely at the
big footprints in the snow. "Then he turned back, because he was so
hungry he just couldn't leave that pudding there in plain sight, I
suppose. He took it and went back to the woods with it to eat it."

"Who was he?" asked Tom.

"That I don't know," Uncle Toby replied. "He must be a stranger around
here, for anybody else would ask for something to eat if he were
hungry. And most of the folks around here are well enough off to get
their own Thanksgiving dinner. They don't have to take other folks'
pudding."

"That's so," said Aunt Sallie. "I wish it hadn't happened, even though I
don't mind a poor hungry man having my nice pudding."

"Is your dog a bloodhound?" asked Harry of Ted, as the boys remained
looking at the footprints in the snow, after the girls had gone back
into the house with Aunt Sallie.

"Oh, no, Skyrocket isn't a bloodhound," answered Ted. "Why?"

"Well, I thought maybe if he was he could smell at these marks in the
snow and then track the man to where he was and we could get back the
pudding," Harry went on.

"Guess there wouldn't be much of the pudding left," said Tom, with a
laugh.

"No," agreed Ted. "Anyhow, Skyrocket isn't a bloodhound, and I don't
believe he'd know how to track a man down."

And evidently Skyrocket didn't take much interest in the strange
footprints in the snow, for, after sniffing them once or twice, he raced
away to chase a snowbird which flew down to get the crumbs Aunt Sallie
scattered from the dinner table. Of course Skyrocket couldn't catch or
harm the snowbird, and he knew it, but he loved to race about and bark.

"No use trying to get him to follow a trail," said Tom. "He's too crazy!
A good dog, but too crazy!"

"That's right!" assented Ted.

Uncle Toby, having listened to the talk of the boys, went back into the
cabin, and soon came out with his heavy overcoat and cap on.

"Where are you going?" asked Ted.

"Oh, just down to the village. You boys stay here and look after things
until I get back," was the answer.

The boys watched Uncle Toby strike into the path and then Tom exclaimed:

"I know where he's going!"

"Where?" asked Ted.

"He's either going to trail that man by his footprints--the man who took
the pudding," declared Tom, "or else he's going to get a constable, or
somebody like a policeman."

"Maybe he's gone to get a bloodhound if your dog isn't any good for
smelling out people," suggested Harry. All the boys were gleefully
excited over what might happen.

"I wish he'd let us go with him," sighed Ted. But he did not think it
wise to ask, and Uncle Toby went off by himself.

The remainder of Thanksgiving was passed by the Curlytops and their
playmates having holiday fun. They played out in the snow, spent some
time in the snow house, and coasted on the toboggan.

Uncle Toby came back before dusk, but where he had been and what he had
done or found out, he did not disclose to Aunt Sallie or the children.

"Will you lock up well to-night, Uncle Toby?" asked Aunt Sallie, when
the bedtime hour approached. She asked this out of the hearing of the
children.

"Of course I'll lock up well. I do every night," Uncle Toby replied,
with a laugh. "Are you afraid that bear who took the pudding will try to
get in?"

"Maybe," answered Aunt Sallie. "Anyhow, please lock all the doors and
windows."

"I will," said Uncle Toby. "But I guess Skyrocket will be a good
watchdog during the night. We don't need to worry."

The children did not worry, at all events. They did not seem to miss the
plum pudding, and after a light supper, on account of the heavy dinner
they had eaten, and having played some games in the cabin, they went to
sleep.

Uncle Toby locked up well, and left Skyrocket in the kitchen for the
night.

"If any bears come in or any tramps try to take any more of Aunt
Sallie's good things, you grab 'em and hold 'em, Sky!" commanded Uncle
Toby.

The dog barked once, as if to say he would.

The night appeared to pass quietly, though once Uncle Toby thought he
heard Skyrocket barking in the kitchen. Getting out of his bed, Uncle
Toby called:

"Who's in the kitchen? Is everything all right?"

There was no answer, not even a bark from the dog, and Uncle Toby
thought he had been mistaken about hearing a noise.

"And I guess Skyrocket is asleep," he added.

In the morning Tom and Ted came down earlier than any of the others, for
they had an idea that they could build a little house of pieces of
carpet on the toboggan and coast while inside it. They wanted to try
out this idea before Uncle Toby should say it was too risky.

"Here, Sky! Sky!" called Ted, as he walked toward the kitchen.

There was no joyous, answering bark, and when the door was pushed open
no dog ran to greet his young master.

Skyrocket was gone!




CHAPTER XX

TROUBLE IS MISSING


Harry came into the kitchen to join his chums, and when he heard that
Skyrocket was gone he and the other two boys made such a noise calling
and whistling for the missing dog that Uncle Toby asked:

"What's the matter out there?"

"Skyrocket's gone!" explained Ted.

"Well, that's all right," said Uncle Toby. "I suppose he went out early
to get up an appetite for breakfast."

"But how could he get out, Uncle Toby?" asked Ted, as Mr. Bardeen came
into the kitchen where the dog had been put for the night. "How could he
get out? There isn't a door or window open, and he hasn't jumped through
any of the window glass, as he did once to get to me when he was shut up
by mistake."

"Hum!" murmured Uncle Toby, thoughtfully. "Are you sure he's gone, Ted?"

"Well, he isn't around and he doesn't come when I call him," the boy
answered. "He must be gone."

Jan and the other girls now came into the kitchen, and soon Aunt Sallie
had Trouble dressed, so the whole family was up. That is all but
Skyrocket, and he surely was one of the family.

"What's the matter?" asked Jan, for she knew that there was something
wrong. And when Ted told her about Skyrocket being gone, tears came into
Jan's eyes. Seeing this, Uncle Toby knew what he had to do to keep the
children contented and happy while on their holiday stay with him at
Crystal Lake.

"Look here, boys and girls," he said, "Skyrocket isn't lost. He has just
run out somewhere. He'll be back soon. Don't feel too bad about him. It
isn't the first time he has run away, is it, Ted?"

"No, Uncle Toby. But how did he get out to run away? That's what I want
to know. There isn't a door or window open. The cabin was shut tight
last night after Skyrocket was in."

"That's what we think," said Uncle Toby. "But some door or window may
have been left open by mistake, and Skyrocket may have got out that way
and be roaming in the woods, having a good time. Don't you often find,
Aunt Sallie," asked Uncle Toby, "that you forget to shut a door or
window, and later in the night get up to close it?"

As Mr. Bardeen asked this question of his housekeeper he winked one eye
at her--an eye the children could not see. Uncle Toby wanted Aunt Sallie
to say "yes" to his question, and she, knowing the little trick he was
trying to play, did as he wanted her to.

"There, you are!" exclaimed Uncle Toby to the children. "Aunt Sallie or
I may have left a door or window open, after you young folks went to
bed, and Sky may have gotten out that way. Then we might have closed it,
locking him out."

"Oh, do you think it could have happened that way?" asked Ted.

"Of course it could!" replied Uncle Toby, but he did not really say that
it had happened like that. In fact Uncle Toby knew it had not happened
this way. He felt pretty sure that some one had come in the night and
stolen Skyrocket away, but he did not want to tell the Curlytops this
for fear of making them afraid.

"Well, if Skyrocket has just run away he'll run back again," said Ted.

"Yes, he will, for he's done it before," added Janet.

Then the children felt better, and sat down to breakfast. But when Uncle
Toby had a chance to speak quietly to Aunt Sallie he said:

"Don't say anything to the children, but I think some tramp--maybe the
same one who took your plum pudding--came in the night and stole
Skyrocket."

"But why would a tramp want Skyrocket?" asked Aunt Sallie.

"Perhaps he thought we would pay money to get the dog back--as I will do
if he doesn't come back himself," said Uncle Toby. "You can't tell what
a tramp would do. Anyhow, I know we didn't leave any doors or windows
open. I just said that to quiet the children. I feel sure Skyrocket has
been stolen by a tramp."

"What are you going to do about it, Uncle Toby?"

"I'm going to get Jim Nelson and some of the lumbermen around here and
have a look around. For one place, we'll go to that old cabin of Newt
Baker's, which we saw the man running away from that day. Maybe he's
the tramp who took Skyrocket and also your plum pudding."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Aunt Sallie, with a frightened look over her
shoulder.

"Don't be afraid!" laughed Uncle Toby. "Nothing will happen. But I don't
want the children's fun spoiled. So let them think Skyrocket just
wandered away and will come back again."

But Skyrocket did not come back that day nor the next nor the next. Back
home in Cresco he had often stayed away a week at a time, Jan said, so
after she and her brother had gotten used to the idea that the dog was
off on one of his wandering trips, they no longer worried.

Uncle Toby got some of the lumbermen and went to the cabin, but though
they found the footprints of men and dogs in the snow, no one was now in
the old shack, and there was no way of telling whether the dog's
footprints were those of Skyrocket.

"Well, I guess that tramp cleared out," said Uncle Toby to Aunt Sallie.
"And he may have taken Skyrocket with him. But don't say anything to the
Curlytops. Christmas is coming, and we want them to have a good time.
And Skyrocket may come back."

But the dog did not. Two weeks went by and he had not returned. By this
time Ted and Janet had rather gotten accustomed to missing him, and
though they felt very sorry, they were having so much fun that they
thought of little else. For surely there were good times at Uncle
Toby's!

The plan of the boys to put up a little carpet house on the big toboggan
coaster did not work. They tried it, without telling Uncle Toby anything
about it, and this is what happened.

First Tom, Ted, and Harry fastened some beanpoles upright on the
toboggan. They tied them tightly with cords so they were fairly solid.
In the barn they found some pieces of carpet and a few old feed bags,
left from the time that Uncle Toby kept a horse out at Crystal Lake, and
by tying these bags together, after ripping them open, they made a large
piece of cloth, big enough for a tent. This they fastened on the
beanpoles that were tied to the toboggan, also using some carpet strips.

"Now we've got a regular little house on it, and we can sit inside and
coast downhill and be nice and warm!" exclaimed Ted.

That was his idea and that of the other boys. Three of them could get
inside the toboggan-tent at a time, and the rear lad could stick his
foot out through a hole in the bag covering a steer.

Without telling Uncle Toby anything about it, and saying nothing to the
girls, the boys drew this new invention of theirs out on the coasting
hill one morning. Tom and Harry took their places toward the front of
the toboggan, inside the tent. There was a hole in the bagging so they
could look out. Ted sat behind to steer.

"All ready?" he asked his chums.

"Let her go!" cried Tom.

Ted pushed off, and for a little way the toboggan went down the hill all
right. The boys were laughing and shouting, for it was fun to coast
inside a tent that kept off the cold wind.

"It's like riding in a closed auto!" yelled Tom.

But just then something happened. The toboggan struck a lump of ice on
the hill, slued around, though Ted did his best to steer it, and began
going sideways.

Just then the three girls, with Trouble, came out to see what the boys
were doing, and seeing the strange tent-covered toboggan going downhill
sideways Janet, Lola, and Mary, all three, screamed, while Trouble
yelled in delight, as he always did at anything new or strange.

Ted declared afterward that the girls' screams made him steer crooked,
but in the girls' opinion the toboggan would have upset anyhow. And
that's what it did.

Over it turned, when half way down the hill. The bean poles snapped and
broke, and a moment later the boys were tangled up in the pieces of
carpet and bagging, rolling off the toboggan which coasted the rest of
the way downhill by itself, and probably it was very glad to be rid of
the tent-house.

"Oh, are you hurt?" cried Jan, as she saw the tangled mass of boys.

"I'll call Uncle Toby!" exclaimed Lola.

"Oh, what a dreadful accident!" wailed Mary.

But an instant later the boys jumped up, laughing, not in the least
hurt, though they were disappointed because their invention did not
work.

"Don't try any more tricks like that," said Uncle Toby, when he heard
what had happened. "The next time some of you may be hurt."

The boys promised to obey, and they didn't do any thing just like that
again, but they did other things almost as risky. However, no one was
hurt, and they certainly had lots of fun at Uncle Toby's.

There was so much to do that they almost forgot about the lost
Skyrocket, though every now and then Ted and his chums would go off in
the woods, whistling and calling. But the dog did not come back.

As the snow did not melt away, Uncle Toby, with the help of some of his
men friends at the camp, cleared a place on the frozen lake where the
children could skate. And with this fun, with coasting, making snowmen,
another snow house, having snowball battles, the children passed many
days most happily.

Christmas was coming. The Curlytops and their playmates now began
counting the days until this grand holiday should arrive. Trouble, with
the help of Janet, had written his letter to Santa Claus, and the other
children had told each other (so Aunt Sallie and Uncle Toby could hear)
the things they wished St. Nicholas to bring them.

One morning Uncle Toby brought the big automobile around to the door of
the cabin. It was two days before Christmas, and everything had been
prepared for a jolly good time at the cabin. A big green tree had been
cut in the woods, and set up in one of the rooms. There it was to be
trimmed and made ready for the presents to be put under it.

"Come, children, we're going to the village to get the mail and some
other things," called Uncle Toby to the Curlytops and their friends.
"Pile in, and we'll all go to the village. I wouldn't be surprised but
what there would be some letters for all of you," he said, with a
twinkle in his eyes, as if he knew what was going to happen.

"Oh, maybe daddy and mother will be here for Christmas!" cried Ted and
Janet.

"And maybe my father and mother will come," added Lola, though she did
not have much hope of this.

"If I could get a letter that my mother was all well again, that would
be the best Christmas present I could have," sighed Mary.

"Maybe you will get such a letter," said Uncle Toby.

Perhaps he knew what was going to happen.

Aunt Sallie said she would not make the trip to the village in the
automobile, as she had work to do at the bungalow. So Uncle Toby,
the Curlytops and their playmates--alas, not with Skyrocket this
time--started off. The snow seemed to be coming down thicker and
faster, but this only made the children more joyful, for they loved
snow at Christmas, as what youngster does not?

The post-office was reached, and Uncle Toby went in for the mail. He
came out with both hands full. There was a letter for Mary and Harry,
one for Ted and Janet and one for Tom and Lola, and then there were
separate letters for each boy and girl from some of the friends they
had left behind. There was even a postal for Trouble.

"Oh, such good news!" cried Ted, when he and Janet had read their
letter. "Daddy and Mother are coming here to spend Christmas with us!"

"Did your father say anything about the money he was afraid of losing?"
asked Uncle Toby.

"No," answered Ted. "But I hope he doesn't lose it."

"We have good news, like yours!" Lola said to Janet. "Our daddy and
mother are coming here also for Christmas. You invited them, didn't you,
Uncle Toby?" she asked.

"Why, yes, I believe I did," chuckled the jolly old gentleman. "But have
you good news, too?" he asked Harry and Mary.

"Yes," they answered with happy tears in their eyes. "Our mother is well
again, and she is coming up here for Christmas. Oh, how happy we are!"

"Everybody's happy!" sang Trouble. "Everybody's happy, an' Santa C'aus
is comin'!"

"That's right!" laughed Janet, hugging him.

They little knew how close unhappiness was following happiness.

After the letters had been read again Uncle Toby drove the automobile
down the village street to the store to get some things Aunt Sallie
wanted for the Christmas dinner. As the children each had some spending
money they were allowed to get out and wander through a general store
next to the grocery. There was a "five and ten cent" department in the
variety "Emporium" as it was called, and the children had fun there,
picking out inexpensive presents as surprises one for the other.

It was not until, bubbling over with joy and happiness, they had again
gotten back in the automobile that Trouble was missed.

"Oh, where is your little brother?" exclaimed Lola.

"Why, I thought you had him!" said Janet.

"And I thought you did. We must have left him back in the store. Let's
look!"

But Trouble was not there! He was missing!




CHAPTER XXI

TROUBLE AND SKYROCKET


You can imagine there was much excitement and some very frightened
feelings in the hearts of all the children when the clerks in the store
where the five and ten cent Christmas presents had been bought said
Trouble was not there.

"But where can he be?" asked Janet, hardly able to keep back the tears.

"Perhaps he went out and walked back to the store where Uncle Toby is
buying his things," suggested Lola. "Let's look there."

"I guess that's where he is all right," said Teddy.

But Trouble was not in the grocery store, and Uncle Toby, who had
finished his shopping, was as much surprised and alarmed as were the
children when told what had happened.

"I guess the little tyke may have walked out by himself and gotten into
the auto," said Uncle Toby.

But Trouble was not in the big closed automobile. And then a frantic
search began. People in the stores where Uncle Toby and the children had
been lent their aid, and when after fifteen minutes it was sure that the
little boy was not in the neighborhood, the constable was called on and
the search made up and down the street.

"Well, we'll find him, of course," said Uncle Toby, speaking more
hopefully than he really felt. "What happened, I suppose, is that he
wandered out of the store, to find me, maybe, and he got in the wrong
place. We'll look in every building along Main Street."

This was done, and the houses on side streets were visited, too, but
without effect. Trouble seemed to have vanished completely and
mysteriously.

By this time Janet was crying, as were the other girls, and the boys
tried not to let the tears in their eyes be seen.

"Where can he be?" asked the Curlytops over and over again, when each
store had been searched twice.

"I'll tell you what I think happened," said Uncle Toby. "Trouble
wandered away from you, while you were buying your Christmas presents.
He wandered out into the street and got confused. Maybe he started
crying in the street, and some farmer and his wife, in their sled, may
have taken him in to comfort him."

"But what would they do with him?" asked Ted.

"Some farmer and his wife picked Trouble up off the street and took him
home with them," repeated Mr. Bardeen, as if he knew this was so. And he
really believed it.

"Why would they do that?" asked Jan, with trembling lips.

"They may have thought Trouble was the child of some neighbor whom they
knew, and they planned to take him home. Depend on it--that's what
happened!"

"But how will we get Trouble back?" asked Ted.

"Why, the farmer, whoever he is, will find out his mistake, and he'll
bring the little fellow back to town again," was the answer. "That's
what will happen. But I'll get as many men as I can, and with the
constable we'll inquire of all the farmers around here. In that way
we'll get Trouble back quicker."

There were willing searchers, and soon the country around Crystal Lake
was being searched by men and women in automobiles and sleds who
inquired at each farmhouse for a little boy taken away by mistake.

But as night came and no Trouble had been found, the Curlytops and their
playmates began to feel very sad indeed.

Uncle Toby decided to take the children home and leave them with Aunt
Sallie in the cabin, while he kept on with the search.

"Trouble missing and Skyrocket gone!" thought Uncle Toby to himself, as
he drove back in the automobile. "This will be a sad Christmas, when I
meant it to be such a happy one."

But it would not be Christmas for two days, and much might happen in
that time.

It was nearly dusk when the big automobile drew near the old deserted
cabin of Newt Baker, from which the strange man had once been seen
running away. Looking from the window on his side, Ted peered at the old
shack, and as he did so he uttered a cry of surprise and wonder.

"What is it?" asked Uncle Toby, quickly bringing the machine to a stop,
for he thought some one had opened a door and fallen out.

"It's Trouble! I saw him at the window just now! In there!" and Ted
pointed to the old cabin.

"Trouble in there? It can't be!" said Uncle Toby.

But just then Janet set up a cry.

"Yes, he is, Uncle Toby! I saw him!"

Mr. Bardeen lost little time in jumping from the automobile. Followed by
the children, he ran to the door of the cabin, and as he opened it he
heard the barking of a dog mingled with the crying voice of Trouble. An
instant later Skyrocket rushed out to greet his friends, and then
Trouble came from an inner room, toddling into the arms of Janet.

"Oh, William! how did you ever get here?" cried Lola.

"And Skyrocket, too! Look! Here's our dog!" shouted Ted.

With the high voices of the children, the barking of Skyrocket, and the
crying of Trouble, there was so much noise that no one heard footsteps
coming from the room out of which the missing boy had rushed until
suddenly a strange man stood on the threshold.

"Look!" cried Tom, glancing up at this man. "There's the tramp!"

And they all saw the same stranger who had rushed away from the cottage
the time Uncle Toby went to the well to get water for the automobile
radiator.

"What are you doing here?" asked Uncle Toby in a stern voice. "And did
you try to kidnap him?" Mr. Bardeen pointed to little William, who was
sobbing in Janet's arms. And as he saw this and thought what a lot of
trouble seemed to have been caused by this man, Uncle Toby started
toward him as if in anger.

"Don't hit me!" pleaded the man. "I'm in trouble! I've had a lot of
trouble. I was in the war--and--but that was long ago--and--"

His voice was very faint, and as Uncle Toby walked toward him the man
tried to run back into the room. But his foot slipped and he fell,
striking his head heavily on the floor. Then he rolled over and lay very
quiet.

"He's fainted, I guess," said Tom.

"Looks so," agreed Uncle Toby. "Well, we've found Trouble, anyhow.
That's the big thing. I don't know how this man got him or what he
intended to do with him. But I'm going to tell the police. I guess he'd
better have a doctor, too," he added. "He's cut his head in his fall.
Ted, you and Tom go to the next house," he went on. "There's a telephone
there. Tell Mr. Hick to call up the police, let them know we have found
the missing boy and have them send out a doctor. It's a long walk to Mr.
Hick's place, but I guess you won't be afraid. Then come back here. I
don't want to leave this man alone, as I'd have to do if we all went
away in the auto."

"We'll go to the telephone," said Tom and Ted, and Harry went with them.

As soon as the boys started tramping through the gathering dusk to Mr.
Hick's house, Janet quieted Trouble and got Skyrocket to stop barking.
This last was hard because the dog was so overjoyed at being with his
friends again. There was a broken rope around his neck, showing that he
had been kept tied up since he had been taken away. But he seemed to
have been well treated and fed.

"Can Trouble tell us what happened and how this man got him?" asked
Uncle Toby of Janet, who was holding her little brother. The "tramp," as
he was called, still lay where he had fallen in a faint.

Janet understood Trouble's baby talk better than any one else, and she
soon had his story out of him. He had wandered out of the store, it
seemed, and on the sidewalk in front had been spoken to by the man who
had brought him to the lonely cabin. The tramp and Trouble rode out to
the cabin in a farmer's sled, so the little boy said.

"I can understand how that might happen," said Uncle Toby. "Some farmer
would be glad to give the man and Trouble a ride out into the country.
And it might have been some farmer from a distance, who didn't know that
no one lived here. Such a farmer wouldn't be surprised at Trouble and
the man getting out here at the lonely cabin. Well, things are coming
out all right, and maybe this tramp didn't intend to do anything mean.
We'll have to wait until he gets better so he can tell us what
happened."

The stranger was still lying very quiet on the floor of the lonely
cabin. It was a long time before the three boys came back, but soon
after them the constable and the doctor arrived. The doctor said the man
was not badly hurt, but should have good care. And as it was thought he
might have tried to kidnap Trouble he was put under arrest.

Of course the man himself did not know this, for he was still in a
faint. The doctor said the blow on his head caused this. But he was
taken away by the constable and the doctor to the doctor's own home,
where he could be well cared for until he was well enough to be put in
jail, for he was under arrest for having carried off Trouble.

Then the Curlytops and their playmates went on to Uncle Toby's cabin, a
happy jolly crowd, now that all worry was removed. They had William with
them, and also Skyrocket.

"But I wonder how that tramp got my dog?" mused Ted.

"He might have found him wandering in the woods," said Uncle Toby. But
he did not really believe this. There was something queer about that
tramp.




CHAPTER XXII

A HAPPY REUNION


Such joyous times as there were next day! It was the day before
Christmas, and, as every one knows, it is the jolliest time in the year,
with one exception. That exception is Christmas itself.

"When are we going to the station to meet the folks?" asked the
Curlytops and their playmates, over and over again. For Mr. and Mrs.
Martin, Mr. and Mrs. Taylor, and the mother of Harry and Mary, now out
of the hospital, were to come on the same train, to spend the Christmas
holidays at Uncle Toby's.

"Oh, we'll go soon now," said Mr. Bardeen, and the children could hardly
wait. Uncle Toby had arranged for an extra automobile to bring the grown
folks from the station to his cabin, as the Bardeen car would be well
filled.

After what seemed many hours, though it was really not more than a wait
of thirty minutes at the station, the toot of a whistle was heard around
a curve in the track.

"Here comes the train!" cried Ted.

"Oh, what a lovely Christmas this is going to be!" sighed Janet.

Out of the car came the mother and father of the Curlytops, then the
mother and father of Tom and Lola, and then, more slowly, Mrs. Benton.

"Oh, we're so glad to see you!" cried the Curlytops and their playmates,
each to the proper parents. There was hugging and kissing, and in
excited tones the story of the missing boy and dog was quickly told.

"It is very good of you, Mr. Bardeen, to ask me out here," said Mrs.
Benton. "I feel sure I shall grow well and strong now, and I can look
after my two children."

"That's all right, Susan!" was the hearty answer. "I'm glad to have you
and the children. We're going to have a jolly Christmas."

And indeed it seemed so, for Mr. and Mrs. Martin found a chance to tell
Ted and Janet that it was all right about the money--that Mr. Martin was
not going to lose it after all. His trip had saved it for him.

As the automobiles were about to start off, the constable came up to
Uncle Toby and said:

"That strange man--the one who fell and hurt himself at the cabin when
you found the kidnapped boy--wants to see you, Mr. Bardeen."

"Wants to see me?" asked Uncle Toby, in surprise.

"Yes. It seems he is much better now, and is in his right mind."

"Was he out of his mind before?" asked Uncle Toby, while the others
listened eagerly.

"Yes, he was most of the time, though not always. He's a soldier, it
seems, or was. He fought in the big war and was hurt or gassed, or
something, and lost his mind. He really doesn't know what happened to
him, except that he ran away from different hospitals, got to this
country somehow, and has been wandering around ever since, living as
best he could. But he's all right now. The doctor said that fall he had
did something to his head and gave him back his right senses, so he's
all right now, and he's asking for you."

"What's his name, and why does he want to see me?" asked Uncle Toby.

"He says he wants to explain that he didn't try to kidnap the little
boy," the constable went on. "And he didn't steal the dog, either. The
dog came to the cabin, made friends with him, and the man kept him.
Though maybe the dog would have gone to you if he hadn't been tied up.
But the man's very anxious to see you and explain all this. I said I'd
go get you. I went out to your cabin, and a lady there said you'd come
here to the station, so I hurried back, and here I am. Could you come
and see that man for a few minutes?"

"Why, I suppose I could, yes," answered Uncle Toby. "But who is he,
anyhow? You say he was a soldier in the big war?"

"Yes. And he says his name is Frank Benton. He--"

But there was an excited cry from the mother of Mary and Harry.

"Frank Benton!" she exclaimed. "Why, that was my husband's name! My
husband fought in the war! We thought he was killed, but we never could
be sure of it, as no record was found. Oh, if this should be your
missing father, children!" and with tears in her eyes she looked at her
boy and girl.

"We'll soon find out!" cried Uncle Toby.

"To the doctor's! First house around that corner," directed the
constable.

Trembling with eagerness and hope, Mrs. Benton, with Harry and Mary,
went into the room where the injured man lay in a white bed. He was much
better now, and the constable did not go along, since he was not to be
arrested, as what he had done had been when he was out of his head
through a war injury.

"Frank!" cried Mrs. Benton, as soon as she caught sight of the man.

"Susan!" he murmured, holding out his arms. And then such a happy
reunion as there was. "My, how big the children have become!" exclaimed
Mr. Benton, through his glad tears. "To think I saw them in the room
with the Curlytops and didn't know them."

"And they didn't know you," said his wife. "But now we have each other!
Oh, how happy I am. This will be the best Christmas in all the world!"

And it was--for every one at Uncle Toby's cabin.

There is not much more to tell. The mystery was all cleared up. Mr.
Benton had been wounded in the war, an injury to his brain making him
out of his head, though not dangerously so. He wandered away, escaping
from one hospital after another under the mistaken notion that the
doctors and nurses were trying to harm him.

In his wanderings he finally reached the neighborhood of Crystal Lake.
He found the old deserted cabin and made his home there, living on what
he could pick up or take from the farmhouses. Thus the rumor of tramps
and burglars was talked of at the lake. Poor Mr. Benton was so timid
that he ran away when Uncle Toby came to draw water.

It was Mr. Benton who took Aunt Sallie's plum pudding from the pantry,
though he did not know he was stealing. And it was he who looked in the
window, thus frightening Janet. And, as he said, he had found Skyrocket
wandering in the woods. There was a loose board on one side of the
cabin, a board Uncle Toby had forgotten about, and Skyrocket got out
through that hole the night he disappeared. After getting him to the
lonely cabin Mr. Benton became so fond of the dog that he tied him up.
Though Skyrocket might have remained of his own accord, for he had made
friends with the wounded soldier.

It was while strolling about the streets of the village that the father
of Mary and Harry saw Trouble wandering out of the five and ten cent
store. Always fond of children, Mr. Benton made friends with William,
and Trouble took a liking to the strange man.

Then, somehow or other, the idea of taking Trouble to the lonely cabin
came into the head of the man, and he got a ride out in the sled of a
strange farmer. But once in the deserted shack Trouble became frightened
and began to cry. Mr. Benton did not know what to do, his head was
troubling him, and he realized dimly that he might get into difficulties
with the police. He left Trouble in a room, trying to think what was
best to do to get the little boy back to his friends, and then Uncle
Toby came along.

After that things happened quickly. Mr. Benton slipped and fell, and
the blow on his head did what the doctors and nurses could not seem
to do for him. It brought him back to his right mind.

"And we'll soon have you out at my cabin, spending Christmas with the
Curlytops!" said Uncle Toby, when everything had been explained.

"Oh, what a happy time it will be!" said Mr. Benton.

That night he was taken out to the cabin, and there was reunited with
his little family. And such a gladsome, happy, and thankful Christmas
eve was never known before!

It seemed that the children never would go to bed, but at last they
quieted down and then--well, what always happens on Christmas eve took
place after that.

The Christmas tree was wondrously trimmed, empty stockings began to
swell out and there was even one for Skyrocket which was laden to
overflowing with dog biscuit.

The sun shone bright on the snow around Crystal Lake.

"Merry Christmas!" cried the Curlytops, as they rushed to see what Santa
Claus had left for them.

"Merry Christmas!" echoed their playmates.

"The happiest Christmas in all the world!" said Harry and Mary. For they
had found their father, long lost to them.

"I 'ikes Ch'is'mus," murmured Trouble, his mouth full of candy. "I 'ikes
Ch'is'mus an' Unk Toby an' everybody! I 'ike 'oo!" he said to Mr.
Benton.

"And I like you," said the father of Mary and Harry. "Only for you and
Uncle Toby I might not be here, happy with my family. Merry Christmas to
everybody!"

And so, with the gladsome echoes of "Merry Christmas" filling the air,
we will say good-bye to the Curlytops.


THE END




    THE CURLYTOPS SERIES

    By HOWARD R. GARIS

    Author of the famous "Bedtime Animal Stories"

    _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors_

    ~Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid~

    [Illustration]

    _Stories for children by the best author of books for little people._


    1. THE CURLYTOPS AT CHERRY FARM
    _or Vacation Days in the Country_

    A tale of happy vacation days on a farm.


    2. THE CURLYTOPS ON STAR ISLAND
    _or Camping out with Grandpa_

    The Curlytops were delighted when grandpa took them to
    camp on Star Island.


    3. THE CURLYTOPS SNOWED IN
    _or Grand Fun with Skates and Sleds_

    Winter was a jolly time for the Curlytops, with their skates
    and sleds, on the lakes and hills.


    4. THE CURLYTOPS AT UNCLE FRANK'S RANCH
    _or Little Folks on Pony Back_

    Out West on their uncle's ranch they have a wonderful time among
    the cowboys and on pony back.


    5. THE CURLYTOPS AT SILVER LAKE
    _or On the Water with Uncle Ben_

    The Curlytops camp out on the shores of a beautiful lake.


    6. THE CURLYTOPS AND THEIR PETS
    _or Uncle Toby's Strange Collection_

    When an old uncle leaves them to care for his collection of pets,
    they get up a circus for charity.


    7. THE CURLYTOPS AND THEIR PLAYMATES
    _or Jolly Times Through the Holidays_

    The children have great times with their uncle's collection
    of animals.


    8. THE CURLYTOPS IN THE WOODS
    _or Fun at the Lumber Camp_

    Exciting times in the forest for Curlytops.




    THE RUBY AND RUTHY SERIES

    By MINNIE E. PAULL

    _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid._

    [Illustration]

    _Four bright and entertaining stories told in Mrs. Paull's happiest
    manner are among the best stories ever written for young girls, and
    cannot fail to interest any between the ages of eight and fifteen
    years._


    RUBY AND RUTHY

    Ruby and Ruthy were not old enough to go to school, but they
    certainly were lively enough to have many exciting adventures,
    that taught many useful lessons needed to be learned by little
    girls.


    RUBY'S UPS AND DOWNS

    There were troubles enough for a dozen grown-ups, but Ruby got
    ahead of them all, and, in spite of them, became a favorite in
    the lively times at school.


    RUBY AT SCHOOL

    Ruby had many surprises when she went to the impossible place
    she heard called a boarding school, but every experience helped
    to make her a stronger-minded girl.


    RUBY'S VACATION

    This volume shows how a little girl improves by having varieties
    of experience both happy and unhappy, provided she thinks, and is
    able to use her good sense. Ruby lives and learns.




    THE LINGER-NOT SERIES

    By AGNES MILLER

    _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors_

    _Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid_

    [Illustration]

    _This new series of girls' books is in a new style of story
    writing. The interest is in knowing the girls and seeing them
    solve the problems that develop their character. Incidentally, a
    great deal of historical information is imparted, and a fine
    atmosphere of responsibility is made pleasing and useful to the
    reader._


    1. THE LINGER-NOTS AND THE MYSTERY HOUSE
    _or The Story of Nine Adventurous Girls_

    How the Linger-Not girls met and formed their club seems
    commonplace, but this writer makes it fascinating, and how they
    made their club serve a great purpose continues the interest to
    the end, and introduces a new type of girlhood.


    2. THE LINGER-NOTS AND THE VALLEY FEUD
    _or The Great West Point Chain_

    The Linger-Not girls had no thought of becoming mixed up with
    feuds or mysteries, but their habit of being useful soon
    entangled them in some surprising adventures that turned out
    happily for all, and made the valley better because of their
    visit.


    3. THE LINGER-NOTS AND THEIR GOLDEN QUEST
    _or The Log of the Ocean Monarch_

    For a club of girls to become involved in a mystery leading back
    into the times of the California gold-rush, seems unnatural
    until the reader sees how it happened, and how the girls helped
    one of their friends to come into her rightful name and
    inheritance, forms a fine story.




    THE RADIO GIRLS SERIES

    By MARGARET PENROSE

    _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors_

    _Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid_

    [Illustration]

    _A new and up-to-date series, taking in the activities of
    several bright girls who become interested in radio. The stories
    tell of thrilling exploits, outdoor life and the great part the
    Radio plays in the adventures of the girls and in solving their
    mysteries. Fascinating books that girls of all ages will want to
    read._


    1. THE RADIO GIRLS OF ROSELAWN
    _or A Strange Message from the Air_

    Showing how Jessie Norwood and her chums became interested in
    radiophoning, how they gave a concert for a worthy local
    charity, and how they received a sudden and unexpected call for
    help out of the air. A girl who was wanted as a witness in a
    celebrated law case had disappeared, and how the radio girls
    went to the rescue is told in an absorbing manner.


    2. THE RADIO GIRLS ON THE PROGRAM
    _or Singing and Reciting at the Sending Station_

    When listening in on a thrilling recitation or a superb concert
    number who of us has not longed to "look behind the scenes" to
    see how it was done? The girls had made the acquaintance of a
    sending station manager and in this volume are permitted to get
    on the program, much to their delight. A tale full of action and
    not a little fun.


    3. THE RADIO GIRLS ON STATION ISLAND
    _or The Wireless from the Steam Yacht_

    In this volume the girls travel to the seashore and put in a
    vacation on an island where is located a big radio sending
    station. The big brother of one of the girls owns a steam yacht
    and while out with a pleasure party those on the island receive
    word by radio that the yacht is on fire. A tale thrilling to the
    last page.




    THE BETTY GORDON SERIES

    By ALICE B. EMERSON

    _Author of the Famous "Ruth Fielding" Series_

    _12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full colors_

    _Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid_

    [Illustration]

    _A series of stories by Alice B. Emerson which are bound to make
    this writer more popular than ever with her host of girl
    readers._


    1. BETTY GORDON AT BRAMBLE FARM
    _or The Mystery of a Nobody_

    At the age of twelve Betty is left an orphan. Her uncle sends
    her to live on a farm.


    2. BETTY GORDON IN WASHINGTON
    _or Strange Adventures in a Great City_

    In this volume Betty goes to the National Capitol to find her
    uncle and has several unusual adventures.


    3. BETTY GORDON IN THE LAND OF OIL
    _or The Farm That Was Worth a Fortune_

    From Washington the scene is shifted to the great oil fields of
    our country. A splendid picture of the oil field operations of
    to-day.


    4. BETTY GORDON AT BOARDING SCHOOL
    _or The Treasure of Indian Chasm_

    Seeking the treasure of Indian Chasm makes an exceedingly
    interesting incident.


    5. BETTY GORDON AT MOUNTAIN CAMP
    _or The Mystery of Ida Bellethorne_

    At Mountain Camp Betty found herself in the midst of a mystery
    involving a girl whom she had previously met in Washington.


    6. BETTY GORDON AT OCEAN PARK
    _or Gay Days on the Boardwalk_

    Adventure in high society let loose on the seashore.




    THE RUTH FIELDING SERIES

    By ALICE B. EMERSON

    _12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 65 cents, postpaid_

    _Ruth Fielding will live in juvenile Fiction._

    [Illustration]

    RUTH FIELDING OF THE RED MILL
    _or Jasper Parloe's Secret_

    RUTH FIELDING AT BRIARWOOD HALL
    _or Solving the Campus Mystery_

    RUTH FIELDING AT SNOW CAMP
    _or Lost in the Backwoods_

    RUTH FIELDING AT LIGHTHOUSE
    _POINT or Nita, the Girl Castaway_

    RUTH FIELDING AT SILVER RANCH
    _or Schoolgirls Among the Cowboys_

    RUTH FIELDING ON CLIFF ISLAND
    _or The Old Hunter's Treasure Box_

    RUTH FIELDING AT SUNRISE FARM
    _or What Became of the Raby Orphans_

    RUTH FIELDING AND THE GYPSIES
    _or The Missing Pearl Necklace_

    RUTH FIELDING IN MOVING PICTURES
    _or Helping the Dormitory Fund_

    RUTH FIELDING DOWN IN DIXIE
    _or Great Days in the Land of Cotton_

    RUTH FIELDING AT COLLEGE
    _or The Missing Examination Papers_

    RUTH FIELDING IN THE SADDLE
    _or College Girls in the Land of Gold_

    RUTH FIELDING IN THE RED CROSS
    _or Doing Her Bit for Uncle Sam_

    RUTH FIELDING AT THE WAR FRONT
    _or The Hunt for a Lost Soldier_

    RUTH FIELDING HOMEWARD BOUND
    _or A Red Cross Worker's Ocean Perils_

    RUTH FIELDING DOWN EAST
    _or The Hermit of Beach Plum Point_

    RUTH FIELDING IN THE GREAT NORTHWEST
    _or The Indian Girl Star of the Movies_

    RUTH FIELDING ON THE ST. LAWRENCE
    _or The Queer Old Man of the Thousand Islands_

    RUTH FIELDING TREASURE HUNTING
    _or A Moving Picture that Became Real_


    ~Send For Our Free Illustrated Catalogue~
    CUPPLES & LEON COMPANY, Publishers New York






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CURLYTOPS AND THEIR PLAYMATES; OR, JOLLY TIMES THROUGH THE HOLIDAYS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

