








THE STEPHENS FAMILY

A Genealogy of the Descendants of Joshua Stevens

Written by Bascom Asbury Cecil Stephens, Los Angeles,
California, A. D. 1892

Printed, with a few additions, by Alonzo Smith Bower, Lima,
Ohio, A. D. 1910




JOSHUA STEPHENS, (6), the ancestor of this STEPHENS Family, was born,
according to the family tradition, in what is now the County of Berkes,
in the State of Pennsylvania, of Welsh parents, A. D. 1733. According to
the recollection of C. C. Stephens, (176) his grandfather, E. D.
Stephens, (16), son of this Joshua Stephens, (6), stated to him in an
interview at Hardin, Ohio, about 1860, that Joshua Stephens's father's
name was also Joshua Stephens, (3), which would make him the senior;
that Joshua Stephens, Senior, with two brothers, David, (5), and
Ebenezer, (4), came over from Wales. Of these three last named persons
nothing further is known at the present writing, than the foregoing
statement.

That there was a large Welsh immigration into the present territory of
Berkes County prior to 1733, the birth year of Joshua Stephens, Jr.,
(6), is a fact well corroborated by the (Stot.) history of Pennsylvania.




EXPLANATION


The principal abbreviations used in these pages are:

   b. standing for born.
   m. standing for married.
   d. standing for died.
   y. standing for young.

For convenience and distinction, as in all genealogical works, each name
is given a number separately. Without this it would be difficult to tell
which Joshua Stephens is meant, for there are many of that name, as also
others. The numbers are also valuable for tracing out any particular
pedigree; for instance, suppose that William Stephens, of Camp Verde,
should desire to know the full line of his paternal ancestry, he would
find his name on page (41) 56, where his number is given as 275: then
looking up the left-hand column of figures he will find No. 275 on page
(21) 27, where he will find the date of his birth, and that his father
is Samuel Stephens, No. 76; thence, running up the column to No. 76,
which he will find on page (11) 12, he will find that Samuel was the son
of Charles Stephens, No. 19; the latter figure is found on page (8) 8,
where Charles is shown to be the son of David Stephens, No. 10; the last
figure is to be found on page (7) 7, showing that David was the son of
Joshua Stephens, No. 6; he is the son of Joshua Stephens, No. 3. His
pedigree is:

   Joshua Stephens, (3), father of
   Joshua Stephens, (6), father of
   David Stephens, (10), father of
   Charles Stephens, (19), father of
   Samuel Stephens, (76), father of
   Williams Stephens, (275), father of

The name STEPHENS is of Greek derivation, and means a "crown". Just how
it came to be adopted by the ancester of this family is unknown. The
Welsh seldom used surnames at that period, one name usually sufficing;
the son taking his father's name with the Welsh suffix "AP," meaning
"son of"; thus STEPHENS AP EVANS, meaning Stephens the son of Evans,
while the latter would be Evans Ap somebody else. W. H. Stephens, (41),
son of the aforesaid E. D. Stephens, (16), once told the writer that the
old family name was STEPHENSHIP. In a conversation between the writer,
(182), and Rev. M. A. Jordan, a stepson of Col. John Stephens, (15), a
brother of E. D. Stephens, (16), Mr. Jordan said that, according to his
information, the original family name was STEPHENS O'BIVENS. Mr. Gilbert
Cope, an eminent genealogist, living at West Chester, Pennsylvania,
clears these discrepancies by stating that the name was STEPHENS AP
EVANS; that is, Stephens the son of Evans. It is thus easy to see how
easily one confused it into Stephenship, and the other into Stephens
O'Bivens. Accordingly, it must be true that Joshua Stephens, Senior,
(3), and perhaps his brothers, David, (5), and Ebenezer, (4), adopted
the permanent surname of Stephens. In fact, a family tradition is that
the emigrant ancester did adopt this name of Stephens. The father of
Joshua Stephens, Sr., (3), who, it is supposed, remained in Wales, may
have been named Stephens, (2), and his father's name may have been
Evans, (1); indeed, this theory is reasonable both from tradition and
the etymology as given in the foregoing. EVANS is a Welsh form of JOHN,
a Greek word of Hebrew derivation, meaning "the grace of God."

This tradition is further strengthened by another: that the immigrant
ancestors of the family, sometime after their arrival in Pennsylvania,
fell heir to their father's estate in Wales. In court they were required
to give additional evidence as to their identity by reason of their
having changed their names, before their shares of the estate were
distributed to them. Through these official channels should be found the
missing links, which will connect the American Lines with the Welsh, and
extend the genealogical tree across the Atlantic Ocean. By these means
only can the family seat, ancestry, arms and name be discovered, for the
item of the estate witnesses the fact that it was of no "common origin."

The indifference of the Welsh in the use of surnames is well shown by
the transcript of some documents of an estate of an old Stephens in
Pennsylvania, in the possession of the writer, wherein two brothers are
named, one "Evans Stephens" and the other "Stephens Evans."

Searches in the offices of the Register of Wills, and the old Probate
Courts of Pennsylvania, and the Doctors' Commons and the Herold's
College, of London, as well as of the files of old Pennsylvania
newspapers, and the archives of the various historical societies of
Pennsylvania should throw more light on the early history of these
immigrant ancesters, and possibly discover collateral branches which are
now seemingly hopelessly lost. Such searches require the expenditure of
more time and money than the writer now (1892) has, and if never done by
him, it is to be hoped that some family historian will come to the front
with the necessary abilities.

The family history, then, really begins thus:




FIRST GENERATION


1. EVANS AP ----, (1), a member of that ancient race, the Welsh, the
lineal descendants of that most ancient race, the Kelts, who inhabited
western Europe from time immemorial, lived in Wales, the territory
reserved for this branch of the Aryan family. He had a son:




SECOND GENERATION


2. STEPHENS AP EVANS, (2), who lived and died in Wales, and was the
owner of considerable estate. The liberal terms of Penn's grant in
America attracted the attention of his three sons:




THIRD GENERATION


     3. JOSHUA AP STEPHENS AP EVANS, (3), the immigrant ancestor of this
        family.

     4. EBENEZER AP STEPHENS AP EVANS, (4).

     5. DAVID AP STEPHENS AP EVANS, (5).

Who left their native home in Wales, and embarking in a sailing vessel,
after a voyage of something like thirty days, landed at Philadelphia;
this sometime prior to the year 1733. The three brothers selected lands
in what is now Berkes County, which was not set off from Philadelphia
County until 1752. There are traces of them in Union Township, where a
David Stephens held land in 1728; he was probably (5), (This from a
letter I have from the secretary of the Pennsylvania Historical
Society). In 1752, a "David Stephens, Jr.," died in Britain Township,
Bucks County, not far from Union, who had a brother Samuel, and a
"Cousin John," (probably 7), which fits our history. (From documents in
my posession from Register of Wills, Philadelphia). His father, David
Stephens, Sr., was probably (5). Nothing would be more natural than that
David Stephens, (5), should have a son named for him, and that that son
should seek lands over in Bucks, and that the family name of John should
descend, as it has through many generations in our own lines, to his.
David's brother Joshua had a son John, (7). It was while the three
brothers, Joshua, Ebenezer and David, were living under the jurisdiction
of Philadelphia County, that they received their shares of the Welsh
estate. Hence, searches for this should be confined to records prior to
1752, the time Berkes was set off from Philadelphia.




FOURTH GENERATION


JOSHUA STEPHENS, Sr., (3), the name now being changed, lived in what is
now Berkes County, and probably in Union Township, near the David
Stephens above mentioned. His children were:

     6. JOSHUA, born in 1733, the immediate ancester of the family, and
        with whom the certain history of the family begins.

     7. JOHN     }
                 }
     8. STEPHENS } Of these two brothers nothing is further known than
        that from a family tradition they "went South", whatever that
        means: "South" being an indefinite term from a standpoint in
        Berkes County. John was a tory during the Revolution. The
        existence of Stephens depends upon the testimony of Joshua
        Bowen Stephens of Hardin, Ohio, in a conversation with me there
        in 1886. To these three brothers Dr. John Wesley Stephens of
        State Line, Indiana, added a sister, in a letter to me, (182):

     9. HETTY "who married a rich man named Humphrey, had liveried
        servants," etc. If so, they probably lived in Philadelphia.

JOSHUA STEPHENS, Jr., (6), was the founder of that particular line of
the family of which we have any definite knowledge. His father was
Joshua Stephens, (3), the immigrant ancestor, who settled in what is now
Berkes County, Pennsylvania.

Berkes was then a "howling wilderness" full of Indians and wild beasts.
It was here in 1733, that Joshua Stephens, Jr., was born. Neighbors were
like Angel's visits, "few and far between". In Amity Township on the
east lived Mordecai Lincoln, in A. D. 1725, the ancestor of the
illustrious President. In Exeter Township to the north-east lived George
Boone, in A. D. 1717, the ancestor of Daniel Boone, the celebrated
pioneer of Kentucky. Our family tradition is that the Stephens and the
Boones were intermarried, and it is known that the Boones and Lincolns
formed such alliances. (See Century Magazine for November, 1886). Joshua
became an expert in the use of the rifle. His early life was spent on
his father's farm and in hunting, in which he became very proficient and
for which he acquired considerable notoriety. Schools were scarce in
those days and his literary education was probably poor. No writings of
his are known to be in existence to-day. To his out-door life must be
attributed the cause of his longevity, extending to a period of ninety
years. He did not marry until he was 38 years of age. In 1771 he married
Priscilla Humphreys. The fact that she was a member of the Seventh-day
Baptist Church, who were then quite numerous in Chester County to the
South of Berkes, and that his son E. D. Stephens was born in Chester,
suggests that at an early date in his life Joshua left Berkes and
settled in Chester, which he did at any rate, and lived not far from
Valley Forge. At the outbreak of the Revolutionary War he identified
himself with the patriot cause, and, according to the statement of his
son, E. D. Stephens, was commissioned Captain of a Company of
sharpshooters. During the famine of the American army in the winter of
1777-8 at Valley Forge, he hauled corn to relieve their distress. On one
occasion he obtained a furlough to return home during harvest. With a
Quaker and his brother John he was in the orchard gathering apples. The
Quaker was up in the apple tree, picking fruit, and improved the
opportunity to expostulate with Joshua over the wickedness of war, and
arguing that Joshua should stay at home like his brother John, the tory.
In the midst of his argument the Quaker fell out of the tree, and
striking the ground violently, broke his neck, and was picked up dead.
This was regarded as an act of Divine Judgment in favor of the war, and
probably went far toward encouraging the despairing hearts of the
patriots about them.

A few years after the war he moved with his family to a place "near the
Warm Springs, Virginia," said E. D. Stephens. Whether this was the Warm
Springs in Bath County, is hard to determine. "And then in a few years"
said the same person, "to near LEXINGTON, (Carlisle) Kentucky." These
residences are indefinitely located. "The Warm Springs" may have been in
what is now KENAWHA County, West Virginia for there are such there, and
according to Mr. Jordan, above quoted, they lived "near a river, in the
vicinity of the residence of Daniel Boone," who lived in KENAWHA. (See
Hale's "Trans-Allegheny Pioneers"). It was while here, said Jordan, that
Boone was a frequent visitor to the place of Joshua, whom he invariably
greeted as "Cousin." Just what the relationship was is unknown, but it
undoubtedly existed. One evening Boone came to the Stephens' place,
weary, and said "Twenty-one less." They understood from this laconic
remark, that he referred to the number of Indians he had killed that
day.

Joshua was accompanied or followed to "near Lexington" by two of his
brothers-in-law, Joshua and Jonathan Humphreys. Here two of his sons
left to find homes for themselves--David Humphreys, (10), who settled in
Evansville, Indiana, and Silas, (14), who settled in Nashville, Tenn.
Katie, (12), a daughter died in Kentucky at a tender age.

It was while in Kentucky that he knocked a Dutchman down for insulting
his daughter Hannah, and dislocated his (Stephen's) thumb.

It must have been about 1798 when he decided to remove to near
Chillicothe, Ohio, for that year his son, E. D. Stephens was fourteen
years old, and was apprenticed to a tanner, which naturally was on his
mother's death. This occured while they were on the Pickaway Plains, in
Ohio. As they were travelling, the women of the party took off their
shoes to walk on the cool grass on account of the heat. His wife was
bitten by a copper-head snake, and shortly died, her body turning to the
color of the snake.

JOSHUA STEPHENS, (6), was over six feet high, kept his face shaven
smoothly, had blue eyes and dark hair, and was powerful physically, and
kept a straight figure of his body until his death.--Statement of Joshua
Stephens, (32).

JOSHUA STEPHENS, (6), a Revolutionary soldier and ancestor of the
Stephens family, was born in Union Township, Berkes County, Penn., in
1733. John Stephens, (15), his son, father of Nancy Stephens Mitchell,
was born in Chester County, Penn., Dec. 23, 1781. Union Township is
separated from Amity and from Exeter Township by the Schuylkill River.
In Exeter Township lived George Boone, A. D. 1717, ancestor of Daniel
Boone, who intermarried with the Stephens. And in Amity Township lived
Mordecai Lincoln, A. D. 1725, and probably also the Stephens. At an
early date in his life, Joshua Stephens left Berkes County and settled
in Chester County, not far from Valley Forge. His early life was spent
on his father's farm in hunting. He was an expert rifleman, and his
proficiency acquired for him considerable notoriety. In 1771, when he
was thirty-eight years of age, he married Priscilla Humphreys, who was a
Seventh-day Baptist. At the outbreak of the Revolutionary War Joshua
Stephens, (6), identified himself with the patriot cause, and was
commissioned by General Washington as Captain of a Company of
Sharpshooters. During the famine of the American Army in the winter of
1777-8 at Valley Forge, he hauled corn from his farm to relieve their
distress. On one occasion he was granted a furlough to return home
during harvest.

A few years after the war he moved with his family to a place near Warm
Springs, Virginia. After another few years to Lexington, Kentucky. While
there, Daniel Boone was a frequent visitor and greeted him as "Cousin".
About 1798, he decided to remove to near Chillicothe, Ohio, lived in
either Ross County or Franklin County until about 1816, when he followed
his two sons, John, (15), and E. D., (16), to Shelby County, where he
lived with them on their farm near Hardin. His grand-children remember
his old Revolutionary Army great coat and his stories of Revolutionary
times. His love for the chase never forsook him. He attributes his
longevity to his outdoor life. He was over six feet in height, kept his
face smoothly shaved, had blue eyes and dark hair; was powerful
physically and kept an erect figure till his death. He lived to be
ninety years of age. He died in March, in 1823, on the farm of his son
John, (15), near Hardin and was buried in the old Hardin graveyard.

JOSHUA STEPHENS, (6), lived in either Ross County or Franklin County
until 1816, when he followed his two sons, John, (15), and E. D., (16),
to Shelby County, where he lived with them on their farms near Hardin.
His grand-children remember how the old gentlemen used to sit around the
fire-place while they teased him by slyly pouring corn into the huge
pockets of his old Revolutionary Army coat. Although over eighty years
of age, the love of the chase never died, and he often took his old
rifle and spectacles and sat by the old salt lick and waited for the
deer which never came. (So said Richard Cannon, of Hardin, to me in
1886, who knew him well, and also spoke of his Revolutionary services).
He died in March, 1823, on the farm of his son John, (15), near Hardin,
and was buried in the old Hardin graveyard. The grave was identified to
me in 1886, and marked by me then with a wooden head board. His children
were:




FIFTH GENERATION


     10. DAVID HUMPHREYS, born in Penn., m. Eliza Wing, A. D. 1843.

     11. SARAH, m. Chas. Vandever, d. 1846.

     12. CATHERINE, died young in Kentucky.

     13. HANNAH, b. May 2. 1776; m. Thomas McClish: d. Mar. 13, 1840.

     14. SILAS

     15. JOHN, b. Dec. 23, 1781; m. 2ts; d. Sept. 12, 1873.

     16. EBENEZER DAVID, b. May 7, 1784; m. S. Groom; d. Sept. 20, 1868.

     17. PRISCILLA, b. Nov. 30, 1786; m. 2ts; d. April 24, 1849.

DAVID HUMPHREYS STEPHENS, (10), a son of Joshua Stephens, (6), was born
in Pennsylvania; accompanied his parents to Lexington, Kentucky; settled
in Evansville, Indiana, of which city he was a pioneer; married Eliza
Wing, a native of North Carolina, by whom he had five children; she
dying, he married a second time (name of his wife not given); he had no
children by her; he was born about 1772, and died about 1843. Search
into early history of Evansville should throw considerable light on his
history, as he must have been quite a prominent citizen, one of his
sons, (20), marrying the only daughter of General Evans, the founder of
the city. He lived with Charles, (19), till his death. Was a Justice of
the Peace. His children were:




SIXTH GENERATION.


     18. JOSHUA, m. Nancy Gibson.

     19. CHARLES, m. Malinda Carr, of Kentucky.

     20. SILAS, b. Feb. 24, 1801; m. Julienne Evans; d. Mar. 28, 1876.

     21. ELIZA, m. ---- Vance; d. April 11, 1876 sine prole.

     22. THOMAS DAVID, d. unm.; was in U. S. Army.

SARAH STEPHENS, (11), daughter of Joshua Stephens, (6), married Charles
Vandever, of the Vandever family of New Jersey, then living (about
1802), in Chillicothe, Ohio. They moved with the others of the Stephens
family to Shelby County about 1816, where she died about 1846, and was
buried in the old Hardin graveyard. Subject of a poem by B. A. C.
Stephens (182); she had four children:

     23. MARY, m. John Wilson.

     24. CATHERINE, b. Mar. 21, 1804; m. Josiah Gaskill; d. Nov. 3,
         1845.

     25. RACHEL, b. May 9, 1809; m. John Garnahan; d. Dec. 3, 1850.

     26. JOSHUA, b. Sept. 9, 1812; m. Susanna Burton; d. ----.

HANNAH STEPHENS, (13), daughter of Joshua Stephens, (6), is described as
having been a very "beautiful woman" and was widely courted on that
account, her father having been compelled to chastise a Dutchman, who
became too familiar. She was born in Penn., May 2, 1776; accompanied her
parents to Virginia, Kentucky and Ohio. She married Thomas McClish in
Ross County about 1803. About 1816, or perhaps a little earlier, they
moved to Shelby County, where he founded the town of Hardin, Oct. 5,
1816, naming it for the famous Kentucky general, (General Hardin was
killed near there) which was the first County Seat. He dedicated a
square to the county on the condition that it should be used solely for
the Court House, which it never was, and is still unused. At an early
date they moved over in Putnam County, then a dence wilderness, and
lived with no neighbors nearer than 40 miles amid Indians and wild
beasts. She died March 13, 1840. Her husband was born July 1, 1776, and
died of a nasal hemmorrage Dec. 26, 1826. They were buried near Dupont,
where their graves are yet to be seen. (I have a page of their family
record taken from their old family Bible). Their children were:

     27. SILAS, b. Oct. 15, 1804; m. Nancy Mellinger; d. June 16, 1860.

     28. ELIZA, b. Dec. 26, 1806; m. John Bush; d. Nov. 24, 1827.

     29. JOHN JACKSON, b. March 5, 1808; d. unm., Oct. 25, 1841.

     30. THOMAS, b. March 3, 1816; d. unm., April 3, 1846.

SILAS STEPHENS, (14), son of Joshua Stephens, (6), left his father's
home, "near Lexington, Kentucky," and settled near Nashville, Tenn.,
where he married and acquired considerable property in land and slaves;
these latter he freed just before the war (about 1859), and one of them
came to Shelby County, Ohio, which is the only information ever had from
Silas. He died sine prolos about 1865.

JOHN STEPHENS, (15), son of Joshua Stephens, (6), was born Dec. 23,
1781, in Penn., accompanied his parents to Ross County, Ohio; voted for
the adoption of the first constitution of that state November 29, 1802,
being just about of age; enlisted in the U. S. Army for the war of 1812;
was present at the surrender of General Hull, Sunday, August 16, 1812;
and witnessed the victory of Commodore Perry, September 10, 1813, from
the shores of Lake Erie. Rev. M. A. Jordon, his step-son said that John
entered the Army as an ensign, and rose to the rank of Colonel, and
after the war was high sheriff of Western Ohio. He was commissioned
Captain of the State Militia in 1822. (I have the original commission
issued by Governor E. A. Brown). About 1816, he moved to near St. Paris,
Champaign County, where he died on his farm September 12, 1873. He had
been a lay preacher of the Methodist Protestant Church. He was twice
married, first to Nancy Brown, (about 1810), by whom he had nine
children; he married secondly Mrs. ---- Jordan, by whom he had no
children. Nancy Brown Stephens was born Feb. 4, 1787. His children were:

     31. ELIZABETH, d. unm., aged 18 years.

     32. JOSHUA, b. Jan. 4, 1812; m. Nancy Creegan; d. Feb. 1, 1891.

     33. DAVID HUMPHREYS, b. Nov. 8, 1813; d. Aug. 23, 1846; m. S. A.
         Burton.

     34. MARIA, d. 1848; m. John Blake.

     35. RACHEL, d. young.

     36. OLIVER PERRY, b. June 20, 1820; d. Nov. 6, 1873; m. 2 times.

     37. SARAH, b. Aug. 4, 1822; m. Smith Wallace; d. June 3, 1868.

     38. CATHERINE, b. Nov. 13, 1824; m. Robert Bower, died Dec. 6,
         1905.

     39. NANCY, b. March 22, 1827; m. T. T. Mitchell, died Jan. 8, 1909.

EBENEZER DAVID STEPHENS, (16), son of Joshua Stephens, (6), was born in
Chester County, Penn., May 7, 1784; accompanied his parents to Kentucky,
where, in 1798, (probably on the death of his mother), he was
apprenticed to a tanner at "Yellow Springs, Kentucky," but disliking his
master, ran away, and followed his father to Ross County, Ohio. He is
said to have burned the brick for the first house of that kind in
Chillicothe, and refused to take a piece of land in the proposed city of
Columbus, in payment for a kiln of brick; he served six weeks in the war
of 1812; in 1816, he settled on the S. E. 1/4 of section 18 Turtle Creek
Township, Shelby County, where he farmed till his death, on September
20, 1868. He married Jan. 11, 1811, Sarah Groome, daughter of Ezekiel
Groome and Rhoda (Brittain) Groome, formerly of Trenton, N. J.; she was
born May 23, 1792, and died Jan. 13, 1871; their children were:

     40. HETTY, b. Oct. 28, 1811; m. John Lennox; d. May 30, 1860.

     41. WILLIAM HUMPHREYS, b. Feb. 25, 1813; m. 3ts.; d. Dec. 13, 1879.

     42. JOSHUA M., b. Dec. 12, 1814; m. Minerva Metcalf; d. July 5,
         1844.

     43. EZEKIEL GROOME, b. Nov. 25, 1816; d. Aug. 20, 1820.

     44. RHODA, b. Feb. 22, 1819; m. Wm. Hawkey; d. Nov. 13, 1852.

     45. JOHN WESLEY, b. Feb. 22, 1819; m. Sarah Graham; d. May 18,
         1881.

     46. ELIZA, b. March 14, 1821; m. Wm. Hawkey; d. Sept. 29, 1887.

     47. DAVID NELSON, b. Feb. 23, 1823; m. Elyda Stone.

     48. BENJAMIN LAKIN, b. Oct. 17, 1824; d. July 16, 1828.

     49. SARAH ANN, b. Feb. 11, 1827; m. W. B. Cannon; d. Dec. 22, 1855.

     50. ALLEN EBENEZER, b. Dec. 30, 1829; d. unm., Nov. 5, 1888.

PRISCILLA STEPHENS, (17), daughter of Joshua Stephens, (6), was born in
Penn., November 30, 1786, and accompanied her parents to Ross County,
Ohio, where she married first Robert Donahue, by whom she had one child,
a boy, who died young; becoming a widow, she married secondly James
Moore (from Virginia), of Franklin County, Ohio, by whom she had
thirteen children. He was born August 7, 1787, and died April 11, 1847.
About 1831, they moved to near Sidney, Shelby County, Ohio, and about
1841, they moved to Pulaski County, Indiana. She married James Moore
Nov. 10, 1810. She died April 24, 1849. Her children were:

     51. ---- Donahue, died young.

By Moore.

     52. LUCINDA, b. October 25, 1812; m. Jacob Marshall.

     53. MINERVA, b. Dec. 8, 1813; m. Richard Francis.

     54. HUGH SCOTT, b. March 17, 1815; m. 2 times.

     55. DOUGLAS LEE, b. March 19, 1816; m. 3ts; d. April --, 1853.

     56. HANNAH, b. July 6, 1817; m. Jacob Baker.

     57. JAMES WELLS, b. Oct. 23, 1818; d. unm.

     58. THOMAS McCLISH, b. June 25, 1820; m. Mary A. Mowdy; d. Dec. 4.
         1862.

     59. JEMIMA CARTER, b. Sept. 1, 1821; m. John B. Rockwell.

     60. ANN URITTA, b. Nov. 3, 1822, m. T. S. Long; d. June 17, 1864.

     61. EPHRAIM RILEY, b. Jan. 8, 1824; m. 2ts; d. July 8, 1864.

     62. ALICE JANE, b. April 13, 1825; d. unm.

     63. ELIZABETH MARGARET, b. Sept. 7, 1826; m. J. W. Williams; d. May
         25, 1856.

     64. ELLEN MARY, b. April 17, 1828; m. R. Richardson; d. 1853.




SEVENTH GENERATION.


JOSHUA WING STEPHENS, (18), son of David H. Stephens, (10), was a tanner
at Evansville, Indiana; married Nancy Gibson; lived in Evansville,
Indiana. He died in California, Oct. 9, 1849. He had seven children:

     65. SILAS, m. Emma Walker.

     66. MALINDA, m. Thomas Bethel; sine prole; residence Newburgh, Ind.

     67. ANN ELIZA, b. Dec. 29, 1824; m. 2ts.

     68. SARAH, m. Dr. W. Norton.

     69. THOMAS, d. unm.

     70. FRANCES, m. first George Jacquese; m. second ----.

     71. JULIENNE, d. unm.

CHARLES A. STEPHENS, (19), son of David H. Stephens, (10), lived at
Evansville, Indiana; married in 1819, Malinda Carr, daughter of Samual
Carr, of Kentucky, and Mary Delaney, of Va., (one account says that
Malinda was born in North Carorlina, probably an error); their children
were:

     72. JOHN, b. July 19, 1823; he went to California, fate unknown.

     73. NANCY MARIA, b. Jan. 25, 1825; m. William Parvin.

     74. SUSAN, b. Nov. 19, 1826; m. 2ts.

     75. ELIZA, b. March 1, 1828; m. William Miller.

     76. SAMUEL, b. Sept. 8, 1831; m. Jeanette Ray.

     77. JULIA, b. Nov. 1, 1835; m. William Underwood.

     78. JAMES EMORY, b. Nov. 28, 1837; m. Margaret Todd.

One account says that Charles Stephens was born in North Carolina, lived
from about 1823 to 1831, at Morganville, Ky.; then from about 1835 to
1837 at Belleville, Ky.; died near Evansville, Ind.

SILAS STEPHENS, (20), son of David H. Stephens, (10), lived in
Evansville, Ind.; born in Lexington, Ky., Feb. 24, 1801; married
Julienna Evans, the only daughter of General Evans, the founder of
Evansville (she was born April 14, 1811, and died March 15, 1845); they
had six children. (He died Feb. 26, 1876).

     79. JANE EVANS, b. April 30, 1830; m. James Scantlin.

     80. MARTHA STOCKWELL, b. Oct. 26, 1832; d. Sept. 29, 1833.

     81. Infant son, b. and d. Dec. 6, 1833.

     82. ROBERT MORGAN EVANS, b. Oct. 15, 1834; m. Mary Tribble.

     83. JOSHUA WING, b. Oct. 29, ----, d. unm., Feb. 20, 1843.

     84. HENRY CLAY, b. Sept. 21, 1842; m. Caroline Renschler; d. Feb.
         5, 1884.

MARY VANDEVER, (23), daughter of Sarah (Stephens) Vandever, (11), was
born about 1802, in Ross County, Ohio; married John Wilson, of Virginia,
about 1824; moved to Jefferson, Mo., about 1833; since which nothing
definite has been heard from them. It is known that she had five
children:

     85. MATILDA.

     86. HASSA HOPA.

     87. ISAIAH.

     88. JOSHUA.

     89. ----.

CATHERINE VANDEVER, (24), daughter of Sarah (Stephens) Vandever, (11),
was born in Ross County, Ohio, March 4, 1804; married Josiah Gaskill;
they ultimately settled in Putnam County, Ohio; he was born Jan. 27,
1802, and died May 29, 1870; she died Nov. 3, 1845, and was buried at
Bluffton, Ohio. She had six children:

     90. SARAH, b. Sept. 7, 1829: d. Jan. 23, 1845, unm.

     91. CALEB, b. Nov. 7, 1832; m. Julia Nelson.

     92. JESSE T----, b. April 21, 1834; m. Isabella Nelson.

     93. MINERVA, b. Feb. 19, 1837; d. unm. June 9, 1851.

     94. JOSEPH C----, b. Oct. 16, 1839; m. Mary E. Hurley.

     95. PHOEBE, b. Nov. 22, 1842; m. Wm. C. Cramer.

RACHEL VANDEVER, (25), daughter of Sarah (Stephens) Vandever, (11), was
born in Ross County, Ohio, May 9, 1809; married John Carnahan at
Chillicothe, Jan. 4, 1830; died near Columbus, Ohio, December 3, 1850;
John Carnahan was born Feb. 26, 1807; d. ----. She had seven
children:

      96. ELIZABETH C., b. Dec. 5, 1830; d. Aug. 30, 1831.

      97. MARY WILSON, b. July 11. 1832; m. Oscar Mott.

      98. JOSHUA VANDEVER, b. Oct. 30, 1834; m. Sarah Ward Dec. 24,
          1856; d. in Bryan, Williams County, Ohio, Nov. 11, 1857,
          sine prole.

      99. JENNIE, b. Dec. 4, 1836; m. E. M. Deuchar.

     100. JOHN JACKSON, b. April 28, 1840; d. unm. Dec. 2, 1862.

     101. WILL ALLEN, b. Aug. 29, 1842; was living at Eagle Pass, Texas.

     102. CATHERINE STEPHENS, b. Mar. 28, 1846; d. July 21, 1865, unm.

JOSHUA VANDEVER, (26), son of Sarah (Stephens) Vandever, (11), was born
on Walnut Creek in Ross County, Ohio, Sept. 9, 1812; married Susanna
Burton May 31, 1837; she died Dec. 10, 1856; he died at Gettysburg,
Darke County Ohio. ----; his eight children were:

     103. ISAIAH WHITE, b. May 8, 1838; m. Lydia A. Martin.

     104. SARAH ELLEN, b. Jan. 28, 1840; m. James B. Bell.

     105. MARY CATHERINE, b. Jan. 18, 1842; m. J. O. Fuller.

     106. MALISSA ALRIRLY, b. Oct. 16, 1844; d. 1847.

     107. NANCY ELIZABETH, b. Nov. 29, 1846; lives unm. in Elkhart, Ind.

     108. BASIL BURTON, b. May 4, 1848; m. Florence E. Gruea (?).

     109. SHADRACH BURTON, b. July 4, 1853; m. Lucy B. Collins.

     110. REBECCA ANN, b. March 25, 1855; d. Oct. 16, 1856.

SILAS McCLISH, (27), son of Hannah (Stephens) McClish, (13), was born in
Ross County, Ohio, Oct. 15, 1804; accompanied his parents to Putnam
County, of which he was the first judge, which position he held for over
twenty years, and "was quite wealthy"; was married by James Lenox, Esq.,
Jan. 2, 1823, to Nancy Mellinger, daughter of David Mellinger, of Shelby
County, Ohio; there were seven children:

     111. LYDIA, b. Jan. 24, 1824; m. Daniel Ridenour.

     112. THOMAS, b. Dec. 11, 1825; m. Susanna Curtis.

     113. JOHN, b. Jan. 27, 1829; m. 3ts.; d. ----.

     114. WILLIAM, b. April 24, 1823; m. Mary E. Wagoner.

     115. HANNAH ELIZA, b. Feb. 2, 1837; m. Samuel Holt.

     116. SARAH, b. Feb. 8, 1838; m. John Wilser.

     117. DAVID, b. Aug. 29, 1841; d. Jan. 5. 1861, unm. falling off a
          gunboat into the Missippi River.

SILAS McCLISH, married secondly Mrs. Sallie (Carter) Hopkins about 1854,
by whom he had no children. He died June 16, 1860.

ELIZA McCLISH, (28), daughter of Hannah (Stephens) McClish, (13), was
born Dec. 25, 1806; accompanied her parents to Shelby County, Ohio;
married John Bush in 1822; died Nov. 24, 1827; had two children:

     118. ---- died young.

     119. ---- died young.

JOSHUA BOWSEN STEPHENS, (32), son of John Stephens, (15), was born in
Pickaway County, Ohio, Jan. 4, 1812; accompanied his parents to Shelby
County, Ohio; taught school; settled on Section 21, Turtle Creek
Township, where he farmed till his death, Feb. 1 1891; married Nancy
Creegan, (she was born Dec. 20, 1820) daughter of James and Eleanor
Creegan, Feb. 16, 1843. (From him I obtained much valuable information
about family history.) Their children were:

     120. SARAH CLEMENTINE, b. Feb. 21, 1844; d. Dec. 21, 1847.

     121. JOHN WESLEY, b. Sept. 5, 1845; is a gunsmith; lives in Sidney,
          Ohio.

     122. DAVID HUMPHREYS, b. Sept. 5, 1847, d. unm. Aug. 6, 1878.

     123. MARY LOUISA, b. Oct. 22, 1849; m. Thomas Evans Oct. 10, 1876;
     lives at Atlantic City, Iowa.

     124. NANCY ELLEN, b. May 19, 1852.

     125. CATHERINE THERESA, b. July 15, 1854.

     126. OLIVER PERRY, b. Sept. 5, 1856; a school teacher.

     127. MARIA ANTOINETTE, b. July 28, 1858; a school teacher.

     128. FLORENCE JANE, b. April 20, 1865.

     The children from 124 to 128, inclusive, live on the farm near
          Sidney, Ohio.

DAVID HUMPHREY STEPHENS, (33), son of John Stephens, (15), was born Nov.
8, 1813, in Pickaway County, Ohio; was a preacher of the Methodist
Protestant Church, and President of the Indiana Conference at the time
of his death; he married Sytha Annesley Burton April 13, 1838: (she was
born Sept. 29, 1817, near Flemingsburg, Ky.); lives at St. Joseph, Mo.
He died August 23, 1846; their children were:

     129. EMMA CLARISSA, b. June 23, 1842; m. A. D. Jewell.

     130. JOHN OLIVER, b. Nov. 20, 1844; m. Sarah J. Dinkle.

     131. MARTHA M----, b. May 13, 1847; m. Gad W. McCoy.

MARIA STEPHENS, (34), daughter of John Stephens, (15), was born about
1815, in Ross County, Ohio; accompanied her parents to Shelby County,
where she married John Blake in 1846; had only one child, a daughter,
who lived only a few months; both mother and child are buried in the
Presbyterian graveyard at Sidney, Ohio. Her child was:

     132. ----.

OLIVER PERRY STEPHENS, (36), son of John Stephens, (15), was born June
20, 1820, near Sidney, Ohio, where he was raised on his father's farm;
became a preacher in the Methodist Protestant Church; married first June
11, 1846, Mary Ann Biddle, a daughter of William H. Biddle, of New
Jersey, a direct descendant of William Penn. She was a women of marked
literary ability, the author of several fine poems; was born Sept. 19,
1821, and died April 15, 1869; she bore him five children. He married
secondly Mary Catherine Hartsook, Nov. 2, 1871; she was the daughter of
Elijah Barnett Hartsook, and was born Dec. 3, 1836. She bore him one
child. He died at Sabina, Ohio, Nov. 6, 1873, and was buried by the
Masonic Lodge of that place. His widow, Mrs. Mary C. (Hartsook)
Stephens, lives eight miles southeast of Xenia, Ohio, her post-office
address. (His remains now repose in the Cemetery at Xenia, Ohio, where
also lives his widow, 1906.) His children are:

By Mary Ann Biddle:

     133. DAVID STUBERT, b. May 12, 1847; m. Marietta L. Gibson.

     134. EMMA CATHERINE, b. Dec. 6, 1848; m. Ira Underwood.

     135. LOUISA FRANCES, b. May 16, 1851; m. J. A. Van Auken.

     136. WILLIAM CHALMERS, b. May 29, 1857; m. Mary Anetta Underwood.

     137. HERBERT TAYLOR, b. Sept. 10, 1864; m. Emma West Johnston.

By Mary C. Hartsook.:

     138. ELIZABETH HARTSOOK, b. May 7, 1873; m. Charles Doods.

SARAH STEPHENS, (37), daughter of John Stephens, (15), was born in
Shelby County, Ohio, August 4, 1822; married Smith Wallace May 11, 1843;
they moved to Clark County, same state, where Wallace farmed; she died
June 3, 1868. Her children were:

     139. ELLEN, b. April 9, 1844; m. J. T. Miller.

     140. MELISSA, b. Feb. 2, 1846; d. unm., Jan. 20, 1861.

     141. JOHN H----, b. Mar. 15, 1849; d. Sept. 4, 1861.

     142. JENNIE, b. May 25, 1851; m. J. R. Thompson.

     143. HUGH, b. Aug. 17, 1853; unm.

     144. EMMA O----, b. Nov. 15. 1855; m. J. E. Lowry.

     145. WILLIAM SMITH, b. Jan. 12, 1858; m. Mary E. Trumbo.

     146. CHARLES BUCKINGHAM, b. April 26, 1860.

     147. ELMER KENT, b. Nov. 28, 1862.

     148. Infant died young.

CATHERINE STEPHENS, (38), daughter of John Stephens, (15), was born in
Shelby County, Ohio, Nov. 13, 1824; d. Jan. 29, 1905; married Robert
Bower of Lima, Ohio; died Dec. 6, 1905. Her children were:

     149. COLUMBUS TAYLOR, b. Sept. 14, 1848; m. Lucy Swab.

     150. JOHN STEPHENS, b. July 28, 1849; m. Mary Boysell.

     151. GEORGE WASHINGTON, b. Aug. 25, 1852; d. Aug. 26, 1908.

     152. ALANZO SMITH, b. Oct. 9, 1855; m. Clara Boyer.

     153. ALVERO LINCOLN, b. Aug. 30, 1858.

     154. ADOLPHUS LEE, b. July 25, 1861; m. Margaret McKenna.

     155. FLORA MAY, b. May 17, 1864.

     156. ZORA CATHERINE, b. Nov. 25, 1866.

NANCY STEPHENS, (39), daughter of John Stephens, (15), was born in
Shelby County, Ohio, March 22, 1827; died Jan. 8, 1909; married January
29, 1850, Thornton Talyor Mitchell; he was born Aug. 27, 1827; died Nov.
24, 1907; they lived in Lima, Ohio. Their children were:

     157. FRANCES ROWENA, b. July 26, 1851; m. A. C. Baxter.

     157-1/2 JOHN PORTER, b. Aug. 25, 1853; d. Dec. 17, 1853.

     158. ELMER BOND, b. Oct. 25, 1854; m. Claude Ralston; she d. Dec.
          14, 1905.

     159. EMMA HERRIET, b. June 25, 1857; m. A. E. Dicker.

     160. DORA FLORENCE, b. Oct. 25, 1860; m. S. K. Blair.

     161. ERNEST TAYLOR, b. May 3, 1863; m. Belle Thatcher.

     162. MARY ELOISE, b. Dec. 9, 1867; m. John A. Hesse; he d. Jan. 29,
          1903.

     163. THORNTON WILBERT, b. April 4, 1874.

HETTY STEPHENS, (40), daughter of E. D. Stephens, (16), was born in
Franklin County, Ohio, Oct. 11, 1811; accompanied her parents to Shelby
County; married John Lenox, son of Richard Lenox, (he was born Oct. 8,
1809, and died Feb. 14, 1891); they lived on their farm just South of
Wapakoneta, Ohio, all their lives; she was the mother of ten children;
she died May 30, 1860; their children were:

     164. ELIZABETH FLORENDA, b. Jan. 8, 1832; m. John Downey.

     165. EBENEZER ALLEN, b. Nov. 21, 1883; d. unm. Jan. 4, 1863.

     166. RICHARD HAMILTON, b. Jan. 30, 1836; m. 4 times.

     167. HENRY CLAY, b. March 11, 1838; d. unm. May 20, 1863.

     168. SARAH ELIZABETH, b. Aug. 8, 1841; d. Jan. 3, 1847.

     169. AMANDA MALVINA, b. Nov. 2, 1843.

     170. GEORGE WASHINGTON, b. May 10, 1846; m. Mrs. Rosella Howe.

     171. JOHN MARION, b. May 25, 1850; m. Catherine Regan.

     172. WILLIAM HARRISON, b. May 25, 1850; d. Aug. 6, 1850.

     173. HETTY MALISSA, b. July 9, 1853; m. H. B. Bilter.

WILLIAM HUMPHREYS STEPHENS, (41), son of E. D. Stephens, (16), was born
Feb. 25, 1813, on Walnut Creek, Franklin County, Ohio; was raised on his
father's farm near Hardin; learned the shoemakers trade in that place;
was there in partnership in that business with Calvin Lenox, and married
Sept. 13, 1835, his sister, Julian Crisup Lenox, daughter of Richard
Lenox, (she was born Oct. 10, 1812, and died Feb. 28, 1839); she bore
him two children; he married secondly, Jan. 13, 1840, Eleanor Cecil,
daughter of Jude William Wirt Cecil, of the Cecil family of Virginia;
(she was born Aug. 5, 1820, near Lockington, Shelby County, Ohio; died
June 12, 1866, at Portland, Oregon); he moved to Sidney, Ohio, and
engaged in the transportation business on the Miami Canal; moved to
Lockington, same County, and built a saw mill there in 1853; was a Whig
in politics and a Methodist in religion; in August, 1855, moved to
Grundy County, Missouri, and purchased a farm 2-1/2 miles southeast of
Trenton; in April, 1857, started overland for California with ox-teams;
was harrassed by Indians and Mormans on the way; arrived in California
in Oct.; first settled in Ione Valley; then moved to Suisun, Solano
County; in 1859, returned to Ione, but lost his farm there by reason of
a Pico grant, as he had by the Waterman grant in Solano County; in 1861,
moved to Santa Clara, California, where he followed the transportation
business till his death; married thirdly, Nov. 30, 1870, Harriet Judidah
Lusk, a native of Freehold County, N. Y., by whom he had no children;
was town trustee of Santa Clara, and a stockholder in the local bank and
street railroad; died Dec. 13, 1879, and was buried by the Odd Fellows,
of which organization he had been a member since 1840; he wrote a
history of the family, but the manuscript was lost. Children:

By Julian C. Lenox:

     174. SARAH ELIZABETH, b. Mar. 13, 1837; m. O. S. Frambes.

     175. WILLIAM HAMILTON, b. Feb. 20, 1839; m. Georgia A. Harlow.

By Eleanor Cecil:

     176. CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS, b. Dec. 29, 1840; m. 2ts; d. Sept. 7,
          1894.

     177. Infant died young.

     178. ROSETTA, b. April 9, 1843; d. May 30, 1843.

     179. Infant died young.

     180. VIRGINIA PAULINE, b. April 28, 1845; m. D. H. Zumwalt.

     181. BEVERLY WAUGH, b. Nov. 14, 1849; d. April 30, 1853.

     182. BASCOM ASBURY, b. Mar. 5, 1855; m. M. M. Overshiner.

JOSHUA M. STEPHENS, (42), son of E. D. Stephens, (16), was born in
Franklin County, Ohio, Dec. 12, 1814; was raised on his father's farm at
Hardin; is said to have assumed the "M" in his name for distinction;
settled on a Government claim near Woodstock, McHenry County, Illinois,
where he died July 5, 1844, of a sore throat; he married Minerva
Metcalf, she was born October 25, 1815; died Dec. 25, 1876; Children:

     183. SIDNEY, b. Nov. 8, 1842; m. Emma Lombard.

     184. ELLEN MINERVA, b. Sept. 16, 1841, m. J. H. Baker.

RHODA STEPHENS, (44), daughter of E. D. Stephens, (16), was born at
Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio, Feb. 22, 1819; twin with her brother, John
Wesley; married William Hawkey, July 30, 1846. He was born June 12,
1813, in Maryland and died Dec. 20, 1886, in Sidney, Ohio; she died Nov.
13, 1852. Children: 185. STANTON WESLEY, b. Oct. 3, 1848; m. Clara E.
Lenox. 186. SARAH ELIZABETH, b. Dec. 9, 1850; m. J. D. Price.

JOHN WESLEY STEPHENS, (45), son of E. D. Stephens, (16), twin brother of
Rhoda Stephens Hawkey, (44), was born Feb. 22, 1819; at Hardin, Ohio;
was raised on his father's farm; became a portrait painter and a
physician; was surgeon of the 99th Ohio V. I. and 50th O. V. I., Third
Division, Army of the Cumberland, serving through the Rebellion; settled
at State Line City, Ind., where he died May 18, 1881; he married Feb.
17, 1842, Sarah Graham; she was born May 18, 1817, and yet lives at
Sidney, Ohio. She furnishes me with much valuable family history.
Children:

     187. JAMES EBENEZER, born Nov. 26, 1842; m. Annia I. Lister.

     188. SARAH ADELIA, b. July 30, 1844; d. unm. Aug. 27, 1869.

     189. ELIZA JANE, b. Aug. 31, 1846; m. David Hoover.

     190. ROBERT GRAHAM, b. Dec. 12, 1848; d. Mar. 28, 1853.

     191. CAROLINE MARY, b. Oct. 12, 1850; m. E. E. Inlow.

ELIZA STEPHENS, (46), daughter of E. D. Stephens, (16), was born Mar.
14, 1821, at Hardin, Ohio; married William Hawkey, the former husband of
her sister, Rhoda Stephens Hawkey, on Sept. 14, 1853, and died Sept. 29,
1887, at Sidney, Ohio. She had one child:

     192. WINONA MAY, b. Aug. 7, 1862; resides in Flagstaff, Arizona,
          married E. S. Gosney, a banker of that place; has -- children:

DAVID NELSON STEPHENS, (47), son of E. D. Stephens, (16), was born at
Hardin, Ohio; was raised on his father's farm; has lived at Hardin,
Shelby County, Ohio, all his life, with the exception of a short time
spent in his early life in Illinois as a farmer; was born Feb. 23, 1823;
married Dec. 25, 1853, Elydia Stone; she was born May 28, 1837, and is
living at Hardin, Ohio. D. N. Stephens died ----. Children:

     193. ALLANSON FOSTER, b. Nov. 23, 1854; m. Mrs. N. A. Princehouse.

     194. SHAFFER FREMONT, b. June 14, 1857; m. Rhoda Stilos.

     195. WILLIAM JOSHUA, b. Oct. 25, 1858; lives unm. at Flagstaff,
     Arizona.

     196. TAMSON PARMELIA, b. Oct. 8, 1860; m. M. E. Shaw.

     197. MARGARET ELLEN, b. June 2, 1863; m. Lewis White.

     198. NANCY ALICE, b. Dec. 17, 1866; m. J. W. Turnis.

     199. WINNIE JENNIFRED, b. Dec. 2, 1872.

SARAH ANN STEPHENS, (49), daughter of E. D. Stephens, (16), was born
Feb. 11, 1827, near Hardin, Ohio; married William Broderick Cannon, son
of Richard Cannon (See page 10) (9) July 10, 1846. She died Dec. 22,
1855. He was born April 11, 1826, and lives at Allerton, Wayne County,
Iowa. She had four children:

     200. MARY ELVIRY, b. Aug. 20, 1847; m. Nathan Swan.

     201. RICHARD EBENEZER, b. March 21, 1849; m. Olive Dill.

     202. SARAH TAMSON, b. Oct. 7, 1850; d. March 4, 1853.

     203. JOHN WESLEY, b. Sept. 26, 1853; d. Feb. 19, 1862.

LUCINDA MOORE, (52), daughter of Priscilla, (Stephens) Moore, (17), was
born Oct. 25, 1812; accompanied her parents to Shelby County; married
Jacob Marshall, of Fort Jefferson, Ohio. Jealousy on the part of her
husband led to their separation; in 1836 she disappeared, saying that
she was going to live with the Quakers at Dayton, Ohio, since which time
she has never been heard from; she had one child:

     204. ----, born and died the same day in 1833.

MINERVA MOORE, (53), daughter of P. S. Moore, (17), was born in Franklin
County, Ohio, Dec. 18, 1813; accompanied her parents to Shelby County,
Ohio; married Richard Francis; had one child which died:

     205. ANN, b. ----

HUGH SCOTT MOORE, (54), son of Priscilla Moore, (17), was born in
Franklin County, Ohio, Mar. 17, 1815; accompanied his parents to Shelby
County, Ohio; was a farmer; lived near Sidney, Ohio, until his death
March 22, 1872; married March 25, 1843, Anna Bryan (she was born May 25,
1819); by whom he had four children; she died ----; he married
secondly Eveline ----, who survived him. Mrs. Evaline Moore lives in
Piqua, Ohio. The four children by Ann Bryan were:

     206. JAMES, b. March 27, 1844; d. July 22, 1864, unm.

     207. MINERVA, b. Sept. 13, 1845; m. William Clawson.

     208. SARAH, b. Oct. 1, 1847; m. C. P. Croy.

     209. JOHN DOUGLAS, b. Jan, 27, 1847; m. Florence Mous.

DOUGLAS LEE MOORE, (55), son of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17), was
born in Franklin County, Ohio; accompanied his parents to Western Ohio
and Indiana; was born March 9, 1816; with his two brothers Thomas
McClish and Ephrain Riley founded the town of Mooresburg in Pulaski
County, Indiana, in 1851, and built a flour mill which was burned in the
summer of 1853. He married first Nov. 16, 1840, Nancy Rockwell, sister
of John Baker Rockwell, by whom he had four children. His wife dying, he
married secondly, Jane Todd of Pleasant Grove, Fulton County, Indiana,
by whom he had no children. His second wife dying he married thirdly,
Martha Jane Borders, by whom he had one child. He died April --, 1853.

By Nancy Rockwell:

     210. LORETTA R----, b. Jan. 12, 1843; married J. G. Martin.

     211. Infant died young.

     212. HANNAH, d. 2 years old.

     213. RICHARD EPHRAIM, b. ----, 1844; d. Dec. --, 1854.

By Martha Jane Borders:

     214. FRANCES JEMIMA, b. Oct. --, 1852; d. Sept. 1, 1854.

HANNAH MOORE, (56), daughter of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17) was
born July 16, 1817, in Franklin County, Ohio.; married about 1835, Jacob
Baker, of Port Jefferson, Shelby County, Ohio, to whom she bore six
daughters; she died Oct. 25, 1852. Jacob Baker was born in Sidney, Ohio,
March 1, 1813 and is living at Nebo, Cass County, Indiana. Children:

     215. MARIA JANE, b. Aug. 26, 1837; d. ----, 1841.

     216. Infant died young.

     217. SUSANNAH, b. Aug. 30, 1842; m. 2ts.

     218. Infant died young.

     219. PRISCILLA MARGARET, b. Aug. 6, 1847; m. Jacob Miller.

     220. LAURA ANN, b. Oct. 4, 1652; m. John Clark.

THOMAS McCLISH MOORE, (58), son of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17), was
born June 25, 1820, in Franklin County, Ohio; accompanied his parents to
Western Ohio and Indiana; with his two brothers E. R. and D. L. founded
the town of Mooresburg, in Pulaski County, Ind. He married Oct. 16,
1845, Mary A. Mowdy, at Logansport, Indiana, by whom he had seven
children. She was born June 25, 1856, and died Dec. 10, 1885. He died
Dec. 4, 1862. Children:

     221. CLARA ANN, b. Oct. 19, 1846; m. A. C. Ward.

     222. JAMES IRA, b. Dec. 8, 1848; lives unmarried at Mooreburg.

     223. EMMA IRENE, b. Sept. 21, 1850; m. P. P. Dukes.

     224. THOMAS DUDLEY, b. Jan. 19, 1852; m. Ellen McCoy.

     225. ELIZABETH ALICE, b. Feb. 8, 1856.; d. Dec. 21, 1856.

     226. CHARLES EPHRIAM, b. Jan. 7, 1858; m. Ida M. Loy.

     227. HARRIET ELSIE, b. Nov. 18, 1861; m. John Cokain.

JEMIMA CARTER MOORE, (59), daughter of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17),
was born Sept. 21, 1821, in Franklin County, Ohio; accompanied her
parents to Western Ohio and Indiana; married Nov. 16, 1840, John Baker
Rockwell, brother of Nancy Rockwell, (wife of D. L. Moore, (55)); he was
born May 25, 1821; served in the U. S. Army in the War of the Rebellion;
was killed by a stroke of lightning Sept. 18, 1884; she still lives in
Homer, Dakota County, Nebraska. Children:

     228. ANNA, b. June 15, 1843; d. June 25, 1843.

     229. MARY JANE, b. May 16, 1845; m. J. D. Walker.

     230. HANNAH, b. Feb. 8, 1848; d. unm., June 13, 1864.

     231. RICHARD DOUGLAS, b. Jan. 21, 1850; m. Susannah Myres.

     232. STEPHEN MILLS, b. Jan. 7, 1853; m. Sylvia E. Snyder.

     233. MARTHA, b. Oct. 6, 1855; d. Jan. 9, 1863.

     234. JEFFERSON, b. May 7, 1858; m. Nancy A. Biggs

     235. ROSA ANN, b. Dec. 27, 1860; m. Albert Peterson.

     236. MARGARET ALICE, b. Dec. 6, 1863; m. William J. Walter.

ANN URITTA MOORE, (60), daughter of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17),
was born Nov. 3, 1822, in Franklin County, Ohio; accompanied her parents
to Western Ohio and Indiana; married June 16, 1844, Thomas Shepherd
Long. He was born Sept. 17, 1819, and died Sept. 23, 1872; she died June
17, 1864. Children:

     237. WILLIAM, ----, b. Feb. 20, 1846; d. Oct. 2, 1848.

     238. MARY BELLE, b. March 4, 1849; m. Henry E. Welsh.

     239. ELIZABETH, I, b. ---- (MARGARET), b. Mar. 2, 1852; d. Feb.
          26, 1859.

     240. HARRIET E---- A----, b. June 15, 1854; d. July 29, 1859.

     241. EPHRIAM T----, b. June 29, 1857, d. Sept. 3, 1857.

     242. ANN R----, b. and d. Jan. 20, 1859.

     243. FRANCIS (?), b. Feb. 25, 1860; d. Mar. 9, 1860.

     244. ANDREW MORTON, b. Mar. 31, 1863; lives unm. at Mishawaka, Ind.

EPHRIAM RILEY MOORE, (61), son of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17), was
born in Franklin County, Ohio, Jan. 8, 1824; accompanied his parents to
Western Ohio and Indiana; with his brothers D. L. (55) and T. McL.,
(58), founded the town of Mooresburg. He married first Oct. 13, 1847,
Sarah Jane Patterson, by whom he had two children. His wife dying, he
married secondly June 13, 1852, Rachel Ann Murphy, who bore him five
children. He died July 8, 1864. His widow survives him, now Mrs. R. A.
Hastings, of Mooresburg, Pulaski County, Indiana, who has the original
family record of Mrs. Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17), Children:

By S. J. Patterson:

     245. WILLIAM PATTERSON, b. Oct. 25, 1848; m. M. Locke.

     246. JOHN WESLEY, b. ----, 1849; d. May 10, 1856.

By R. A. Murphy.

     247. NATHAN HURT, b. Mar. 23, 1853; m. Susie A. Parsley.

     248. EPHRIAM RILEY, b. July 27, 1856; d. Aug. 12, 1856.

     249. THOMAS RILEY, b. Feb. 27, 1857; m. Nettie L. Borch.

     250. LILY DAY, b. Nov. 18, 1853; m. Lee Monroe.

     251. HENRY P----, b. Nov. 23, 1860; d. Mar. 3, 1861.

ELIZABETH MARGARET MOORE, (63), daughter of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore,
(17), was born Sept. 17, 1826; accompanied her parents to Western Ohio
and Indiana; married Sept. 28, 1843, John W. Williams, to whom she bore
four children; she died May 25, 1856; J. W. Williams still lives in
Union City, Indiana. Children:

     252. PRISCILLA ELLEN, b. May 29, 1845; m. Oscar Knowlton.

     253. SARAH JANE, b. Mar. 20, 1848; m. E. W. Penny.

     254. MARY ANN, b. Aug. 9, 1850; d. Aug. 2, 1851.

     255. EVA ADALINE, b. Aug. 13, 1853; d. Oct. 17, 1853.

ELLEN MARY MOORE, (64), daughter of Priscilla (Stephens) Moore, (17),
was born April 17, 1828; accompanied her parents to Western Ohio and
Indiana; in which latter state at Logansport she married Richard
Richardson, to whom she bore one child, and died in May (or June) 1853.
Child:

     256. DUDLEY, lived five or six years.

NOTE:--The foregoing closes the records of the Seventh Generation, so
far as I have them to date.




EIGHTH GENERATION.


SILAS STEPHENS, (65), son of Joshua Stephens, (18), married Emma Walker,
by whom he had two children. His parents lived in Evansville, Indiana;
was a tanner; moved to a farm in Warrick County, Indiana; died Feb. 28,
1859. It has been very difficult to get any information about him, or
what has become of his children who are:

     257. JOSHUA WING, (Merchant at Browns, Edwards County, Ill.)

     258. FREDERICK, d. unm.

ANN ELIZA STEPHENS, (67), daughter of Joshua Stephens, (18), was born
Dec. 19, 1824, probably in Evansville, Ind.; married first Dec. 22,
1842, George L---- Schnae, by whom she had three children. He dying,
she married secondly, Thomas F. T. Roberts, Feb. 28, 1884; he died Nov.
27, 1887; Mrs. A. E. Roberts may now be living at New Harmony, Indiana.
Her children by Schnae were:

     259. EMILY, b. Sept. 18, 1843; m. William H. Bennett.

     260. ELLA, b. July 5, 1847; m. Dr. Thomas Smith.

     261. GEORGE WING, b. Feb. 12, 1853; m. Elizabeth Nelgin.

     261-1/2. JOSHUA, d. about three years old.

SARAH STEPHENS, (68), daughter of Joshua Stephens, (18), married Dr. W.
Norton; probably lived in Evansville Indiana; had one child:

     262. ----, died young.

She married secondly, Thomas T. Roberts.

FRANCIS STEPHENS, (70), daughter of Joshua Wing Stephens, (18); married
first George Jaques; probably living in Owensville, Gibson County,
Indiana. Had three children:

     263. ----, died young.

     264. ----, died young.

     265. ----, died young.

NANCY MARIE STEPHENS, (73), daughter of Charles Stephens, (19); married
William Parvin; lives at Crevi, Mississippi.

SUSAN STEPHENS, (74), daughter of Charles Stephens, (19), was born Nov.
19, 1826; married first Aug. 10, 1844 John Sibley Wilson. They moved
from Evansville, Ind., to Tallahatchie County, Missippi; Wilson died
Aug. 28, 1852; she married secondly John Troutman, who yet lives at
Crevi, Tallahatchie County, Miss. She is dead. She had eight children:

     266. JOSEPHINE TOBITHA, m. William Mitchell.

     267. ELLA S----, m. 2 times.

     268. JULIA d. unm.

     269. MARIE, married and died.

     270. EFFIE T----, m. George Harney.

     271. ----.

     272. ----.

     273. ----.

ELIZA STEPHENS, (75), daughter of Charles Stephens, (19), was born March
1, 1826; married William Miller.

SAMUEL STEPHENS, (76), son of Charles Stephens, (19), was born Sept. 8,
1831, in Morgansfield, Ky.; married Jeanette Ray; lives at West Shoals,
Marvin County, Ind.; has had five children:

     274. CHARLES W----, b. Nov. 8, 1864; m. Minnie H. Stephens.

     275. WILLIAM, b. Nov. 23, 1866; m. Fannie Wingfield, June 6, 1892;
          residence, Camp Verde, Arizona.

     276. FREDERICK, b. Nov. 12, 1868.

     277. JESSIE, b. Dec. 12, 1872; d. May 27, 1872.

     278. MARY, b. Dec. 23, 1873; d. July 6, 1883.

JULIA STEPHENS, (77), daughter of Charles Stephens (19), was born Sept.
8, 1836, at Belleville (Bellevue), Ky.; married Dec. 14, 1869, William
Underwood; lives at Sherman, Grayson County, Texas; has one child:

     279. CHARLES STEPHENS, b. Sept. 25, 1870, at Rome, Ohio; residence
          No. 820 East Hoiston Street, Sherman, Texas.

JAMES EMORY STEPHENS, (78), son of Charles Stephens, (19), was born Nov.
28, 1837; married May 28, 1863, Margaret Todd; was a job printer and
prominent politician in New Orleans; was divorced, and moved to Albany,
Dougherty County, Georgia, where he married ---- ----, by whom he had
no children. He died in 1890. By Margaret Todd, he had two children:

     280. JAMES TODD, b. Aug. 15, 1864; lives at No. 71 Rampart St., New
          Orleans, La., with his mother.

     281. MARY ELIZABETH, b. May ----; d. Nov. 2, 1870; aetat rys. 7
          mos.

JANE EVANS STEPHENS, (79), daughter of Silas Stephens, (20), was born
April 30, 1830, in Evansville, Ind., where she yet lives at No. 617
Upper Water Street; married Sept. 2, 1846, James Scantlin, to whom she
bore eight children:

     282. JULIENNE, b. Mar. 2, 1848; m. Mauntrille Johnson.

     283. SILAS STEPHENS, b. Mar. 23, 1850; m. Sarah A. Lawton.

     284. JAMES S----, b. July 27, 1854; d. July 10, 1855.

     285. MARY ELIZABETH, b. Aug. 4, 1856; m. James M. Chandler.

     286. MARTHA WING, b. Oct. 1, 1859.

     287. ALBERTHA, P----, b. Jan. 10, 1862.

     288. ELIZA SELITA, b. Mar. 23, 1866; m. H. K. Carrington.

     289. ROBERT E----, b. Aug. 18, 1870.

ROBERT MORGAN EVANS STEPHENS, (82), son of Silas Stephens, (20), was
born Oct. 15, 1834, in Evansville, Ind.; married Oct. 4, 1857, Mary
M---- Tribble, by whom he had three children. He died May 3, 1864; his
widow yet lives in Evansville. Children:

     290. MARY ELLA, b. July 15, 1859; m. A. J. Miller.

     291. EDGAR, b. Aug. 8, 1861; d. April 22, 1866.

     292. JANE CAROLINE, (or Jennie), b. Nov. 20, 1863; m. Ed. F.
          Sonntag.

HENRY CLAY STEPHENS, (84), son of Silas Stephens, (20), was born in
Evansville, Ind., Sept. 21, 1842; was a farmer; married Nov. 7, 1861,
Caroline Ronschler (she was born Aug. 19, 1839), by whom he had six
children. He died Feb. 5, 1884. Children:

     293. EMMA JANE, b. Aug. 18, 1862.

     294. SILAS SCANTLIN, b. March 22, 1864.

     295. ROBERT MORGAN EVANS, b. Dec. 6, 1866.

     296. JULIENNE EVANS, b. Sept. 6, 1868.

     297. WILLIAM HENRY, b. Oct. 8, 1870; d. Jan. 31, 1871.

     298. DEWITT EVANS, b. Aug. 24, 1873.

The widow and surviving children live in Evansville, Ind.

CALEB GASKILL, (91), son of Catherine (Vandever) Gaskill, (24), was born
May 7, 1832; married Nov. 13, 1860, Julia Nelson (she was born Feb. 15,
1842; died Sept. 30, 1881), by whom he had seven children. He was a
member of Company G, 7th Regiment, Veteran Reserve Corps, U. S. A.,
participating in seven pitched battles during the war of the Rebellion,
and was honorably discharged at Washington, D. C., May 9, 1865; now
farms near Brainerd, Nebraska. Children:

     299. WILLIAM, b. ----, 1861; d. ----, 1874.

     300. ALBERT, b. Jan. --, 1864; d. Nov. 2, 1880.

     301. SARAH, b. ----, 1868; d. ----, 1875.

     302. GEORGE J----, b. May 6, 1873.

     303. RENNIE, b. ----, 1877; d. ----, 1877.

     304. ANNIE MAY, b. April 12, 1879.

     305. CORA, b. Mar. 20, 1881; d. Dec. 15, 1881.

JESSE T---- GASKILL, (92), son of Catherine (Vandever) Gaskill, (24),
was born April 21, 1834; married Isabella Nelson (she was born ----,
1840; d. ----, 1883) by whom he had eight children. He is a farmer
and lives near Haysprings, Nebraska. Children:

     306. FRANCIS A----, b. ----, 1858; d. ----, 1861.

     307. SARAH A----, b. ----, 1859; d. ----, 1861.

     308. ELLEN, b. ----, 1860; m. Perry Milliken.

     309. FLORA CATHERINE, b. ----, 1862; m. Hugh L. McCoy.

     310. JESSIE (?), b. ----, 1864; d. ----, 1865.

     311. GEORGE WILSON, b. ----, 1866; d. ----, 1867.

     312. ESTELLA MARY, b. Nov. 2, 1868; m. Lewis Jacobs.

     313. CHARLES W----, ----, 1873.

JOSEPH C---- GASKILL, (94), son of Catherine (Vandever) Gaskill, (24),
was born Oct. 16, 1839, at Bluffton, Allen County, Ohio; married Aug.
29, 1861, Mary E. Hurley; she was born Sept. 3, 1843, at Milltown,
Ireland. He is farming near Valentine, Cherry County, Nebraska.
Children:

     314. ANNETTA, b. July 16, 1862.

     315. EMMA, b. June 6, 1864; m. John T. Hamilton.

     316. ELIZA, b. July 15, 1866; m. D. J. Kirwan.

     317. NORA, b. Dec. 23, 1868.

     318. MARGARET, b. Aug. 23, 1871.

     319. DANIEL M----, b. Sept. 12, 1873.

     320. MARY LOULU, b. July 26, 1870.

     321. DAVID LEO, b. Sept. 25, 1883.

PHOEBE GASKILL, (95), daughter of Catherine (Vandever) Gaskill, (24),
was born Nov. 22, 1842; married William C. Cramer, Aug. 29, 1861, to
whom she bore three children; lives near Creighton, Knox County,
Nebraska. Children:

     322. ABI, b. Oct. 22, 1862; m. E. D. Mason.

     323. McCELLAN, b. Oct. 15, 1864.

     324. WILLIAM, b. July 23, 1870.

MARY WILSON CARNAHAN, (97), daughter of Rachel (Vandever) Carnahan,
(25); was born July 11, 1832; married July, 11, 1865, Oscar Mott, to
whom she has borne one child. She was a nurse in the U. S. Army, as was
also her sister, Catherine Stephens Carnahan, (102), who died while in
the service. Oscar Mott was born Feb. 25, 1839. They live at No. 311 S.
Second St., Elkart, Ind. Child:

     325. WILLIAM EDGAR, b. Jan. 25, 1870.

JENNIE CARNAHAN, (99), daughter of Rachel (Vandever) Carnahan, (25), was
born Dec. 4, 1836; married Nov. 8, 1860, Dr. Edgar Montague Deucher; he
was born in 1832, and was killed in the battle of Atlanta, Sept. 4,
1864, while in command of his Company, of which he was Captain, Co. E.
38th O. R. She bore him one child.

     326. ROSE, b. May 25, 1862; m. J. E. Beach. They live in Bryan,
          Williams County, Ohio.

ISAIAH WHITE VANDEVER, (103), a son of Joshua Vandever, (26), was born
May 8, 1838; married Lydia A. Martin; lives at Webster, Darke County,
Ohio.

SARAH ELLEN VANDEVER, (104), daughter of Joshua Vandever, (26), was born
January 28, 1840; married April 23, 1865, James Barnett Bell. He was
born Aug. 9, 1835. They live at Gettysburg, Darke County, Ohio. Their
children are:

     327. EMMA ESTELLA, b. Jan. 17, 1866; d. Mar. 16, 1868.

     328. ALBERT WALTER, b. April 13, 1868.

     329. MARTHA OLIVE, b. Aug. 30, 1870.

     330. CHARLES HEIKES, b. Jan. 12, 1872.

     331. JAMES EDGAR, b. May 20, 1875.

     332. PEARL SUSANNA, b. June 6, 1879.

     333. HENRY LEWIS, b. Nov. 15, 1871.

MARY CATHERINE VANDEVER, (105), daughter of Joshua Vandever, (26), was
born Jan. 18, 1842; married Joseph Orrin Fuller. He was born May 8,
1845; died Dec. 13, 1886. She died March 28, 1884. They lived in Darke
County, Ohio. Their children were:

     334. WILLIAM EDWARD, b. June 15, 1867; lives at Piqua, Ohio.

     335. NETTIE B----, b. June 28, 1871.

     336. JAMES WEBSTER, b. April 11, 1874; lives at Webster, Ohio.

     337. HARRY H----, b. April 21, 1877.

     338. WALTER J----, b. Mar. 17, 1882.

BASIL BURTON VANDEVER, (108), son of John Vandever, (26), was born May
4, 1848; married Feb. 7, 18--, Florence Emma Cruea (?). She was born
June 2, 1860. They lived in Tippecanoe City, Ohio. Children:

     340. BLANCHE, b. Nov. 17, 1878; d. Jan. 1879.

     341. CHARLES GARFIELD, b. Oct. 4, 1880.

SHADRACH BURTON VANDEVER, (109), son of Joshua Vandever, (26), was born
July 4, 1853 (?); married Judy B---- Collins, daughter of A. D. and
Sarah ---- Collins; she was born March 10, 1858, they live in Piqua,
Ohio. Children:

     342. ARTHUR FOSTER, b. Sept. 23, 1879; d. Aug. 30, 1880.

     343. GOLDEN ETNA, b. Oct. 2, 1882.

     344. ROYAL RAY, b. June 28, 1886.

LYDIA McCLISH, (111), daughter of Silas McClish, (27), was born Jan. 4,
1824; married May 18, 1843, Daniel Ridenour, to whom she bore four
children. She died Oct. 15, 1851. He was born Sept. 10, 1811, and died
on the Pacific Ocean while en route from Panama to San Francisco, Jan.
7, 1852. They lived in Putnam County, Ohio. Children:

     345. THOMAS M----, b. Mar. 10, 1846; m. Eilza J. Shaffer.

     346. JOHN C----, b. June 5, 1849; mysteriously disappeared in
          1878.

     347. GEORGE H----, b. Aug. 20, 1851; lives in Dupont, Putnam
          County, Ohio.

THOMAS McCLISH, (112), son of Silas McClish, (27), was born Dec. 11,
1825; married April 1, 1852, Susannah Curtis, who bore him one child
only. He died Jan. 11, 1854. Child:

     348. DAVID, who died aged 19 years.

JOHN McCLISH, (113), son of Silas McClish, (27) was born Jan. 27, 1829;
married first, Aug. 3, 1854, Hannah Jeffrey, by whom he had four
children. His wife dying, he married secondly, April 2, 1860, Harriet
Dash, by whom he had four children. His wife dying, he married thirdly,
Jan. 29, 1874, Elizabeth Hitchcock, by whom he had no children. He
died ----, 1879. He was a member of Co. H. 66th O. V. I. His widow
lives on the estate near Dupont, Putnam County, Ohio. Children:

By Hannah Jeffreys:

     349. NANCY, b. Dec. 13, 1850; m. ---- Pitcher.

     350. WINNIE, b. July 2, 1856; m. Evan Dalton.

     351. GILBERT, b. Nov. 28, 1857; m. Flora E. Miller.

     352. GEORGE, b. April 9, ----; d. July 29, 1859.

By Harriet Dash.

     353. FRANK, b. Jan. 22, 1861; d. April 29, 1874.

     354. AMBROSE, b. Sept. 5, 1862.

     355. MARY, b. May 19, 1868.

     356. ALICE, died young.

WILLIAM McCLISH, (114), son of Silas McClish, (27), was born April 24,
1833; in 1854 went to California gold mines where he lost an eye by a
premature explosion of gunpowder in blasting in a mine; returned to
Putnam County, Ohio, married Mary Ellen Wagoner, by whom he had four
children; died about 1871. Children:

     357. JOHN, b. about 1868.

     359. ----.

     360. ----.

HANNAH ELIZA McCLISH, (115), daughter of Silas McClish, (27), was born
in Putnam County, Ohio, Feb. 2, 1837; married July 15, 1854, Samuel
Holt; he was born March 31, 1828. She has borne him four children. They
farm at Dupont, Putnam County, Ohio. Children:

     361. WILLIAM, b. Nov. 15, 1856; d. Nov. 28, 1856.

     362. JOHN WESLEY, b. July 26, 1859; m. Lydia Wolet.

     363. IRA RINALDO, b. Aug. 14, 1862.

     364. DAVID POOL, b. April 6, 1865.

SARAH McCLISH, (116), daughter of Silas McClish, (27), was born Feb. 8,
1838; married John Wilser; he was born Dec. 29, 1839; she had four
children; she is dead. (All efforts to open communication with the
children for several years have been failures.) John Wilser was living
in 1888 at Merice City, Putnam County, Ohio. Children:

     365. MARY.

     366. MATILDA, m. ---- Coombs; said to live at Evansville, Putnam
          County, Ohio, now Drusilla P. O.

     367. WILLIAM.

     368. GEORGE.

EMMA CLARISSA STEPHENS, (129), daughter of D. H. Stephens, (33), was
born June 23, 1842; married July 22, 1860, Aden Dudley Jewell; he was
born Nov. 28, 1838; to him she had borne seven children. All the family
are musicians, and have an entire string band. They live at Worthington,
Indiana, Children:

     369. MARTHA ELLEN, b. June 1, 1862.

     370. JAMES DAVID, b. April 8, 1864.

     371. JOHN OLIVER, b. Nov. 7, 1866.

     372. WILLIAM, b. May 25, 1869.

     373. MINERVA BELLE, b Aug. 3, 1872.

     374. FREDERICK ALTON, b. May 28, 1874.

     375. MARY ETTA, b. April 20, 1878.

JOHN OLIVER STEPHENS, (130), was born Nov. 30, 1844; served in the U. S.
Army in the War of the Rebellion. Married Sarah J. Dinkle; sine prole;
is a successful business man; lives at St. Joseph, Missouri.

MARTHA M---- STEPHENS, (131), daughter of D. H. Stephens, (33), was
born May 13, 1847; married March 8, 1864, Cad W. McCoy, to whom she has
borne eight children; lives at Mound City, Holt County, Missouri.
Children:

     376. EDWARD SEBERRY, b. June 5, 1865; m. S. E. Shultz.

     377. CHARLES OLIVER, b. May 21, 1870.

     378. JEANETTE ANNESLEY, b. Oct. 21, 1872.

     379. MARTHA ELNORA, b. Jan. 15, 1876.

     380. GRACE EDELL, b. Dec. 10, 1878.

     381. BLANCHE EMILY, b. Jan. 23, 1881.

     382. MINERVA TOIS, b. Sept. 7, 1884.

     383. JOHN STEPHENS, b. June 6, 1887.

DAVID STUBERT STEPHENS, (133), son of O. P. Stephens, (36), was born May
12, 1847; graduate of Edinburgh University, Scotland; ex-president of
Adrian College, Michigan; preacher of the Methodist Protestant Church;
editor of the "Methodist Recorder," Pittsburg, Pa., where he resides;
married Marrietta Louisa Gibson, Oct. 7, 1874; she was born Oct. 10,
1850.

(ADDENDA, 1907. He is also a graduate of Wittenburg College,
Springfield, Ohio, and Adrian College, Michigan. Moved from Pittsburg,
Pa., to Kansas City, Kansas, in 1894, to accept the Chancellorship of
the Kansas City University, which position he now holds. Was permanent
chairman of the Tri-Church Conference, composed of delegates from the
Congregational, United Brethren and Methodist Protestant churches, held
at Dayton, Ohio, in February, 1906, to consider the question of Church
Union.) Children:

     384. THOMAS CALDERWOOD, b. March 9, 1876.

     385. STUBERT BIDDLE, b. March 20, 1880.

     386. CHARLES EMERSON, b. March 24, 1883; m.

     386-1/2. ----, daughter died young.

EMMA CATHERINE STEPHENS, (134), daughter of Rev. O. P. Stephens, (36),
was born Dec. 6, 1848; married Aug. 19, 1904, Ira Underwood; they live
in Athens, Calhoun County, Michigan.

LOUISA FRANCES STEPHENS, (135), daughter of Rev. O. P. Stephens, (36),
was born May 16, 1851; married June 18, 1874, Jared Antony VanAuken (he
born March 17, 1847, and died in 1895). She died July 20, 1900. To them
were born two children. They are both graduates of Adrian College,
Michigan. He is Register of U. S. Land Office, at Central City, Colo.;
he is also editor of the "Colorado Miner", at Georgetown, Colo.
Children:

     387. BLANCHE ANNA, b. March 18, 1875.

     388. JARED ANTONY, b. June 14, 1888.

WILLIAM CHALMERS STEPHENS, (136), son of Rev. O. P. Stephens, (36), was
born May 29, 1857; married May 19, 1886, Mary Annetta Underwood (she was
born Feb. 17, 1860), by whom he has had four children.

(ADDENDA, 1907. Is a printer and shorthand reporter, and was engaged in
newspaper work until 1883, when he entered railroad service as
stenographer with the Missouri Pacific Railway, at St. Louis, Mo., was
private Secretary to the President of the "Cotton Belt Route" from 1886
to 1888; was Loss and Damage Freight Agent same road from 1888 to 1890;
was Soliciting Freight Agent same road at Little Rock, Ark., from 1890,
to 1891; moved to Chattanooga, Tenn., in July 1891, to accept position
as freight agent with the "Queen & Crescent Route," in the service of
which line he has continued up to date, now holding the position of
Division Freight Agent, with headquarters at Chattanooga, Tenn., where
he resides at 1020 Tenth Street. He is an Elder in the Frist
Presbyterian Church of that city. Is a leading musician and Conductor of
the Chattanooga Glee Club). Children:

     389. LUCILE, b. and d. Sept. 3, 1887.

     389-1/2 CHESTER OLIVER, b. July 8, 1891.

     389-1/4 WILLIAM CHALMERS, b. and d. March 1, 1899.

     389-3/4 ANITA, b. July 17, 1900.

HERBERT TAYLOR STEPHENS, (137), son of Rev. O. P. Stephens, (36), was
born Sept. 10, 1864; is a graduate of Adrain College, Michigan; member
of the Prohibition Party; minister of the Methodist Protestant Church;
married Oct. 15, 1891, Emma West Johnston; lives at New Cumberland, West
Virginia.

ADDENDA, 1907. Is also a graduate of the Pittsburg, Pa., Theological
Seminary and Harvard University. Moved to Kansas City, Kansas, in 1895,
to accept a chair in Kansas City University, which he now occupies.
Children are:

     ----. BROOKS, b. ----.

     ----. WINIFRED, b. ----.

     ----. DOROTHY, b. ----.

     ----. LOIS, b. ----.

     ----. HERBERT, b. ----.

ELLEN WALLACE, (139), daughter of Sarah (Stephens) Wallace, (37), was
born April 9, 1844; married Jan. 1, 1868, John Tyler Miller; they live
in Rantoul, Illinois; she is the mother of five children:

     390. THOMAS S----, b. Oct. 3, 1868; d. June 10, 1881.

     391. JOHN W----, b. Feb. 12, 1870.

     392. FRANK A----, b. June 16, 1872.

     393. CALVIN P----, b. March 21, 1875.

     394. JESSIE MAY, b. May 23, 1876.

JENNIE WALLACE, (142), daughter of Sarah (Stephens) Wallace, (37), was
born May 25, 1853; married Jan. 16, 1869, James R---- Thompson; they
live at Stanford, Illinois; she is the mother of four children:

     395. SMITH A----, b. Oct. 29, 1871.

     396. CORA A----, b. Oct. 3, 1873.

     397. DAVID A----, b. Aug. 29, 1877.

     397-1/2 HOMER W----, b. Jan. 8, 1884.

HUGH WALLACE, (143), son of Sarah (Stephens) Wallace, (37), was born
Aug. 17, 1853; lives unmarried at Donnellsville, Ohio.

EMMA O---- WALLACE, (144), daughter of Sarah (Stephens) Wallace, (37),
was born Nov. 15, 1855; married Oct. 26, 1886, James E. Lowery; they
live at Donnellsville, Ohio; she is the mother of one child:

     398. MARTHA ADELA, b. May 29, 1890.

WILLIAM SMITH WALLACE, (145), son of Sarah (Stephens) Wallace, (37), was
born Jan. 12, 1858; married Jan. 27, 1879, Mary Elizabeth Trumbo; she
was born Jan. 3, 1857; he is engaged in the railroad business, and lives
in Kansas City, Mo. Children:

     399. SARAH FANNIE, b. June 5, 1880; d. April 2, 1881.

     400. LILLY GARFIELD, b. Sept. 27, 1881; d. Aug. 22, 1882.

     401. GEORGIA MARIA, b. Nov. 22, 1882.

     402. SMITH, b. Oct. 18, 1885.

     403. ROY, b. April 18, 1685; d. May 26, 1888.

CHARLES BUCKINGHAM WALLACE, (146), son of Sarah (Stephens) Wallace,
(37), was born April 26, 1860; lives unmarried at Sparr, Florida, where
he is engaged in the orange business.

ELMER SMITH WALLACE, (147), son of Sarah (Stephens) Wallace, (37), was
born Nov. 23, 1862; changed his middle name from Kent to Smith; lives in
Santa Anna, California, where he is engaged in the news-paper business.
Married and has children.

COLUMBUS TAYLOR BOWER, (149), son of Catherine (Stephens) Bower, (38),
was born Sept. 14, 1846; married Sept. 14, 1871, Lucy Swab; lives in
Lima, Ohio. Children:

     404. EULA LEE, b. June 12, 1872.

     405. ROBERT FRANKLIN, b. Aug. 4, 1874.

     406. CLEMENT EARL, b. April 18, 1877.

     407. ALONZO GLENN, b. Oct. 4, 1880.

JOHN STEPHENS BOWER, (150), son of Catherine (Stephens) Bower, (38), was
born July 28, 1849; married July, 17, 1873, Mary Bousel; lives in Lima,
Ohio. Children:

     408. LELA BLANCHE, b. June 1, 1874.

     409. FLORENCE ANNETTA, b. June 15, 1877.

ALONZO SMITH BOWER, (152), son of Catherine (Stephens) Bower, (38), was
born Oct. 9, 1855; married Oct. 6, 1881, Clara Bowyer. They live in
Lima, Ohio. Children:

     410. TIMA FAY, b. July 23, 1882; d. April 30, 1889.

     411. ROBERT SIDNEY, b. Nov. 29, 1884; m. Edith Hanson.

     412. HELEN LOUISA, b. July 15, 1890.

     412-1/2. ELENOR RUTH BOWER, b. Feb. 19, 1893.

ADOLPHUS LEE BOWER, (154), son of Catherine (Stephens) Bower, (38), was
born July 15, 1861; married Sept. 26, 1889, Margaret McKenna; lives in
Lima, Ohio; has one child:

     413. ROBERT JOHN, b. Oct. 13, 1890.

     413-1/4. JANET CATHERINE, b. Oct. 15, 1893.

     413-1/2. HAROLD JAMES, b. Oct. 18, 1896.

FRANCES ROWENA MITCHELL, (157), daughter of Nancy (Stephens) Mitchell,
(39), was born July 26, 1851; married Nov. 21, 1876, Alfred Cherry
Baxter; lives in Lima, Ohio; has one child:

     414. REX MITCHELL, b. Sept. 1, 1877.

(Alfred Cherry Baxter born Sept. 27, 1836; died Aug, 24. 1893.)

ELMER BOND MITCHELL, (158), son of Nancy (Stephens) Mitchell, (39), was
born Oct. 25, 1854; married Nov. 11, 1879, Claude Ralston; lives in
Lima, Ohio; children:

     415. MADGE, b. April 15, 1881; m. June 15, 1908, to ---- Barnes.

     416. FRANCIS RALSTON, b. Oct. 9, 1885.

(Claude Ralston Mitchell, b. May 10, 1862; d. Dec. 14, 1905.)

EMMA HARRIET MITCHELL, (159), daughter of Nancy (Stephens) Mitchell,
(39), was born June 25, 1857; married Sept. 29, 1886, E. A. Deiker;
lives in Mankato, Minn. Is the mother of one child:

     ----. MARIE CLAUDIUS, b. Feb. 9, 1890.

DORA FLORENCE MITCHELL, (160), daughter of Nancy (Stephens) Mitchell,
(39), was born Oct. 25, 1860; married Dec. 16, 1879, Solen Kent Blair;
lives in Fort Wayne, Indiana; has two children:

     417. KENT LAURUE, b. April 9, 1881.

     418. MARY ELIZABETH, b. June 11, 1886; m. Oct. 24, 1906, Harry
          Alfred Hattersley.

ERNEST TAYLOR MITCHELL, (161), son of Nancy (Stephens) Mitchell, (39),
was born May 3, 1868; married Sept. 15, 1886, Bell Thatcher; lives in
Lima, Ohio; one child:

     ----. MARGUERITE MITCHELL, b. Nov. 11, 1889.

MARY ELOISE MITCHELL, (162), daughter of Nancy (Stephens) Mitchell,
(39), was born Dec. 9, 1867; married Nov. 11, 1896, John Adolph Hesse,
(he was born March 11, 1863, and died June 29, 1903). One child:

     ----. MARY JOHN HESSE, b. Sept. 19, 1903.

ELIZABETH FLORENDA LENOX, (164), daughter of Hetty (Stephens) Lenox,
(40), was born Jan. 8, 1832; married Feb. 19, 1857, Rev. John Downey,
Baptist Minister; (he was born Nov. 9, 1829); she died June 13, 1831;
children:

     419. HETTY ALLETTA, b. July 4, 1858; m. Martin Wilson.

     420. MARY, b. April 12, 1860; m. George C. Jordan.

RICHARD HAMILTON LENOX, (166), son of Hetty (Stephens) Lenox, (40), was
born Jan. 30, 1836; married first April 7, 1859, Lyda Margaret Styles;
(she was born April 10, 1840; died Sept. 11, 1860); married secondly,
April 12, 1866, Lydia Hopkins Shanahan; (she was born Aug. 29, 1847;
died Dec. 5, 1866); married thirdly, April 14, 1874, Margaret Ann Lenox;
(she was born March 29, 1853; died Jan. 22, 1883); married fourthly Dec.
31, 1884, Rachel Josephine Styles, (sister of his first wife, she was
born July 24, 1855); he lives at Wapakoneta, Ohio. Children:

By Lydia Margaret Styles:

     421. JOHN CARSON, b. March 1, 1860.

BY Margaret Ann Lenox:

     422. ----, b. April 22, 1876; d. April 26, 1876.

By Rachel Josephine Styles:

     423. ----.

AMANDA MALVINA LENOX, (169), daughter of Hetty (Stephens) Lenox, (40),
was born Nov. 2, 1843; married Dec. 8, 1864; William Gottlieb Miller (he
was born Jan. 12, 1837; he is a farmer and resides near Wapakoneta,
Ohio.) Children:

     424. HETTIE ELIZABETH, b. Sept. 11, 1865; m. J. A. Rhule.

     425. JOHN HENRY, b. Aug. 4, 1867.

     426. MARY CATHERINE, b. Sept. 19, 1869.

     427. GEORGE WILLIAM, b. Sept. 9, 1872.

     428. SARAH MALISSA, b. Sept. 6, 1874.

     429. ALBERT JAMES, b. Nov. 15, 1878.

     430. CHARLES BENNETT, b. Dec. 3, 1880.

     431. WILLIAM FREDERICK, b. April 6, 1883.

GEORGE WASHINGTON LENOX, (170), son of Hetty (Stephens) Lenox, (40), was
born May 10, 1846; married Oct. 10, 1886, Mrs. Rosella Howe; lives near
Wapakoneta, Ohio.

JOHN MARION LENOX, (171), son of Hetty (Stephens) Lenox, (40), was born
May 25, 1850; was a twin; married March 31, 1872, Catherine Regan; she
was born Aug. 3, 1855; lives in Sidney, Ohio. Children:

     432. FLORINDA JANE, b. Sept. 22, 1873; d. Aug. 23, 1889.

     433. WILLIAM BIRTIE, b. Nov. 23, 1878.

HETTY MELISSA LENOX, (173), daughter of Hetty (Stephens) Lenox, (40),
was born July 9, 1853; married Nov. 29, 1877, Henry Bennett Bilter. He
was born May 8, 1852. They live at Wabash, Mercer County, Ohio.
Children:

     434. JOHN THEODORE, b. Feb. 26, 1881.

     435. AMANDA, b. March 4, 1884.

     436. MARY, b. Dec. 15, 1886.

SARAH ELIZABETH STEPHENS, (174), daughter of W. H. Stephens, (41), and
Julian Crisup Lenox, was born in Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio, March 13,
1837; has been a successful teacher in the public schools, academies,
colleges and universities, all her life. Wrote a grammar; married at
Santa Clara, California, June 14, 1860, Oliver Spencer Frambes, of Ohio,
a professor then in the University of the Pacific, and the founder of
several academies and colleges, and the University of Southern
California, now a minister of the Methodist Episcopal Church; he was
born Feb. 1, 1830, in southern Ohio, is descended from the Frambes
family of New Jersey of Huguenot descent (Frambes is from the French,
meaning strawberry). They lived at Traver, Tulare County, California, in
1892, but in 1905, in Los Angeles. Children:

     437. ELEANOR, b. Oct. 22, 1865.

     438. PARK SARGENT, b. Feb. 1, 1870; accidentally killed April 23,
          1886.

O. S. Frambes d. Jan. 13, 1906.

Sarah Elizabeth Frambes d. Aug. 12, 1906.

HAMILTON WILLIAM STEPHENS, (175), son of W. H. Stephens, (41), was born
in Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio, Feb. 20, 1839; graduate of the
University of the Pacific of 1865; reversed the order of his given names
to avoid confusion with his father's initials; became book-keeper for
the Santa Clara Valley Mill & Leather Company, with which firm he has
been, excepting four years, since 1867; married Sept. 27, 1869, Georgia
Anna Harlow; she was born May 26, 1849: was County Recorder and
Ex-Officio Auditor of Santa Clara County 1879-82; resides near San Jose,
California. Children:

     439. ADELLA MAY, b. June 16, 1872; m. Chas. Wooster, July, 1902.

     440. ELEANOR, b. Jan. 27, 1876; m. Dr. Francis Williams, May 26,
          1903

     441. ROY HAMILTON, b. Feb. 20, 1880.

     442. GEORGE LENOX, b. Oct. 19, 1881.

COLUMBUS CECIL STEPHENS, (176), son of W. H. Stephens, (41), was born in
Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio; changed his name, dropping the Christopher
and adding the Cecil, in honor of his mother's family; accompanied his
parents to California in 1857; he returned to Ohio in 1859, via Panama
and New York, and entered the Delaware College; in 1861 he came overland
to California a second time, this time being alone most of the way and
afoot, walking over 1500 miles in seven weeks, and rejoining his
father's family at Ione, Amador County, Cal., graduated from the
University of the Pacific as Santa Clara in 1865; taught school two
years; admitted to practice law in the third district of California Jan.
15, 1867; married first Dec. 31, 1867, Flora Belle Williams, at Pine
Grove, Esmeralda County, Nevada, second daughter of Thomas Williams and
his wife Mary Blasdel, sister of Ex-Governor H. G. Blasdel, of Nevada.
She was born in Elizabethtown, Indiana, Dec. 23, 1846, and died at San
Jose, Calif., July 14, 1881. He practiced law in San Jose from 1867
until May, 1881, when he moved to Tucson, Arizona. Was admitted to the
Supreme Court of California July 11, 1870; June 6, 1873, was admitted to
the United States District Court; July 12, to the United States Circuit
Court; May 20, 1881, to the Arizona District Court; Feb. 13, 1882, to
the Arizona Supreme Court; ---- 888, to the United States Circuit and
District Court for the District of Southern California. Married secondly
Mary Elizabeth Pearson, of Tucson, Ariz., Feb. 3, 1883. She was born
June 22, 1863, at Petaluma, Cal., third daughter of Richmond C. Pearson
and his wife, Mary Ayers. In 1884 he was elected Councilman at Large for
Southern Arizona (the Upper House of the Territorial Legislature). While
there, among other bills, he succeeded in having passed those abolishing
the English Common Law Doctrine of Riparian Rights, now incorporated in
the Constitution of Arizona, and establishing the University of Arizona.
In June, 1887, he moved to Los Angeles, Cal., where he at once became
one of the leading members of the bar. Is a K. T. Mason, member of the
Historical Society of Southern California. He died in Los Angeles, Cal.,
Sept. 7, 1894.

Children:

By Flora Belle Williams:

     443. FLORENCE ELEANOR, b. Dec. 27, 1867; d. Feb. 21, 1869.

     444. EDWARD CECIL, b. Jan. 30, 1870; m. Esther E. Benjamin, (a
          Jewess).

     445. FANNIE GERTRUDE, b. April 15, 1872; d. Oct. 25, 1873.

     446. WALTER HERBERT, b. Aug. 9, 1874.

     447. CLARANCE ARTHUR, b. Feb. 29, 1876; m. Oct. 2, 1903, Irene
          Steyming, who was born May 3, 1876.

     448. ALBERT BLASDEL, b. Jan. 13, 1873; lives in San Francisco, Cal.

By Mary Pearson:

     449. CHARLES CECIL, b. Jan. 6, 1884.

     450. FLORENCE MAY, b. Sept. 23, 1885.

     451. ETHEL ELEANOR, b. July 15, 1887.

     452. IRENE MARGUERITE CECIL, b. Jan. 24, 1892.

VIRGINIA PAULINE STEPHENS, (180), daughter of W. H. Stephens, (41), was
born in Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio, April 28, 1845; graduate of Young
Ladies' Institute, of Santa Clara and State Normal School, at San Jose,
California; has been a public school teacher all her life; married David
Kindle Zumwalt, of Visalia, California, of the Zumwalt family of
Missouri, Jan. 18, 1874; was divorced Jan. 12, 1882, for desertion;
lives in Los Angeles, Cal.; has one child:

     453. CORA CECIL STEPHENS, b. Nov. 19, 1875.

BASCOM ASBURY CECIL STEPHENS, (182), son of W. H. Stephens, (41), was
born on Monday, March 5, 1855, at 7:00 A. M., in Lockington, Shelby
County, Ohio; assumed the name of Cecil of his mother's family; graduate
of Santa Clara High School, 1871; clerked in the Santa Clara Post-Office
two years; founded the Santa Clara Echo, now the Journal; in 1875
entered the ministry of the Seventh-day Adventist Church; ordained to
the ministry Sept. 6, 1878; married Sept. 8, 1878, Minerva May
Overshiner; she was born in Sacramento, California, Jan. 15, 1857; she
is a daughter of G. A. J. Overshiner and his wife Minervea Dumpy; in
1879 was President of the Nevada Conference; preached from 1875 to 1881
in Northern California and Nevada, and was very successful in obtaining
converts and organizing churches; left the ministry in June, 1880, on
account of personal differences with church authorities, and resumed
journalism; published papers in Dixon and Santa Cruz, Calif.; in Jan.
1881, went to Arizona; settled in Los Angeles, Calif., in March 1882,
where he has ever since resided with the exception of one year, June
1883-4 in Tucson, Arizona; was reporter several years on papers in Los
Angeles; in 1886-7 published the Pomoa Progress; in 1882, the Daily
Commercial in Los Angeles; in 1883-4, was city Editor of the Daily
Citizen at Tucson; attended the Quijotoa mining excitement in 1884; in
1886, visited Indiana and Kentucky on detective business and took
occasion to visit the ancestral home in Shelby County, Ohio, and
obtained a mass of information of family history, on which he has been
engaged since April 1881. In April, 1890, joined a fillibustering
expedition to capture Lower California from Mexico and annex it to the
U.S. Was selected Secretary of State of the proposed Republic, but
before the scheme was ripe, as proposed by its British promoters, it was
betrayed and exposed; regular contributor to the press and magazines,
and an advocate of State division; author of several Pamphlets on
Southern California, Arizona and Lower California; three years Secretary
of the Historical Society of Southern California; author of a History of
Los Angeles City, and another of Los Angeles County; and another of San
Diego County, and one in MSS of Orange County; also a work on State
Division (in MSS) engaged in oil and mining business; agnostic in
religion; independent in politics; children:

     454. BASCOM ALBERT, b. in San Jose Cal., Oct. 11, 1879.

     455. MINERVA ELEANOR, b. in San Diego, Cal., Jan. 3, 1882; m. A. H.
          Nieman Aug. 25, 1903; child: Minerva Catherine, b. Jan. 12, 1905.

     456. WILLIAM ASBURY GIDEON, b. in Los Angeles, Cal., Sept. 6, 1886.

ELLEN MINERVA STEPHENS, (183), daughter of Joshua M. Stephens, (42), was
born Sept. 16, 1841; married Joseph H. Baker; he was born Dec. 9, 1835,
and was shot and killed Oct. 20, 1876, while Sheriff of Portage County,
Wisconsin, in the act of executing a writ of ejectment; his murderer was
promptly hanged by a mob. She is the mother of six children, and lives
at Plover, Portage County, Wisconsin. Children:

     457. FRANCES, b. Aug. 24, 1865; m. William Hartwell.

     458. JOHN STANLEY, b. April 9, 1867; d. Jan. 7, 1875.

     459. GEORGE H----, b. April 9, 1869.

     460. WALTER, b. June 10, 1871.

     461. BLANCHE, b. June 19, 1874.

     462. JOSEPH H----, b. April 13, 1876.

SIDNEY STEPHENS, (184), son of Joshua M. Stephens, (42), was born Nov.
8, 1842, near Woodstock, McHenry County, Illinois; married Oct. 10,
1866, Emma Elizabeth Lombard; she was born Oct. 8, 1845; they live in
Livingston, Montana. Children:

     463. MINERVA ISABELL, b. Nov. 27, 1867.

     464. MABEL SIDNEY, b. Dec. 11, 1873.

     465. ARTHUR DUANE, b. Oct. 11, 1884.

STANTON WESLEY HAWKEY, (185), son of Roda (Stephens) Hawkey, (44), was
born Oct. 3, 1848; married May 11, 1870, Clara Edith Lenox, daughter of
James Lenox, born Nov. 4, 1855, (brother of John Lenox of Wapakoneta,
Ohio.) They live at No. 70 Woodlawn Ave., Indianapolis, Indiana; he is a
grocer. Child:

     466. WINNIFRED GERTRUDE, b. Aug 25, 1872.

SARAH ELIZABETH HAWKEY, (186), daughter of Rhoda (Stephens) Hawkey,
(44), was born in Shelby County, Ohio, Sept. 9, 1850; married James
Daniel Price; he was born Nov. 9, 1852; farms near Flagstaff, Arizona.
Children:

     467. HARLEY CLIDE, b. April 12, 1879.

     468. RHODA FAY, b. June 3, 1881.

     469. JOSEPH WILLIAM, b. Aug. 4, 1885.

     470. EDNA BROWNING,

     471. ETHEL MAY, b. March 14, 1887.

     472. CARRIE KIBBON, b. June 27, 1890; d. Nov. --, 1890, at Los
          Angeles, California.

JAMES EBENEZER STEPHENS, (187), son of Dr. John Wesley Stephens, (45),
was born in Shelby County, Ohio, Nov. 26, 1842; served a short time in
the Union Army; was a Freemason, a music teacher, editor of the
Veedersburg (Ind.) Reporter; married Jan. 10, 1875, Annie I. Lister; she
was born Dec. 27, 1857. He was drowned Feb. 3, 1883. His children are
all dead. His widow lives at Aylesworth, Indiana. Children:

     473. JOHN REUBEN, b. Dec. 2, 1875; d. Oct. 13, 1878.

     474. WILLIAM WIRT, b. Mar. 26, 1877; d. Nov. 15, 1878.

     475. CHARLES EDWARD, b. Feb. 2, 1879; d. Feb. 16, 1879.

     476. ALTA MAY, b. Feb. 27, 1880; d. Feb. 12, 1884.

     477. ELEANOR BERTHA, b. Jan. 7, 1883; d. Feb. 10, 1884.

ELIZA JANE STEPHENS, (189), daughter of Dr. J. W. Stephens, (45), was
born in Shelby County, Ohio, Aug. 31, 1846; married David Hoover, who
farms near Tocsin, Indiana. Children:

     478. JOHN WILLIAM, b. Nov. 26, 1866; d. Aug. 23, 1876.

     479. BELLE DELLA, b. Aug. 8, 1868.

     480. ROBERT DINSMORE, b. April 10, 1870.

     481. ANNA CAROLINE, b. Jan. 22, 1872.

     482. SUSAN EMILY, b. Feb. 15, 1874; d. June 24, 1876.

     483. Infant son, born and died Aug. 26, 1876.

     484. EVALYN VICTORIA, b. Feb. 23, 1879.

     485. MARY ESTHER, b. Nov. 15, 1881.

     486. Infant son, b. March 27, 1883; d. April 8, 1883.

CAROLINE MARY STEPHENS, (191), daughter of Dr. J. W. Stephens, (45), was
born in Shelby County, Ohio, Oct. 12, 1850; married Edward Everett Inlow
July 7, 1881; he is an engineer; live at Burlington, Indiana. Child:

     487. GRACE ETHEL, b. July 5, 1882.

ALLEN FOSTER STEPHENS, (193), son of D. N. Stephens, (47), was born in
Shelby County, Ohio, Nov. 25, 1854; married Sept. 3, 1881, Mrs. Nancy
Ann Princehouse (born, Saunders), she was born Aug. 9, 1847, and died
Aug. 25, 1889; he is a farmer and lives at Hardin, Ohio. Child:

     488. WILLIAM NELSON, b. June 10, 1882.

SHAFFER FREMONT STEPHENS, (194), son of D. N. Stephens, (47) was born in
Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio, June 14, 1857; married Dec. 25, 1890, Rhoda
Stiles; lives in Hardin, Ohio.

TAMSON PARMELIA STEPHENS, (196), daughter of D. N. Stephens, (47), was
born in Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio, Oct. 8, 1860; married Michael Elias
Shaw; he is a farmer; lives at Anna, Shelby County, Ohio. Child:

     489. PEARL, b. Oct. 7, 1880.

MARGARET ELLEN STEPHENS, (197), daughter of D. N. Stephens, (47), was
born in Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio, June 2, 1863; married Dec. 27,
1882, Lewis White; he is a farmer, and lives at Hardin, Shelby County,
Ohio. Children:

     490. GEORGE EDWARD, b. Sept. 16, 1885.

     491. ROY S----, b. Sept. 25, 1889.

NANCY ALICE STEPHENS, (198), daughter of D. N. Stephens, (47), was born
Dec. 17, 1876, in Hardin, Shelby County, Ohio; married July 28, 1887,
James William Turnis; they live in Winamac, Indiana. Child:

     492. ANDREW NELSON, b. May 3, 1889.

MARY ELVIRY CANNON, (200), daughter of Sarah Ann (Stephens) Cannon,
(49), was born Aug. 20, 1847, in Shelby County, Ohio; married Feb. 10,
1869, Nathan Swan; he was born Aug. 6, 1836; live in Waldron, Illinois.
Children:

     493. WILLIAM HENRY, b. Jan. 5, 1870.

     494. ORIN ALANSON, b. Dec. 25, 1871.

     495. SUSANNAH, b. Aug. 31, 1874.

RICHARD EBENEZER CANNON, (201), son of Sarah Ann (Stephens) Cannon,
(49), and W. B. Cannon, was born in Shelby County, Ohio, March 21, 1849;
married Nov. 4, 1849, Olive Dill; she was born April 17, 1856; they live
in Anna, Ohio. Children:

     496. CAROLINE, b. Sept. 11, 1876.

     497. ETTIE, b. Oct. 12, 1877.

     498. ORVILLE CLYDE, b. Jan. 3, 1881.

     499. ROLLO ROSS, b. Jan. 4, 1883.

MINERVA MOORE, (207), daughter of Hugh Scott Moore, (54), was born in
Shelby County, Ohio, Sept. 15, 1845; married William Clawson; he was
born Oct. 5, 1840; is a farmer; they live in Sidney, Ohio. Children:

     500. ANNA MARY, b. March 3, 1870.

     501. EFFIE CAPITOLA, b. June 27, 1871.

     502. HUGH CANBY, b. June 8, 1875.

     503. FERN PEARL, b. Sept. 24, 1885.

     504. FRANK McCUNE, b. Sept. 24, 1885.

SARAH MOORE, (208), daughter of Hugh Scott Moore, (54), was born in
Shelby County, Ohio, Jan. 27, 1854; married Feb. 14, 1883, Florence
Maus; farm near Sidney, Ohio. Children:

     505. HUGH SCOTT, b. Jan. 5, 1867.

JOHN DOUGLAS MOORE, (209), son of Hugh Scott Moore, (54), was born in
Shelby County, Ohio, Jan. 27, 1854; married Feb. 14, 1883, Florence
Maus; farm near Sidney, Ohio. Children:

     506. HENRY, b. Aug. 8, 1883.

     507. CARL, b. Nov. 17, 1884.

LORETTA R---- MOORE, (210), daughter of D. L. Moore, (55), was born
Jan. 12, 1842; married Aug. 13, 1865, John Granville Martin; he was born
April 13, 1839; they live in Red Clover, Johnston County, Kansas. Child:

     508. ROSA, b. May 26, 1866.

SUSANNAH BAKER, (217), daughter of Hannah (Moore) Baker, (56), was born
Aug, 3, 1842; married first March --, 1861, J. W. McClain; divorced;
married secondly Sept. 25, 1887, John C---- Crawford. They live at No.
1427 East Ninth St., Kansas City, Mo. Children: By J. W. McClain.

     509. JOSEPHINE, b. Dec. 12, 1862; m. Dr. C. W. Courtwright.

     510. EDWARD, b. May 15, 1865; m. Nettie Walker.

PRISCILLA MARGARET BAKER, (219), daughter of Hannah (Moore) Baker, (56),
was born Aug. 6, 1847; married May 26, 1868, Jacob Miller in Wayne
County, Indiana; Mr. Miller was killed about 1884; she resides at No.
227 Third Ave. S., E. Mineapolis, Minn. Children:

     511. LAURA ALBERTA, b. Nov. 16, 1870; d. Aug. 19, 1872.

     512. HARRY ELLSWORTH,

     513. WILLIAM ELMER, b. Sept. 3, 1873, in Minneapolis.

     514. CHARLES ANDREW SUMMER, b. June 4, 1877, at Red Wing, Minn.; d.
          June 30, 1888, in Minneapolis.

Jacob Miller was born June 26, 1841; d. Sept. 30, 1880.

LAURA ANN BAKER, (220), daughter of Hannah (Moore) Baker, (56), was born
Oct. 4, 1852; married Nov. 28, 1876, John Clarke; she died June 4, 1885;
Mr. Clark lives in Tyler, Texas. Children:

     515. JOHN EDGAR, b. Jan. 10, 1878, at Palestine, Texas.

     516. MARGARET ALBERTA, b. Dec. 15, 1879, at Logansport, Ind.

     517. HARRY, b. April 10, 1881, at Minneapolis; d. Aug. 21, 1881.

     518. ALFRED VERNON, b. July 23, 1882; d. Sept. 6, 1884.

     519. Infant, born and died Nov. 16, 1884.

CLARA ANN MOORE, (221), daughter of Thomas McClish Moore, (58), was born
Oct. 18, 1846; married Sept. 10, 1865, Ashford C. Ward; she died March
30, 1873; Mr. Ward lives in Mooresburg, Indiana. Child:

     520. MARY, XARISSA, b. March 8 1868; m. O. F. McCoy.

EMMA IRENE MOORE, (223), daughter of Thomas McClish Moore, (58), was
born Sept. 21, 1850; married Jan. 28, 1871, Peter Perry Dukes; he was
born Sept. 26, 1850; live in Star City, Ind. Children:

     521. CHARLES B----, b. Oct. 27, 1872.

     522. NORA ELLEN, b. Sept. 21, 1874.

     523. JACOB LEONARD, b. Jan. 19, 1878.

     524. JAMES ANDREW, b. July 11, 1892.

     525. Infant son, born and died Sept. 19, 1880.

     526. Infant son, born and died Oct. 19, 1885.

     527. SIMY, b. Dec. 19, 1887.

THOMAS DUDLEY MOORE, (224), son of Thomas McClish Moore, (58), was born
Jan, 19, 1852; married Nov. 15, 1874, Sarah Ellen McCoy; she was born
Jan. 10, 1850; they live in Mooresburg, Indiana. Children:

     528. GRANVILLE A----, b. Sept. 8, 1875.

     529. LULU D----, b. July 15, 1877.

     530. MAUDE E----, b. Nov. 3, 1878.

     531. MABEL E----, b. April 22, 1883.

     532. THOMAS R----, b. April 4, 1887.

CHARLES EPHRIAM MOORE, (225), son of Thomas McClish Moore, (58), was
born Jan. 7, 1858; married Nov. 5, 1885, Ida M. Loy; she was born Feb.
15, 1859; they live in Mooresburg, Indiana.

HARRIET ELSIE MOORE, (227), daughter of Thomas McClish Moore, (58), was
born Nov. 18, 1861; married June 30, 1880, John Cokain; they live in
Logansport, Indiana. Children:

     533. GEORGE BERTRAM, b. March 21, 1882.

     534. ROBERT MOORE, b. Jan. 13, 1884.

     535. JOHN LEWIS, b. Jan. 26, 1886.

MARY JANE ROCKWELL, (229), daughter of Jemima Carter (Moore) Rockwell,
(59), was born May 15, 1845; married April 7, 1864, John De Wayne
Welker; he was born April 12, 1840; live in Homer, Dakota County,
Nebraska. Child:

     536. IDA JEMIMA, b. May 6, 1866; m. E. H. Loomis.

RICHARD DOUGLAS LOCKWELL, (231), son of Jemima Carter (Moore) Rockwell,
(59), was born Jan. 21, 1850; married Oct. 8, 1873, Susannah Myers; she
was born Oct. 20, 1856; live in Hubbard, Dakota County, Nebraska.
Children:

     537. JOHN DOUGLAS, b. Aug. 11, 1874.

     538. CHARLES ELMER, b. Sept. 1, 1876; d. Aug. 26, 1878.

     539. MABEL JANE, b. Aug. 28, 1886.

STEPHENS MILLS ROCKWELL, (232), son of Jemima Carter (Moore) Rockwell,
(59), was born May 7, 1958; married Oct. 19, 1885, Sylvia Elizabeth
Snyder; she was born Jan. 31, 1862; live in Newport, Brown County,
Nebraska. Children:

     540. MYRTLE, b. Aug. 24, 1886.

     541. WILLIAM MILLS, b. Oct. 22, 1888.

JEFFERSON ROCKWELL, (234), son of Jemima Carter (Moore) Rockwell, (59),
was born May 17, 1858; married March 31, 1881, Nancy A---- Bigg; she was
born Dec. 16, 1858; live in Homer, Dakota County, Nebraska. Children:

     542. BESSIE ALICE, b. March 27, 1882, d. April 29, 1885.

     543. MINTA GUILDING, b. Sept. 26, 1883.

     544. WINFIELD SCOTT, b. Sept. 28, 1885.

     545. HOWARD JEFFERSON, b. March 30, 1887.

ROSA ANNA ROCKWELL, (235), daughter of Jemima Carter (Moore) Rockwell,
(59), was born Dec. 27, 1860; married Nov. 17, 1880, Albert Peterson; he
was born Nov. 20, 1856; live in Andrews, Cedar County, Nebraska.
Children:

     546. ELSIE JEMIMA, b. June 7, 1880; d. Nov. 1, 1881.

     547. LILIE GERTRUDE, b. March 1, 1883.

     548. WALTER LEWIS, b. Nov. 27, 1885.

     549. MYRTLE ALICE, b. Oct. 14, 1887.

MARGARET ALICE ROCKWELL, (236), daughter of Jemima Carter (Moore)
Rockwell, (59), was born Dec, 6, 1863; married Feb. 4, 1884, William
Joseph Walter; he was born April 6, 1863; live in Soux City, Iowa.
Children:

     550. RICHARD JEFFERSON, b. Dec. 26, 1885.

     551. BEATRICE JEMIMA, b. Sept. 1, 1886.

     552. MARY RUBY, b. Oct. 25, 1888.

MARY BELL LONG, (238), daughter of Ann Uritta (Moore) Long, (60), was
born March 4, 1849; married March 3, 1867, Henry Ensign Welsh; he was
born Sept. 12, 1839; since the birth of her last child in 1874, she left
Mr. Welsh and went away, and is reported to have again married, but all
efforts to find her whereabouts have so far been fruitless. Mr. Welsh
lives in Marion, Wapaca County, Wisconsin, with his children by her:

     553. WILLIAM THOMAS, b. Feb. 6, 1868.

     554. ARTHUR LAGEE, b. June 9, 1870.

     555. BERTHA MATILDA b. Feb. 18, 1874.

WILLIAM PATTERSON MOORE, (245), son of E. R. Moore, (61), was born Oct.
25, 1848; married March 8, 1887, Mary Lockes, daughter of Dr. J. T.
Locke, founder of the town of Lockeford, San Joaquin County, Cal., where
they now live. He came to California in 1872, and taught school.

NATHAN HURT MOORE, (247), son of E. R. Moore, (61), was born March 23,
1853; married first Sept. 28, 1880, Susie Anna Parsley; she was born
June 30, 1865; died April 13, 1883; he married secondly April 25, 1887,
Catherine Mildred Dunsworth; she was born May 3, 1864; they live in
Kansas. Children:

By S. A. Parsley:

     556. ANNA LEOTIE, b. Sept. 7, 1881; d. Oct. 1, 1881

     557. GERTIE DAY, b. Feb. 13, 1883; d. March 13, 1883.

By C. M. Dunsworth:

     558. THOMAS LEE, b. Feb. 20, 1888.

     559. RACHEL ADELAIDE, I am uncertain whether this child is the
          daughter of N. H. or T. R. Moore, as the letter giving the
          information is vague.

THOMAS RILEY MOORE, (249), son of E. R. Moore, (61), was born Feb. 27,
1857; married July 15, 1883, Nettie L. Borch; live in Kansas. I cannot
make out from letters of Mrs. H. A. Hastings, the address. Child:

     560. GEORGIE EDNA, b. June 1, 1887.

LILY DAY MOORE, (250), daughter of E. R. Moore (61), was born Nov. 18,
1858; married March 19, 1885, Lee Monroe, of the Monroe family of
Virginia, an attorney at law; live in WaKenny, Kansas. Children:

     561. LENORE, b. July 27, 1886.

     562. DAY MOORE, b. Oct. 19, 1888.

PRISCILLA HELEN WILLIAMS, (252), daughter of Elizabeth Margaret (Moore)
Williams, (63), was born May 29, 1854; married Oscar Knowlton; live at
Lowell, Kent County, Michigan. Children:

     563. HANNAH ANNETT, b. March 27, 1864.

     564. JOHN ABRAM, b. March 4, 1866.

     565. WILLIAM BREWER, b. June 28, 1868.

     566. FREDERICK BENEDICT, b. April 2, 1870.

SARAH JANE WILLIAMS, (253), daughter of Elizabeth Margaret (Moore)
Williams, (63), was born March 20, 1848; married Jan. 25, 1866 E. W.
Penny; live in Goodlands, Kansas. Children:

     567. EDWIN ALONZO, b. Jan. 17, 1857.

     568. ROSELLA OLIVE, b. May 18, 1873.

NOTE:--This ends the record of the Eighth Generation in so far as I have
them to date.



NINTH GENERATION.


EMILY SCHNAE, (259), daughter of Ann Eliza (Stephens) Schnae, (66), was
born Sept. 18, 1843; married Aug. 5, 1853, William M. Bennett; live in
New Harmony, Posey County, Indiana. Children:

     569. MOLLY, b. May 23, 1864; m. W. N. Hammett.

     570. JULIA STEPHENS, b. Jan. 3, 1867; m. F. E. Piper.

     571. ELLA SCHNAE, b. Dec. 8, 1872.

     572. WILLIAM NIBLACK, b. May 20, 1870.

ELLA SCHNAE, (260), daughter of Ann Eliza (Stephens) Schnae, (66), was
born July 5, 1847; married Dr. Thomas Smith; she died Aug. --, 1877; Dr.
Smith lives in Millersburg, Warwick County, Ind.; she was the mother of
one child:

     573. ----, b. ----; d. Aug. 17, 1877.

GEORGE WING SCHNAE, (261), son of Ann Eliza (Stephens) Schnae, (66), was
born Feb. 12, 1853; married Jan. 13, 1878, Elizabeth Nelgin; she was
born Jan. 10, 1857; live in Evansville, Indiana. Children:

     574. NELLIE ANN, b. Jan. 5, 1882.

     575. LONA, b. Feb. 8, 1887.

JOSEPHINE TOBITHA WILSON, (266), daughter of Susan (Stephens) Wilson,
(74), and John Sibley Wilson, was born Dec. 25, 1848, in Boliver County,
Mississippi; married William Carson Mitchell; he was born Oct. 12, 1845,
in Tallahatchie County, Miss.; live in Merkel, Taylor County, Texas,
where Mr. Mitchell is in the merchantile business. Children:

     576. ULYSSESS WILSON, b. Nov. 8, 1868.

     577. PEARL, b. July 27, 1872.

     578. PAUL LAMAR, b. Nov. 8, 1878.

     579. NOAH BOOTH, b. July 30, 1881.

The children were all born at Batesville, Texas.

ELLA S---- TROUTMAN, (267), daughter of Susan (Stephens) Troutman,
(74), and John Troutman, was born Feb. 12, 1855; married first Feb. 12,
1873, Joseph B. Kellebrew, by whom she had two children; he died at
Crevi, Miss., June 9, 1877; she married secondly March --, 1879, Dr. A.
C. Bremlett, by whom she has had six children; live at Crevi,
Mississippi. Children:

     580. JOHN W----, b. Nov. --, 1874; d. ----.

     581. DANIEL BOONE, b. Feb. --, 1876; d. ----.

By Dr. Bremlett:

     582. EUGENE, b. May 4, 1880.

     583. JULIAN, b. Nov. --, 1882.

     584. ARTHUR, b. April --, 1884; d. July --, 1885.

     585. JESSIE STEPHENS, b. Dec. 25, 1885.

     586. EFFIE, b. Sept. --, 1885.

     587. WILLIAM PARVIN, b. April --, 1891.

MARIE P---- TROUTMAN, (269), daughter of Susan (Stephens) Troutman,
(74), was born Oct. 5, 1860; married March 1, 1881, A. C. Mabry; she
died Nov. 7, 1884. Children:

     588. LOWRY, b. March 5, 1882; d. ----.

     589. JULIA EFFIE, b. June --, 1884; d. ----.

EFFIE L---- TROUTMAN, (270), daughter of Susan (Stephens) Troutman,
(74), and John Troutman, was born Nov. 20, 1864, in Boliver County,
Miss., married Harney Nov. 30, 1881; live in Crevi, Tallahatchie County,
Miss. Children:

     590. MAUDE, b. Sept. 8, 1882.

     591. GEORGE P----, b. Aug. 29, 1885.

CHARLES WALTER STEPHENS, (274), son of Samuel Stephens, (76), was born
Nov. 8, 1864, in Cincinnati, Ohio; married Nov. 4, 1890, Minnie H.
Stephens; she was born Aug. 23, 1866, in Dover Hill, Ind.; he is in the
railroad business. Child:

     592. JEANATTE H----, b. May 8, 1891.

WILLIAM STEPHENS, (275), son of Samuel Stephens (76), was born Nov. 23,
1866; married June 6, 1892, Fannie Wingfield; he is in the merchantile
business; lives in Camp Verde, Arizona.

JULIENNE SCANTLIN, (282), daughter of Jane Evans (Stephens) Scantlin,
(79), was born March 2, 1848; married Mauntrille Johnson; residence,
Evansville, Indiana. Children:

     593. ----.

     594. DEWITT.

     595. HENRY.

SILAS STEPHENS SCANTLIN, (283), daughter of Jane Evans (Stephens)
Scantlin, (79), was born March 23, 1850; married Sarah A---- Lawton,
address, No. 315 Upper Fourth Street, Evansville, Ind. Mr. Scantlin is
in the cracker business, and is a prominent citizen of Evansville.

NOTE:--It was through him that I first obtained information of the
descendants of David Stephens, (10), and that correspondence was resumed
with that branch of the family, with which there has been none for over
fifty years.

MARY ELIZABETH SCANTLIN, (285), daughter of Jane Evans (Stephens)
Scantlin, (79), was born Aug. 4, 1856; married June 29, 1880, James H.
Chandler. Residence, Evansville, Ind. Child:

     596. JESSIE JANE.

ELIZA SELITA SCANTLIN, (288), daughter of Jane Evans (Stephens)
Scantlin, (79), was born March 3, 1866; married Nov. 6, 1889, Herschel
Knox Carrington. Residence, Evansville, Ind.

MARY ELLA STEPHENS, (290), daughter of R. M. E. Stephens, (82), was born
July 15, 1859; married Andrew James Miller. Residence, Evansville, Ind.
Mr. Miller was born Sept. 4, 1855; he is editor of the Tribune of that
city; he has acquired notoriety over his explorations in Central
America.

JANE CAROLINE STEPHENS, (292), daughter of R. M. E. Stephens, (82), was
born Nov. 20, 1863; married Ed. F. Sontag. Residence, Evansville, Ind.

NOTE:--I am uncertain but that her name is Jeanie; it was given to me
both ways.

ELLEN GASKILL, (308), daughter of J. T. Gaskill, (92), was born ----,
1860; married Perry Milliken. Residence, Lincoln, Neb.

NOTE:--Repeated efforts have failed to reach them with letters.

FLORA CATHERINE GASKILL, (309), daughter of J. T. Gaskill, (92), was
born ----, 1862; married Hugh L. McCoy. Residence near Creighton,
Nebraska. Children:

     597. JESSIE E----, b. ----, 1880.

     598. PEARL S----, b. ----, 1886.

ESTELLA MARY GASKILL, (312), daughter of J. T. Gaskill, (92), was born
Nov. 2, 1868; married May 7, 1886, Lewis Jacobs; he was born Dec. 16,
1865. Residence, Haysprings, Sheriden County, Nebraska. Child:

     599. ALTHA, b. Dec. 11, 1887.

EMMA GASKILL, (314), daughter of J. C. Gaskill, (94), was born June 6,
1864; married Dec. 23, 1889, John T. Hamilton. Residence, Hemingford,
Nebraska.

ELIZA GASKILL, (316), daughter of J. C. Gaskill, (94), was born July 15,
1866; married Feb. 10, 1888, D. J. Kirwan. Residence, Valentine,
Nebraska.

ABI CRAMER, (322), daughter of Phoebe (Gaskill) Cramer, (95), was born
Oct. 22, 1862; married Aug. 9, 1882, Edmund D. Mason; he was born in
Delaware County, Iowa, in 1857, and moved with his parents to Nebraska
in 1879. Residence, Creighton, Knox County, Nebraska. Child:

     600. HARRY E----, b. Nov. 12, 1884.

ROSE DEUCHAR, (326), daughter of Jennie (Carnahan) Deuchar, (99), was
born May 25, 1862; married May 12, 1876, John E. Beach. Residence,
Bryan, Williams County, Ohio. Mr. Beach is a photographer. Child:

     601. EDGAR DEUCHER, b. June 12, 1889.

THOMAS M---- RIDENOUR, (345), son of Lydia (McClish) Ridenour. (111),
was born March 10, 1845; married Dec. 3, 1871, Eliza Jane Shaffer.
Residence, Dupont, Putnam County, Ohio. Children:

     602. ETTA CLARA, b. Aug. 23, 1872.

     603. FREDERICK JOHN, b. Dec. 26, 1875.

NANCY McCLISH, (349), daughter of John McClish, (113), was born Dec. 13,
1850; married ---- Pitcher.

(NOTE:--All efforts to find them have failed.)

WINNIE McCLISH, (350), daughter of John McClish, (113), was born July 2,
1856; married Oct. 31, 1875, Evan Dalton. Residence, Dupont, Putnam
County, Ohio. Children:

     604. JOHN WESLEY, born Jan. 10, 1876.

     605. WILLIAM FRANKLIN, b. Sept. 24, 1876.

     606. MARY ARMINTHY, b. Dec. 28, 1880.

     607. DAISEY BELLE, b. Oct. 24, 1883; d. Oct. 6, 1884.

     608. CORA MAY, b. Sept. 2, 1885.

GILBERT McCLISH, (351), son of John McClish, (113), was born in Putnam
County, Ohio, Nov. 28, 1857; married Oct. 29, 1882, Flora E. Miller;
live at Dupont, Ohio. Children:

     609. GRACE, b. Sept. 26, 1883.

     610. ZOA, b. Feb. 7, 1886.

JOHN WESLEY HOLT, (362), son of Hannah Eliza (McClish) Holt, (115), was
born July 26, 1859; married Lyda Wolet; she was born in 1866; live in
Dupont, Putnam County, Ohio. Children:

     611. MARTHA ANN, b. Feb. 24, 1881.

     612. DANIEL, b. July 13, 1883.

MATILDA WILSER, (366), daughter of Sarah (McClish) Wilser, (116), was
married to Mr. Coombs; said to live at Evansville, now Drusilla, Putnam
County, Ohio.

NOTE:--Has not responded to many letters of inquiry.

EDWARD SEBERRY McCOY, (376), son of Martha M. (Stephens) McCoy, (131),
was born June 5, 1865; married April 10, 1887, S. E. Shultz; she was
born Jan. 7, 1869. Residence, Mound City, Holt County, Missouri.

HETTIE ALLSETTA DOWNEY, (419), daughter of Elizabeth Florenda (Lenox)
Downey, (164), was born July 4, 1858; married Nov. 28, 1878, Martin
Wilson; live in Evans, Marshall County, Illinois. Child:

     613. GUY LENOX, b. July 17, 1880.

MARY DOWNEY, (420), daughter of E. F. (Lenox) Downey, (164), was born
April 12, 1860; married Nov. 1, 1881, George Clarke Jordan; live in
Evans, Marshall County, Illinois. Children:

     614. FLORENCE ELIZABETH, b. Oct. 13, 1882.

     615. JOHN CLARKE, b. Nov. 3, 1883.

     616. NANCY HELEN, b. March 13, 1885.

HETTIE ELIZABETH MILLER, (424), daughter of A. M. (Lenox) Miller, (169),
and W. G. Miller, was born near Wapakoneta, Ohio, Sept. 11, 1865;
married April 29, 1886, Justus Augustus Rhule; live at Celina, Liberty
Box, Mercer County, Ohio. Child:

     617. GEORGE WILLIAM, b. April 15, 1887.

EDWARD CECIL STEPHENS, (444), son of C. C. Stephens, (175), was born in
San Jose, California, Jan. 30, 1870; married Esther Eve Benjamine; she
was born in Towoomba, Queensland, Australia, July 18, 1868. Residence,
Oakland, California. Children:

     618. VIVIENNE GERTRUDE, b. April 9, 1881.

     619. BEATRICE EVE, b. ----.

     620. EDNA CATHERINE, b. Aug. 13, 1897.

     621. ----, a boy, born June 29, 1906.

FRANCES BAKER, (457), daughter of Ellen Minerva (Stephens) Baker, (163),
was born Aug. 24, 1865; married Nov. 18, 1883, William Hartwell; live in
Plover, Portage County, Wisconsin. Child:

     622. ----.

JOSEPHINE McCLAIN, (509), daughter of Susan (Baker) McClain, (217), was
born Dec. 12, 1862; married Oct. 12, 1889, Dr. C. W. Courtwright; live
in Kansas City, Mo. Child:

     623. BESS, b. Nov. --, 1890.

EDWARD McCLAIN, (510), son of Susan (Baker) McClain, (217), was born May
15, 1865; married June 17, 1890, Nettie Walker. Residence, Kansas City,
Mo.

MARY XARISSA WARD, (520), daughter of Clare Ann Moore, (221), was born
March 8, 1868; married Aug, 17, 1886. Oliver Fernandus McCoy; he was
born May 19, 1861; she died Nov. 8, 1888: Mr. McCoy resides at
Mooresburg, Ind. Children:

     624. WILLARD ARTHUR, b. June 22, 1887.

     625. ORMY XARISSA, b. Sept. 19, 1888.

IDA JEMIMA WELKER, (536), daughter of Mary Jane Welker, (229), was born
May 6, 1866; married Oct. 29, 1885, Eugene Henry Loomis; he was born May
15, 1863. Residence, Homer, Dakota Co., Neb. Children:

     626. HENRY DE WAYNE, b. Jan. 27, 1888.

     627. FRANKIE EUGENE, b. Aug. 26, 1890.

The foregoing ends the records of the Ninth Generation in so far as I
have them to date.




TENTH GENERATION.


NOTE:--It does not appear of record that there are any yet born of the
Tenth Generation; but it may be there are, as I have not yet been able
to get the records of the following families:

MOLLY BENNETT, (579), daughter of Emily (Schnae) Bennett, (259), was
born May 23, 1864; married May 23, 1882, Walter N. Hammett; live at New
Harmony, Indiana. Has one child:

     627-1/2. WALTER BENNETT, b. Feb. 25, 1883.

JULIA BENNETT, (580), daughter of Emily (Schnae) Bennett, (259), was
born Jan. 3, 1867; married June 3, 1888, Frank E. Piper; live at Peoria,
Illinois; had one child:

     628. JULIA, b. Feb. 28, 1887; d. May, 25 1889.

ROBERT FRANKLIN BOWER, (405), born at Lima, Ohio, August 4th, 1874. m.
to Mary Adeline Wright. Invented roller bearings for vehicles and all
kind of friction bearings which is proving very successful; moved to
Dayton, Ohio, where he established a large factory. Has two children:

     629. BURCHARD BENJAMIN, b. May 13, 1907.

     630. VIRGINIA ADELINE, b. ----, 1909.

CLEMENT EARL BOWER, (406), born at Lima, Ohio. m. to Anna Fisk Glover;
lives in Kentucky; has two children, twins:

     631. EULA LEE, b. July 28, 1906.

     632. CLEMENT EARL, b. July 28, 1906.

LELIA BLANCH (Bower) WOODS, (408), m. to Vern Woods; live at Dayton,
Ohio; their children were:

     633. FLORENCE EVELYN d. ----.

     634. JOHN ELY, b. 1904.

FLORENCE ANNETTA (Bower) BINKLEY, (409), m. to ---- Binkley; live at
Columbus, Ohio. Have one child:

     635. MARY ----, b. ----.

ROBERT SIDNEY BOWER, (411), was born in Lima, Ohio, married to Edith
Hanson March 23, 1906; lives in Lima, has two children:

     636. DOROTHY FAY, b. May 9, 1907.

     637. MARY JANE, b. May 17, 1908.




CONCLUSION.


The foregoing seventy-three pages include all the names and date of
birth, deaths and marriages of the descendents of Joshua Stephens, (6),
which I have to date. The subject matter is merely a skeleton of the
mass of family history data, which I have on hand, including
biographies, pictures, manuscripts, letters, papers, relics, etc. I have
put it in this shape for the reasons:

1. That it is impossible just now to publish the family history in full
as it should be.

2. Fearing possibly a destruction of the data, etc., on hand, in this
shape it can at least be preserved, as one copy will be deposited in the
archives of the "Historical Society of Southern California," at Los
Angeles, California, and one copy in the archives of the "Ohio State
Archaeological and Historical Society" at Columbus, Ohio; so that, if
fortunately any relative should have a sufficiency of that commendable
family love and pride to perpetuate the record, he will have a
foundation on which to build, by going to those archives.

I am aware that this work must contain errors. Many letters are vague;
hand-writing hard to understand; correspondents are often contradictory,
and many of their statements are known by me to be erroneous. I have
endeavored to verify each report, and have, in many instances,
successfully. I will reserve an account of my very interesting
experience in digging up family history for the to be published work.
There are undoubtedly clerical errors in this work, which I have
corrected with ink so far as detected.

THIS WORK OF GATHERING family was begun in April, 1881, and has been
continued by me unremittingly ever since, and will be so long as I live.
Due acknowledgements will be made in the to-be published work, of all
assistance.

   (Signed)
   BASCOM ASBURY CECIL STEPHENS,
   Los Angeles, California, Oct. 25, 1892.

   1       2       3       4       5       6       7

Location of graves in west end of the old Hardin grave yard on N. E. 1/4
of Section 29, of Turtle Creek Township, Shelby County, Ohio.

   Reading from the left:
   1. Sarah (Groome) Stephens                 No. 11
   2. Benjamin Lakin Stephens                 No. 16
   3. Benjamin Lakin Stephens                 No. 48
   4. Ezekiel Groome Stephens                 No. 43
   5. JOSHUA STEPHENS, b. 1833; d. 1823,      No.  6
      in this book history, page 5-10.
   6. ELIZABETH STEPHENS                      No. 31
   7. RACHEL STEPHENS                         No. 35




ADDITIONAL FACTS OF THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE FAMILY.


A church of Seventh-Day Baptists was established on French Creek, in the
Northern part of Chester County, Colony of Pennsylvania, in the year
1722. It became extinct after 1812. The name of Stephens is on the list
of Members.--Letter of Charles H. Greene, of Alfred, N. Y., July 11,
1901.

JOSHUA HUMPHREYS was granted 400 acres near where the town of Carlisle
now stands, in Fayette County, Virginia, (near Kentucky in the year
1785) upon a Land Office Treasury Warrant issued July 1, 1780, and
survey made Feb. 26, 1873.--Letter of J. D. Hudgens, Clerk of the U. S.
Office at Frankfort, Ky.

JOSHUA STEPHENS, (6), was over six feet high, kept his face shaven
smoothly, had blue eyes and dark hair, and was powerful physically, and
kept a straight figure of his body until his death.--Statement of Joshua
Stephens, (32).




NOTE


Desiring for myself a copy of the generalogy of the Stephens family I
found on investigating, that a number of printed copies could be secured
at the cost of one typewritten one, and after deciding to print I
concluded to have a number printed for distribution.

All who may receive one of these histories will appreciate the greatness
of the task accomplished by our esteemed relative, Bascom A. C. Stephens
of California, who searched out the historical facts and family
traditions. The family is fortunate to have one of its members able and
willing to devote the time and labor necessary to gather this
information.

I am under obligation to W. G. Stephens of Chattanooga from whose book
this copy is taken.

I am taking some liberties in having a number of copies printed, knowing
that many members of the family would never have an opportunity to see
and a much less chance to own one of these histories unless someone
would assume this responsibility.


   Respectfully, A. S. BOWER


  +------------------------------------------------------+
  |Transcriber's Note:                                   |
  |                                                      |
  |Variations in spelling, abbreviations, punctuation and|
  |hyphenation, as well as unexpected spellings have been|
  |retained as in the original.                          |
  +------------------------------------------------------+






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STEPHENS FAMILY: A GENEALOGY OF THE DESCENDANTS OF JOSHUA STEVENS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

