





    +--------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                    |
    |                                                        |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has  |
    | been preserved.                                        |
    |                                                        |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For  |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.  |
    |                                                        |
    +--------------------------------------------------------+





                                 KINSTON,

                          WHITEHALL AND GOLDSBORO

                             (NORTH CAROLINA)

                                EXPEDITION,

                              December, 1862.




                                 NEW YORK,
                                W. W. HOWE,
                            157 E. 37th Street,
                                   1890.




                              Copyrighted by
                        W. W. HOWE, NEW YORK CITY,
                                   1890.




                                  To the

                                  MOTHERS

                     WHO WERE EVER THOUGHTFUL OF THEIR

                         ABSENT ONES, AND TO THOSE

                                 COMRADES

                        WHO ANSWERED THE LAST CALL

               AND HAVE PASSED TO THE OTHER SIDE, ALSO TO MY

                                 COMRADES

                    WHO HAVE BEEN LEFT BEHIND TO FIGHT

                            THE BATTLE OF LIFE,

                            THIS LITTLE MEMENTO,

                 IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED, WITH THE HOPE

                     THAT THE MEMORIES IT WILL REVIVE

             WILL SERVE TO UNITE US AS STRONGLY IN THE FUTURE

                            AS IN THOSE DAYS OF

                                  "'62."




                                  ERRATA.

       On Contents, note, for "Grey" read "_Gray_."
       On page 32, note, 1st line, for "Willson" read "_Wilson_."
          "     "    "   7th   "    "     "        "        "
          "    61    "   for "Winton" read "_Trenton_."
          "    80    "   10th line, for "Bowler" read "_Boler_."
          "    91    "   6th    "    "     "      "         "
          "     1 of Index, 23  "    "     "      "         "
          "     8     "     add, N. Y. 23d Independent Battery--p. 44
          "     8     "      "    "    24th     "         "       "
          "    11     "      "    "    23d      "      Batteries  "
          "    12     "      "    "    24th     "         "       "




                                 PREFACE.


The letter press from New York Herald, Dec. 20-25, 1862, by permission,
also New York Times. The illustrations of Kinston, Whitehall and
Goldsboro, also portrait of Gen. J. G. Foster, are reproduced from
Harper's History of the Rebellion, by arrangement with Messrs. Harpers
Brothers.

New York, Dec. 1, 1890.




                                 CONTENTS.

            Commencement of the March,                        9

            Battle of Kinston,                               14

            Battle of Whitehall,                             23

            Battle of Goldsboro,                             35

            Death of Colonel C. O. Gray,                     58

            Losses in the Three Battles,                     77

            Death of Major General John G. Foster,           82

            Obsequies of Major General John G. Foster,       86

            List of Regiments in the Expedition,             89

            Index,                                           93




                       KINSTON, WHITEHALL, GOLDSBORO

                              NORTH CAROLINA.

                        EXPEDITION, DECEMBER, 1862.




                                      IN THE FIELD, FIFTEEN MILES FROM }
                                             NEW BERNE, DEC. 11, 1862. }

Major General J. G. Foster commenced a movement of his army from New
Berne this morning. At 3 p. m. we came upon the enemy's pickets (near
our present camping ground), when three prisoners were taken by the
advance guard of the Third New York Cavalry. In attempting to press
forward we found the road densely blockaded by felled trees; this
blockade extended for several hundred yards, being situated in the midst
of a swamp possessing an abundance of creeks. Owing to this obstruction
it became absolutely necessary to halt here for the night. During the
same time the woods were cleared and with great rapidity, too, by
pioneers from several regiments and a strong force of "pioneer
contrabands"--the latter under the direction of the civil engineer of
this department, Henry W. Wilson.


                                                      DECEMBER 12, 1862.

During the past night the Ninth New Jersey Infantry, under command of
Colonel Heckmann, advanced through the swamp and took up a position
within three miles of Trenton, engaging the enemy successfully for a
short time.

At 9.30 o'clock to-day we came upon a body of rebel cavalry and an
ambush of rebel infantry. Captain Marshall, with Company B., of the
Third New York Cavalry, charged the enemy's cavalry, driving them ahead,
taking seven prisoners and wounding or killing the captain of the
company, besides killing and wounding a few others. In this charge we
lost four men, who were taken prisoners; also Franklin Kingsley, who was
wounded in the leg, and Augustus G. Butler, who was wounded in the side.
We had other light skirmishing during the day; also took a few more
prisoners.


                                                      DECEMBER 13, 1862.

We advanced at daylight, making several feints on various roads, but
always finding the enemy posted in such a manner as to be able to
destroy the bridges and otherwise retarding our movements. About 9
o'clock, Company K., Captain Cole, of the Third New York Cavalry, came
upon the enemy at a place called Southwest Creek. The rebels had an
earthwork thrown up directly across the road. Behind it they had posted
four guns. Captain Cole attempted to charge across the bridge, but found
it partially destroyed. He then retired a short distance, after leaving
John Costello wounded in the face, when the rebels opened fire with
their artillery and small arms. We returned the fire with carbines,
driving the enemy for several minutes from a piece of his artillery,
which was posted at the other end of the bridge. About this time
Lieutenant-Colonel Mix arrived with a force of cavalry and a section of
the Third New York Artillery, under command of Lieutenant Day. This
section opened fire with shot with good effect.

Near 10 o'clock the Ninth New Jersey Infantry was brought into action;
also Morrison's battery, of the Third New York Artillery. By the aid of
both of these forces the enemy was soon driven from his position. As
soon as the battery ceased firing, the Ninth New Jersey forded the creek
and charged upon the battery. The battery was taken, the old flag of the
Union waved over it, and cheers were given and an interesting scene
enacted.

While the bridge was being rebuilt, and while the "black pioneer
brigade" was again making itself eminently useful, Colonel Heckmann
pushed forward with the Ninth New Jersey, again engaging the enemy,
capturing a Rodman gun, killing three of the enemy and taking a few more
prisoners. Colonel Heckmann was soon after supported by
Brigadier-General Wessell's brigade.

Just as the sun was sinking in the west we came upon two regiments of
rebel infantry and two of their pieces of artillery, posted on a rise of
ground behind a dense woods. The Ninth New Jersey once more advanced and
drove the enemy back upon their guns after a rapid and sharp fire, when
Captain Morrison's battery, of the Third New York Artillery, forced him
to retire from his position, ceasing his fire altogether. Before the
Ninth New Jersey got engaged, Captain Cole, with Company K., of the
Third New York Cavalry, charged the enemy, clearing the road and driving
the rebels to the woods. In this charge Franklin Chapman was wounded in
the leg. Night having set in, we encamped about three miles and a half
or four miles from Kinston. In the evening affair our losses were: ----
Clifford, of the Ninth New Jersey, jaw broken; and ---- Neucommer of the
same regiment, taken prisoner.


                                                      DECEMBER 14, 1862.

Almost immediately after commencing anew our advance, we came upon a
force of the enemy, entering into a heavy skirmish and then a general
engagement.

The Ninth New Jersey advanced slowly down the road and then into the
woods on either side. These skirmishers stood their ground until their
entire stock of ammunition was exhausted, when the Eighty-fifth
Pennsylvania was ordered up to support the Ninth. They did their duty
well. This was at 10 o'clock. The enemy having brought his artillery
into action, we returned a similar and much more effective fire from
Captain Morrison's battery, of the Third New York Artillery, the latter
being posted in a small field, on a rise of ground, within eight
hundred yards of the enemy. Soon after Captains Schenck's and E. S.
Jenney's batteries were brought into play, from different and the best
available positions on either side of the road. The engagement having
become more general, Brigadier-General Wessell's brigade was ordered up.
It comprised the Eighty-fifth, One Hundred and First and One Hundred and
Third Pennsylvania, and the Eighty-eighth, Ninety-second and
Ninety-sixth New York. After the Forty-fifth, Seventeenth and
Twenty-third Massachusetts Regiments had been ordered up, General
Wessell, who was on the field, ordered the execution of a flank movement
on the enemy's battery. So it was that while a small portion of this
force operated to the left, the remainder moved through a woods to the
right, also flanking a swamp, and got a position on the line of an open
field that enabled our men to play upon the enemy with intense effect
and remarkable execution. The Ninth New Jersey, after sustaining a
terrific fire from the enemy, obtained a position close to the bridge,
being handsomely supported by the Seventeenth Massachusetts, and then it
was that we found ourselves almost on the banks of the Neuse river, with
a long fortification on the opposite side. This fortification, one
hundred and seventy-five feet long, thoroughly commanded all the
approaches to the bridge. In it and supporting it were three companies
of light artillery, four companies of heavy artillery, two North
Carolina regiments, the Second, Seventeenth, Eighteenth and Twenty-third
South Carolina Regiments, a portion of the Third North Carolina Cavalry,
part of Major Nethercote's battalion, and the Raleigh detachment, under
command of Colonel Molett, who was wounded in the leg--in all about six
thousand strong.

The Forty-fifth and Twenty-third Massachusetts Regiments advanced to the
right and helped to execute the flank movement. While the above was
being done, Captain Jacobs, with his company of the Third New York
Cavalry and some light (Third New York) artillery, advanced on another
road, to the right of the main column, and attracted as well as
distracted the attention of the enemy.

Captain Jacobs came upon a regiment of rebel infantry, engaged them,
drove them off with artillery, and then charged his men across, thereby
saving quite an important bridge. Another diversion was created by Major
Garrard, who was sent another road with a portion of his battalion of
the Third New York Cavalry, one piece of Allis' Flying Artillery and two
or three other light field pieces.

The gunboats, under command of Captain Murray, of the navy, and
Lieutenant-Colonel Manchester, advanced up to the blockade and kept up a
heavy firing. By this means General Evans was mystified regarding our
order of movements that he would not bring the entire force under his
command into operation in such a manner as to unitedly affect our main
column.

After a sharp engagement for over three hours, we drove the enemy from
his entrenchments and got possession of the bridge. The latter was fired
in three places, but the Ninth New Jersey, a few of the Third New York
Artillery, and the Provost-Marshal, Major Franklin, advanced in haste
and put out the flames before the fire had done any material injury.
Immediately our advance regiments crossed, when the Tenth Connecticut
advanced upon the enemy and drove him over the fields forcing him to
retreat to the further end of the town.


                                          KINSTON, N. C., DEC. 14, 1862.
                                                            [AFTERNOON.]

Your correspondent crossed with the regiment, and Ninth New Jersey, and
found lying on the bridge three or four men who had been shot down,
smothered by the smoke, and burned by the flames; also an abundance of
arms. Soon after we found that we had captured eleven pieces of
artillery, taken 400 prisoners, (all of whom were paroled by the
provost-marshal), 1,000 rounds of heavy ammunition, 500 stands of arms,
a dozen or so gun carriages and a large quantity of commissary and
quartermaster stores. These latter were solely saved through the
exertions of Major Franklin, who found them in flames at the
storehouses. We found the railroad depot in flames and that was also
saved.

On looking around the town we found every evidence of our large and
small shot having taken excellent effect. By the time two or three of
our regiments had crossed, Major-General Foster dispatched Col. Potter,
under a flag of truce, to communicate with Gen. Evans, and to demand a
surrender of his forces. The flag was recognized. We found the rebel
regiments retreating up the railroad and on the road and in various
ways, straggling and otherwise, toward Goldsboro.

General Evans refused to comply, on high military grounds, etc. Soon
after our artillery commenced anew to shell the rebels across the town,
firing low--in fact so low that some of the shells swept very closely
over our heads. General Evans then sent, by flag of truce, his
compliments, etc., to Gen. Foster, and requested a place of safety for
the women and children, as he intended to return the fire from his
artillery. Our artillery ceased firing, and the women and children that
could be found were conducted to a place of safety, when, we found, on
preparing again for action, that the bird had flown; that General Evans
had succeeded during the flag of truce operations in safely conducting
off what remained of his entire command. We then advanced a short
distance and encamped for the night.

Our loss in wounded is between 100 and 120. Our total loss in killed,
wounded and missing will not exceed 150. Colonel Gray, of the
Ninety-sixth New York, was killed. Two or three other officers were
wounded. We cannot at this time ascertain the names of these.

All the combinations worked well, and General Foster deserves great
credit for not only his plan of operations, but also the effective
manner in which he carried them out.

General Foster will recommend Colonel Heckmann, of the Ninth New Jersey,
for a brigadier-generalship. Colonel Hunt, of the Ninety-second New
York, made two splendid charges with his regiment, and will also be
recommended for a brigadier-generalship. The Tenth Connecticut lost
heavily. They fought until they used up all their ammunition, and then
advanced with the bayonet.

General Foster highly commends Colonel Ledlie, acting brigadier-general
of artillery, for the energetic and skillful manner in which he operated
a portion of his pieces, or those brought into action.

During the engagement, Captain Cole, with Company K, of the Third New
York Cavalry, was in position in the nearest open field, ready for a
charge, if such a thing was possible, notwithstanding the shot and shell
which fell around the company on all sides.

During the whole affair all the troops engaged behaved with great
courage, and promptly executed the orders of the commanding generals.

We advance for Goldsboro at daylight to-morrow.

On the road, just after crossing the bridge, we found the following
letter (it evidently had been dropped during the course of the enemy's
hasty retreat):


                                               GOLDSBORO, Dec. 14, 1862.

     _General Evans_: All the men I have here have been sent to you.
     You received them last night. Rogers is nearly with you, 400
     strong. I understand from rumors that three other regiments are
     on their way here from Petersburg.

                                               J. A. J. BRADFORD.

We learn that the Rogers force arrived just in time to retreat.

The rebels destroyed some eighty or ninety bales of cotton. This we
found burning as we entered the town. Most of it belonged to a Scotchman
named Nicolo.

During the evening a house accidentally got on fire, when the flames
communicated to three or four others, all being destroyed. Energetic
measures were taken to subdue the flames.

The provost guard arrangement works admirably. Little or no damage is
being done. The good conduct of the troops is remarkable.


                                FIFTH DAY.

                                            IN THE FIELD, DEC. 15, 1862.

We moved out of Kinston at a very early hour this morning, and marched
up the line of the Neuse River on the side opposite to that place. The
road lay through a section of country hilly and comparatively poor.
During the day we came upon the enemy's pickets and drove them in,
taking three or four prisoners. By sunset we had marched seventeen
miles. We then bivouacked for the night. This day's march was considered
a very good one, considering the fatigued condition of the troops. On
marching out of Kinston and recrossing the river the bridge we so
fortunately saved the day previous was totally destroyed, in order to
defeat any design on the part of General Evans to follow up and attack
us in the rear. When the main column halted for the night Major Garrard,
with his battalion of the Third New York Cavalry, and a section of
Captain Jenney's battery of the Third New York Artillery, were sent
forward to dash into and take a small town on the Neuse, known as
Whitehall. To do this we had to go a distance of three and a half miles
from the main column. This we accomplished at a full gallop; but,
notwithstanding we pushed forward so rapidly, we found on our arrival
the bridge over the river in flames. We also learned that a Virginia
regiment had just retreated across the bridge, and that they would be
heavily reinforced on the following morning. The Major immediately
ordered a reconnoissance of the whole position by dismounted cavalrymen.
In this reconnoissance we found previous reports confirmed, in that we
discovered a rebel gunboat on the other side of the river.

To destroy the gunboat which was not fully completed, was one of our
principal objects; but to do it in the face of an enemy, concealed in
the woods on the opposite bank, was a different matter. In order to cast
a heavy reflection of light on the enemy, we set fire to large
quantities of turpentine, in barrels, in sheds and otherwise. This
rendered the scene one of peculiar and lively interest. The flames
ascended in all forms and to various heights, communicating to and
firing many of the adjacent trees. During all this time the enemy laid
low in the woods, only firing one or two small arms.

After brief deliberation, the Major determined to call upon some one to
volunteer and swim the river; then, after swimming it, to board the
gunboat and fire it. To do this daring deed, Henry Butler, of Company C,
Third New York Cavalry, volunteered. Our artillery was ordered up, and
opened with shell to the right and left of the bridge. Butler then
undressed, ran down the bank, plunged into the river, and swam to the
opposite side. He then started to get a fire brand at the burning
bridge, when the enemy opened fire on him. Butler instantly turned and
ran for the river, followed by a couple of the enemy (who quickly sprang
from their hiding places), jumped into the water, was again fired upon,
and finally reached his old position without injury. For this gallant
act the Major highly complimented Butler on the spot and while Butler
was in a situation not observable in civilized, unwarlike society. We
then gave the enemy a severe dose of canister, and, finding that we
could not well get over to the gunboat, we battered it to pieces with
shot and shell. The vessel was a small one, flat bottomed, intended for
fast river navigation, designed for one or two guns, built somewhat
after the form of the Merrimac, iron plating and all. We then returned
to camp, having accomplished our purpose.

In connection with our movements to-day I may add that the enemy was
completely outwitted. From the fact of our having fought hard to save
Kinston bridge, and then crossed to the opposite side, occupying the
town, the enemy prepared to meet us at Mosely Hall--a small town
adjacent to the line of the Goldsboro and Kinston railroad--supposing
that we intended proceeding to that town along the right bank of the
Neuse. Instead of that, as will be observed by what is above, we passed
up on the other side, leaving Mosely Hall, with its armed force, far to
the right.


                                SIXTH DAY.

                                               WHITEHALL, Dec. 16, P. M.

The column again moved at an early hour this morning in the direction of
Whitehall. As we neared the town an open space revealed our approach to
the enemy, the latter being concealed in a thick woods on the opposite
side of the river. Heavy skirmishing immediately ensued between the
Ninth New Jersey and three regiments of rebels. Major Garrard who was in
advance of the column, with three pieces of artillery and a squadron of
cavalry, passed over a high hill behind the skirmishers, in full sight
of the enemy, until he got to the left of those in action, and then
opened with his artillery. In a few minutes other artillery came up,
when the Major ceased firing. Although his cavalry force was in a
position of great exposure, under a heavy fire for quite a while, still
the loss was quite trifling.

Under cover of action on both sides, Major Garrard, with his command,
pressed on past Whitehall, and made a rapid march (a distance of over
twenty miles) to Mount Olive Station, a small place situated on the line
of the Wilmington and Goldsboro railroad. While Major Garrard was away,
in order to cover his operations, General Foster entered into a regular
engagement at Whitehall.

The enemy, having destroyed the bridge over the river, showed that he
labored under the impression that we would attempt to cross at this
point; whereas, if he had not been so fast, he would have discovered
that it was our intention to burn the bridge on the previous evening.
The engagement at Whitehall lasted for over three hours. The enemy
operated against us with a force of about five or six thousand infantry
and three batteries of artillery. The Ninth New Jersey Volunteers,
General Wessell's brigade, and a couple of Massachusetts regiments, were
engaged in the fight. A few other regiments were brought under fire;
and, as they lost a few men, I suppose they claim to being in the fight
also. My accounts of the killed and wounded will explain the engagements
in which the regiments participated. Neither in the battles of Kinston
or Whitehall was over half our forces engaged at one time, especially
not in the latter.

The better to deceive the enemy, General Foster made feint of rebuilding
the bridge under fire. A feint was also made to cross the river; and a
few of one of our Massachusetts regiments, not knowing that they were
only to make a feint, actually swam across the river and got on the
opposite bank. Of course they were forced back. Under the direction of
Colonel Ledlie (acting brigadier-general), our artillery was so
admirably posted and gallantly worked that we silenced the enemy's fire,
and drove him, infantry, artillery and all, away far back from the river
bank. After this we could, of course, have crossed the river; but the
scope of General Foster's plan tended still more to deceive the enemy.
Under cover of infantry firing and the working of two sections of
artillery we passed on without further molestations and went into camp
for the night several miles the other side of Whitehall.


                                     MOUNT OLIVE STATION, Dec. 16, 1862.

On leaving the main column we pressed rapidly on, on regular and
by-roads until we reached a swamp. Here we struck a turpentine path, and
after a full gallop of a distance of over four miles, came out at this
station at 3 p. m. This action was a perfect surprise to the people of
the place. The ticket agent was selling tickets; passengers were
loitering around waiting for the cars, the mail for Wilmington laid
ready on the platform, and a few paroled prisoners were in readiness to
go to Wilmington, probably to fight again. As a matter of course, for
the time being, Major Garrard put everybody under arrest. The telegraph
wire was immediately and afterwards effectually cut and destroyed by
Captain Wilson, of the Third New York Cavalry. Mount Olive is seventeen
miles from Goldsboro, and as I have specified before, immediately on the
line of the Goldsboro and Wilmington railroad.

Captains Wilson and Pond, with their respective commands of the Third
New York Cavalry, were sent seven miles in the direction of Wilmington,
to destroy an extensive bridge and trestle work. This they accomplished
with great labor, after a few minutes' skirmishing and joined our main
forces by dusk. In connection with the destruction of these bridges they
also destroyed the track and set fire to cross ties in several places.
While this was being done, Captain Jacobs, with a company of the Third
New York Cavalry, and one piece of Allis' Flying artillery, was sent
three and a half miles in the direction of Goldsboro, on the line of the
railroad, to destroy the tracks, some culverts and a bridge. Just as
Captain Jacobs reached the three and a half mile point the mail train
from Goldsboro came rattling down. The engineer on the train, in coming
around a sharp turn, observed ahead a heavy dark smoke, immediately
whistled down brakes, and reversed his order of proceeding.
Notwithstanding this, Captain Jacobs was enabled to bring his pieces of
artillery into such a position as to give the retreating train the force
of three shells. After doing his business, and well and ably developing
the bumps of destruction in North Carolina, he joined us at Mount Olive
just about sundown.

By this time we at Mount Olive Station had taken up a large extent of
the track, destroyed the switches and did all the damage we could; then,
about 8 o'clock, we set out for a change of base, made several
strategical movements through woods and swamps and reached the camp of
the great army about midnight, having cut across, as explained above,
without moving on any main road more than five minutes at a time.

On leaving Mount Olive I paused for a moment to behold the sight
presented to our view. I saw the railroad apparently on fire for miles
in extent, huge fires of ties and warping rails, and the blank amazement
that was but too evident on the faces of our newly released prisoners.
The woods were bright and radiant with the reflected light; our hidden
road was also illuminated, and all nature seemed changed--as the light
reflected on the water in the swamp--if not to one of beauty, at least
to a great degree of attractiveness. As we left, the boys gave three
cheers for the Major's success, and the same was highly complimented by
General Foster, on making his report to that officer.

We had hardly left Mount Olive Station over an hour when the enemy came
down as near as he could with a so-called "Merrimac Railroad Car," and
shelled the woods for quite a while.


                               SEVENTH DAY.

                                            ON THE FIELD, Dec. 17, 1862.

We resumed our line of march this morning and got on a high hill and in
full sight of a large force of the enemy drawn up in line on the
railroad, without meeting anything of importance to impede our progress.

Having the advantage of position, being on a hill, over a mile from the
railroad, with an entirely open country before us, the river on our
right and a dense wood to the left--we opened on the enemy with shell.
For a very short space of time the rebels stood their ground; but so
accurately did we get the range of their position, rapidly throwing in
the shells, that the enemy broke front and line, and commenced a
precipitate retreat across the river on the railroad bridge. We kept up
our firing with considerable rapidity, and by that means cut off the
retreat of two rebel regiments, who fell back into thick woods on the
other side of the railroad. Colonel Ledlie then moved a battery to
within less than half a mile of the enemy's position. The Ninth New
Jersey was sent, to support the battery, across an open field and
afterwards beyond it, until the regiment got close to the right of the
railroad bridge, and a short distance from the enemy and the river.
While these operations were being carried out, the Seventeenth
Massachusetts, under command of Lieutenant-Colonel Fellows, moved to the
left, into the woods, waded through a mill stream, and came out on the
railroad line directly in front of the enemy. By this time and while the
Seventeenth was slowly advancing, the enemy commenced a rapid fire of
shot and shell from a battery concealed in the woods across the river,
and to the left of the bridge, looking from our position, as also from
their iron-clad railroad car, occupying a position on the other side of
the river, close to the entrance to the bridge. At this point they also
had sharpshooters, who tried hard, but did not well succeed in picking
off our men.

By the time the action had become tolerably heavy we heard the whistle
of an approaching train, and soon after learned from prisoners that the
rebel General Pettigrew had just arrived with reinforcements in the way
of a big brigade.

One of our shells was seen to pass along a platform car, thereby
creating so much confusion as to delay General Pettigrew from coming
immediately into action. Having got range of the train, we threw the
shells in so fast that in a little while it moved further off and out of
range of our guns.

The object of General Foster's penetrating so far inland being to
destroy this railroad bridge, he now gave orders to have it burned.
Colonel Heckmann, who got the order, called for volunteers to carry into
effect the general's desire. Many volunteered from the Seventeenth
Massachusetts and Ninth New Jersey Regiments, so the Colonel selected
some from each regiment to go and do the work. Several advances were
made to fire, but our men were driven back. In one of the advances a
former adjutant of the Seventeenth was dangerously wounded.

Finally, Lieutenant Graham, of the Rocket Battery, and now acting aid to
Colonel Heckmann, and Wm. Lemons, a private in the Ninth New Jersey,
advanced under the enemy's heavy firing, when Lieutenant Graham got near
enough to, and did fire, the bridge.

As soon as we saw the bridge in flames the General gave orders to have
the railroad track destroyed. Two Massachusetts regiments, who had been
lying in reserve, stacked arms and rushed upon the track with yells and
cheers, and did the work of destruction at short notice. The rails and
ties were thoroughly destroyed by physical power and the effect of fire.

General Foster having successfully accomplished all his plans, and more,
to-day determined to withdraw his forces from the field, and to fall
back to the first convenient camping place for the night. The column was
got in motion (each regiment cheering the General as it passed), and we
had advanced a considerable distance (probably two miles), with the
supply train, etc. in front. When the rebels, seeing the last brigade,
Col. Lee's, about to move, and some distance from the artillery, took
courage and rushed out of the woods on the other side of the railroad,
and gave the rallying cry and yell that follows it. Immediately
afterwards two South Carolina regiments, who had come from Franklin,
fired a volley and then charged with the bayonet on Morrison's battery.
The enemy were allowed to get rather close to the battery, when the guns
opened on them with canister. Belger's battery put in a powerful cross
fire, and Col. Lee's brigade wheeled into line and did excellent
execution. The rebels made this bayonet charge with great dash and
courage, but, notwithstanding, they were repulsed with great loss of
life, and an amusing and astonishing precipitancy.

Of course, this latter movement on the part of the rebels had the effect
of halting our column for several hours. Not knowing but that they might
be in strong force this side of the river, we made every preparation to
enter into a regular engagement. However after a renewed fight, lasting
nearly two hours, we again silenced the enemy's fire, and pursued our
retrograde movement. In the last fight the rebels opened from two
batteries instead of one--their iron plated car--and brought into action
their infantry on both sides of the river.

In the battle of this bridge the rebels had, as prisoners report,
between eight and ten thousand troops engaged. We never had over
one-third of our force engaged. About nine o'clock p. m. our army
bivouacked for the night, between Whitehall and the Goldsboro railroad
bridge.

While the battle was progressing at the bridge, Major Fitzsimmons with
his battalions of the Third New York Cavalry made a dash against Dudley
Station, on the line of the Wilmington railroad, five miles from the
Goldsboro railroad bridge, took prisoners several rebel pickets,
captured and destroyed a train of four cars, took up three miles of the
railroad track, burned some trestle work, a bridge, and other little _et
ceteras_, including a most complete destruction of the telegraph line,
and joined the main column without loss to his command. The Major also
repeated a similar experiment at Everett Station, on the line of the
same railroad. Major Garrard with his battalion of the Third New York
Cavalry went (while the main army was moving) early in the morning to
Tompkins bridge, over the Neuse river. He took with him a section of
Ransom's Twenty-third New York Artillery. On arriving in the vicinity of
the bridge Captain Jacobs, with his company of cavalry, was ordered to
charge down to it. He did so, found the bridge in flames, and received
fire from the enemy. It will again be seen that the enemy was deceived
in regard to a crossing of the Neuse. The Major immediately opened with
his artillery, and at the same time despatched a messenger to inform
General Foster with regards to his position, condition, etc. As soon as
General Foster received the information he reinforced the Major with
four pieces of artillery from Angel's battery and the Forty-third
Massachusetts Regiment under command of Colonel Holbrook. After a fight
of over two hours we silenced the enemy's heavy guns and musketry, and
returned to the main column with a loss of one killed and four wounded.
Before leaving, our forces could go anywhere in that neighborhood, along
the banks of the river, without being fired at. The rebels had eight
pieces of artillery and four regiments of infantry at this bridge. About
10 o'clock Allis' Flying artillery, and Companies G, A, and D, of the
Third New York Cavalry, in attempting to join the main column from
another direction, were attacked by two pieces of the rebel's artillery,
and, as is supposed, about a regiment of rebel infantry. In less than
fifteen minutes our artillery silenced that of the enemy.

During the engagement a chaplain of one of the Massachusetts regiments,
who was on the field, seeing one of the men of Battery B, Third New York
Artillery, being borne off wounded, said to him: "Were you supported by
Divine inspiration?" "No!" was the reply, "we were supported by the
Ninth New Jersey."

On the battle field at Whitehall, Colonel Ledlie (chief of artillery)
received a very slight wound on the hand from one of the rebels' shells.

During the progress of our operations there were brought into action, at
various times, Belger's battery, batteries A, B, C, D, E, H, I, F, and
K, of the Third New York Artillery, and the Twenty-third and
Twenty-fourth (independent) New York Batteries. The whole of our
artillery was worked admirably.

Captain Morrison's battery of the Third New York Artillery had three men
wounded, and lost the same number of horses. Captain Morrison took at
the battle of Kinston forty-one prisoners, including two commissioned
officers. At the battle of the railroad bridge he took seven more
prisoners. When his battery was charged by the South Carolina regiments
he kept up a steady fire until every round of his ammunition was gone,
and then gave way to Captain Belger. Captain Riggs' battery was also
engaged in helping to repulse the charge of the South Carolina brigade.
In the battles of the 16th and 17th Captain Ammon's battery did good
execution, and without sustaining any casualties in the company. These
three batteries while in action, were under the immediate command of
Major Kennedy. At Mount Olive Station, among the private papers of the
postmaster was found the following:

     "Whereas, we, the people of the counties of Wayne and Dublin,
     have seen a proclamation from the black republican president,
     Abraham Lincoln, calling for seventy-five thousand men, (and a
     call made on North Carolina among the rest), for the purpose of
     subjugating our Southern brethren of the Confederate States,
     who are asking nothing but for their rights to be respected and
     their institutions let alone, the interest of North Carolina
     being identified with the said Confederate States, we, as her
     citizens, deem it highly necessary to express our views to the
     world, irrespective of former party ties; therefore

     _Resolved_, That the example of our patriotic forefathers
     is too plainly set before us to be unmindful of our duty. We
     know the cause of the Confederate States to be the supreme
     interest of North Carolina; therefore, we pledge our fortunes,
     our lives, and our most sacred honors in the maintenance of the
     said cause.

     _Resolved_, That, for the aid and furtherance of said cause
     and the defence of our homes and our rights, we will form a
     military company for the purpose of drilling that we may be the
     better prepared to defend our homes and our country.

     _Resolved_, That we call upon all good citizens to sustain
     us and give us their aid for the support of our company.

     _Resolved_, That the manly and patriotic courage of His
     Excellency, John W. Ellis, in ordering our forts taken and held
     by troops of this State, and his independent denial of troops
     to Abe Lincoln to sustain him in his diabolical policy, meets
     the entire approbation of this company and this community."

Our total loss is between four and five hundred. In all we took over
five hundred prisoners.


                                EIGHTH DAY.

                                                      DECEMBER 18, 1862.

The army marched this day to within seven miles of Kinston. We had to
pass through woods on fire; some of the natives had purposely and some
of our men having accidentally (the latter through the medium of their
camp fires) communicated flames to the turpentine trees. Though the
scene was novel and pleasing still it was dangerous, and at times
somewhat more than this.


                                NINTH DAY.

                                                     DECEMBER, 19, 1862.

Your correspondent left the army about seven o'clock this morning, and,
after a horseback ride of over forty miles, reached New Berne by
sundown. When he left, the army was on its way to New Berne.


                                THE LATEST.

                                               NEW BERNE, Dec. 20, 1862.

During the progress of the late expedition we came upon large quantities
of cotton and turpentine. Our advance was so peculiar and rapid that the
rebels did not have time to burn it, although we occasionally found
large quantities on fire.

Our entire movement was greatly facilitated by Captain Sleight, to whose
energetic course of action was due the keeping of our supply, etc.,
trains. General Foster highly complimented Captain Sleight for the
ability with which he conducted his department.

I forgot to mention in my account of the engagement at Goldsboro
railroad bridge that the enemy, on finding that our troops were
outflanking them by wading through a mill stream, hoisted the gate at
the mill and let the water rush down with astonishing impetuosity. By
this means one or two of our men were drowned, while others still pushed
on, with the water up to their armpits, regardless of the difficulty.

We learn by flag of truce, from the rebels at Kinston, that their (the
rebels) loss is between eight and nine hundred, and that the two South
Carolina regiments that charged Morrison's battery, lost in that charge
about three hundred and fifty men; their color bearer was shot three
times.


                  BRILLIANT CONDUCT OF THE UNION TROOPS.

                                          KINSTON, N. C., Dec. 15, 1862.

An important movement has long been on foot looking towards the capture
of Goldsboro and Weldon, and the severance of one rebel railroad line of
communication connecting the cotton states with the capital of the
so-called confederacy; Preparations have for some time been carried to
enable the force which was to engage in the attempt to push it to a
successful issue. The time has now come when the object and the means of
execution of this movement may be safely revealed. The object of the
expedition was to capture Kinston, and then to take Goldsboro, thereby
cutting the Wilmington and Weldon railroad, which would isolate
Wilmington and effectually cut off its supplies and reinforcements.
That, I believe, was the object of the expedition. The first portion of
the work has been accomplished--the capture of Kinston; and the other
portion is in a fair way of being carried successfully out to the
letter.

The forces under General Foster left New Berne on Thursday, the 11th,
and moved up the Trent road, along the Trent River, about ten miles,
when the division halted for the night. On Friday the march was resumed
at sunrise, the Ninth New Jersey having the extreme advance, followed by
Wessell's brigade, one of General Peck's brigade, recently sent from
Suffolk, with Company B, Third New York Artillery, Captain Morrison.
Then followed the brigade of Acting Brigadier-General Amory consisting
of four Massachusetts regiments.

Acting Brigadier-General Lee's brigade of Massachusetts regiments came
next, Colonel Stevenson's brigade, also of Massachusetts regiments,
brought up the rear with four regiments. Acting Brigadier-General
Ledlie, of the Third New York Artillery, had command of the artillery,
consisting of the Third New York Artillery and Belger's battery, First
Rhode Island Artillery. Colonel Mix's Third New York Cavalry,
Lieutenant-Colonel Mix in command, were employed as scouts on the
advance and on the sides of the line of march, and as provost-guards to
protect houses along the road.

On Friday night the column halted within eleven miles of Kinston, and
encamped in line of battle, no fires being allowed and all unusual
noises prohibited. The troops did not get into camp until 9 o'clock.
Skirmishing continued all day between cavalry of the rebels and Mix's
cavalry, in which we lost two men prisoners and one wounded. We captured
fifteen or sixteen of the rebel cavalry, and killed and wounded several.

On Saturday morning at 7 o'clock the line of march was resumed towards
Kinston at a slow pace, as the enemy were beginning to appear in some
force in front, to a point where the Whitehall, and main Kinston roads
unite, about seven miles from Kinston. This point was reached at about
11 o'clock on Saturday morning, and then it was that it was expected
that the rebels would offer battle, as it was a strong position. Our
troops were formed in line of battle in an open field on the left of the
road which ran to Whitehall, in front of a wood, which it was supposed
covered the enemy's main force. A small creek ran across the road 500
yards to the right and in front of our line of battle, over which was a
bridge, which the rebels had destroyed, and out of the debris of which
they had erected a breast-work and planted two six-pounders, rifled,
sweeping the road. Morrison's battery was put forward to the right of
the road, and taking a position on a small hill 250 yards from the rebel
battery, opened fire. The enemy hotly replied with grape and canister,
sweeping the road, but doing no damage. Morrison continued to shell the
battery and the woods on either side for nearly an hour, when the enemy
began to retire. Just as the enemy were about retiring, the Ninth New
Jersey were deployed as skirmishers to the left of the road, and
advancing under fire, they crossed the creek on a mill dam, flanked the
rebel battery, and, taking it by storm, captured a rifled six-pounder
and several prisoners. The rebels retreated hastily and succeeded in
saving the other six-pounder, but left six killed and wounded. Three
hours were consumed in the reconstruction of the bridge. When completed
the infantry and artillery crossed and marched towards Kinston, about
three and a half miles, and halted for the night, in line of battle,
with strong pickets out. The enemy made but feeble resistance to the
advance of our forces, Mix's cavalry driving them like chaff before
them. The night passed quietly, a little affair between pickets, without
result, breaking the monotony of the night.

On Sunday morning, at daybreak, Mix's cavalry and Wessell's brigade
began to advance, feeling their way cautiously up the road about two
miles, when the enemy's pickets were met and driven back through a piece
of woods about three-quarters of a mile, when they retired upon the main
body of the enemy, six thousand strong, under command of
Brigadier-General Evans, of Ball's Bluff notoriety. His forces consisted
of three regiments of South Carolina infantry, the balance, of
artillery, cavalry and infantry, was made up of North Carolina troops.
Here our advance halted and the artillery was ordered to the front, and
at 10.30 the artillery opened on the enemy. The rebels were found to be
drawn up in line of battle, on a ground partially wooded and covered
with a dense underbrush, with their artillery in the center and on
either flank. They formed their line nearly in the shape of a triangle,
with the base towards our forces. Our line was formed with the Ninth New
Jersey on the right, Wessell's brigade in the center and left; Behind,
in a second line, was the Twenty-third Massachusetts Regiment, on the
right the Forty-fourth and Forty-fifth and other regiments of Amory's
brigade, Stevenson's and Lee's brigades being held in reserve. Our
artillery was placed in position on the right, centre and left of the
line. The battle was begun by the artillery at 10.30, and continued
uninterruptedly until about 1.30 o'clock, when the enemy commenced to
retreat. But a short time elapsed after the artillery duel had begun
before the infantry got to work in earnest, and the musketry became very
rapid and hot. The fight was quite lively until 1 o'clock, but not at
very close quarters, when the rebels began to fall back, and the Ninth
New Jersey were thrown out as skirmishers, and Wessell's brigade pushed
forward in pursuit. Our batteries were then thrown around to the right
of the road, and fired upon the retreating rebels, but with little
effect. The enemy fell back hastily nearly a mile, and crossed the
bridge leading into Kinston, the Ninth New Jersey following closely in
pursuit. As the last rebel regiment crossed the bridge the rebels
applied the match to it, and as it had been prepared for the purpose,
the fire gained some headway; but the Ninth New Jersey came up in time
to extinguish the fire soon before it had done much damage.

After crossing the bridge one rebel brigade retreated in the direction
of Goldsboro and the other in the direction of Snow Hill, on the road to
Weldon. General Evans, with his South Carolina troops, retreated towards
Goldsboro, our artillery throwing shells on the retreating columns.

Our division immediately crossed the bridge and occupied Kinston, the
rebels on their retreat burning a quantity of cotton, a locomotive and
some cars. Our troops held the town until yesterday morning, when they
left the town and moved forward in a northerly direction, after burning
the bridge over the Neuse River. We captured on the battle field four
hundred prisoners, eleven pieces of artillery on this side of the
bridge and three on the other, making fourteen guns in all, taken from
them. A large number of small arms, perhaps eight hundred, were taken.
Our loss was one hundred and sixty, killed and wounded. That of the
enemy about one hundred and twenty-five, as they were more protected.
The only officers killed on our side were Colonel Gray, of the
Ninety-sixth New York Volunteers; Captain Wells and Lieutenant Perkins,
of the Tenth Connecticut; we captured a lieutenant-colonel of a South
Carolina regiment, and several other officers. The Twenty-third
Massachusetts, Major Chambers commanding, captured seventy officers and
men of the Twenty-third South Carolina Regiment. The mudsills are a
little ahead of the chivalry this time.

Our forces are now on the march, and I halt behind to send off this
report. You will hear from me again by the first conveyance. Our troops
are in excellent spirits and eager to push forward and reap the fruits
of our victory. You may rest assured that General Foster will follow up
his advantage to a successful issue. I forgot to mention that Company K,
Mix's Third New York Cavalry, charged and captured three pieces of
artillery, with caissons, horses and all, in the most gallant manner.


                       SCENE OF THE DEATH OF COLONEL
                                   GRAY.

                                        NEW BERNE, N. C., Dec. 16, 1862.

Colonel Boler of the Forty-sixth Massachusetts, has returned from
General Foster's expedition, and reports the successful capture of the
town of Kinston by the Union troops, and their advance towards
Goldsboro, the junction of the Atlantic and North Carolina and the
Wilmington and Weldon railroads.

There was some fighting for three days--Friday, Saturday, and Sunday,
last--the enemy disputing our advance with pertinacity wherever the
ground favored them. They are reported to have had a force of 15,000
under command of General Evans, of Ball's Bluff fame. Their loss is
heavy in killed, wounded and prisoners, five hundred of the latter
having fallen into our hands. Our loss is one hundred and fifty to two
hundred and fifty in killed, wounded and missing.

The principal fight was a few miles beyond Kinston, where the enemy had
intrenched themselves. The Third New York Cavalry, Colonel Mix's, had a
hand to hand conflict with the Second North Carolina Cavalry. The New
Yorkers routed the North Carolinians after a hard fight. All the Union
troops are reported to have behaved well, exhibiting in many instances
great courage and fearlessness.

Our wounded were placed in unoccupied houses in Kinston and the dead
buried.

The advance continues toward Goldsboro; but before reaching that point
we shall have to encounter further and still stronger opposition. With
the large and well disciplined forces of Generals Foster and Wessell,
every obstruction will be overcome, and the object sought attained.

Twelve miles beyond Kinston, at a place called Mosely Hall, the enemy
have a battery of ten heavy guns, so planted as to deal a very
destructive fire upon an advancing foe.

In the attack upon Lieutenant-Colonel Manchester's transports in the
Neuse River the rebels suffered severely as reported by a deserter this
morning. The shells from the Allison fell directly in the midst of the
battery, killing and wounding several, and, for a time, dispersing the
working force of the battery, together with an infantry reserve of some
two hundred men, with two regiments at hand.

The Ocean Wave was fired upon from an open field by a force of one
hundred and ten North Carolina rebel troops, commanded by Captain
Whitfield.

The first brush with the enemy commenced about 8 o'clock on Friday
morning, about twenty miles from New Berne, on the main road to
Kinston, a little to the right of Trenton when Company B, Captain
Marshall, Third New York Artillery, encountered them.

The enemy's force consisted of one company of cavalry and four companies
of infantry, of Major Nethercote's North Carolina battalion. After a
brief skirmish we dispersed the rebels, killing two, wounded and missing
amounting to fifty. Our loss was two wounded and four missing. The
advance then moved on, after crossing a bridge, partly destroyed, over a
creek, and being delayed an hour in fixing the same. Captain N. encamped
the same night within nine miles of Kinston.

On Saturday morning Company K, Captain Cole, Third New York Cavalry,
took the advance, and while moving forward captured two prisoners,
belonging to Nethercote's battalion, who gave some valuable information,
proceeded thence to Southwest creek, about five miles from Kinston. On
Captain Cole's approach, the enemy were found engaged in endeavoring to
destroy the bridge over the creek. Captain Cole dismounted a platoon,
who fired a volley upon the enemy while they were at work. The enemy
then retreated, but soon after fired from a battery of two six-pounders,
howitzers, upon our advance, wounding one man--a private, named John
Costello--who was shot through the head.

Colonel Heckmann, of the Ninth New Jersey (the advance guard of the
infantry), here came forward and ordered the Ninth to deploy as
skirmishers. This order was quickly executed, and had the effect of
partly dispersing the enemy; and Schenck's Third New York battery coming
up, fired about a dozen shells, driving the enemy entirely away. On the
Ninth New Jersey crossing the bridge, four of the enemy were found dead,
the wounded being carried on with the retreating enemy. The Ninth
succeeded in capturing one of their howitzers, which was brought into
New Berne this morning.

As soon as Captain Cole had crossed the bridge, following the New Jersey
Ninth, he was ordered forward by Colonel Heckmann, and his company
directed to act as scouts to find the position of the enemy. They had
proceeded about eighty or one hundred rods beyond the pickets of the
Ninth when the advance guard of Company K was fired upon by a concealed
body of the enemy, and Private Chapman wounded in the thigh. Captain
Cole then halted, and Colonel Heckmann ordered a part of the Ninth New
Jersey forward to skirmish through the woods. The enemy were found in
the edge of the woods when a lively fire commenced between our
skirmishers and the foe. The entire Ninth was then ordered forward, and
the rebels commenced firing sharply from a battery of three howitzers,
with grape and canister. A section of two pieces of Schenck's battery
was now ordered up, and returned the enemy's grape and canister with
twelve-pound shells. The gallant Jerseymen kept advancing steadily upon
the enemy, committing great havoc in their ranks by their unerring aim,
until finally the rebels were driven from the woods, and obliged to fall
back about half a mile to an open field, skirted by woods. The fight
ended about dark, when our advance guard encamped upon the scene of
battle. It is a singular fact, notwithstanding the conspicuous part
taken and gallantry displayed in this skirmish by the Ninth New Jersey
in their advancing movements, but one man was wounded in the whole
regiment. But they suffered subsequently. The number of the enemy killed
and wounded is unknown, but supposed to be heavy.

The advance laid upon the field all night without molestation. On the
following morning (Sunday), about 7.30, the first gun was fired upon the
enemy by one of Captain Cole's pickets, and the report spread that the
rebels were approaching in force. Colonel Heckmann had the brigade of
which he is acting-commander immediately drawn up in line of battle,
with the intrepid Ninth still in the advance. After waiting about half
an hour, and finding the enemy did not approach, the Ninth was ordered
forward, with skirmishers to the right and left, the main body being in
the Kinston road. They were then within about three miles from Kinston,
and while moving were occasionally saluted with a shot from the enemy's
skirmishers. In a short time the firing became more general, and as the
Jerseymen went on, closely followed by the brave boys of Company K of
the Third New York Cavalry, they returned the fire briskly. After
reaching a point bordering on a piece of woods, the rebels commenced
firing artillery, nearly raking the road on which our troops were
advancing. They then fired to the right and left, to prevent a flank
movement, which was attempted by Colonel Heckmann. The fight began now
in earnest, and as our infantry and artillery were ordered up, regiment
by regiment. General Wessell rode forward, immediately followed by
General Foster; and while the fighting in front was going on, the
manoeuvering of our forces so as to outflank the enemy was begun.
General Foster ordered Colonel Heckmann to take his brigade to the
right, by the river road, and attack the enemy on their left flank; the
artillery, consisting of the Third New York Artillery, Belger's Rhode
Island battery, Schenck's battery, and two or three others, closely
following the infantry. After getting into position a terrible fire was
opened upon the enemy from the front and flank. This was withstood with
great fortitude and bravery by the enemy for about four hours, when a
dashing charge, made by several of our regiments, caused the rebels to
break and retreat in confusion across the bridge, over the Neuse, clear
to and through the village of Kinston and beyond. Some places they
crossed in their flight up the river, to the left, the water was so deep
that it reached the bellies of our cavalry horses while in pursuit. The
Neuse River bridge had been saturated with turpentine in places, and as
the enemy retired in their great haste they imperfectly set fire to it;
but the fire was easily extinguished by the aid of the artillery
buckets, used for watering the horses. It was here we met our saddest
loss, almost, as it were, by accident. Colonel Gray of the Ninety-sixth
New York was at work with his regiment, endeavoring to put out the fire,
when a loaded musket, thrown away by a flying rebel, caught fire and
exploded, the charge entering the body of the Colonel, and inflicting a
wound which caused instant death. His body was brought to New Berne by
Company K, and will be sent to New York.

The bridge was soon in condition to permit the infantry to cross with
perfect safety, our artillery having in the meantime opened from the
bridge upon the enemy, who had been rallied and was again formed in line
of battle about a mile beyond the village of Kinston. The enemy made no
reply but with artillery, but fell back behind a high hill out of sight.
About 2 p. m. General Foster ordered troops to enter the town, when it
was occupied, and three brigades sent about two miles beyond. Seven or
eight houses were burned in Kinston, some say by accident and some by
design, after our men got in. The rebels burned a great amount of corn
and cotton before leaving the place. The Ninth New Jersey, taking the
advance again, forced the rebels from behind the hill where they had
made a stand, to a point about three miles from Kinston, when the troops
encamped for the night (Sunday).

After reaching the town, Captain Cole of Company K, Third New York
Cavalry, was ordered to proceed down the river to the blockade, and
where a battery had been erected to play upon our gunboats if they
attempted to ascend the river. Captain Cole, on arriving at the place--a
sort of half circular fort, with breastworks a mile and a half
long--ascertained from a negro that the rebels had moved six brass
pieces about six hours before he reached there; that they had more guns
there, and that a guard had been left to protect them until they could
be secured, the rebels not having enough horses to get them all away.
Captain Cole attempted to surround the fort and capture what there was
remaining in it, when the guard discovered his force and decamped for
the woods without firing a shot. Company K charged on the fort and took
possession thereof, capturing everything in it. The armament remaining
was found to consist of seven guns, including one eight-inch columbiad,
two thirty-two-pounder iron guns, and four six-pounder iron guns. The
four latter were found to be loaded, primed and ready to be fired; but
the brisk movements of Captain Cole and his daring company prevented the
execution of the latter deadly operation. Company K and its commander
have been highly complimented by the commanding General for their
gallantry on this occasion. A small amount of provisions, clothing,
etc., was found in the fort, which was left. The four six-pounders were
brought away; the columbiad and the thirty-twos, being too heavy to be
removed, were spiked and the carriages burned. Captain Cole reached
Kinston about midnight with the trophies. The next morning about 5
o'clock he received orders from General Foster to return to New Berne
with seven pieces--two brass and five iron--captured with other
trophies. The two brass pieces were the same captured from us at Little
Washington about three months ago. Captain Cole also brings the remains
of Colonel Gray, of the Ninety-sixth New York, killed on Neuse bridge.
On his way down Captain Cole captured eight rebels and brought them
into New Berne. Three belonged to South Carolina and four to Georgia.

The New Jersey Ninth captured the regimental flag of a South Carolina
regiment before crossing the Neuse bridge, and carry it as a trophy of
their gallantry.

Most of the 500 rebels captured and paroled by General Foster belonged
to South Carolina and Georgia.

The conduct of the Tenth Connecticut Regiment is spoken of in the
highest terms. They, with the New Jersey Ninth, were particularly
distinguished for their bravery, and suffered the most.


                        THE GUNBOATS IN THE BATTLE.

                      [Our New Berne Correspondence.]

                                        NEW BERNE, N. C., Dec. 16, 1862.

An expedition, consisting of the gunboats Delaware, Seymour and
Shawsheen, of the navy, under the command of Commander Murray, United
States Navy, and the steamboats Ocean Wave, Allison, North State, Port
Royal, and Wilson, manned by the Marine Artillery and commanded by
Colonel Manchester, left this point on Thursday last, the 11th inst., to
proceed up the Neuse River to co-operate with the land forces under
General Foster in his advance toward Kinston, or more properly to effect
a diversion in General Foster's favor. Owing to lack of water the
gunboats were unable to go up the river more than fifteen or eighteen
miles, and were compelled to stop and allow the affair to be carried on
by the Marine Artillery flotilla alone. Colonel Manchester assumed
command of the expedition from that point, and resolutely pushed up
toward Kinston, determined to reach the village and participate in its
capture. The low state of the water alone prevented Commander Murray
from carrying his heavy gunboats to the town.

Colonel Manchester met but little resistance going up, a few scattering
shots being fired at him by guerrillas on the banks. He experienced
much difficulty, however, in getting ahead rapidly, because of the bars
and shoals, upon which the boats grounded. But all obstacles being
overcome, they reached a point within two miles of Kinston on Saturday
afternoon, when they suddenly found themselves under the fire of an
eleven gun battery, which opened on the Allison, the leading boat, as
she rounded a point of land and appeared full in view of the enemy's
formidable work, and not over 1,200 yards distant. The river was here
only about one hundred feet in width, with shoals on either side of the
channel, and it was found to be utterly impossible to turn the boat. To
back out of the scrape was the only resort, and as soon as that could be
effected it was done; but not until the Allison had been twenty minutes
under an exceedingly hot fire, in which she was repeatedly struck by
shell and shot. She returned the fire from her thirty-pounder Parrott
gun forward, and occasioned the rebels considerable loss. The Allison
was seriously damaged in the fray. The top of her pilot house was torn
off, her smoke stack pierced by a shell, and her steam safety pipe cut
away. It was a miracle she was not sunk. Finally extricating herself
from her perilous position, also backed around the point of land and
came to anchor with the rest of the flotilla, screened from the rebel
battery by woods, but in short range. There they laid all night,
prepared at any moment to repel any attempt on the part of the enemy to
capture them by boarding. Several times during the night they fired upon
the rebel reconnoitering parties, who became very bold in their
advances.

All night long our men could hear the rattle of trains over the
railroad, evidently conveying reinforcements to Kinston, against which
General Foster had steadily pushed his advance, fighting for every inch
of ground. The blows of axes, as the rebels felled trees to block up
the avenues of approach to the town, the calls of soldiers, barking of
dogs, and other sounds, were heard all the night long proceeding from
the wooded shore. But no serious attempt was made to capture the boats,
which might have been successful if well planned. On Sunday morning the
boats turned, and descended the stream, as the water in the river had
fallen nearly fifteen inches during the night, and promised to leave
them high and dry, prizes to the rebels, if they much longer delayed
their return. On their way down they were fired upon from the shores by
guerrillas, who followed them a distance of twenty miles, killing one of
our men (Edward J. Perkins, Company H, Marine Artillery), and wounding
three others, none very seriously. The Ocean Wave, and, indeed, all the
boats, were more or less injured by musketry and field pieces. Bullets
were found on the Ocean Wave dipped in verdigris, to poison the wounds
they inflicted, and others had copper wire attached, for the same
purpose. The rebels evidently have been taking some new lessons in
warfare from the Sepoys or Chinese; They are apt pupils. It would also
appear that about 150 of these guerrillas were the attacking party, and
thirty of them were killed and wounded before they relinquished the idea
of taking the boats, as we have since learned. The attempt to pen in the
boats, by felling trees across the river, was thwarted by the rapid
movements of the boats.

On our return the Ocean Wave was unfortunate enough to stave a hole in
her bottom by running on a stump, and sunk in three feet of water. She
can be raised with but little trouble. Her guns have been taken off, as
well as the crew, coal, provisions, etc., and she will soon be afloat.
What effect this had on Gen. Foster's fortunes has not yet been
ascertained. It probably prevented some rebel troops from meeting his
forces. If the river had been up, the flotilla would have been of great
service in aiding in the capture of Kinston; but lack of water prevented
it. Colonel Manchester and the officers and men of the Marine Artillery
have earned a still higher reputation for their gallantry and
indomitable perseverance on this expedition. They are a valuable arm of
the service, and merit better treatment than they have received from the
authorities. It seems about time to recognize them as a corps, now that
they are performing all duties contemplated in their organization.
Justice ought to be done them.

Commander Murray is displaying an immense deal of energy in conducting
naval operations in North Carolina waters, and is greatly aiding General
Foster in his operations.


                       LOSSES IN THE THREE BATTLES:

Those of Kinston, Whitehall and the Goldsboro Bridge consolidated.

Ninth New Jersey, Col. C. A. Heckmann, 2 killed, 32 wounded, 2 missing.
Battle of Whitehall, 44 wounded. Battle of Goldsboro, 11 wounded.

Fifth Rhode Island, Capt. J. B. Arnold, 1 killed, 4 wounded.

Third New York Artillery, Capt J. J. Morrison, Battery B, 2 wounded.
Capt. E. S. Jenney, Battery F, 2 wounded.

Twenty-fourth New York Independent Battery, 1 killed.

General Wessell's Brigade--Eighty-fifth New York, 3 wounded.
Ninety-sixth New York, Col. Charles O. Gray, 1 killed, 6 wounded.
Twenty-second New York, 2 killed, 16 wounded.

One Hundred and First Pennsylvania did not lose any in killed or
wounded.

Eighty-fifth Pennsylvania, 9 wounded.

One Hundred and Third Pennsylvania. When this regiment went into action
it had about 450 men, and after the action it was found that it had 14
killed and 58 wounded.

Casualties in Second Brigade, First Division, Department of North
Carolina, Col. Thos. G. Stevenson commanding, at Kinston, Whitehall,
Everettville, December 14, 16 and 17, 1862:

Tenth Connecticut Volunteers, Lieut.-Col. Robert Leggett commanding, 11
killed, 86 wounded, of whom 10 have since died.

Twenty-fourth Massachusetts Volunteers, Major Robert H. Stevenson
commanding, 1 killed, 7 wounded.

Forty-fourth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteers, Col. Francis S. Lee
commanding, 8 killed, 13 wounded.

Fifth Regiment Rhode Island Volunteers, Capt. Job Arnold commanding, 1
killed, 3 wounded.

Battery F, First Regiment Rhode Island State Artillery, Capt. James
Belger, 1 killed, 8 wounded; 10 horses killed and wounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

Report of the casualties in the Third (Col. H. C. Lee's) Brigade. The
expedition to Goldsboro:

Fifth Massachusetts Volunteers, Col. Geo. H. Pierson, 7 wounded.

Third Massachusetts Volunteers, Col. Silas P. Richmond, 2 wounded.

Twenty-seventh Massachusetts Regiment, Col. H. C. Lee, 3 wounded.

Forty-sixth Massachusetts Regiment, Col. George Boler, 2 killed, 3
wounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

List of killed and wounded in the First Brigade, first division,
commanded by Colonel Amory:

Seventeenth Massachusetts Volunteers, 1 killed, 29 wounded.

Forty-fifth Massachusetts, Col. Chas. R. Codman, 6 killed, 38 wounded.

Twenty-third Massachusetts, 14 killed, 52 wounded.

Fifty-first Massachusetts, Col. Abram B. R. Sprague, 2 wounded.

Forty-third Massachusetts, Col. Chas. L. Holbrook, 2 killed, 1 wounded.

Artillery Brigade, Col. J. H. Ledlie, commanding, 2 staff wounded.

Battery B, Capt. James J. Morrison, 4 wounded.

Battery F, Capt. E. S. Jenney, 8 wounded.

Battery E, Lieut. G. E. Ashby, commanding, 3 wounded.

Battery I, Lieut. George W. Thomas, commanding, 1 killed.

Battery K, Capt. James R. Angel, 2 killed, 5 wounded.

Twenty-fourth Battery, Capt. J. E. Lee, 1 killed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Casualties in Third New York Cavalry: Company A, Capt. W. S. Joy, 3
wounded; 7 horses killed.

Company B, Capt. John F. Marshall, 7 wounded; 10 horses killed.

Company E, Capt. F. Jacobs, Jr., 2 wounded.

Company K, Capt. Geo. W. Cole, 2 wounded.

It is impossible to send the list of the missing, which may turn up in a
day or two.


                     [New York Times, Sept. 3, 1874.]

                        MAJOR-GEN. JOHN G. FOSTER.

The death of this distinguished soldier and military engineer is
announced. He died at his mother's residence at Nashua, N. H., at 1
o'clock yesterday morning, in the fifty-first year of his age. He
graduated at West Point, July 1, 1846, being in the same class with
Generals George B. McClellan and Stonewall Jackson. He served in the war
with Mexico, 1847-48, attached to the Company of Sappers, Miners, and
Pontoniers, and was engaged in the siege of Vera Cruz, battle of Cerro
Gordo, and battles of Contreras and Churubusco, in which he
distinguished himself. On the 20th of August, 1847, he was promoted
Brevet First Lieutenant. He was severely wounded on the 8th of
September, 1847, while leading the forlorn hope at the capture of Molino
del Rey. For his gallant conduct on this occasion he was promoted Brevet
Captain, and was placed, with full pay, for more than two years on the
sick list of the army. When convalescent, he joined Gen. R. E. Lee at
Baltimore as Assistant Engineer, and afterwards was on the Coast
Survey. He was Assistant Professor of Engineering at West Point from
January, 1855, to June, 1857, and Superintending Engineer of the survey
of the site of the fort at Willett's Point, Long Island; of the
preliminary operations for building a fort at Sandy Hook, N. J.; of
building Fort Sumter, and repairs of Fort Moultrie, Charleston Harbor,
South Carolina, from 1858 to 1861. On the 1st of July, 1860, he was
promoted Captain, Corps of Engineers, for fourteen years' continuous
service. During the rebellion of the seceding States he was Chief
Engineer of the fortifications of Charleston Harbor, South Carolina. He
was also engaged in defense of Fort Sumter from 27th of December, 1860,
to April 14, 1861, when it was surrendered and evacuated. For the
distinguished part taken by him in the transfer of the garrison of Fort
Moultrie to Fort Sumter he was, on the 20th December, 1860, promoted
Brevet Major. Soon after the surrender of Fort Sumter he was given the
command of a brigade, as second to General Burnside on the North
Carolina expedition, in which he again distinguished himself. He took by
storm the central fortification on the Island of Roanoke, which soon led
to the entire possession of the island. For these services he was
promoted Brevet Lieutenant Colonel on the 8th February, 1862, and
Brevet-Colonel on the 12th March, 1862, for gallant and meritorious
services in the capture of New Berne, N. C. He was present at the
bombardment of Fort Macon, which capitulated 26th April, 1862, and on
July 1, 1862, when Gen. Burnside was ordered to join Gen. McClellan, he
was left in command of the division, and subsequently of the whole
department of Virginia and North Carolina, with his headquarters at Old
Point Comfort. During this period he successfully conducted the
expedition to burn the Goldsboro Railroad Bridge, (December, 1862), was
engaged in the action of Southwest Creek, December 14, 1862; at the
battle of Kinston the following day; two days afterward at the action of
Whitehall, and on the 18th of December, 1862, at the action of Goldsboro
Bridge. He repulsed the rebel attack on New Berne, March 14, 1863. At
the time of the investment of Little Washington, on Tar River, he
performed one of the most gallant deeds in the annals of the war, by
running in a small steamer past the rebel batteries commanding the
channel, for the purpose of hurrying forward reinforcements to relieve
the little garrison. The daring act was not unobserved by the rebels,
who sent a solid shot through the stateroom of the General, but as he
happened to be on deck, he escaped harm, reached New Berne in safety,
and accomplished his purpose.

On December 12, 1863, he relieved General Burnside and took command of
the Army and Department of the Ohio, which he retained up to February 9,
1864, when he was obliged to relinquish the command in consequence of
severe injuries from the fall of his horse. He was obliged to be removed
to Baltimore for surgical assistance, and while yet on his crutches, he
was, on the 26th of May, 1864, placed in command of the Department of
the South, and met and aided General Sherman when he completed his march
to the sea. He was in command of this department up to February 11,
1865, when he was again relieved for surgical treatment. He was promoted
Brevet Brigadier-General on March 13, 1865, for gallant and meritorious
services in the capture of Savannah, Ga., and on the same day Brevet
Major-General for "meritorious services in the field during the
Rebellion." He subsequently commanded the Department of Florida from
August 7, 1865, to December 5, 1866, and was on temporary duty in the
Engineer Bureau, Washington, from January to May, 1867. General Foster
had been in ill-health for about a year, and his condition recently was
such as to leave no hope of his recovery. He was a man of commanding
presence, great executive ability, and undaunted courage, and was at
all times very popular with those under his command. The funeral will
take place at 10 o'clock, a. m., Saturday, with military honors. It is
expected that a detachment of regulars from Fort Warren will attend the
funeral.

At a meeting of the citizens of Nashua last night, to make arrangements
for the funeral of General Foster on Saturday, a committee was appointed
to co-operate with the City Government. The public buildings will be
draped and business suspended. Invitations were sent to President Grant,
the Secretary of War, Ex-Governor Allen, of New Hampshire, and other
distinguished persons.


                     [New York Herald, Sept. 6, 1874.]

                       OBSEQUIES OF GENERAL FOSTER.


                   IMPRESSIVE CEREMONIES AT NASHUA, N. H.

                                           NASHUA, N. H., Sept. 5, 1874.

Since the obsequies of Major Ainsworth, a Nashua man who fell at the
head of his command at Front Royal, there has not been so profound an
expression of sorrow as that evinced in this city to-day, over the death
and funeral rites of her honored citizen, patriot and gallant soldier
of two wars, Major-General John G. Foster. The morning dawned foggy and
heavy, but mellowed into autumnal splendor, while the populace seemed
subdued in thought and mindful that one was being consigned to mother
earth who had performed his duty to his country wisely and well. The
mills and workshops, stores and offices were closed, and the citizens
and citizen-soldiers of Nashua and vicinity vied with one another in
paying the last sad tribute of respect to a son of New Hampshire who has
honored her on many fields of carnage, and whose name is a household
word with her children.

At 8 o'clock a requiem mass was held at the Church of the Immaculate
Conception by Rev. John O'Donnell, and at the same hour a detail of ten
men from Post John G. Foster, under command of Colonel George Bowers,
took charge of the remains at the residence of his mother on Orange
square, where the body laid in state two hours. Lighted candles were
burning at the head and feet, according to the custom of the Catholic
Church.

The body was encased in a heavy rosewood casket, upon which lay the
sword, sash and belt of the deceased soldier. On the inner side of the
lid, which was turned back, was a large floral wreath about a heavy
silver coffin plate, upon which were handsomely engraved emblems of the
army and the following inscription:--"John Gray Foster,
Lieutenant-Colonel Engineers, Brevet Major-General United States Army,
died September 2, 1874, aged 51 years." Hundreds of citizens, women and
children viewed the remains, and hundreds more, owing to the crowd, were
unable to look upon the face of the dead, which, although emaciated by
disease, bore the soldierly impress it was wont to bear in life. The
arrangements at the house were under the direction of Captain Solomon
Spalding.

The city flags were at half-mast, minute guns were fired from 10 until
12 o'clock, and all the bells in the city were tolled. The cortege
received the remains at his mother's residence and proceeded to the
Church of the Immaculate Conception, the nave of which was heavily
draped in mourning, via. Orange, Concord, Main, East Pearl and Temple
streets, where the body was placed in front of the altar, and the
funeral service of the Catholic Church was performed by the Right Rev.
Bishop Lynch, of South Carolina. The funeral oration was delivered by
Rev. Robert Fulton, S. J., and President of the Boston College,
connected with the Church of the Immaculate Conception, of which the
deceased soldier was a member.

The singing, which was grand and appropriate, was by the choir of the
Church of St. Aloysius, assisted by General Michael T. Donahue and
others, from Boston, and John McEvoy, of Lowell.

At the close of the exercises in the church the procession was
re-formed, when it proceeded through Amory street to Canal street, up
Canal street to the Nashua Cemetery, in the rear of the Unitarian
church, where the remains of the gallant dead were interred with those
of his kindred, and the grave blessed by Rev. Father O'Donnell.

The following regiments participated in these battles:

Third Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. S. P. Richmond.

Fifth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. Geo. H. Pierson.

[A]Eighth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. F. J. Coffin.

Seventeenth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, Col. T. J. C.
Amory.

Twenty-third Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, Major J. G.
Chambers.

Twenty-fourth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, Col. T. G.
Stevenson.

Twenty-fifth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, Col. Josiah
Pickett.

Twenty-seventh Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, Col. H. C.
Lee.

Forty-third Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. Chas. L.
Holbrook.

Forty-fourth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. Francis S.
Lee.

Forty-fifth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. Chas. R.
Codman.

Forty-sixth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. Geo. Boler.

Fifty-first Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia, Col. A. B. R.
Sprague.

Battery F, First Regiment Rhode Island, Capt. James Belger.

Fifth Regiment Rhode Island Volunteers, Capt. Job Arnold.

Third Regiment Cavalry, New York State Volunteers, Col. S. H. Mix.
Company A, Capt. Walter S. Joy; Company B, Capt. John F. Marshall;
Company E, Capt. Ferris Jacobs, Jr.; Company K, Capt. George W. Cole.

Third New York Artillery, State Volunteers, Col. J. H. Ledlie. Battery
B, Capt. Joseph J. Morrison; Battery C, Lieut. G. E. Ashby; Battery F,
Capt. E. S. Jenney; Battery I, Capt. John H. Ammon; Battery K, Capt.
James R. Angel.

Twenty-second New York Infantry, State Volunteers, Col. Walter Phelps,
Jr.

Eighty-fifth New York Infantry, State Volunteers, Col J. S. Belknap.

Ninety-sixth New York Infantry, State Volunteers, Col. Chas. O. Gray.

Tenth Connecticut Volunteers, Col. E. D. S. Goodyear.

Twenty-fourth Independent Battery, New York State Volunteers, Capt. T.
E. Lee.

Ninth Regiment New Jersey Infantry, Col. C. A. Heckmann.

Eighty-fifth Regiment Pennsylvania.

One Hundred and First Regiment Pennsylvania.

One Hundred and Third Regiment Pennsylvania.

[Footnote A: Eighth Massachusetts Regiment garrison New Berne while the
other troops were away.]



                                   INDEX

Ainsworth, Major, 86

Allen, Ex-Gov., 86

Allison, 60, 72, 73

Allis' Flying Artillery, 17, 32, 42

Ammon, Captain John H., 44, 91

Ammon's Battery, 44

Amory, Colonel Thomas J. C., 80, 90

Amory's Brigade, 50, 55, 80

Angel, Captain James R., 81, 91

Angel's Battery, 42

Ashby, Lieut. G. E., 81

Arnold, Job Col. B., 78, 79

Atlantic and North Carolina R. R., 58


Ball's Bluff, 54, 59

Baltimore, Md., 85

Belger's Battery F., First Rhode Island Artil'y, 39, 51, 66, 79, 90

Belger, Captain James, 44, 79

Belknap, Col. J. L., 91

Black Pioneer Brigade, 12

Boler, Col. George, 80, 91

Boston, Mass., 89

Boston College, 88

Bowers, Col. George, 87

Butler, Henry, 26

Butler, Aug. G., 11

Bradford, J. A., 22

Burnside, Gen. A. E., 83


Catholic Church, 88, 89

Cerro Gordo, 82

Chambers, Major John G., 57, 89

Chapman, Franklin, 13

Chapman, ----, wounded, 63

Charleston Harbor, S. C., 83

Chinese, 76

Church of the Immaculate Conception, 87, 89

Church of St. Aloysius, 89

Churubusco, 82

Clifford, 1

Codman, Col. C. R., 80, 91

Coffin, Col. F. T., 90

Cole, Capt. Geo. W., 11, 13, 21, 61, 62, 65, 68, 69, 70, 81, 91

Company B, Third New York Cavalry, 10, 61, 91

Company K, Third New York Cavalry, 10, 13, 22, 61, 65, 68, 70, 80, 91

Company K, Ninth New Jersey, 63

Company K, Ninety-sixth New York, 67

Confederate States, 45

Connecticut Tenth Infantry, 18, 21, 57, 71, 78, 92

Contreras, 82

Costello, John, wounded, 11, 62


Day, Lieut. S. S., 12

Department of Florida, 85

Department of the South, 85

Dublin County, North Carolina, 45

Dudley Station, N. C., 41

Donahue, Gen. M. T., 89


Eighth Massachusetts Infantry, 90, 91

Eighteenth South Carolina Regiment, 16

Eighty-fifth New York Infantry, 78, 92

Eighty-eighth New York Infantry, 15, 91

Eighty-fifth Pennsylvania, 14, 15, 78, 92

Ellis, John W., 46

Evans, Maj.-Gen. N. S., 17, 19, 20, 22, 24, 54, 56, 59

Evansville, N. C., 79

Everett Station, 41


Fellows, Lieut.-Col. John F., 36

Fifth Massachusetts Infantry, 80, 90

Fifty-first Massachusetts Infantry, 80, 91

Fifth Rhode Island Infantry, 79, 91

Fitzsimmons, Major Chas., 41

Florida, Department of, 85

Forty-sixth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, 58, 80, 91

Forty-third Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia Infantry, 42, 80, 90

Forty-fourth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia Infantry, 55, 79, 91

Forty-fifth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteer Militia Infantry, 15, 16, 55,
    80, 91

Foster, Maj.-Gen. John G., 9, 19, 20, 21, 29, 30, 34, 37, 38, 42, 48, 50,
    58, 60, 66, 68, 70, 71, 72, 74, 76, 77, 82, 86, 87, 88

Foster, Maj.-Gen. John G., Obsequies of, 86

Foster, Maj.-Gen. John G., Post, 87

Franklin, N. C., 39

Franklin, Major, 18, 19

Front Royal, 86

Fulton, Rev. Robert, 88


Garrard, Major Jeptha, 17, 24, 28, 29, 31, 41, 42

Georgia, 71

Georgia, Savannah, 85

Goldsboro, 19, 22, 27, 32, 33, 40, 44, 49, 56, 58, 59, 77

Goldsboro R. R. Bridge, 48, 77, 84

Goldsboro and Wilmington R. R., 32, 41

Grant, President U. S., 86

Gray, Col. Charles O., 20, 67, 70, 78, 92

Gray, Col. Chas. O., Death of, 57, 67

Graham, Lieut. Geo. W., 38

Gunboats:
  Delaware, 71
  Seymour, 71
  Shawsheen, 71


Harper Bros., 5

Harper's History of the Rebellion, 5

Heckmann, Col. C. A., 10, 13, 21, 37, 62, 63, 65, 66, 78, 92

Holbrook, Col. Chas. L., 13, 42, 80, 90

Hunt, Col. Lewis C., 21


Jacobs, Jr., Capt. Ferris, 17, 32, 33, 41, 91

Jackson, Gen. Stonewall, 82

Jenney, Capt. E. S., 15, 24, 78, 81, 91

Jerseymen, 64

Joy, Capt. Walter S., 81


Kennedy, Major T. D., 44

Kingsley, Franklin, 11

Kinston, N. C., 9, 14, 18, 23, 24, 27, 46, 48, 49, 51, 53, 55, 56, 58, 59,
    60, 61, 65, 67, 68, 72, 73, 74, 77, 84


Ledlie, Col. J. H., 21, 30, 50, 81, 91

Lee's Brigade, 39, 50, 55

Lee, Col. Francis S., 79, 91

Lee, Col. H. C., 80, 90

Lee, Capt. O. E., 92

Lee, Gen. R. E., 82

Leggett, Lieut.-Col., 79, 91

Lemon, Wm., 38

Little Washington, N. C., 70, 84

Lincoln, Abraham, 45

Lowell, Mass., 89

Lynch, Rev. Bishop, 88


Macon, Fort, S. C., 84

Manchester, Lieut.-Col. H. A., 17, 60, 72, 77

Marine Artillery, New York, 72, 75, 77

Marshall, Capt. James F., 10, 61, 81, 91

Massachusetts, 29, 30
  " Third Regiment Vol. M., 80, 90
  " Fifth Regiment Vol. M., 80, 90
  " Eighth Regiment Vol. M., 89, 90
  " Seventeenth Regiment Inf., 16, 36, 37, 38, 80, 90
  " Twenty-third Regiment Inf., 16, 54, 57, 80, 90
  " Twenty-fourth Regiment Inf., 79, 90
  " Twenty-fifth Regiment Inf., 90
  " Twenty-seventh Regiment Inf., 80, 90
  " Forty-third Regiment Vol. M., 42, 80, 90
  " Forty-fourth Regiment Vol. M., 55, 79, 91
  " Forty-fifth Regiment Vol. M., 15, 16, 55, 80, 91
  " Forty-sixth Regiment Vol. M., 58, 80, 91
  " Fifty-first Regiment Vol. M., 80, 91

McClellan, Gen. George B., 82

McEvoy, John, 89

Merrimac, 27

Mexico, 82

Mexico, Molino del Rey, 82

Mix's Cavalry, 51, 53

Mix, Col. Simon H., 51, 59, 90

Mix, Lieut. John, 12, 51

Molett, Col., 16

Morrison, Capt. Joseph J., 13, 44, 50, 52, 78, 81, 91

Morrison's Battery, 12, 13, 14, 39, 44, 48, 52

Mosely Hall, N. C., 27

Moultrie, Fort, S. C., 83

Mount Olive Station, N. C., 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 44

Murray, Capt., 17

Murray, Commander A., 71, 72, 77


Nashua, N. H., 82, 86, 89

Nethercote, Major, 16

Nethercote's N. C. Battalion, 16, 61

Neucommer, ----, 14, 70

Neuse River Bridge, 66

Neuse River, 16, 23, 27, 41, 42, 56, 59

New Berne, 9, 47, 58, 60, 62, 67, 70, 71, 83, 84

New Hampshire, 86, 87

New York Third Artillery:--
  A, 43
  B, 43, 50, 58, 60, 77, 80, 91
  C, 43, 91
  D, 43
  E, 43, 80, 81, 91
  F, 43, 77, 91
  H, 43
  I, 43, 80, 92
  K, 43, 80, 81, 92

New York Third Artillery, 12, 13, 14, 18, 24, 43, 44, 50, 66, 77

New York Third Cavalry, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 22, 24, 26, 32, 41, 43, 51,
    57, 59, 80, 91
  A, 46, 91
  B, 10, 91
  C, 26
  D, 43, 46
  E, 91
  G, 43, 46
  K, 10, 13, 22, 58, 61, 68, 69, 91

New York Eighty-eighth Infantry, 15
  " Ninety-second Infantry, 15
  " Ninety-sixth Infantry, 15, 57, 67, 70, 78

New York Herald, 5, 86

New York Times, 5, 81

New Yorkers, 59

New York, 1, 5

Nicolo, ----, 23

Ninth New Jersey, 10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 21, 28, 29, 36, 37, 43, 50, 52,
    53, 54, 55, 62, 63, 64, 68, 70, 71, 78, 92

North Carolinians, 59

North Carolina, 1, 33, 45, 54, 77, 78, 83, 92

North Carolina Infantry, 16
  " Second Cavalry, 59
  " Third Cavalry, 16
  " Rebel Troops, 60


Ocean Wave, Gunboat, 60, 75, 76

O'Donnell, Rev. John, 87, 89

Ohio, Department of, 85

Old Point Comfort, Va., 84

One Hundred and First Pennsylvania, 15, 78, 92

One Hundred and Third Pennsylvania, 15, 78, 92


Parrott Gun, 74

Peck's, Gen., Brigade, 50

Perkins, Edward J., Death of, 75

Perkins, Lieut. W. W., Death of, 57

Pennsylvania Eighty-fifth Regiment, 15, 78, 92

Pennsylvania One Hundred and First, 15, 78, 92

Pennsylvania One Hundred and Third, 15, 78, 92

Pettigrew, Gen. J. J., 37

Phelps, Col. Walter, Jr., 92

Pickett, Col. Josiah, 90

Pierson, Col. George N., 79, 90

Pioneers, Contraband, 10

Poisoned Bullets, 75

Pond, Capt. N. P., 32

Porter, Col., 19

Provost-Marshal, Major Franklin, 18


Ransom's Twenty-third N. Y. Artillery, 41

Richmond, Col. S. P., 80, 90

Rhode Island Fifth Regiment Infantry, 91

Riggs', William J., Battery, 44

Raleigh, N. C., 16

Roanoke Island, N. C., 83

Rocket Battery, 38

Rogers, ----, 22

Rodman Gun, 13


Sandy Hook, N. J., 83

Savannah, Ga., 85

Schenck, Capt. Theo. H., Battery, 62, 66

Second N. C. Cavalry, 59

Seventeenth Infantry, Massachusetts Volunteers, 16, 36, 37, 38, 80, 90

Sepoys, 76

Sherman, Gen. W. T., 85

Sleight, Capt. J. C., 41

Snow Hill, N. C., 57

South Carolina Regiments, 39, 44, 48, 54, 56, 57

South Carolina Second Cavalry, 16
  " Seventeenth Infantry, 16
  " Eighteenth Infantry, 16
  " Twenty-third Infantry, 16

Southwest Creek, N. C., 11, 61, 84

Spalding, Capt. S., 88

Sprague, Col. A. B. R., 80, 91

Steamboats:--
  Ocean Wave, 60, 71, 76
  Allison, 60, 72, 73
  North State, 71
  Port Royal, 71
  Wilson, 71

Stevenson's Brigade, 50, 55

Stevenson, Thomas G. Col., 79, 90

Stevenson, Major R. N., 79

Suffolk, Virginia, 50

Sumter, Fort, S. C., 82, 83


Tar River, 84

Tenth Conn. Volunteer Inf., 18, 21, 51, 71, 79, 92

Third Massachusetts Volunteers, 80, 90

Third New York Artillery, 12, 13, 14, 18, 24, 43, 44, 50, 66, 77

Third New York Cavalry, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 22, 24, 26, 32, 41, 43, 51,
    57, 59, 80, 91

Third New York Cavalry:--
  Company A, 46, 91
          B, 10, 91
          D, 26, 43
          E, 91
          G, 43, 46
          K, 10, 13, 22, 58, 61, 68, 69, 91

Trenton, N. C., 61

Trent Road, 50

Trent River, 50

Twenty-third Infantry, Massachusetts Volunteers, 16, 54, 57, 80, 90

Twenty-third New York Independent Batteries, 44

Twenty-fifth Massachusetts Volunteers, 90

Twenty-fourth Massachusetts Volunteers, 79, 90

Twenty-seventh Massachusetts Volunteer Inf., 80, 90

Twenty-third New York Independent Battery, 44

Twenty-fourth New York Independent Battery, 44, 77, 80, 92


Union Troops, 58, 59

United States Navy, 71


Vera Cruz, 81


Washington, D. C., 85

Wayne County, N. C., 45, 56

Weldon, N. C., 49

Wells, Capt. Henry A., Death of, 57

Wessell's Brigade, 13, 15, 29, 50, 53, 54, 55, 78

Wessell, Gen. H. W., 15, 59, 65

West Point, 83

Whitehall, N. C., 1, 5, 9, 24, 28, 29, 30, 31, 40, 43, 52, 77, 84

Whitfield, Capt., 50

Willett's Point, Long Island, 82

Wilmington and Weldon R. R., 49, 58

Wilmington, N. C., 31, 32, 40

Wilson, Capt. John M., 32

Wilson, Henry W., 10

    +------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                  |
    |                                                      |
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:              |
    |                                                      |
    | Page   4 Errata mentioned here have been corrected   |
    | Page   7 page 16 changed to 23                       |
    | Page   7 page 17 changed to 35                       |
    | Page   7 page 89 changed to 90                       |
    | Page  15 Wessel changed to Wessell                   |
    | Page  16 terriffic changed to terrific               |
    | Page  18 Provost-Marshall changed to Provost-Marshal |
    | Page  34 radient changed to radiant                  |
    | Page  42 Angell's changed to Angel's                 |
    | Page  67 Ninty-sixth changed to Ninety-sixth         |
    | Page  70 Poster changed to Foster                    |
    | Page  73 guerillas changed to guerrillas             |
    | Page  81 K. changed to R.                            |
    | Page  90 Picket changed to Pickett                   |
    | Page  91 Ferrish changed to Ferris                   |
    | Page   i Added Boler, Col. George, see errata        |
    | Page   i Removed Bowler, Col. George, see errata     |
    | Page  ii Cherebusco changed to Churubusco            |
    | Page  iv Forth-fifth changed to Forty-fifth          |
    | Page vii Mollett changed to Molett                   |
    | Page  ix Hundeed changed to Hundred                  |
    | Page  ix Provost-Marshall changed to Provost-Marshal |
    | Page  xi Added page 61 to Trenton, N. C.             |
    | Page xii Massachusets changed to Massachusetts       |
    |                                                      |
    +------------------------------------------------------+







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KINSTON, WHITEHALL AND GOLDSBORO (NORTH CAROLINA) EXPEDITION, DECEMBER, 1862 ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

