



The Voyages of the Ranger and Crusader, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________
The Ranger is a naval vessel, employed largely as a troopship, carrying
men to India and other areas in which the British strove to keep the
peace, the Pax Britannica, while the Crusader is being used as an
emigrant ship, carrying people looking for a new life in New Zealand.
It appears that many emigrants were a pretty useless lot, whom no life
anywhere would have suited, and this comes out very clearly towards the
end of the book.  That was far being the universal rule, and this book
shows the pluck and courage under adversity of the better class of
emigrant.

Both vessels run into difficult situations, and the story is about how
the passengers and crews managed to pull through them.  The Crusader
fares worst, being a total loss not very far from New Zealand.  The
survivors work hard to feed themselves and at the same time to build a
vessel, the New Crusader, in which they can get themselves to New
Zealand.  Even on this final leg of the story they run into a problem
with hostile natives.  At this point the Ranger appears and effects a
rescue, so that the better class of emigrants have survived, while the
worse class, who had joined with some of the seamen to stage a mutiny,
nearly all die.

A very good read, or of course you can make yourself an audiobook of it.
There are the usual Kingston swimming episodes, but always so
beautifully described.

________________________________________________________________________
THE VOYAGES OF THE RANGER AND CRUSADER, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE FAMILY PARTY.

"Harry, my boy; another slice of beef?" said Major Shafto, addressing
his fine young sailor-son, a passed midshipman, lately come home from
sea.

"No, thank you, since I could not, if I took it, pay due respect to the
mince-pies and plum-pudding; but Willy here can manage another slice, I
daresay.  He has a notion, that he will have to feed for the future on
`salt junk' and `hard tack.'"

Willy Dicey was going to sea, and had just been appointed to Harry
Shafto's ship, the "Ranger."

Among the large party of family friends collected at Major Shafto's
house on that Christmas Day not many years ago, was Lieutenant Dicey, a
friend and neighbour of the Major's, who had served with him in the same
regiment for many years.  The Lieutenant had lost a leg, and, unable to
purchase his company, had retired from the army.  His eldest son,
Charles, and two of his daughters, Emily and May, had arranged to go out
and settle in New Zealand; and they expected shortly to sail.  The
Lieutenant would gladly have gone with them, but he had a delicate wife
and several other children, and thought it wiser, therefore, to remain
at home.  The party was a happy and cheerful one.  The fire burned
brightly, showing that there was a hard frost outside.  The lamp shed a
brilliant light over the well-covered table, and the Major did his best
to entertain his guests.  The first course was removed, and then came a
wonderful plum-pudding, and such dishes of mince-pies!  And then the
brandy was brought and poured over them, and set on fire; and Harry
Shafto and Willy Dicey tried if they could not eat them while still
blazing, and, of course, burned their mouths, eliciting shouts of
laughter; and the whole party soon thought no more of the future, and
were happy in the present.  How Mrs Clagget's tongue did wag!  She was
a tall, old lady, going out to a nephew in New Zealand; and, as she was
to be the companion of the young Diceys on the voyage, she had been
asked to join the Christmas party.

Dinner was just over when voices were heard in the hall singing a
Christmas carol, and all the guests went out to listen to the words
which told of the glorious event which had, upwards of eighteen hundred
years before, occurred in the distant East, and yet was of as much
importance to all the human race, and will be to the end of time, as
then.  Ringers came next, and lastly mummers played their parts,
according to an ancient custom, which some might consider "more honoured
in the breach than in the observance."  After this there was blind-man's
buff, in which all the maid-servants as well as the children joined, and
Mrs Clagget's own maid and the Diceys' Susan, who had come with the
children.  Well was that Christmas Day remembered by most of the party.

Soon after this the Diceys began to make active preparations for their
intended voyage.  Charles went up to London and engaged a passage for
himself and sisters, and for Mrs Clagget, on board the "Crusader."  He
came back, describing her as a very fine vessel, and he seemed well
pleased with her commander, Captain Westerway.

As the time for parting approached, the young people began to feel that
it would prove a greater trial than they had expected.  While talking of
their future life in the colony, and anticipating the various novel
scenes and the new existence they were to enjoy, they had scarcely
considered the wrench to their feelings which they would have to endure.
Mr and Mrs Dicey had felt this, probably, from the first; and
therefore, when the trial came, they were better prepared for it.  Willy
was the first to be got ready to start with his friend, Harry Shafto.
We will, therefore, follow their fortunes before we accompany our other
friends on their voyage.



CHAPTER TWO.

THE "RANGER" SAILS.

HARRY AND WILLY LEAVE HOME--JOURNEY TO PORTSMOUTH--THE "BLUE POSTS"--
MIDSHIPMEN'S TRICKS--ON BOARD THE "RANGER"--THE SOLDIER-OFFICERS--THE
SERGEANT'S WIFE--MRS MORLEY AND HER FAMILY--MRS RUMBELOW NURSES
WILLY--CAPE OF GOOD HOPE--SENT TO LAND TROOPS--THE "RANGER" IN DANGER--
DRIVING TOWARDS SHORE--THE LAST ANCHOR HOLDS--SAIL MADE--MRS RUMBELOW'S
SERMON--TROOPS CARRIED ON.

One bright morning at the end of January, the Portsmouth coach drove up
to Major Shafto's door.  The Diceys were breakfasting at the house, for
Harry Shafto's leave was up, and he was to take Willy with him on board
the "Ranger," then lying in Portsmouth harbour.  Farewells were said,
fond embraces exchanged, for Harry, though a tall young man, was not
ashamed to kiss his mother again and again, and his dear young sisters;
nor did Willy mind the tears which trickled unbidden from his eyes.  His
heart was very full; though he had so longed to go to sea, now that he
was actually going, he felt that he should be ready, if required, to
give up all his bright hopes, and stay at home.

In spite of the cold, the whole family came out and stood at the door
while the two young sailors mounted to the top of the coach.  "All
right," shouted the guard, as the last article of luggage was handed up.
The coachman gave a gentle lash to his horses, and the lads, standing
up, turned round to give a last fond look at all those they loved so
well.

This, it must be understood, was some time before Charles Dicey and his
sisters started on their more important expedition.  The young sailors
expected to be home again in little more than a year, or perhaps even in
less time, for the "Ranger" was a Government troop-ship, with the usual
officers and crew, however, of a sloop-of-war.  Harry Shafto would have
preferred being in a dashing frigate, but, at the same time, he was glad
to serve under so worthy a captain as Commander Newcombe.

Harry and his young companion, on their arrival at Portsmouth, went to
the "Blue Posts,"--not an aristocratic hotel, certainly, but one
resorted to in those days by the junior officers of the service.  Willy
felt very proud of his new uniform, and could not help handling his dirk
as he sat by Harry Shafto's side in the coffee-room.  Several midshipmen
and masters' assistants came in.  Two or three who took their seats at
the same table asked Willy to what ship he belonged.  "To the `Ranger',"
he answered proudly; "and a very fine ship she is."

"Oh, ay, a lobster carrier," observed a young midshipman, in a squeaky
voice.  "I have heard of old Newcombe.  He is the savage fellow who tars
and feathers his midshipmen if they get the ship in irons, or cannot box
the compass when he tells them to do it."

"I have been told, on the contrary, that he is a very kind man,"
answered Willy; "and as to getting the ship in irons or boxing the
compass, I do not think he would allow either the one thing or the
other."

"What! do you mean to call my word in question, youngster?" exclaimed
the midshipman.  "Do you know who I am?"

"Tell him you think he has eaten a good deal of the stuff they feed
geese on," whispered Harry.

Willy did as he was advised.  The midshipman on this got very angry,
especially when all his companions laughed at him, and advised him to
let the "young chip" alone, as there was evidently an "old block" at his
elbow, who was not likely to stand nonsense.  At last the midshipman,
who said that his name was Peter Patch, acknowledged that he himself had
just been appointed to the "Ranger," and that he believed old Newcombe
to be a very good sort of a fellow, considering what officers generally
are.

Next morning, after breakfast, Harry and his young companion went on
board their ship, and Harry reported himself and Willy to the
first-lieutenant, Mr Tobin.  Captain Newcombe was on board; and when
Harry, accompanied by Willy, went up and spoke to him on the
quarterdeck, he received them very kindly.

Willy, by Harry's advice, set to work at once to learn his duty.  Peter
Patch, though fond of practical jokes, was very good-natured, and
assisted him as far as he could, telling him the names of the ropes, and
showing him how to knot and splice, and the principle of sailing and
steering a ship.  Willy, who was a sharp little fellow, quickly took in
all the instruction given him.

The midshipmen's berth was somewhat confined, as, indeed, were those of
the other officers, as a large portion of the space below was given up
for the use of the troops.  The poop cabins were devoted to the
accommodation of the military officers and their families.  There was
also a space occupied by the hospital, and another portion by the women
who accompanied the regiment, certain non-commissioned officers and
privates being allowed to have their wives and children with them.

At length the ship was ready, and the soldiers were seen approaching her
from Gosport.  As they came up the side, they formed on deck, and each
man had his allotted berth shown him; so that, although there were two
hundred men, with a proportionate number of non-commissioned officers
and their wives and families, there was perfect order and regularity
observed.  The "Ranger" had the honour of conveying Colonel Morley, who
commanded the regiment, and there was a Mrs and two Miss Morleys.  Then
there was Captain Power, Captain Gosling, and Captain Twopenny; and
Lieutenants Dawson, Hickman, and Ward; with Ensigns Holt and Gonne.
There was a surgeon, David Davis, who hailed from Wales; and a
paymaster, who was the stoutest man on board.  There were several
sergeants, but only one, Serjeant Rumbelow, whose name it is necessary
to record.  He was accompanied by his wife, who was a person well
capable of keeping order, not only among the soldiers' wives, but among
the soldiers themselves.  She was a woman of powerful frame and voice,
tall and gaunt, and of a dauntless spirit.  The regiment had not been on
board many hours before Willy saw her go up to two young soldiers who
were quarrelling.  Seizing them, she knocked their heads together.
"There, lads," she exclaimed; "make it up this moment, or the next time
I catch you at that work I'll knock them a precious deal harder."

Willy Dicey looked with a good deal of awe at Mrs Morley and her
daughters, who appeared to be very great people.  They quickly made
themselves at home in their cabins, and had their work-boxes out, and a
number of things arranged, as if they had been living there for weeks.
Captain Newcombe made some remark on the subject.  Mrs Morley replied,
laughing, "You need not be surprised, for this will be the tenth voyage
I have made, and you may suppose, therefore, that I am pretty well
accustomed to roughing it.  This ship is like a royal yacht compared to
some vessels I have sailed in.  My husband was not always a colonel, and
subalterns and their wives have to put up with rough quarters
sometimes."

Harry Shafto was glad to find that most of the officers were gentlemanly
men, and there appeared every prospect of their having a pleasant
voyage.

As soon as the troops were on board, the ship went out to Spithead, and
having taken in her powder and a few more stores, with a fair wind she
stood down Channel.

The "Ranger" had to undergo not a little tumbling about in the Bay of
Biscay, no unusual occurrence in that part of the ocean: it contributed
to shake people and things into their places; and by the time she got
into the latitude of Madeira, both military and naval officers, and the
ladies on board, were pretty well acquainted.  Colonel Morley found out
that he had served with Major Shafto, and was very happy to make the
acquaintance of his son; and Mrs Twopenny, for Captain Twopenny was
married, was acquainted with the Diceys, and took Willy Dicey under her
especial patronage.  Mrs Rumbelow found out, somehow or other, that she
had been nurse in his mother's family, and, of course, Willy became a
great pet of hers.  Willy fell ill, and Mrs Rumbelow begged that she
might nurse him, a favour very readily granted: indeed, had it not been
for her watchful care, the doctor declared that little Dicey would have
slipped through his fingers.

We need not accompany the "Ranger" in her course.  With mostly
favourable winds, she had a quick run to the Cape of Good Hope, and,
without any accident, came to an anchor off Cape Town.  Those who had
not been there before looked with interest on the novel scene which
presented itself from the anchorage.  Willy Dicey, soon after his
arrival, wrote a long letter home, from which one extract must be
given:--

"Before us rose the perpendicular sides of Table Mountain, while on
either hand we saw the crags of the Lion's Head and Devil's Peak, the
former overhung by a large cloud, known as the Table-cloth.  As it
reached the edge, it seemed to fall down for a short distance, and then
to disperse, melting away in the clear air.  The town still preserves
the characteristics given to it by its founders, many of the houses
retaining a Dutch look, a considerable number of the inhabitants,
indeed, having also the appearance of veritable Hollanders.  The town is
laid out regularly, most of the streets crossing each other at right
angles, with rows of oak, poplar, and pine-trees lining the sides of the
principal ones.  Many of the houses have vine and rose-trees trailed
over them; while the shutters and doors, and the woodwork generally, are
painted of various colours, which give them a somewhat quaint but neat
and picturesque appearance."

Harry twice got a run on shore, but his duties confined him on board for
the rest of the time the ship remained.  She was on the point of sailing
when news was received of a serious outbreak of the Kaffirs.  A small
body of troops on the frontier had been almost overwhelmed, and
compelled to entrench themselves till relief could be sent to them.  The
Commander-in-chief accordingly ordered the "Ranger" to proceed
immediately to the nearest point where it was supposed troops could be
disembarked.  It is known as Waterloo Bay.  She arrived off the bay in
the evening; but Captain Newcombe, not deeming it prudent to run into an
unknown place during the night, stood away from the land, intending to
return at daylight.  In a short time, however, it fell calm.  The lead
was hove.  It was evident that a current and swell combined were
drifting the ship fast towards the shore, on which the surf was breaking
heavily.  On this the captain ordered an anchor to be let go, which
happily brought her up.  Though there was scarcely a breath of air,
every now and then heavy rollers came slowly in, lifting the ship
gently, and then, passing on, broke with a terrific roar on the rocky
coast.  The passengers were on deck.  The young military officers
chatted and laughed as usual, and endeavoured to make themselves
agreeable to the ladies.  Colonel Morley, however, looked grave.  He
clearly understood the dangerous position in which they were placed.
Willy Dicey asked Harry what he thought about the matter.

"We must do our duty, and pray that the anchor may hold," answered
Harry.

"But if that gives way?" said Willy.

"We must let go another, and then another."

"But if they fail us, and no breeze springs up?" said Willy.

"Then you and I must not expect to be admirals," answered Harry.

"What do you mean?" asked the young midshipman.

"That a short time will show whether any one on board this ship is
likely to be alive to-morrow," said Shafto.

"You don't mean to say that, Harry?" remarked Willy, feeling that the
time had come when he must summon up all the courage he possessed, and
of the amount he had as yet no experience.  "You don't seem afraid."

"There's a great deal of difference between knowing a danger and fearing
to face it," said Harry.  "Not a seaman on board does not know it as
well as I do, though they do not show what they think.  Look at the
captain--he is as cool and collected as if we were at anchor in a snug
harbour; yet he is fully aware of the power of these rollers, and the
nature of the ground which holds the anchor.  There is the order to
range another cable."

Harry and Willy parted to attend to their respective duties.  Night came
on, but neither Commander Newcombe nor any of his officers went below.
They were anxiously looking out for a breeze which might enable the ship
to stand off from the dangerous coast.  The night was passing by, and
still the anchor held; at length, in the morning watch, some time before
daylight, a breeze sprang up from the eastward, and the order was given
to get under weigh.  As the men went stamping round the capstan, a loud
crash was heard.

"The messenger has given way, sir," cried Mr Tobin, the
first-lieutenant.  Out ran the cable to the clench, carrying away the
stoppers, and passing through both compressors.  At length the messenger
was again shackled, and the anchor hove up, when it was found that both
flukes had been carried away.

Not, however, for some hours did the ship succeed in reaching Waterloo
Bay, where she brought up, about a mile and a-half from the
landing-place.  A signal was made:--"Can troops land?" which was
answered from the shore, "Not until the weather moderates," the wind
having by this time increased to a stiff breeze.  A spring was now got
on the cable, in case of its being necessary to slip; for it was very
evident, if so heavy a surf set on shore in comparatively fine weather,
that, should it come on to blow from the southward, the position of the
ship would be still more critical.

As the day drew on, the breeze freshened, but the rollers at the same
time increased, and broke heavily half-a-cable's length to the westward
of the ship, foaming and roaring as they met the resistance of the
rockbound shore.  The position of the "Ranger" was more dangerous than
ever.  The crew were at their stations; the soldiers were on deck,
divided into parties under their officers, ready to assist in any work
they might be directed to perform.  Topgallant masts and royal masts
were got up, and everything was prepared for making sail.  The order was
now given for shortening in the cable.  As it was got on board, it was
found that it had swept over a sharp rock about fifty fathoms from the
anchor, and it seemed a miracle that it had not been cut through.

"Avast heaving," cried the captain.  "Loose sails."  In an instant the
crew were aloft.

At that moment, as the topsails were filling, the second-lieutenant
cried out from forward, "The cable has parted."

"Let go the second bower," cried the captain.  The ship was drifting
towards the rocks.  Willy held his breath.  What Harry had said might
soon be realised.  Mrs Morley and her daughters were on deck.  They
stood together watching the shore.  Their cheeks were paler than usual,
but they showed no sign of alarm, talking calmly and earnestly together.
As Willy Dicey observed them, he wondered whether they could be aware
of the danger they were in.  To be sure, they might be lowered into the
boat before the ship struck, but then the Colonel was not likely to quit
his men, and they could not be indifferent to his safety.  Still the
ship drifted.

"Let go the sheet-anchor," was the next order.  All were looking out
anxiously to ascertain whether she was driving nearer the treacherous
surf.  Many a breast drew a relieved breath.  The last anchor had
brought her up.  Sails were now furled and royal yards sent down.

Near the "Ranger" an English barque was at anchor.  Her master came on
board, and volunteered to assist in making a hawser fast to his vessel,
for the purpose of casting the ship the right way.  "You will find,
Captain Newcombe, that the rollers will soon be increasing, and, knowing
the place as I do, I have great doubts whether the anchors will hold,"
he observed; "I wish you were well out of this."  As he spoke, he cast
an anxious glance astern, where the surf was breaking with terrific
violence.  The offer was gladly accepted.  The two cutters were
accordingly lowered to take hawsers to the barque.  On the sheet-anchor
being weighed, it came up without resistance.  Both flukes had been
carried away.  The only hope of safety depended on the remaining anchor
and cable holding till sail could be made.  In vain the boats attempted
to carry the hawsers to the barque.  A strong current sent them to
leeward, and they were accordingly ordered again on board.  Happily, at
this moment the wind veered a point to the east.  There is no necessity
to tell the men to be sharp.  The order to make sail is given.  The crew
swarm aloft; the soldiers, under proper guidance, are stationed at the
halliards, and the tacks and sheets.  The cable is slipped,
single-reefed topsails, courses, topgallant sails, jibs, and driver set.
Few among even the brave seamen who do not hold their breath and offer
up a silent prayer that the ship may cast the right way.  Hurra! round
she comes.  The sails fill.  She moves through the water.  The boats
with the hawser get alongside and are hoisted up, and the old "Ranger"
stands out towards the open sea.  Is there a soul on board so dull and
ungrateful as not to return fervent thanks to a gracious superintending
God for deliverance from the imminent danger in which they have been
placed?

As the ship drew off the land, the rollers were seen coming in with
increased strength and size, and it was very evident that, had she not
got under weigh at the time she did, she would have been dashed to
pieces in the course, probably, of another short hour, and few of the
soldiers and crew would have escaped.  [Note 1.]

"I tell you what, boys," said Mrs Rumbelow, "you will have to go
through a good many dangers in the course of your lives may be, but
never will you have a narrower escape than this.  I was just now
thinking where we all should be to-morrow, and wishing I could be
certain that we should all meet together in heaven.  Not that I think
any one of us have a right to go there for any good we have ever done;
only I wish you boys to recollect, when you are rapping out oaths and
talking as you should not talk, that at any moment you may be called
away out of this world; and just let me ask you if you think that you
are fit to enter the only place a wise person would wish to live in for
ever and ever?"

Mrs Rumbelow was not very lucid, it may be, in her theology, but she
was very earnest, and the regiment benefited more than some might be
ready to allow by her sayings and doings too.  Things might have been
much worse had it not been for her.

It being found impossible to land the troops, the "Ranger" returned to
Simon's Bay, where she was detained some time longer in replacing the
anchors and cables she had lost.  Captain Newcombe was exonerated for
not carrying out his directions, seeing it was impossible to do so.  A
little army of regulars and volunteers was despatched from another
station for the relief of the hard-pressed garrison, and arrived just as
their last cartridge and last biscuit had been expended.  Other troops
also coming out from England, the "Ranger" proceeded towards her
previous destination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  In 1846 H.M.S. "Apollo" was placed under exactly the
circumstances described.  It was in this locality, also, that the
"Birkenhead" troop-ship was lost.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE "CRUSADER" LEAVES FOR NEW ZEALAND.

THE YOUNG EMIGRANTS--GOING ON BOARD EMIGRANT SHIP--THE "CRUSADER"
DESCRIBED--VOYAGE TO PLYMOUTH--THE CABIN PASSENGERS--A MYSTERIOUS
PASSENGER--LAST SIGHT OF ENGLAND--MR PAGET'S GOOD EXAMPLE--EMPLOYMENT
FOR EMIGRANTS--VISIT FROM NEPTUNE--MAWSON IN THE TRITON'S HANDS.

Charles Dicey and his sisters were busily employed from morning till
night, after Willy left home, in preparing for their intended voyage,
and for their future life in New Zealand.  Charles was a very fair
carpenter.  He had also learned how to shoe a horse and to milk a cow.
The latter accomplishment his sisters also possessed.  They also knew
how to make butter, and to bake bread, and pies, and tarts.  They could
manufacture all sorts of preserves, and could cook in a variety of ways;
while, since they were young girls, they had made all their own dresses;
indeed, they possessed numerous valuable qualifications for their
intended life in a colony.  Charles was a fair judge of horse-flesh, and
not a bad one of cattle and sheep.  He also possessed steadiness and
perseverance, and those who knew him best foretold that he would make a
successful settler.

The time fixed for the sailing of the "Crusader" was drawing on.  The
"Ranger," it must be remembered, had sailed a short time before.  This
fact should not be forgotten.

The day before the emigrant ship was to sail, the old Lieutenant
accompanied his children up to London, and had the honour of escorting
Mrs Clagget at the same time.  Though the "Crusader" was to touch at
Plymouth, they wisely went on board at the port from which she first
sailed, that they might have time to get their cabins in order, and the
luggage carefully stowed away.

"Bless you, my children," said Lieutenant Dicey, as he kissed his young
daughters, and held Charles' hand, gazing earnestly into his
countenance.  "I entrust these dear girls to you, and I know that you
will act a brother's part, and protect them to the utmost.  But there
are dangers to be encountered, and we must pray to One in heaven, who
has the power, if He sees fit, to guard you from them."

The "Crusader" was a fine ship, of about a thousand tons, with a
poop-deck, beneath which were the cabins for the first-class passengers.
Below their cabins were those for the second-class passengers, while
the between-decks was devoted to the use of the steerage passengers.
Thus there were three ranks of people on board; indeed, including the
officers and crow, the good ship presented a little world of itself.
Old Captain Westerway was the sovereign--a mild despot, however; but if
he was mild, his first mate, Mr William Windy, or Bill Windy, as he was
generally called, was very much the contrary, and he took care to bring
those who trespassed on the captain's mildness very quickly under
subjection.  The "Crusader" was towed down the Thames, and when clear of
the river, the Channel pilot, who was to take her to Plymouth, came on
board.  We shall know more of her passengers as she proceeds on her
voyage.

She had a pleasant passage round to Plymouth, with just sufficient sea
on for a few hours to shake people into their places, and to make them
value the quiet of Plymouth harbour.  The wise ones, after the tumbling
about they had received, took the opportunity of securing all the loose
articles in their cabins, so that they might be prepared for the next
gale they were destined to encounter.

At Plymouth a good many steerage and a few more cabin passengers came on
board the "Crusader."  Captain Westerway informed those who had come
round from London that he expected to remain in that magnificent harbour
three days at all events, and perhaps longer, before finally bidding
farewell to Old England.

The Misses Dicey had a cabin to themselves, their brother had a small
one near theirs, and Mrs Clagget had one on the opposite side of the
saloon; but they could hear her tongue going from morning till night;
and very often, at the latter period, addressing her next-door neighbour
whenever she guessed that she was not asleep.  There were two young men,
Tom Loftus and Jack Ivyleaf by name, going out as settlers.  With the
former, who was gentlemanly and pleasing, Charles Dicey soon became
intimate.  A card, with the name of Mr Henry Paget, had been nailed to
the door of one of the cabins hitherto unoccupied.  "I wonder what he is
like," said Emily to her sister May.  "His name sounds well, but of
course that is no guide.  Captain Westerway says an agent took his
passage, and that he knows nothing about him."  At length a
slightly-built gentleman, prepossessing in his appearance, if not
handsome, came up the side, and presented a card with Mr Henry Paget on
it.  The steward immediately showed him into his cabin, where for a
short time he was engaged in arranging several cases and other articles.
He then going on deck, took a few solitary turns, apparently admiring
the scenery.  Returning below, he produced a book from his greatcoat
pocket and began reading, proceedings duly remarked and commented on by
his fellow-passengers.  "Who can he be?"

"What is taking him out to New Zealand?" were questions asked over and
over again, without eliciting any satisfactory reply.

In the second cabin there was a Mr and Mrs Bolton, very estimable
people apparently, from the way they took care of their children.  There
was an oldish man, James Joel, and a young farmer, Luke Gravel.  The
last person who came on board told the mate, Bill Windy, as he stepped
up the side, that his name was Job Mawson.  He had paid his
passage-money, and handed his ticket.  Windy, who was a pretty good
judge of character, eyed him narrowly.  The waterman who had put him on
board, as soon as the last article of his property was hoisted up,
pulled off to the opposite side of the Sound from which the emigrants
had come, and thus no information could be obtained from him.  There was
an unpleasant expression on the man's countenance.  His glance was
furtive, and he always seemed to be expecting some one to touch him on
the shoulder, and say, "You are wanted;" so Charles remarked to his
sisters.

It would be impossible to describe all the people.  There were three
other young ladies in the first cabin, and the steerage passengers were
generally respectable persons, whose object in emigrating was to find
sufficient scope for their industry.  Some were farm labourers and
farming people, others mechanics, and a few shopkeepers, who had been
unsuccessful in England, but who hoped to do better in the colony.

At length the captain with his papers, and the agent, came on board, all
visitors took their departure, the anchor was hove up, and the
"Crusader" with a fair wind sailed out of the Sound.  The next day she
took her departure from the Land's End, the last point of Old England
many of those on board were destined to see.  Mr Mawson now quickly
recovered his spirits, and began to give himself the airs of a fine
gentleman.  "Circumstances compel me to take a second-class cabin," he
observed to Mr Paget, to whom he at first devoted his especial
attention; "but you may suppose that, to a person of my birth and
education, such is greatly repugnant to my feelings.  However, this is
one of the trials of life, sir, we must submit to with a good grace.
Circumstances are circumstances, Mr Paget, and I am sure my young
friend, Mr Dicey (I think, sir, that is your name?) will agree with
me," he added, turning to Charles.

"We make our own circumstances, sir, however," answered Mr Paget, "by
wise and prudent, or by foolish conduct, or by honest or dishonest
dealings with our fellow-men.  The upright man is not degraded by loss
of fortune, and I have no doubt many persons of education go out in
second-class cabins on board emigrant ships."

"Of course they do, sir, of course," exclaimed Mr Mawson; but either
the tone or the words of Mr Paget did not please him, for he
immediately afterwards walked away to another part of the ship.

Mr Paget had not been long on board before he visited the
between-decks, and spoke to the fathers and mothers of the families on
board.  "It would be a pity that your children should be idle during the
voyage," he said; "and as perhaps some of them may be unable to read or
write, I shall be happy to give them instruction."  In a short time he
had a school established on board, and in a day or two afterwards he
collected a Bible-class for the elder people; and then every morning he
went below, and read the Bible to them, and offered up a prayer, and
explained to them what he read.

"I thought, from his cut, he was one of those missionary fellows,"
observed Mr Mawson to Charles Dicey with a sneer.

"I am very glad we have got such a person on board," answered Charles,
firmly.  "If he will let me, I shall be very thankful to help him."

Mr Paget gladly accepted Charles Dicey's assistance, and the Miss
Diceys offered to teach the girls, and they also undertook a
sewing-class for the young women, many of whom scarcely knew how to use
their needles properly.  And then Tom Loftus, who was very ingenious,
set to work to give employment to the young men.  He got them to cut out
models of all sorts, and showed them how to make brushes and other
useful articles.  Then he induced some of the sailors to teach them to
knot and splice, and, indeed, to do all sorts of things.

"I am much obliged to you, gentlemen," said Captain Westerway.  "The
last time I took out emigrants, they were almost in a state of mutiny.
They had nothing to do on board, and idleness breeds mischief; and idle
enough they were.  Now, all these people seem as happy and contented as
possible, and as far as I can judge, they are much the same class as the
others."

There was a black fiddler on board, who went by the name of Jumbo; and
while he played the sailors danced, greatly to the amusement of the
passengers.  Jack Ivyleaf, who was up to all sorts of fun, used to join
them, and soon learned to dance the hornpipe as well as the best dancer
on board.

"I wonder, Mr Ivyleaf, you can so demean yourself," exclaimed Mrs
Clagget, when he came on the poop after his performance.  "You, a
gentleman, going and dancing among the sailors, and exhibiting yourself
to the steerage passengers!"

"Why, Mrs Clagget, that is the very thing I did it for," answered Jack,
laughing.  "I went on purpose to amuse them.  I cannot teach them, like
our friends Dicey and Loftus, and so I do what I can.  I rather
contemplate giving them some recitations, and I am going to sing some
songs; and I am not at all certain that I will not act a play for their
amusement."

"Oh, you are incorrigible!" exclaimed Mrs Clagget; not that she really
minded what Jack proposed to do, but she must say something.

The fine weather continued.  Jack recited and sang songs to the people
one evening, and the next he appeared in costume as a conjurer, and
performed a number of wonderful tricks; and the third day he got an
interesting book, and read out to them a story in a voice that might be
heard right across the deck, so that he had a large number of auditors.
At length it struck him that he might have a young men's class; and
before the day was over all the young men on board had begged to belong
to it, so that he not only had plenty of pupils, but he got them on at a
rapid rate.  Thus the "Crusader" sailed onwards.  The weather was
getting hotter and hotter, and Jack Ivyleaf and several of his pupils
were found to be especially busily employed in the forepart of the ship,
with the assistance of the boatswain and some of the men; but what they
were about no one could discover.  At length Captain Westerway announced
that the "Crusader" had reached the line.  The sails were set, but there
was so little wind that they hung against the masts, every now and then
slowly bulging out, soon again to hang down in a discontented mood.  The
carpenter's chips could be seen floating alongside sometimes for
half-an-hour together, and the pitch in the seams of the deck bubbled
and hissed, and the passengers, as they walked about, found their shoes
sticking to it.  Suddenly a loud noise was heard ahead.  "Ship ahoy!
What ship is that?"

"The `Crusader,' Captain Westerway," answered the master.

"Ay, ay, Captain Westerway, you are an old friend of mine, and I am sure
you will welcome me on board," sang out some one, apparently from
beneath the bows.

"Who are you?" asked the captain.

"Daddy Neptune, to be sure," answered the voice.  "Don't you know that?
Your ship is just over my parlour windows, and shutting out the light,
so that my wife and children can scarcely see to eat their porridge."

"I beg your pardon, but that is not my fault, as your Majesty well
knows," answered Captain Westerway.  "However, you are welcome on
board."  As he spoke, some strange figures were seen coming over the
bows, one with a crown on his head, a trident in his hand, and a huge
nose and brownish beard, which flowed over his breast.  He was evidently
Daddy Neptune himself.  His companions were in sea-green dresses, with
conch shells in their hands, and among them were half-a-dozen
strange-looking fish, who came walloping about the deck as if they
supposed themselves still to be swimming in the water.

"Well, Captain Westerway, as you are an old friend, I will grant any
favour you like to ask; so just out with it, and don't stand on
ceremony," said Neptune, in a familiar, easy way.

The captain replied, "As my passengers here are leaving their native
shore, and are about to settle in a strange country, I must beg that,
after you have mustered all hands, your Majesty will allow them to pass
without the ceremonies which those who cross the line for the first time
have usually to go through."

The passengers were accordingly called up on deck, when most of them, in
acknowledgment of his courtesy, presented Daddy Neptune with a fee,
which he forthwith handed to an odd-looking monster whom he took care to
introduce as his treasurer.  Mr Job Mawson, however, kept out of the
way, evidently determined to pay nothing.  Neptune, who had been eyeing
him for some time, now turned to his attendants.  Four of them
immediately sprang forward, when Mr Mawson, suspecting their
intentions, took to flight.  Round and round the deck he ran, pursued by
the tritons, to escape from whom he sprang below; but in his fright he
went down forward, so that he could not reach his own cabin, and he was
soon hunted up again and chased as before, till at length, exhausted,
and nearly frightened out of his wits, he was caught beneath the poop.

"Let him alone," exclaimed Neptune; "he is beneath our notice, after
all."

Instead of the rough amusements often carried on on board ships crossing
the line, a drama was acted by Neptune and his attendants, he being
shortly afterwards joined by his wife and children, who had by this
time, he observed, finished their breakfasts, and had come to pay their
respects to their old friend, Captain Westerway.



CHAPTER FOUR.

A SEAMAN'S SUPERSTITION.

"RANGER" TAKES A SOUTHERLY COURSE--ALBATROSSES APPEAR ASTERN--HOLT
PREPARES HIS RIFLE--MISS MORLEY PLEADS FOR THE BIRDS--HOLT KILLS AN
ALBATROSS--A SUPERSTITION OF SEAMEN--THE FATE OF THE ANCIENT MARINER--
MRS RUMBELOW'S OPINIONS ON THE SUBJECT--SERJEANT RUMBELOW--MUSIC HEARD
OVER THE OCEAN--A SHIP PASSED AT NIGHT--A HAIL FROM THE "RANGER"--
BLOWING HARD--MRS RUMBELOW COMFORTS THE SICK--THE COLONEL CAUTIONS THE
COMMANDER--LOOK-OUT FOR ICEBERGS--THE COLONEL'S WIFE AND DAUGHTERS--THE
COLONEL'S PRACTICAL RELIGION--A CALM.

The lofty height of Table Mountain sank lower and lower in the blue
ocean as the "Ranger" stood towards the south.

"I propose taking the short circle on our voyage eastward," said
Commander Newcombe to Colonel Morley.  "We may experience somewhat cold
weather; but, at this time of the year we may hope to escape heavy
gales, and it is important, with so many men on board, to make a quick
passage.  If, too, our water should run scarce, we may obtain a supply
from the icebergs, with which it is not impossible we may fall in now
and then."

"I hope we may not run foul of one," observed Colonel Morley.

"No fear of that, colonel, if we have our eyelids open, and our wits
about us," answered the commander of the "Ranger."

The sea was calm, the wind light, and the "Ranger" glided proudly over
the smooth sea.  The ladies and most of the other passengers were on
deck.  Two or three of the lieutenants and ensigns brought up their
rifles and proposed shooting at the albatrosses, which, with expanded
wings, floated around the ship, now rising high in the air, now darting
down on the scrapings of the mess tins which had been thrown overboard.
Ensign Holt had just loaded his rifle.

"I think I can hit that fellow," he exclaimed, pointing at a magnificent
bird which, at the instant, came swooping down near the stern.

"Oh! do not be so cruel," exclaimed Miss Morley, who observed him.  "I
could not suppose that anybody with right feeling would wish to deprive
so beautiful a creature of its joyous existence.  How delightful it must
be to fly at freedom through the clear blue air, and remain thus, for
days and weeks together, away from the heat and dust of the shore."

The ensign reddened, and lowered his weapon from his shoulder, and the
albatross swept off to a distance, far out of range of his rifle.

"I was only thinking of the good practice they would give us," he
observed; "but your interference, Miss Morley, has saved the bird's
life."

"That is to say, Holt, it prevented you from firing," observed
Lieutenant Dawson; "it does not follow that the bird would have been the
sufferer."

Lieutenant Hickman and Ensign Gonne laughed heartily, for Holt was not
celebrated for his shooting.  The magnificent birds continued as before,
hovering about the ship, not aware of the evil intentions harboured
against them by the young officers.

Ensign Holt was nettled, and, notwithstanding Miss Morley's remark, was
longing for an opportunity of exhibiting his skill.  She soon afterwards
went below, when he again prepared, as he said, to bring down an
albatross.  He and his brother officers, however, fired several shots
without producing any effect.  A rifle ball at length striking one of
the birds, the white feathers were seen flying from its breast; upwards
it soared, making several wide circuits, then once more darted towards
the surface of the water, apparently not in any way the sufferer.

While the young officers were thus engaged, Commander Newcombe appeared
on the poop.  "I do not wish to interfere with the amusements of my
passengers," he observed; "but we sailors are apt to be superstitious,
and we hold to the idea, if one of those magnificent birds is wantonly
killed by any one on board a ship, she is sure to meet with some
misfortune."

"Why, captain, I do not see that there can be any more harm in killing
an albatross than shooting a pheasant," answered Ensign Holt, who was
somewhat vexed at being thus a second time interfered with.

"The pheasant, sir, might serve for dinner," observed the commander,
"but I do not fancy you would wish to eat an albatross, even should you
happen to shoot one, and we could lower a boat and pick it up.  I
confess I do not like to see the creatures wantonly injured.  You may
break a leg or wing of one of them, and leave it to suffer and die out
in the ocean here; but your rifle balls can scarcely penetrate the
bird's thick coat of feathers, unless you get a fair shot at close
range, so as to kill it outright."

The young ensign, who did not at all like to be thus thwarted by the
commander, had been watching a bird which, bolder than its companions,
had more than once swooped close up to the taffrail.  Determined to
prove that he was not the bad shot it was supposed, he had kept his
rifle capped and ready; he lifted it as the commander spoke, and fired.
The albatross rose for an instant, and then, with expanded wings, fell
heavily into the water, where it was seen struggling in a vain effort to
rise.

"You have done for him, old fellow, at all events," cried Lieutenant
Dawson.

"Well, Holt, you have retrieved your character," remarked the other
ensign.

"I wish that Mr Holt would have listened to my advice," said the
commander, turning away annoyed.  The young officers were too much
engaged watching the poor bird to observe this.  In another instant the
struggles of the wounded albatross ceased, and immediately several of
its companions pounced down upon it, and, ere the ship had run it out of
sight, the body was almost torn in pieces.

"Why, it appears that your pets are somewhat ferocious creatures,"
observed Lieutenant Dawson, pointing out what had occurred to Commander
Newcombe, who had again returned aft.

"That is their nature, gentlemen," he replied; "I have an idea, too,
that it was implanted in them for a beneficent purpose.  Better that the
creature should be put out of its pain at once than linger on in agony.
If we come to look into the matter, we shall find that every living
creature is imbued with certain habits and propensities for a good
purpose.  I do not hold that anything happens by chance, or that the
albatross is unworthy of being treated with humanity, because it acts in
what you call a savage way.  You will pardon me for being thus
plain-spoken, gentlemen; and now Mr Holt has shown his skill by
shooting one of those poor birds, I will ask you to favour me by not
attempting to kill any more."

Though not over well pleased at the interference of the commander, the
young officers, feeling that his rebuke was just, discharged their
rifles in the air, and did not again produce them during the voyage.

Willy Dicey and Peter Patch had been on the poop when these remarks had
been made.  "I say, Dicey, do you suppose that the commander really
believes harm will come to the ship because Ensign Holt killed the
albatross?" asked Peter, as they took a turn together on the port side
of the quarterdeck.

"I should think not," answered Willy.  "I do not see what the one thing
has to do with the other."

"The sailors say, however, that it is very unlucky to kill an
albatross," observed Peter.  "They fancy that the souls of people who
die at sea fly about in the bodies of albatrosses, I suppose, or
something of that sort--I am not quite certain; and for my part I wish
that Ensign Holt had been less free with his rifle.  I have always
thought him a donkey, and donkeys do a good deal of mischief sometimes."

"I will ask Harry Shafto what he thinks about it," said Willy.  "I have
read a poem about a man who shot an albatross, and all the people died
on board, and the ship went floating about till the masts and sails
rotted, and he alone remained alive."

"I suppose he lived on the ship's stores then," observed Peter.  "He
would have had plenty to eat, as there was no one to share the grub with
him; but I should not like to have been in his skin.  Did he ever get to
shore, or how did people come to know it?"

"I think the old hulk reached the land after a good many years," said
Willy; "but I am not quite certain about that."

"He must have had a terrible life of it, all alone by himself," said
Peter.  "I should like to hear more of the story; but, I say, Dicey, are
you certain that it is true?"

"No, I rather think it is a poet's fancy, for the story is written in
verse," answered Willy.

"Well! that's some comfort," observed Peter; "because, you see, if the
same thing was to happen to us, we should all have to die, and Ensign
Holt would be the only person left on board the `Ranger.'"

Harry Shafto soon afterwards coming on deck, the two midshipmen appealed
to him for his opinion.  Harry laughed heartily.

"I think, however, that those soldier-officers might as well have let
the poor birds alone," he observed.  "It is a cruel thing to shoot them,
but I do not think any further harm will come of it."

Still, neither Peter nor Willy were quite satisfied.  "I'll ask Mrs
Rumbelow what she thinks about it," said Willy.  "She will soon get the
opinion of the seamen, and I should not quite like to ask them myself."

As soon as their watch was over, the two midshipmen went below, where
they found Mrs Rumbelow seated on a chest, busily employed in darning
her husband's stockings, or in some other feminine occupation, as was
her wont: Mrs Rumbelow's fingers were never idle.

"Glad to see you, young gentlemen," she said, looking up from her work.
"Well, Mr Dicey, you don't look like the same person you were before we
reached the Cape; by the time you get home again they won't know you."

"If all goes well with us, perhaps not," said Willy; "but Ensign Holt
has gone and killed an albatross, and perhaps, as you know, that is a
very dreadful thing to do.  They say that evil is sure, in consequence,
to come to the ship."

Mrs Rumbelow looked at the faces of her two young visitors.  "Do you
think seriously that God rules the world in that fashion?" she asked, in
a somewhat scornful tone.  "Because a foolish young gentleman happens to
kill a bird, will He who counts the hairs of our heads allow a number of
His creatures, who have nothing to do with the matter, to suffer in
consequence.  Do not let such nonsense enter your heads, my dears."

"We wanted you, Mrs Rumbelow, to inquire of the seamen what they think
about the matter," said Willy.

"I will do no such thing, and that's my answer," replied the sergeant's
wife; "harm may come to the ship, but it won't be because of that, or
anything of the sort."

Just then Sergeant Rumbelow himself came up: in appearance he was very
unlike his wife.  Whereas she was tall and thin, he was comparatively
short and broad; indeed, though of the regulation height, his width made
him appear shorter than he really was; while his countenance, though
burnt and tanned by southern suns and exposure to all sorts of weather,
was fat and rubicund.  He held his sides and laughed so heartily at the
account his wife gave him of the questions which had been put to her,
that Willy and Peter wished they had not mentioned the subject.

The wind was light and the ship made but little way for several days.
Shafto, though only a mate, did duty as a lieutenant.  Willy was in his
watch; it was the middle watch.  Willy enjoyed such opportunities of
talking with his friend.  The sea was perfectly smooth, there was only
wind sufficient just to fill the sails, and the ship was making scarcely
three knots through the water.  Every now and then a splash was heard;
some monster of the deep rose to the surface, and leaping forth, plunged
back again into its native element.  Strange sounds seemed to come from
the far distance.  A thick fog arose and shrouded the ship, so that
nothing could be seen beyond the bowsprit.

"Keep a bright look-out there, forward," sang out Shafto every now and
then, in a clear ringing voice, which kept the watch forward on the
alert.

"Hark!" said Willy; "I fancy I heard singing."

"You heard the creaking yards against the masts, perhaps," said Shafto.

"No, I am certain it is singing," exclaimed Willy; "listen!"

Harry and his companion stopped in their walk; even Harry could not help
confessing that he heard sweet sounds coming over the water.  "Some
emigrant ship, perhaps, bound out to Auckland," he observed; "the
passengers are enjoying themselves on deck, unwilling to retire to their
close cabins.  Sounds travel a long distance over the calm waters.  She
is on our beam, I suspect; but we must take care not to run into each
other, in case she should be more on the bow than I suppose."  He hailed
the forecastle to learn if the look-out could see anything.  "Nothing in
sight," was the answer.  "Keep a bright look-out, then," he shouted.
"Ay, ay, sir," came from for'ard.

Soon after this the fog lifted.  Far away on the starboard hand the dim
outline of a tall ship appeared standing across their course.  "She will
pass under our stern if she keeps as she is now steering," observed
Harry; "the voices we heard must have come from her."

The stranger approached, appearing like some vast phantom floating over
the ocean, with her canvas spread on either hand to catch the light
wind.  "A sail on the starboard beam," shouted the look-out, as he
discovered her.  It appeared as if she would pass within easy hail,
when, just as Harry Shafto had told Willy to get a speaking-trumpet, she
appeared to melt into a thin mist.

"What has become of her?" exclaimed Willy, feeling somewhat awe-struck.

"She has run into a bank of fog which we had not perceived," said
Shafto; "I will hail her;" and taking the speaking-trumpet, he shouted
out, "What ship is that?"  No answer came.  Again he shouted, "This is
Her Majesty's ship `Ranger.'"  All was silent.  "Surely I cannot have
been deceived," he remarked; "my hail would have been answered if it had
been heard."  Willy declared that he heard shouts and laughter, but
Harry told him that was nonsense, and that undoubtedly the stranger was
much further off than he had supposed her to be.

Before the watch was out, Harry had to turn the hands up to shorten
sail; a strong breeze was blowing, increasing every instant in violence.
Before morning the "Ranger" was ploughing her way through the ocean
under close-reefed topsails, now rising to the summit of a sea, now
plunged into the trough below.  It was Willy's first introduction to
anything like a gale of wind.

"Well, Mr Dicey, you have at last got a sight of what the sea can be,"
said Roger Bolland, the boatswain, with whom Willy was a favourite.

"I have got a feeling, too, of what it can do," answered Willy, who was
far from comfortable.

"Don't you go and give in, though, like the soldiers below," said the
boatswain; "there are half of them on their backs already, and the gay
young ensigns, who were boasting only the other day of what capital
sailors they were, are as bad as the men."

Though the whole battalion had been sick, Mrs Rumbelow was not going to
knock under.  She was as lively and active as ever, going about to the
ladies' cabins to assist them into their berths, and secure various
articles which were left to tumble about at the mercy of the sea.  If
the truth must be known, she did not confine her attentions to them
alone, but looked in as she passed on the young ensigns, offering
consolation to one, handing another a little cold brandy and water, and
doing her best to take comfort to all.

At length, after the ship had been tumbled about for nearly ten days,
the gale began to abate, the soldiers recovered their legs, though
looking somewhat pale and woebegone, and the cabin passengers once more
appeared on deck.  The weather, however, had by this time become very
cold; there was no sitting down, as before, with work or book in hand,
to while away the time; the ladies took to thick cloaks, and the
military officers in their greatcoats walked the deck with rapid steps,
as a matter of duty, for the sake of exercise.  Gradually, too, the sea
went down, and the "Ranger" glided forward on her course under her usual
canvas.

Colonel Morley more than once asked the commander whether they had not
by this time got into the latitude where icebergs were to be found.  "We
keep a sharp look-out for them, colonel, as I promised you," answered
the commander.  "They are not objects we are likely to run upon while
the weather remains clear, and as long as we have a good breeze there is
no fear.  They are, I confess, awkward customers to fall in with in a
thick foe during a calm."

"You may think I am over-anxious, captain," observed the colonel, "but
we cannot be too cautious with so many lives committed to our charge;
and when I tell you that I was sole survivor of the whole wing of a
regiment on board a ship lost by the over-confidence of her commander
when I was an ensign, you will not be surprised at my mentioning the
subject."

"You are right, colonel, you are right," said Commander Newcombe.  "I
pray that no such accident will happen to us; but danger must be run,
though we who are knocking about at sea all our lives are apt to forget
the fact till it comes upon us somewhat suddenly."

Willy Dicey did not find keeping watch at night now quite so pleasant as
in warmer latitudes; still, with his pea-coat buttoned well up to his
chin, and his cap drawn tightly down over his head, he kept his post
bravely on the forecastle, where he now had the honour of being
stationed.  "He is the most trustworthy midshipman on board," said Mr
Tobin, the first-lieutenant.  "I can always depend on him for keeping
his eyes open, whereas Peter Patch is apt to shut his, and make-believe
he is wide awake all the time."  This praise greatly encouraged Willy.
He determined to do his best and deserve it.  Blow high or blow low, he
was at his station, never minding the salt sprays which dashed into his
eyes, and at times nearly froze there, when the wind blew cold and
strong.

The "Ranger" continued her course, making good way, the wind being
generally favourable.

The only grumblers among the passengers were three or four of the young
lieutenants and ensigns, who, having finished all their novels, and not
being addicted to reading works of a more useful description, found the
time hang heavily on their hands.  They ought to have followed the
example of the Miss Morleys and their mother, who were never idle.  Very
little has hitherto been said about them.  They were both very nice
girls, without a particle of affectation or nonsense, though they had
lived in barracks for some portion of their lives.  Fanny, the eldest,
was fair, with blue eyes, somewhat _retrousse_ nose, and good figure,
and if not decidedly pretty, the expression of her countenance was so
pleasing that no one found fault with any of her features.  Emma was
dark, not quite so tall as her sister, but decidedly handsomer, with
hazel eyes and beautifully formed nose and mouth.  As yet, perhaps, they
had had no opportunity of giving decided proof of any higher qualities
they may have possessed, but they were both right-minded, religious
girls.  Some of the officers pronounced them far too strict, others
considered them haughty, and one or two even ventured to pronounce them
prudish, because they showed no taste for the frivolous amusements in
which the ordinary run of young ladies indulge; not that they objected
to dance, or to join in a pleasant pic-nic; indeed, the few who did find
fault with them complained only of the way in which they did those
things.  Ensign Holt, who was not a favourite, whispered that he thought
them very deep, and that time would show whether they were a bit better
than other people.  Neither Fanny nor Emma would have cared much for the
opinion of Ensign Holt, even had they been aware of it.  He might
possibly have been prejudiced, from the fact that Mrs Morley, though
very kind and motherly to all the young officers, had found it necessary
to encourage him less than the rest.  Ensign Holt, and indeed most of
his brother officers, had no conception of the principles which guided
the Misses Morley or their parents.  They looked upon their colonel as
not a bad old fellow, though rather slow; but somehow or other he
managed to keep his regiment in very good order, and all the men loved
him, and looked up to him as to a father.  It was his custom to read the
Bible every day in his cabin to his wife and daughters; and as there was
no chaplain on board, he acted the part of one for the benefit of his
men.  His sermons were delivered in a fine clear voice, and were
certainly not too long for the patience of his hearers; but Ensign Holt
insisted that they were too strict: he did not like that sort of
theology.  Lieutenants Dawson and Hickman were inclined to echo Holt's
opinion.  Whatever the captains thought, they had the good taste to keep
it to themselves.  Indeed, Power, the senior captain in the regiment,
was suspected of having a leaning toward the colonel's sentiments.  No
one, however, could say that he was slow or soft: he was known to have
done several gallant acts, and was a first-rate officer, a keen
sportsman, and proficient in all athletic exercises.  It was whispered
that Power was the only man likely to succeed with either the Miss
Morleys, though, as far as was observed, he paid them no particular
attention; indeed, he was not looked upon as a marrying man.  He was the
only unmarried captain on board.  Captain Gosling had left his wife at
home; and Mrs Twopenny was in delicate health, and generally kept her
cabin.  She has not before been mentioned.  There were no other ladies
on board, but there were several soldiers' wives, with their children,
though, altogether, there were fewer women than are generally found in a
troop-ship.

A calm unusual for these latitudes had prevailed for several days.  Now
and then a light wind would come from the northward, just filling the
sails, but again dying away; now the ship glided slowly over the smooth
water; now she remained so stationary that the chips of wood swept
overboard from the carpenter's bench floated for hours together
alongside.

Peter Patch asked Willy whether he did not think that the fate which
befell the ship of the Ancient Mariner was likely to be theirs.

"I hope not," said Willy; "particularly if the icebergs, which they say
are not far off, should get round us, we should find it terribly cold."

"But we should not die of thirst, as the crew of that unfortunate ship
did," observed Peter; "that's one comfort."

"Very cold comfort, though," said Willy, who now and then ventured on a
joke, if only Peter and some other youngster were within hearing.



CHAPTER FIVE.

"ICEBERG AHEAD!"

A GALE SPRINGS UP--A DARK NIGHT--SOUND OF BREAKERS--SHIP RUNNING ON AN
ICEBERG--THE "RANGER" SCRAPES ALONG THE BERG--PROVIDENTIAL ESCAPE--
ENSIGN HOLT'S ALARM--THE CARPENTER REPORTS A LEAK--THE CHAIN-PUMPS
RIGGED--THE "RANGER" ON HER BEAM-ENDS--THE MASTS CUT AWAY--RUNNING
BEFORE THE GALE--ALL HANDS AT THE PUMPS--THE WEATHER MODERATES--PREPARE
TO RIG JURY-MASTS.

Once more a strong breeze had sprung up from the westward, and the ship
was making good way through the water.

Though it was the summer time in the southern hemisphere, the weather
was very variable; now, when the wind came from the antarctic pole,
bitterly cold; or drawing round and blowing from the north, after it had
passed over the warm waters of the Indian Ocean, it was soft and balmy.

It was Harry Shafto's morning watch; he had just relieved the
second-lieutenant.  Willy was for'ard.  It was blowing somewhat fresh,
and the ship had a reef in her topsails and her courses set.  The night
was very dark.  Willy having just been aroused from a midshipman's sound
sleep, was rubbing his eyes to get them clear.  Now he peered out ahead
into the darkness, now he rubbed them again, and shut and opened them,
to satisfy himself that they were in good order.  He could not
distinguish who was on the forecastle, but he knew by the voice that one
of the best men in the ship, Paul Lizard, was by his side.

"I have seen many a dark night, Mr Dicey, but this pretty well beats
them all," observed Paul.  "It's not one I should like to be caught in
on a lee-shore or a strange coast; though out here, in the open sea,
there is nothing to fear, as the highway is a pretty wide one, and we
are not likely to fall in with any other craft crossing our course."

"Very true," answered Willy; "but there is one thing I have been told to
do, and that is to keep a bright look-out, though it may be difficult
enough to see an object; even should one be ahead."

"On course, sir," said Paul, "what is our duty must be done, though it
would be a hard matter to see the `David Dunn' of Dover, even if our
jibboom were over her taffrail."

"What ship is that?" asked Willy.  "I never heard of her."

"The biggest ship that ever was or ever will be, sir," answered Paul,
who was fond of a joke.  "When she went about going up Channel once, her
spanker pretty nigh swept away one of the towers of Calais, while her
jibboom run right into Dover Castle."

"She must have been a big ship, then," said Willy.

The voice of the officer of the watch hailing the forecastle put a stop
to Paul's wit.  "Ay, ay, sir," he answered, in his usual stentorian
voice; then he added, "It seems to be growing darker than ever."  So
Willy thought, but still he tried his best with his sharp young eyes to
penetrate the gloom.

"I wish it would clear," observed Willy.  "It is dark."

"It couldn't well be darker, sir," said Paul; "to my mind it would be
wise to shorten sail, or heave the ship to.  The captain knows best,
though."

"It is getting very cold, though," said Dicey.  "I can feel the
difference since the last five minutes."

"I can't say I feel it," said Paul; "but hark, sir; I fancy I heard the
sound of breakers."

Willy listened, bending forward in his eagerness.  "Yes," he thought he
heard a sound, and it seemed to be almost ahead, but yet it seemed to
come from a long way off.

"It is only fancy after all," observed Paul.  The other men for'ard
could hear nothing.

A few minutes passed.  "What is that?" exclaimed Willy, with startling
energy.  "There seems to be a great white wall rising up before us."

"Iceberg ahead!" shouted Paul, and he never hallooed louder in his life,
"a little on the starboard bow."

"Starboard the helm," cried Harry from the quarterdeck.  "Man the
starboard braces.  Brace the yards sharp up; call the captain; all hands
on deck to save ship."  Such were the orders he issued in rapid
succession.  In an instant the boatswain's whistle and the hoarse
bawling of his mates was heard along the lower decks, and the ship,
lately so silent and deserted, teemed with life.  The crew came tumbling
up from below, some with their clothes in their hands; the soldiers
quickly followed, hurrying from their berths.  Commander Newcombe and
the other officers were on deck a few instants after the order to summon
them had been given.  He now took command, issuing his orders with the
calmness of a man well inured to danger.  Another voice was heard; it
was that of Colonel Morley.  "Soldiers, keep to your quarters," he
shouted out.  The men, who had been rushing on deck, without a murmur
obeyed the command.

The danger was indeed imminent.  Sheer out of the ocean rose a huge
white mountain, directly against which the ship appeared to be running
headlong; but, answering her helm, she came up to the wind, though not
in sufficient time altogether to avoid the danger.  As Willy looked up,
he expected to see the yards strike the sides of the iceberg, for such
it was.  A grating sound was heard: now it seemed as if the ship would
be thrown bodily on to the icy mass; still she moved forward; now she
heeled over to the wind, the yards again almost touching the frozen
cliffs.  An active leaper might have sprung on to the berg, could
footing have been found.  Every moment the crew expected to find their
ship held fast by some jutting point, and speedily dashed to pieces; the
bravest held their breath, and had there been light, the countenances of
those who were wont to laugh at danger might have been seen blanched
with terror.

Again and again the ship struck, as she scraped by the berg.  It seemed
wonderful, indeed, to those ignorant of the cause, that she should
continue to move forward, and be driven ever and anon actually away from
the ice.  This was caused by the undertow, which prevented her from
being thrown bodily on to the berg.  Not a word was spoken, not an order
issued, for all that could be done had been done.  All were aware,
however, that, even should she scrape clear of the berg, the blows her
sides were receiving might at any moment rip them open, and send her
helplessly to the bottom of the cold ocean.

The voyager on such an occasion may well exclaim, "Vain is the help of
man!"

Harry, with the second-lieutenant, had gone for'ard among the men
stationed on the forecastle, all eagerly looking out in the hopes of
seeing the extreme end of the berg.  Suddenly the white wall seemed to
terminate, the ship glided freely forward, rising to the sea, which came
rolling in from the north-west.

"Sound the well, Mr Chisel," said the commander to the carpenter.  All
on deck stood anxiously waiting his report.

The berg appeared on the quarter, gradually becoming less and less
distinct, till what seemed like a thin white mist alone was seen, which
soon melted away altogether in the thick darkness.  Still all well knew
that other bergs might be in the neighbourhood, and a similar danger
might have to be encountered.

The officers paced the deck, looking out anxiously, and those who, while
the danger lasted, had not felt the cold, hurried below to finish
dressing as best they could, or buttoned up their flushing coats, and
wrapped comforters round their necks.

Colonel Morley returned to the cabin to tell his wife and daughters that
the danger had passed.  He found them pale and anxious, but neither
trembling nor fainting.  The two girls were seated on each side of their
mother, holding her hands.  They had been fully aware of the danger in
which the ship had been placed, and they had together been offering up
their prayers for their own safety and for that of all on board.

Peter Patch, finding himself near Willy, whispered that he should like
to go and see how Ensign Holt had behaved himself.  He would have found
the ensign seated on the deck of his cabin with his bed-clothes pulled
over his head, much too alarmed to think, or to utter any sounds but
"Oh! oh! oh! what is going to happen?  Oh dear, oh dear, oh dear, I wish
I had not come!"

The other officers had collected in the main cabin, where Captain Power
had taken his seat at the head of the table, giving encouragement to
those around him, while their well-disciplined men, according to orders,
kept to their quarters, the sergeants moving among them to see that no
one went on deck.  Mrs Rumbelow had taken the poor women under her
charge, and did her best to comfort them.

"I told you so," she exclaimed, when the ship was found to be moving
easily forward, and those fearful grating sounds had ceased.  "Just
trust in God, and all will come right.  Never cry out that all is lost
while there is life, and even at the last moment hope that a way of
deliverance may be found."

The wind had increased, the courses had been taken off the ship, and she
stood out under her topsails.  It might have been supposed that nothing
particular had occurred.  All hands were at their stations, however,
both watches being kept on deck; indeed, no one, even the most careless,
felt inclined to go below.

The commander was walking the poop, awaiting the report of the
carpenter; he had taken one or two turns, when a figure approached him.

"I don't like the state of things," said a voice which he recognised as
that of Mr Chisel.  "The ship is making water very rapidly; it's coming
in in several places, though the worst leaks are for'ard."

"We must do our best to stop them, however," answered the commander.
"And, Mr Chisel, do not let more than necessary know this."  The
first-lieutenant and master instantly hurried below to assist the
carpenter in discovering the leaks.  That they were high up seemed
certain, and thus some hope existed that they might be reached.  In time
the chief injuries were discovered, and every effort was made to stop
the leaks, old sails and blankets being used for the purpose.  The pumps
were immediately manned by the soldiers, who were told off to work them.
Their clanking sound echoed along the decks, while, at the same time,
the loud gush of the clear water rushing through the scuppers gave
fearful proof of the large amount which must be rushing in.  How eagerly
all on board longed for daylight.  The wind, however, was rising, and
the ship heeled over on the side which had received the injury; she was
accordingly put on the other tack, although it would take her out of her
proper course.

All on board felt it to be a solemn time.  The only sounds heard were
those of the clanking pumps, and the gush of water as it was forced up
from below.  The wind was every instant increasing.  The topsails were
closely reefed, and the "Ranger" went plunging on into the fast-rising
seas.

At length the cold light of early morn broke on the countenances of the
crew; many looked pale and haggard.  The past hours had been trying
ones, and the soldiers, some in their shirts and trousers only, were
labouring away manfully at the pumps; the crew at their stations, ready
to obey the commands which any sudden emergency might demand.  At length
the carpenter reported that he had so far conquered the leaks that the
ship might safely be put again on the port tack.

"Helm a-lee!" was heard.  "Shift tacks and sheets!  Mainsail haul! of
all haul!" shouted Commander Newcombe; but at that instant, before the
words were well out of his mouth, while the yards were in the act of
being swung round, a terrific blast laid the ship over, a heavy sea
striking her at the same time.  For an instant it seemed as if she would
never rise again.  Shrieks were heart! rising from the foaming waters
under her lee; several poor fellows were seen struggling amid them.  No
help could be given; no boat would have lived in that sea, had there
been time to lower one, before they had sunk for ever.  Their fate might
soon be that of all on board.

The commander, after a moment's consultation with the first-lieutenant
and master, had summoned the carpenter, who appeared directly afterwards
with his crew and several picked men with axes in their hands.  They
stood round the mizen-mast.  "Cut," he cried.  The mizen shrouds were
severed, a few splinters were seen to fly from the mast, and over it
fell into the seething sea.  Still the ship did not rise.  They sprang
to the mainmast.  "That, too, must go," said the commander, and issued
the order to cut.  In another instant the tall mast fell into the sea.
For a moment it seemed doubtful whether that would have any effect.
Suddenly the ship rose with a violent motion to an even keel, carrying
away, as she did so, her fore-topmast.  The helm was put up.  Onwards
she flew before the still-increasing gale.  The seas rolled savagely up
with foaming crests, as if trying to overwhelm her.  To attempt to heave
her to without any after-sail would now be hopeless.

Willy Dicey, who had gone aft, heard the commander remark to the
first-lieutenant, that he hoped the gale would not last long, as
otherwise they might be driven in among the ice, which would be found in
heavy packs to the south-east.  "With a moderate breeze we might reach
New Zealand in ten days or a fortnight," he observed.  "I trust we can
keep the old ship afloat till then."

"Chisel thinks the injuries very severe, though," said the
first-lieutenant; "still, with the aid of the soldiers, we can keep the
pumps going without difficulty, and we may be thankful that we have them
on board."

All day long the "Ranger" ran on, the wind and sea rather increasing
than in any way lessening.  Night once more approached, but no sign
appeared of the gale abating.  The soldiers relieved each other bravely
at the pumps.  Had it not been for them, the seamen well knew that the
ship must have gone down; for though they might have worked them well,
their strength must in time have given in.  Mrs Rumbelow continued her
kind ministrations to the women and children below; she had a word, too,
for the seamen and soldiers, who were allowed half-a-watch at a time to
take some rest.  "You see, laddies," she observed, "how you can all help
each other.  If the ship is to be kept afloat, and our lives saved, it
will be by all working together with a will; you soldiers, by labouring
at the pumps, and the sailors by taking care of the ship.  If all do
their duty there's he fear, boys.  I only wish people could learn the
same in the everyday concerns of life--the world would get on much more
happily than it does."

While the sea continued rolling and the ship tumbling about, there were
no hopes of getting up jury-masts.  That night was even more trying than
the previous one.  It was not quite so dark, for now and then the clouds
cleared away, and the bright stars shone forth; but still it was
impossible to say whether some big iceberg might not be ahead, or
whether the ship might not be driven into the midst of a field of ice,
which would be scarcely less dangerous.  All night long she ran on
before the gale.  It would be hopeless to attempt bringing her on a wind
while the storm continued, and yet she was running into unknown dangers.
Before, when she almost ran into the iceberg, she had had her masts
standing, and was under easy steering canvas; now, with her after-masts
gone, should an iceberg rise in her course, it would be scarcely
possible for her to escape it.

Not a single officer of the ship, and but few of the men, went below
that night.  The military officers took their turn at the pumps to
relieve their men; for, although so many were ready for the duty, so
great was the exertion required, that they could continue at it but a
few minutes together.  As soon as one man was knocked up, another sprang
into his place.

Another day dawned.  It is easy to imagine how anxiously the night had
been spent by all on board, especially by the poor ladies and soldiers'
wives.  Happy were those who knew the power and effect of prayer.
Wonderfully had they been supported.  Those who knew not how to pray had
been seated with hands clasped, or lying down with their heads covered
up, endeavouring to shut out all thought of the future.  Mrs Morley and
her daughters had remained in their cabin, calm, though not unmoved,
visited every now and then by the colonel; yet he could afford them but
little consolation with regard to the safety of the ship.  All he could
say was that the men were doing their duty, and that they must hope for
the best.

Ensign Holt had been missed by his brother officers, and roused up, not
very gently, and had been compelled to take his turn at the pumps.  He
ought to have been very much obliged to them, as those are best off who
are actively engaged in times of danger, though he grumbled
considerably, declaring that it was not in the articles of war, and that
he did not see why he should be made to work at the pumps like the
common men.

As the day advanced, though the weather remained thick and lowering, the
wind began to abate; yet the sea ran still very high, and the ship
laboured greatly.  The seamen were making preparations, however, to set
up jury-masts, the carpenter and his crew were busy in lashing the spars
together for the purpose, and the boatswain and his party in preparing
the rigging; but while the ship continued pitching and rolling as she
was then doing, it would be impossible to set up the masts.  "I often
wished to encounter a gale of wind," observed Peter Patch to Willy;
"but, to confess the honest truth, now I know what it is, especially in
these cold regions, I would rather have been excused."



CHAPTER SIX.

MORE ICE.

HOPES OF ESCAPE--HARRY'S ADVICE TO WILLY--AMONG ICEBERGS--WONDERFUL
APPEARANCE OF ICE ISLANDS--GETTING UP JURY-MASTS--DRIFTING TOWARDS AN
ICEBERG--THE ICEBERGS MOVING--THE SHIP STRIKES A BERG--CONSTERNATION OF
PASSENGERS--THE SOLDIERS AT THE PUMPS--SHIP DRIVEN STERN-ON TO A BERG--
FEARFUL DAMAGE RECEIVED--A SLANT OF WIND TAKES HER OFF--THE LEAKS
INCREASING--STORES HOVE OVERBOARD--JURY-MASTS CARRIED AWAY--ATTEMPTS TO
STOP THE LEAKS--MATTERS BECOME WORSE--AN ANXIOUS NIGHT--THE WATER GAINS
ON THE LEAKS.

The "Ranger" had been running on for another night.  Though the wind had
fallen, there was too much sea to attempt rigging jury-masts, or heaving
her to.  The weather had been tolerably clear, and a bright look-out
being kept, it was hoped that, should icebergs appear ahead, they might
be seen in sufficient time to steer clear of them.  During the whole
time the commander had not gone below; indeed none of the officers had
turned in, and a few only of the men had taken short snatches of sleep.
Not for a moment had the clanging pumps ceased to work.  At frequent
intervals the carpenter had sounded the well, and reported that they
were greatly gaining on the leaks.

"I hope, Willy, you will still be able to write home a long yarn of our
adventures," said Harry Shafto, as they stood together on the deck.
"The sea has gone down considerably during the last two hours, and if we
can pump the ship clear we may yet stop the leaks, get jury-masts up,
and reach New Zealand not long after the time we were due."

"I hope so," said Willy, who was feeling somewhat worn-out, and whose
spirits for a midshipman were getting unusually low.  "I cannot help
thinking of the poor fellows who were washed overboard, and thankful I
ought to be that I was not among them.  I was holding on when one of the
men who was making his way for'ard was carried off by the sea.  I know I
wish that it was daylight."

"It will soon come," said Harry, "and we shall get the ship to rights;
and with regard to those poor fellows, I would not tell you not to think
about them, but that their fate should teach us always to be ready.  If
we are so, we shall never fear to face danger."

"By the by, Willy, I wish to report your conduct to the commander.  I
find that it was your sharp eyes that first discovered the iceberg from
which we so providentially escaped."

"Thank you," said Willy; "but I was only just doing my duty in keeping a
bright look-out."

"Exactly," said Harry; "that's the utmost we can do, and all that is
expected of any man; just go on, Willy, doing that, and you'll do well.
But see, there is a light streak in the horizon; the clouds are clearing
away.  Though the ocean looks black enough at present, it will soon be
sparkling with brightness."

The two friends made their way along the deck to the forecastle, where
they found the officers who were stationed there eagerly looking out.
One declared that he saw land ahead.  "If it is, daylight will soon show
it," observed another.  While the discussion was going on, the sea
seemed on a sudden to go down, and the ship glided on in comparatively
smooth water.

"It may or may not be land ahead," exclaimed the master; "but I tell you
what--we are under the lee of a large field of ice, and it is a mercy we
did not run on it in the dark.  See, there!  What do you think of that?"

Stretching far round in the eastern horizon, appeared a white line,
clearly marked on the dark ocean.  All hands were now called and set to
work to get up jury-masts.  Every one worked with a will, from the
smallest boy on board.  No time was to be lost.  The soldiers were
summoned on deck to lend a hand in pulling and hauling.  Gradually the
light increased, and, as it did so, the work went on more rapidly.
Willy had but little time to look about him, but he could not help every
now and then glancing towards the east, which was now illuminated by a
rich, ruddy glow, extending far and wide, gradually melting into a
yellow tint, that again vanished in the dark-blue sky overhead.
Presently the sun itself rose out of the ocean, at first like a fiery
arch, till, springing rapidly upwards, the whole circle appeared in
view.  Just then he turned his eyes to the right.  He could not refrain
from uttering an exclamation of astonishment; for there appeared, not a
mile away to the westward, what seemed like a vast island of alabaster,
covered with countless edifices--towers and columns, and embattled
walls, glowing with numberless brilliant and varied hues.  Colonel
Morley, who had just then come on deck, observed it also, and pointing
it out to the commander, hastened below to summon his wife and daughters
to witness the beautiful spectacle.  Commander Newcombe's countenance
did not show that he was as pleased with the sight as the colonel had
apparently been.  Casting an anxious glance round, he summoned the
first-lieutenant to his side, who seemed to be holding earnest
conversation with him.  Willy, who had gone aft on some duty, heard the
latter remark, "We are embayed, sir, there is no doubt about it.  All we
can hope for is a breeze from the southward to get out again."  Willy
heard no more.

"Oh, how beautiful! oh, how magnificent!" exclaimed the Miss Morleys, as
they reached the deck; "it is worth making a voyage to witness such a
scene as that!"

Willy could now observe what he had only before partially seen.  The
whole ocean to the west was of a deep-purple hue, from out of which rose
several superb icebergs; some could not have been less than a third of a
mile in length, and from two to three hundred feet in height.  The sides
of one appeared perfectly smooth, as if carefully chiselled all over.
In one of the nearest were seen bold projecting bluffs, with deep
caverns beyond, into which the sea forced its way, rushing out again
with a loud sound.  On the summits of others appeared the towers and
pinnacles, the ruined arches and buttressed walls, which had at first
caught Willy's sight.  It seemed, indeed, as if a large city of
alabaster had once stood there, reduced to ruins by a convulsion of
nature.  Here appeared huge piles of buildings grouped together, with
long lanes and streets winding irregularly through them, with what had
been the citadel rising in their midst.  As the sun rose, the whole mass
became bathed in a red light.  No words, however, can convey a full idea
of the beauty and grandeur of the spectacle.

"I was thinking for a moment that I should like to get out my
drawing-book and colour-box," said Emma Morley to her sister; "but I am
sure it would be impossible to do anything like justice to such a
scene."

"Those who have not witnessed it would believe that you had taken a
painter's licence," answered her sister; "and yet I believe that you
might produce a very fair idea of the scene.  Let me go and get your
drawing things."

Mrs Morley was afraid her daughters might suffer from the cold if they
remained much longer on deck.  Cloaks were, however, brought, and what
her parents considered a masterly sketch was quickly produced by their
young daughter.  Little did they think at the time of the dangerous
position in which the ship was still placed.

While the drawing was going on, numerous sea-birds were seen to be
passing in and out of the caverns, now plunging down into the ocean to
seek their breakfasts, now rising again and pitching upon the icy points
and pinnacles as if they were their accustomed home.

"Don't you think we have drawn nearer to that magnificent iceberg?" said
Fanny to her sister.

"Yes, I am almost sure we have," was the answer.  "Papa, what do you
think?"

"It is possible, but perhaps the changing light may have deceived us; it
is difficult to calculate distances in this atmosphere."

As may be supposed, they had been several times interrupted by the crew,
who now and then came by leading aft the stays of the mast now at length
set up.  Scarcely any of the men cast more than a momentary glance at
the icebergs, but this glance showed that they looked on them with no
favourable eyes.  All the time, too, it must be remembered, the pumps
were kept clanking away as before.  No human beings ever worked harder
than the crew of the "Ranger;" they well knew, indeed, that they were
labouring for their lives.  Hour after hour passed by--there was no
knocking off even for breakfast; it would be time enough to take their
food when the sails were spread, and the ship was standing away from the
beautiful but fearfully dangerous icebergs.

By the time the sun had risen high in the sky the water around had
become of a dark-green hue, and now not only icebergs and the distant
fields of ice were seen, but vast masses of drift ice were observed
floating about.  Already two or three yards had been got across, and the
sails were being bent.

Willy found himself close to his friend Harry.  "Shafto, you look
unusually grave," he observed; "you seem pretty well knocked up."

"We all of us have reason to be grave," answered Harry; "there is
evidently a strong in-draught towards that big berg, and unless we can
get the sails bent and a breeze to take us off, no human power can save
us from driving against it, and then we shall be worse off than we were
when we struck the berg the other night."

"But don't you think we shall get the sails bent in time?" asked Willy.

"We may get the sails bent, but the wind to fill them may not come; we
must depend on Heaven's mercy for that."

Harry Shafto would not generally have spoken so despondingly, but he was
well-nigh worn-out; and yet he probably did not see matters in a worse
light than most of the other officers.

The passengers had been sometime before summoned below to breakfast, and
only the crew and soldiers engaged in active duty remained on deck.
They were all working away as hard as ever.

The foremast, which had stood, had been well stayed, and a fresh
fore-topmast had also been got up.  The captain and officers were
watching anxiously for a breeze.  It came at length from the southward.
Sail was made, the ship was put before the wind, and it seemed that she
was now about to move out of her dangerous position.  "Let the people go
below and get their breakfasts, Mr Tobin," said the commander to the
first-lieutenant; "they are well-nigh knocked up, and may still have
heavy work before them."  The boatswain's whistle was soon heard piping
to the welcome meal, and the men gladly hurried below, though with less
of the elasticity which they exhibited generally on such occasions.

The lofty icebergs were still dangerously near on the port side.  Shafto
and Willy, who had snatched a hurried meal in the midshipmen's berth,
were quickly again on deck, as were indeed many of the officers and men,
those who had remained on duty going below.  The ship made but slow way.
In the far distance could still be seen a field of ice, which had
hitherto sheltered them from the tumbling sea, which came in from the
north-east; several large pieces were also floating about, and it
required much watchful care to avoid them.  But the chief danger
evidently lay from the icebergs to the west; they, too, it appeared,
were slowly moving and slightly changing their relative positions.  The
most northern of a line of bergs was much the largest, its summit
towering far above the ship's masts.  The anxious glances which the
commander and first-lieutenant occasionally cast towards it showed that
they wished they were farther off.  Still, as Willy looked over the
side, and saw the calm waters and the clear space ahead, he could not
fancy but that the ship would soon be out in the open sea.  "I shall be
quite sorry to lose sight of these beautiful icebergs," he observed to
Shafto; "it may be a long time before we again shall see anything like
them."

"And I shall be very thankful to bid farewell to them for ever,"
answered Harry.  "Just fancy what it would be to have the ship driven in
under one of them.  Should there be any sea at the time she would
speedily be ground to pieces, or, as sometimes happens, the whole mass
might come tumbling over and crush her, without a prospect of a human
being on board escaping."

"Very dreadful!" said Willy; "and I am thankful there is no chance, of
that.  In another ten minutes we shall be well clear of them."

"I hope so," said Harry; but still he looked grave.

They had just then reached the forecastle, where the master was
standing.

Though the ship was moving on parallel to the side of the berg, the
in-draught was evidently carrying her nearer and nearer it.  The master
had gone on to the end of the bowsprit, where he stood holding on by the
stay, and looking anxiously ahead; still it seemed as if no danger need
be apprehended.

"What can the master be looking out for?" asked Peter Patch, who had
just then come up to Willy; "we are all right enough at last."

The words were scarcely out of the young midshipman's mouth when a loud
crash was heard.  The ship trembled from stem to stern, and it appeared
as if the masts were going by the board.  Orders were instantly given to
brace round the yards, so as to box the ship off.  In so doing she made
a stern-board, and drove rapidly in towards the berg.  The sound of the
first shock had brought all hands on deck.  For a moment discipline was
well-nigh lost: the soldiers, women, and children came rushing up from
below, the poor women frantically shrieking and clinging to their
husbands; even some of the seamen, who understood the danger, evidently
thought that all hope was gone.  The passengers, too, came hurrying up
out of their cabins, with dismay on their countenances.  Their alarm was
still further increased when, in another instant, the stern of the ship
struck with tremendous force against the mass of ice concealed below the
surface; it seemed indeed as if the stern was completely stove in.  At
this juncture the voice of Colonel Morley was heard ordering the
soldiers below.  "Take your wives with you, and remain till you receive
fresh orders; they will be safer there than on deck," he exclaimed.

"To your stations, men," shouted Commander Newcombe.  "We are not going
to lose the ship yet."

The officers hurrying among the men soon brought them back to a sense of
their duty.  It was found, however, that the damage the ship had
received was very severe.  The rudder had been torn from its position;
the starboard tiller rope had been carried away, and the neck of the
rudder was wrenched off so as to render it unserviceable.  Believing
tackles were at once applied to the tiller, in hopes that the rudder
might be made to work; but after several attempts it was found to be
utterly useless.  In vain were the yards braced round.  Without the use
of the rudder the ship could not be got sufficiently off to give her
head-way.  Slowly she continued to drive towards the monstrous berg,
which threatened, should she strike it, to overwhelm her in an instant.

"A slight shift of wind would take her off," observed the
first-lieutenant to the commander.

"I pray that it may come, then," was the answer.

Again and again the ship struck, evidently on each occasion receiving
fearful damage.  The soldiers who had been stationed at the pumps had
knocked off, forgetting their duty in their alarm, when the ship first
struck.  The officers now went among them, and urged them to return;
Colonel Morley had himself, however, to go before his orders were
obeyed.  The carpenter, who had been sent to sound the well, reported
two feet in the hold.  "We may keep that under," observed the commander,
"if the men do their duty."

Mrs Rumbelow was not idle all this time.  She had been from the first
tending to the other women; but when she found that the men were
inclined not to obey orders, she was in their midst in an instant.
"What, my lads!" she exclaimed; "is this like you, to let the ship sink
with your wives and children, and the good colonel, and his lady and
daughters, and not do your best to keep her afloat?  Shame on you!  I
would not have believed it if it had been told me!"  In another moment
the pumps were heard clanking away, and sending out the water as rapidly
as before.

The ship was moving at a fearfully rapid rate towards the side of the
vast iceberg.  The crew, after the first alarm had subsided, exerted
themselves manfully, and arrangements were being made for the dreaded
encounter.  Spars were got out and secured to the sides and quarters,
but still some hope remained that the wind might catch her headsails,
and pay her off in time to avoid it.  Every instant, however, that hope
lessened, and on she drove, stern foremost, till the summit of the berg
appeared almost overhead.  Close at hand was seen, between two bluffs, a
vast cavern, into which it seemed more than probable that the ship would
drive, and if so, her escape would be impossible.

Such moments try the stoutest hearts.  Many countenances became pale,
and some eyes were turned away from the danger; but the commander and
officers faced it boldly, while the crew remained steadily at their
stations.  Willy Dicey fully understood the terrific danger in which
they were placed.  He looked at the blue sky, at the sun shining
brightly, at the waters dancing gaily, and he thought of the loved ones
at home, and of the little prospect which existed of their ever hearing
of him again.  But, boy though he was, even his young heart did not
quail; he was at the post of duty, he knew that; and he knew that there
was One all-powerful watching over him, who would carry him safely
through the danger, if He thought fit.

Nearer and nearer the "Ranger" drew to the iceberg--the bravest held
their breath as they saw that she must inevitably strike.  Then came a
fearful crash.  So perpendicular was the side of the berg that the stern
davits drove right against it.  The stern boat was crushed in, a portion
of the taffrail and the upper part of the spar-deck bulwarks wrenched
off.  It seemed as if the whole stern of the ship was about to be
carried away.  Her larboard quarter next came in contact with the ice,
but the severity of the shock saved her; for after the damage which has
been described was received, she again bounded off with a cant to
starboard.  The jib was instantly run up, and it and the other headsails
catching the wind, away she glided from the berg.  Those who had their
eyes turned aft, however, could not refrain from uttering a cry of
horror, for at that instant the berg, shaken by the concussion,
threatened to fall over and crush them.  From its summit down came
rushing an avalanche of ice and snow, a portion of the mass even
striking the poop.  Still the ship glided on; the after-sails were
trimmed, and again she was clear of another threatened danger.  Yet,
with the rudder gone, her stern crushed in, with numberless rents in her
side, and two of her masts carried away, the "Ranger" was indeed in a
perilous condition.

The first thing to be done was to get the rudder repaired.  The breeze
had increased, and rendered the operation difficult.  The weather, too,
had far from a satisfactory appearance.  Whatever Commander Newcombe
thought of the prospect of ultimately saving the ship, he was not the
man to relax in his efforts till the last.  It was no easy matter to
steer the ship while the rudder was being repaired; the only means of
doing so was by keeping the yards swinging to and fro, in order to
direct the ship's head towards the opening between the bergs.

Mrs Rumbelow insisted on lending a hand in pulling and hauling.  "Why,
boys," she exclaimed, "I can do it as well as any of you, and I don't
see why a woman should be idle because she is a woman."  She well knew
that by acting thus she should assist in keeping up the men's spirits.

At length the rudder was shipped, but even then it could be only worked
by relieving tackles, which required a number of hands for the purpose.

The carpenter had been so busy with the rudder that he had not for some
time sounded the well.  He now did so.

"Are we keeping the leaks under, Mr Chisel?" asked the commander, when
he came to make his report.

"No, sir, I am sorry to say we are not," he answered.  "There are three
feet of water in the hold, and I fear, from the damages the ship has
received, that no power can keep her afloat much longer.  If we cannot
repair them, you know, sir, that it won't be for want of our doing our
best."

"I am very sure of that, Mr Chisel, and hope that we may still overcome
the leaks, if the sea continues tolerably smooth," observed the
commander.  "But we must not let the pumps be idle."  He said this in a
cheerful tone, that those who overheard the carpenter's report might not
lose heart.

The ship was now standing out clear of the ice, and being thus more
exposed than before to the sea, which rolled in from the northward,
began to labour heavily.  In a short time the carpenter again reported
that the water had gained another foot on the pumps in spite of the
incessant way they had been kept going.  The commander now summoned the
superior officers round him, though what was said was not generally
known.  The first-lieutenant instantly collecting a party of men, led
them between-decks, where, aided by some of the soldiers, they at once
set to work to heave overboard such heavy stores and provisions as could
be got at.  Everything that had been received at the Cape was thrown
overboard.  The purser was in despair.  "Remember, Tobin," he observed,
"we have got all these mouths to feed.  We may as well drown at first as
starve."

"You are right, purser," answered the first-lieutenant.  "We will get up
what provisions we can, and place them on the upper deck.  They will
soon be destroyed if they remain where they are."

At length the ship got clear of the ice, and now the crew were piped
below to snatch a hasty meal, those only required to work the rudder and
the pump gangs remaining on duty.  Matters did not change much till the
sun went down in a bank of dark clouds, its rays casting a ruddy glow
across the western sky.  As darkness came on, the wind increased, the
waters becoming covered with crests of foam, which danced and hissed
around the ship.  No one could be ignorant of their dangerous position;
but in spite of it, most of the weary seamen and soldiers not actually
on duty turned into their berths to sleep.  The officers did so
likewise, though they were aware that it might perhaps be the last sleep
they should ever enjoy.  Two persons, however, did not for a moment
retire to their berths, the commander of the ship and the colonel of the
regiment.  Both felt that the lives of the people under them had been
committed to their charge.  The commander remained on deck to take
advantage of any change for the better which might occur, or to guard
against any fresh accident; and the colonel, that he might go among his
men labouring at the pumps, and encourage them to persevere in their
duty.  The hammocks had been piped down as usual, and most of the men
turned into them all standing.  Willy Dicey had done the same, though,
weary as he was, he could not for some time go to sleep--an unusual
event in a midshipman's career.  He was thinking of home and the loved
ones there, and those voyaging like himself; and when he did sleep, he
continued dreaming of, that same home, and of his brother and sisters,
now probably far distant from it.  He fancied in his troubled dreams
that he saw their ship tempest-tossed.  Now her masts and yards were
shattered.  Onward she drove towards a rocky shore.  He was there
himself; he stretched out his arms, imploring them to keep at a
distance.  Still on came the ship; her destruction seemed inevitable.
Wildly he waved his arms--he shrieked loudly.  A dreadful crash was
heard--the ship was split into a thousand fragments.  He awoke.  That
loud crash rang in his ears; he sprang from his hammock, and rushed on
deck.  One of the jury-masts had gone.

Morning was breaking, the faint grey light exhibiting the destruction
which had taken place, and the wild leaden-coloured sea, which rose in
foaming billows around, now leaping here, now there, threatening
destruction to the ship.  At the same moment the boatswain's whistle
sounded shrilly, calling all hands on deck.  While one party was
endeavouring to secure the jury-mast which had been carried away,
another was employed in fothering a sail: this, filled with oakum, was
lowered over the bows and drawn under the keel, where it was hoped the
water rushing in would suck it into the leaks, and thus contribute to
stop them.  It seemed, however, to have but little effect.

"We must try another sail," said the commander.  The sail was prepared,
and, like the first, with great difficulty dragged under the ship's
bottom.  The seamen employed in the work were drenched to the skin by
the heavy seas which frequently broke over the hapless ship; still they
persevered, no one flinching from the work.  Harry Shafto attracted the
notice of the commander by his activity.  Willy Dicey imitated him to
the best of his power.  Although not so strong as a man, by his
intelligence and comprehension of what was to be done he was able to
direct others, and thus rendered good service.

"I say, Dicey," exclaimed Peter Patch, who was standing near him, "do
you think really the ship will go down?  I feel awfully queer.  I wish
that I'd followed your advice about some things long ago.  I should like
to say my prayers, but I don't know how to begin, and there isn't time
for it now."

"That's it," answered Willy.  "Had you said them morning and night, and
not have been afraid of our messmates laughing at you, you would have
known how to say them even while you are hard at work.  I don't think
God would be well pleased if we all were to knock off, and go down on
our knees to pray and ask Him for help while we were neglecting to help
ourselves."

"I must work now, at all events," said Peter.

"Of course you must," answered Willy, "or praying would be mockery; but
you can pray out of your heart while you are pulling and hauling, or
while you are running along the deck with a message."

"I daresay you are right, Dicey," sighed Peter; "but it's very terrible.
I had no thought, when we left England, that we should get into such a
scrape as this.  For what I see, we may all be drowned, or be driven on
those fearful icebergs, and be frozen to death before many days are
over."

"Very true, Peter.  I have been thinking the same; but it is our duty to
struggle to the end--first to try and save the ship, and then our own
lives."

Matters did not mend as the day advanced.  Again and again the carpenter
sounded the well, and reported that the water had rather increased than
diminished.  The after-part of the deck was now scuttled, so that more
provisions and stores could be got up and hove overboard.  The pumps
continued to be worked as energetically as at first, but still the water
gained on them, till it reached the orlop-deck.

The fearful condition of the ship could no longer be concealed from the
people.  Even the most sanguine began to lose heart.  Many cast wistful
glances at the boats.  Notwithstanding this, the commander kept them
labouring at the pumps, still hoping against hope that the wind and sea
might go down, and that the ship might be kept afloat.  At length,
however, some of the crew showed signs of giving in.  Willy saw several
of them steal off to hide themselves away, but he instantly followed and
drove them up again; they grumbled, but obeyed.

"What's the use of working when we shall have to go to the bottom in a
few hours?" exclaimed one.

"I only wish we had a chance of getting to the spirit room," cried
another.  "A short life and a merry one for me."

"You should be ashamed of yourselves," cried the young midshipman.  "Are
you men with souls, and do you wish to die like dogs?"  The seamen,
astonished at a mere boy thus addressing them, felt ashamed, and
returned to their duty.  Others, however, soon afterwards were seen
behaving in the same manner.  Willy, falling in with Mr Bolland,
reported what he had observed.

"We will soon put a stop to that," observed the boatswain, seizing a
rope's end.  He was not long in hunting out the fellows.

The water continuing to rise, the poor women and children were now
collected on the poop cabins.

There they sat, crouching down on the deck, holding their children in
their arms, and hiding their pallid faces.  Mrs Rumbelow was the only
one who remained calm.  She might have been a little more excited than
usual, as she went among them, trying to cheer them up.  "Do not be
downhearted, my dear women," she exclaimed.  "There is a God in heaven,
remember, who takes care of us.  He may make the storm to cease, and
keep the old ship afloat notwithstanding all the leaks she has got in
her bottom.  Do you think the men of our regiment are not going to do
their duty, and work away at the pumps as long as the pumps will work?
If they do not, we will go and handle them ourselves, and put them to
shame.  Hurrah, lasses! you think better of your young husbands than to
suppose that, and we old ones have tried ours, and know that they will
not shirk their duty."  Still, though Mrs Rumbelow spoke thus
cheerfully, she had a heavy weight at her heart.  She had been too often
at sea not to know the danger the ship was in, and she observed no signs
of the weather improving.

The night was again drawing on; Commander Newcombe had done his utmost.
The ship was kept under easy sail, to relieve her as much as possible.
He would get another sail fothered, which might help to keep out the
water a few hours longer.  "Should that fail," he observed to Mr Tobin,
"we must get the boats ready, and endeavour to save the lives of as many
as they can hold."

"Too true, sir," was the answer.  "I see no other prospect for us."

"We must trust in God, Mr Tobin; He is our only hope," observed the
commander with a sigh.

Darkness came down once more upon the hapless ship as she lay rolling
and pitching heavily in that cold antarctic sea.  The pumps kept
clanking away the whole night; the gush of water was heard even amid the
roar of the waves, as it rushed from her sides.  The men crouched down
in groups at their stations in different parts of the ship, many a stout
heart knowing full well that at any moment the fearful cry might be
heard, "She is sinking! she is sinking!"

The colonel was in his cabin with his wife and daughters.  Captain Power
sat at the table reading, or endeavouring to read, and every now and
then addressing a few remarks to the officers around him.  They were
mostly behaving as English gentlemen generally do behave under such
circumstances, with calm courage, ready to perform any duty which might
be required of them.  The only person who did not show his face was the
unhappy Ensign Holt, who kept himself shut up in his cabin for most of
the time.  Now and then he appeared, with a pale face, to inquire
whether the leaks were being got under; and on being told that they were
still gaining on the pumps, he rushed back again, with a look of dismay
on his countenance.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE "CRUSADER" IN THE TROPICS.

FINE WEATHER--LIGHTS ON THE OCEAN--FLYING-FISH COME ON BOARD--
TROPIC-BIRDS--A SHARK CAUGHT--SOUTHERN CONSTELLATIONS--A CALM--FEVER
BREAKS OUT--DEATHS AMONG THE EMIGRANTS--MR PAGET'S ACTIVITY--THE DICEYS
ASSIST THE SICK--SIGNS OF A COMING BREEZE--A GALE COMES ON--
JACK-O'-LANTERN--JOB MAWSON'S ALARM--REEFS SHAKEN OUT--A MAN OVERBOARD--
CHARLES AND WINDY GO OFF IN BOAT--BOAT LOST SIGHT OF--SEARCH IN VAIN FOR
THE BOAT--EMILY AND MAY'S GRIEF.

Little did Charles Dicey and his sisters think of the fearful dangers to
which their brother Willy was exposed.  The "Crusader" sailed on over
the smooth sea, with her white canvas spread out, towering to the sky,
studding-sails on either side reaching to the very surface of the water.

An awning had been spread over the after-part of the ship, and beneath
it the cabin passengers assembled, sheltered from the hot rays of the
sun.  Neither Charles nor Mr Paget were ever idle, and their example
generally induced many of their companions to work also.  Mrs Clagget,
if she did nothing else, always contrived to keep her tongue going.
Emily and May were usually well employed.  Their attention, however, was
frequently called to the various objects which appeared around them.
They enjoyed watching the flights of flying-fish which darted with the
speed of arrows out of the water, hovered like birds in the air for a
few seconds, scarcely touching the foam-crested seas, and then sunk
quickly again beneath the surface.  "How beautiful and blue are the
reflections on their glittering wings, how transparent their tiny
bodies, how light their movements!" observed Emily; "they look like
ocean elves, as they float through the air.  What a happy life they must
lead--now in the pure ocean, now getting an uninterrupted sight of the
glorious sun and the clear sky above them."

"They would have a very different tale to tell, Miss Dicey, if they
could speak to you," observed Mr Paget.  "Could your eyes pierce
through the surface, you would see some savage bonitos or dolphins
pursuing the hapless fish who visit the air, not for amusement, but in
the hopes of escaping from their persecutors."

Just then a large covey was seen to rise abeam close to the ship.  They
flew high into the air, and in an instant the deck was covered with
their floundering bodies; their wings, dried by the heat of the sun, no
longer spread out, they looked like ordinary fish.

"Catch them, catch them," cried Mrs Clagget; "they will make a
delightful dish for dinner."

"Poor creatures--how unromantic you are," said Emily.

"I am practical, my dear.  I pride myself on being practical," answered
Mrs Clagget.  "I prefer eating them myself to allowing the dolphins to
have them for their supper."  Jumbo, the cook's mate, seemed to be of
Mrs Clagget's opinion, for in an instant he was among the poor fish,
tumbling them into his bucket as fast as he could pick them up.

"That's a wise lad," observed the loquacious lady.  "If any of you
happened to be in a boat far away from land without provisions, you
would be very glad to have a dish of those fish fly on board."

"But we happen to have plenty of provisions, and are not in want of the
poor fish," said Charles.  "However, if they were thrown overboard
again, I suspect that they would have very little reason to thank us, as
the bonitos would speedily swallow them up."

"Get them while you can, Mr Charles," said Mrs Clagget, nodding her
head.  "Some day, perhaps, you would be very thankful if you could only
catch a single one, and be ready to eat it raw."  Mrs Clagget's tongue
was apt to run on so fast that she now and then said things, among the
many she uttered, which came true, in which instances she never failed
to boast of her prophetic powers.  Shortly afterwards, a number of those
beautiful inhabitants of tropical seas, the little Portuguese
men-of-war, were seen floating round the ship on the crest of the waves,
their out-spread fans sparkling and glistening with the transparent
brightness of crystal; as the wind blew them gently through the sea,
their wings reflected all the colours of the rainbow.  As Emily and May
were admiring them, they saw the terrible dismay the ship created among
them, as she passed through their midst.  As the ship sailed on, the
sea-gulls of the northern ocean were succeeded by the high towering
tropic-birds, several of which were seen; appearing at first like mere
specks in the blue sky, where, with the wonderful balloon apparatus with
which they are furnished, they floated calmly at their ease, then
suddenly descending like bolts from the skies, they pounced down upon
the nether world, to seize some hapless fish swimming unconscious of
danger near the surface of the ocean.  Beautiful creatures they
appeared, with two long streamer-like feathers floating behind their
wide-spreading wings.  Now and then a sword-fish of a bright hue shot
with gold darted by, and huge sharks might be seen turning up their evil
eyes with longing glances toward the ship.  Bill Windy did not fail to
point them out to the boys who were sky-larking in the rigging, and to
bid them take care not to fall overboard to become a prey of the
monsters.  One of the savage creatures continued to follow the ship so
pertinaciously that the mate vowed he would punish him for his audacity.

"Either the brute will be catching some of us, or we must catch him," he
observed, as he prepared a harpoon and line.  Descending by the
dolphin-striker, he stood on the bob-stay, watching with keen eye and
lifted arm for the shark, which now dropped astern, now swam lazily
alongside.  Bill ordered one of the men to get out to the jibboom end
with a piece of pork, and heave it as far ahead as he could fling.  No
sooner did the creature see the tempting bait than he darted forward,
and turning round to seize it exposed the white under side of his body
to a blow from Bill's harpoon, driven home with right good will.  The
men on deck who held the line hauled away on the slack, while others
stood by with bowlines in their hands ready to slip them over the
shark's head and tail.

"Haul away," cried the mate, who was on deck in a moment; and the savage
creature, in spite of its convulsive struggles, was hoisted up, and lay
a helpless captive on the forecastle.  Here it continued to plunge and
strike out with its tail, keeping the seamen at a respectful distance.
Now and then one would rush in with a handspike and endeavour to give it
a blow, which might have settled it; but so rapid were its movements
that it was necessary to be wary, as one stroke of that tail would have
been sufficient to break a man's leg.  The shark was at length killed
and cut up.  In spite of its cannibal propensities, many of the
emigrants gladly accepted portions, and even the seamen did not refuse
to eat a slice of their hated foe.

While the day presented much to occupy the attention, the night also
afforded many objects of interest.  The constellations of the northern
hemisphere were now sinking one by one in the ocean; the Great Bear
disappeared, followed by the Polar Star, and in their stead, towards the
south, rose the Southern Cross, each night appearing higher and higher
in the firmament.  Charles and his sisters gazed at the beautiful
constellation with deep interest.  Beneath its glittering light they
expected to pass the greatest portion of their future life; and it
seemed to welcome them to the new world to which they were bound.
Charles confessed that, interesting as it was, it scarcely equalled in
beauty several of the northern constellations on which he had been
accustomed to gaze.  Now, too, the Magellanic clouds appeared in the
heavens, composed probably of countless millions of worlds, so far away
that the human mind can scarcely calculate their distance from this tiny
world of ours.  At night, also, Charles, with his sisters at his side,
often watched the track of the ship on the ocean, which appeared like a
broad road dotted with brilliant and innumerable stars; while on either
side the waves were lighted up by thousands of electric sparks,
appearing here and there; now lost altogether, now dispersed, as the
waves rose and fell.  Sometimes, when the wind freshened, and a huge sea
broke against the bows with a tremendous crash, the spray appeared all
alight, rising in the air to fall on deck like drops of fire.

"Who would not wish to come to sea to witness such a spectacle as this?"
exclaimed Emily, with enthusiasm, as the whole ocean appeared glowing
with flashes of brilliant light.  The remark was made not to Mrs
Clagget, but to Mr Paget, who stood by her side.

"You would scarcely suppose that this glorious illumination of the ocean
is caused by countless numbers of minute living creatures," he observed.
"As the telescope reveals to us some of the wonders of the heavens, so
the microscope enables to inspect many of the smallest of created
beings."

"What, Mr Paget, is every spark of light we see a living creature?"
asked May.

"Yes, indeed," was the answer.  "And probably we see at a time not a
thousandth part of the number of those which are floating around."

The ship all this time had been standing over towards the coast of South
America, then to steer parallel with it, till, feeling the influence of
the trade winds, she was to keep eastward towards her destination.
Hitherto good progress had been made, and a rapid passage was expected;
but near the Tropic of Capricorn the wind fell, till a dead calm rested
on the ocean; gradually every ripple was (as Mrs Clagget expressed it)
smoothed out of the water.  The sails hung idly down against the masts,
chips of wood thrown overboard floated alongside, the sun struck down
with terrific force, the whole sea shining like a sheet of burnished
gold.  The passengers could no longer bear the heat below; and when they
came on deck, and sought whatever shade could be found, they gained but
little by the change.  Though the sky, after a time, became overcast,
and a light steamy mist pervaded the atmosphere, the heat, rather than
moderating, increased.  Few on board could resist complaining.  Night
brought no relief.  People who had appeared active enough before sat
listless about the decks.  Books, if open, were unread.  The seamen even
exhibited the same listlessness as the rest of those on board.  Emily
and May did their best to keep up their spirits, but their efforts were
unavailing.  Captain Westerway and Bill Windy were among the few who
appeared unaffected.  Mr Paget, also exerting himself to the utmost,
went about his usual occupations, and endeavoured to revive the spirits
of his companions.  It was evident, however, that unless a breeze should
spring up some evil consequences would too probably ensue.  Day after
day the ship floated on the glassy sea, no sail in sight, the only
object ever visible beyond her deck being some wandering tropic bird,
which might be seen hovering on high, watching with keen sight for its
prey.

The surgeon appeared one morning with a grave face, to make his report
to the captain.  Several of the steerage passengers were on the sick
list.  As the day wore on, others were added to them: some, he feared,
were cases of malignant fever.  They were removed to a part of the ship
screened off to serve as an hospital.  Nothing else could be done except
to fumigate the "between-decks," that operation rather adding to the
heat than otherwise.  The cabin passengers at length became alarmed.

"Oh, dear, what shall we do if there is fever?" exclaimed Mrs Clagget
to her young companions.  "We must take care that no one ever comes near
us."

No one was more alarmed than Mr Job Mawson; for, in spite of the heat,
he shut himself up in his cabin, and was afraid of coming in contact
even with the steward, lest he should have passed near any of the sick
emigrants.  Mr Paget, on the contrary, was more active than ever; he,
without hesitation, spent many hours of each day visiting those stricken
down by disease, and endeavouring to rouse the spirits of those who had
hitherto escaped.  Charles Dicey, in spite of Mrs Clagget's warnings,
accompanied him, and gave every assistance in his power to the surgeon.
Day after day others were added to the numbers already suffering from
fever.  One poor woman, the mother of a family, sank beneath it, and it
was a sad spectacle to all on deck as the body, secured in canvas, and
heavily weighted, was committed to the deep.  The voice of Captain
Westerway, generally so firm, trembled as he read the funeral service.
Another and another followed.  At last the good captain entreated Mr
Paget to perform the painful duty for him.  How every one longed for a
breeze to carry the fever-stricken ship out of that inhospitable region!
It was supposed that the disease must have been brought on board, and
had only now developed itself, as the poor woman who had just died had
been ill when she left England.

Emily and May had at first listened to Mrs Clagget's advice, but when
so many women and children became ill, they could no longer refrain from
assisting in nursing them.  Fearlessly they sat by the side of the sick,
reading to the elder ones, and trying to soothe and comfort the younger
children.  Several children of the first poor woman who had died
followed their mother to her watery grave.

Charles at first tried to persuade his sisters that they were not called
upon to risk their health.

"Then why do you risk yours, brother?" asked Emily.  "Your life, surely,
is as precious as ours.  You would get on very well without us, but we
should be forlorn creatures indeed if left alone.  I am sure we are but
doing our duty, and there is One above who will protect us."

"But I am more hardy than you are," argued Charles.  "I can go aloft,
too, and get any germs of fever which I might have contracted blown
away."

"There is no wind to blow them away," said Emily, "and we are not more
likely to catch the fever than you are.  Let us do our duty, and leave
the rest to God."

Still, though Charles was not thoroughly convinced, his sisters gained
their object.  That very day they visited the hospital, nursed the poor
children, gave them their medicine and food, and rendered all the
assistance they could to the sick mothers.  Charles used to look
anxiously at them every morning as they appeared at breakfast, fearful
of hearing them complain of illness; but the bloom of health still
glowed on their cheeks, and though grave, and sometimes sad when another
victim had been added to those already taken off by the disease, they
retained their spirits and courage.

"Really, Dicey, you are a brave fellow," said Jack Ivyleaf one day,
while Charles was taking his usual walk on deck for exercise.  "I cannot
bring myself to go among those sick people as you do.  It's all very
well to go forward and amuse them when they are in health, and inclined
to be jolly; but to go and sit in the hot, sweltering atmosphere
between-decks is quite another thing."

"Possibly, Mr Ivyleaf, you do not reflect that those poor sick people
have immortal souls like ourselves," observed Mr Paget, who had that
instant joined them.  "If we profess to be Christians we should look
upon them as brothers in distress, and do our utmost for their souls as
well as their bodies."

"Ah, no, to be sure," said Jack, keeping his mouth agape, and gazing at
Mr Paget.  "I should have thought that sort of work might be left to
the parson and doctor."

"But as we have no parson on board, and the doctor is overworked, does
it not strike you that the poor people have a right to our assistance?"
asked Mr Paget.

"Right!  I don't see that they can have any right!" said Jack; "though
it's very kind in you and Dicey to attend to them."  Jack Ivyleaf looked
as if he was afraid that his companions wished to enlist him in the
service he dreaded, and was evidently trying to make his escape from
them.

The captain and first officer were on deck.  The latter had been casting
an eager look for some time to the north-west.

"We shall have it soon, sir," he observed, pointing with his hand.

"Turn the hands up, Mr Windy, and trim sails," said the captain in a
cheerful voice.  "See there, gentlemen, those clouds yonder are the
pleasantest sight I have seen for many days."  A low bank of clouds
could be observed resting on the horizon.  It grew higher and higher
every instant, while a dark line could be seen extending across the
ocean in the same direction.  The sea, however, continued as calm as
before; around the ship not a ripple could be seen on its surface.  The
crew, hurrying from below, went to their stations, all eyes being turned
in the direction of the approaching clouds.  Presently cats'-paws began
to play over the mirror-like expanse, and then to disappear; the sails
slowly bulged out, and speedily again hung down as listlessly as before
against the masts.  The dark line grew brighter and brighter; presently
the loftier sails swelled out, and the ship began to glide smoothly over
the ocean.  The joyful news was communicated below, and all who were not
in their beds came up on deck.  The ship, at length feeling the power of
the helm, was put before the wind.  The dark line now increased
gradually in width, and seemed covered with sparkling foam; a rushing
noise was heard; in another instant almost the aspect of the whole ocean
was changed; the sails bulged out steadily; waves, at first but small,
danced up astern, and on either side their crests hissing and foaming,
while the spray in broad sheets flew off from their summits.  Now the
stout ship dashed forward, every instant increasing her speed, as if
eager to make up for the time lost.  On she went, faster and faster,
rising to the seas, and plunging into them as they rolled around her.
The lighter sails were taken in.  A strong gale was blowing--it was
increasing too.  The clouds now rapidly gathered in dense masses across
the sky; the seamen were busy in all directions securing the boats, the
spars, and other articles hitherto left about the deck.

"We shall have a heavy gale, gentlemen, before long," observed the
captain, in answer to Mr Paget's and Charles' inquiries respecting the
weather.  "It's what I have been wishing for, as nothing else is likely
to clear us of this terrible fever."  Before night his predictions were
verified, and the ship, under close-reefed topsails, was running on at
the rate of twelve knots or more an hour.

Emily and May found it far more difficult to attend to their charges
than during the calm; but they still persevered; and though it was very
hot between-decks, yet the sick people felt sensibly the change which
had occurred in the atmosphere.

For several days the "Crusader" ran on before the gale; sometimes,
indeed, the wind blew so hard, and the ship rolled and tossed and
tumbled about so much, that many wished the calm back again.  One night
the thunder roared and rattled overhead with crashing peals; bright
lightning darted from the skies.  All hands were on deck, for it was
impossible to say what might next occur.  The masts strained and
cracked, and it seemed every instant that the canvas would be blown out
of the boltropes.  The dark seas came rolling up astern, their crests
hissing and foaming, threatening to break over the poop.  Several of the
gentlemen passengers were collected on deck.  Suddenly a voice was
heard, exclaiming in a tone of terror, "What is that?  Oh mercy, mercy!"
They looked aloft; at the end of the yardarm was a mass of bluish light
like a small globe.  Charles saw Job Mawson standing not far off; his
knees were knocking together, his arms outstretched.  Presently the
light began to move, and suddenly it appeared at the mainmast head;
there it remained stationary for some time.

"What is it?" exclaimed Job Mawson.  "Oh, captain, do make it go away!"

"It is nothing very terrible," answered Bill Windy, who overheard him.
"We might easily box up that fellow, if it were worth while to go aloft
and catch him."

"Let no one make the attempt," said the captain.  "I must not have you,
Mr Windy, or the men, risk your lives to catch a jack-o'-lantern.  I
hope it's a sign that the gale is breaking, and that we shall have
moderate weather again before long."

Job Mawson did not appear as satisfied with this explanation of the
captain's as the rest of the passengers; he continued watching the light
with a terror-stricken glance, as if he expected something dreadful was
about to happen.  At length, now travelling to one mast-head, now to the
other, and back again to the yardarm, it finally disappeared.  The wind,
however, continued blowing for some time as hard as ever.  When morning
broke, it had somewhat moderated, and as the day wore on, a strong
breeze only was blowing.  The sea, notwithstanding this, continued as
high as ever, and consequently the ship rolled and tumbled about fully
as much as before.  The captain, who had been on deck all the night and
a great part of the forenoon, at length retired to his berth.

Bill Windy had the watch, Charles was standing near him.

"What do you think of the weather now?" he asked.

"Can't say that I think it settled yet," answered Bill.  "There's a
stormy look away there to the nor'ard, but the captain ordered me to
shake the reefs out of the topsails if it grows no worse; though, to my
mind, we shall have to take them in again before nightfall."

Bill took a turn on deck, then ordered the hands aloft to shake out the
reefs.  The topsails were sheeted home; the ship felt the fresh impulse
given to her, and went bounding on over the tossing ocean.  The mate
walked the deck keeping a watchful eye to windward.

"I don't know what to make of it, Mr Dicey," he observed to Charles.
"It is always well to take a reef in in good time, and better
seamanship, too, to my mind, than to wait till the squall is down upon
one.  Still, we have lost so much time in that calm that it won't do to
be shortening sail before it is necessary.  The surgeon, too, wishes the
captain, unless the sickness abates, to put into the Cape, that the
people may be landed and the ship fumigated."

"I am thankful to hear that," said Charles; "a few days on shore may, I
hope, restore all to health."

Although no deaths had occurred for several days, a considerable number
of the people still remained on the sick list, many of the cases being
very severe.  Even to people in health, the steerage of an emigrant ship
is not a desirable place, especially in a hot climate; and now the poor
sufferers were not only confined below with closed hatches, but the ship
was tumbling and rolling fearfully about, the masts were groaning, the
bulk-heads creaking, the stamping of feet was heard overhead, the waves
were constantly dashing against the sides, while now and then came the
heavy blow of a sea, as it fell on board and deluged the decks.

Bill Windy and Charles had continued their walk for some time, when the
mate, looking to windward, exclaimed, "It's high time to shorten sail,
or we shall have the masts whipped out of the ship.  Boy, call the
captain!  Hands aloft--two reefs in the topsails."  The crew were
running up the rigging, when Captain Westerway made his appearance.  The
men quickly laid out on the yards, and were busily employed in gathering
up the sails.  An active young topman, whom Charles had seen just before
laughing and joking with his shipmates, was on the lee-yardarm; while,
with earing in hand, he was passing the point through the cringle, the
ship gave a heavy lurch, he lost his hold, and was jerked off the yard.
For an instant he was seen hanging on to the earing; but it would have
required superhuman strength to maintain his hold with the ship pitching
and rolling as she was doing; in another moment he fell headlong into
the foaming sea.  Scarcely had he touched the water when Bill Windy ran
to the falls of the lifeboat on the starboard side, crying out for
volunteers.  Charles followed him.  The most active men were aloft; but
several gathered at the falls.  The captain took the helm, relieving the
man at the wheel, who hurried to assist the mate.  Bill, with three
hands, was already in the boat.  Charles leaped in also.

"You had better not, Mr Dicey," exclaimed Bill.  "Get up the side
again, and let another hand come.  You don't know the danger you are
running."

"Not more than you," answered Charles.

"It's my duty, sir," said Bill, "and not yours; do be advised by me."

Charles, however, was eager to go to the assistance of the young seaman.
There were in all six stout hands in the boat.  The lifebuoy had been
let go.  Some time passed before the seaman saw it; at last he made
towards it, but his strength seemed insufficient to buffet with that
rough sea.  The attention of most on board was for the moment engaged
rather with the boat endeavouring to carry help to the drowning man than
to the man himself.  The greater number of the crew, too, were occupied
in handing the sails.  This task had to be accomplished before the ship
could be brought to.  That was itself a manoeuvre of no small danger,
yet the sea was not sufficiently high, nor the wind too strong, to make
it altogether impracticable.  The boat at length got clear off, and
pulled away in the direction the man had last been seen, Mr Paget and
other passengers pointing with their hands to guide them.  Charles
seized an oar--there were only four in the boat; the mate took the helm.
They had not pulled far when one of the oars broke.  This was seen from
the ship.  Mr Paget observed that the boat had rapidly dropped a long
way to leeward.  While he was watching her, a huge wave rose up between
her and the ship.  He looked anxiously, expecting to see her on the
crest of the sea.  She was nowhere visible.  It was some time before
another hand came aft to the helm to relieve the captain.  The second
and third mates were forward.  Not a seaman had been able to keep his
eye upon the boat.  Mr Paget, however, felt sure he knew where she
could be found.  The captain was now able to look about for her.  Mr
Paget told him his fears.

"I am afraid you are right, sir," he said, after he had continued for
some time looking out all around.

"The boat has been swamped.  I have no doubt about it."  Mr Paget's
heart sank within him at these words; he had formed a sincere regard for
Charles Dicey; he felt still more for the poor girls who were thus
deprived of their brother.

"I hoped better things of that boat," observed the captain; "but a very
heavy sea is running even for her.  Poor fellows, I would to heaven this
had not happened.  Still she may have escaped."

He hailed the men aloft, and desired them to look out.  No one could see
the boat; and neither the lifebuoy nor the young sailor, who, it was
supposed, had got hold of it, were anywhere to be seen.  The captain
continued looking out for some time, ordering those aloft also to keep a
bright look-out.  At length he gave the order to brace round the yards,
and the ship once more gathered way.  "We must not give them up yet; so
I will wear ship, and run over the ground we have passed."

While this manoeuvre was being carried out the Miss Diceys and several
other ladies, followed by Mrs Clagget, appeared on deck.

"What is the matter, captain?" exclaimed the latter.  "They tell me that
a man has fallen overboard, and that a boat has gone to look for him.
How could you let a boat go away while the sea is tumbling about in this
terrible fashion; and, pray, who has gone in her?  Ah, Mr Paget, I am
glad to see you have not risked your life.  But where is Charles Dicey?
Just like him, to do such a madcap trick.  My dear girls, your brother
jumped into the boat to pick up a silly man who tumbled overboard, and
they cannot find him or any of those who went with him."

"Our brother!" exclaimed Emily and May in a tone of alarm.  "Where is
the boat?  Oh! do tell us, Captain Westerway; we do not see her."

"We are somewhat anxious about the boat, I confess, Miss Dicey," said
Mr Paget, approaching Emily and May; "but still we may hope to find
her.  In this mountainous sea she might be easily concealed between the
waves, though at no great distance."

In vain, however, every one on board kept looking out for the missing
boat.  The ship was standing back exactly over the spot where she had
been lowered.  The only sign of her was a broken oar, which tossed up
and down--for a moment was seen, and then disappeared.  Mrs Clagget
continued to abuse Charles for his foolhardiness, as she called it.

"Poor young man, I wish he had not gone," said the good captain; "but it
was a brave deed.  I ought not to have allowed the boat to be lowered;
but I could not bear to let one of my fellows perish without an attempt
to save him; and I thought that lifeboat could be trusted."

"Very wrong in all concerned," exclaimed Mrs Clagget.  "But surely,
captain, you don't think poor Charles is really lost, and your worthy
mate too.  I had a great respect for that honest man."

"Indeed, madam, I fear such is the case," said the captain with a sigh;
"and I trust you will do your best to console those dear young ladies.
It will break their hearts, I am afraid, for it is easy to see what
affection they have for their brother."

Emily and May were, as may be supposed, almost stricken down by grief
when they were told, though as cautiously as possible by Mr Paget, of
what had occurred.  Not till night had arrived, and all hopes had been
abandoned, could they be induced to leave the deck.  They stood with
their hands clasped together, looking out over the tossing sea as though
they expected the boat which contained him they loved so much would
appear again in sight.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE "RANGER'S" BOATS ARE SENT AWAY.

THE PUMPS DISABLED--THE WOMEN PLACED IN BOATS--YOUNGER OFFICERS AND BOYS
SENT AWAY--THE CAPTAIN AND COLONEL REMAIN--THE CAPTAIN'S LETTER--CHILD
SAVED BY YOUNG BROKE--SHIP DRIVING ON LAUNCH--ESCAPE OF LAUNCH--VOYAGE
IN BOATS COMMENCED--LAST SIGHT OF "RANGER"--MRS RUMBELOW ENCOURAGES HER
COMPANIONS--BOATS RUNNING BEFORE THE GALE--MRS MORLEY'S GRIEF--A CABIN
FORMED FOR THE WOMEN--A SEA BREAKS ON BOARD--SEARCH FOR PROVISIONS--
FIRST NIGHT IN THE BOAT--HARRY SHAFTO AT THE HELM--THE WEATHER
MODERATES--IMPOSSIBILITY OF RETURNING TO THE SHIP--SCARCITY OF WATER--
THE DOCTOR MANUFACTURES A STILL--VARIOUS PROVISIONS DISCOVERED.

Dreary as was the night, it was happily of no long duration.  Daylight
again appeared; but the scene was as forlorn and threatening as that of
the previous morning.

While the first-lieutenant and Harry Shafto, and some of the other
officers, were engaged in examining the boats and clearing them of
lumber, the purser was busily employed in collecting provisions, and
separating those of various description, so that each boat might be
supplied with a sufficiency, in due proportion.

"The boats will not carry a quarter of our number," observed Harry to
the first-lieutenant.

"No, Shafto," was the answer.  "We know that.  The captain has decided
who is to go in each of them.  Then we who remain must form rafts, and
do the best we can to save our lives."

"Should the ship sink beneath us!" observed Harry.  "I fear, in this
cold and stormy sea, that a raft would be of no real service, though it
might prolong our existence for a few hours."

"We, however, must do our best to preserve the lives of the poor people
committed to our charge," said Mr Tobin.

"We certainly must do that, if possible," said Harry; "and it seems to
me that the sea has gone down a little since daybreak; I have been
watching it anxiously."

"I agree with you, Shafto," replied Mr Tobin.  "The wind has lessened
considerably within the last half-hour, and though we may not be able to
keep the old ship afloat, there is a better prospect of the boats
escaping."

Some time was occupied in getting the boats ready; oars, masts, and
sails were put into each; tackles were rove for hoisting them out; but
Commander Newcombe was unwilling to give the order to lower them while
there seemed a prospect of the ship floating and the sea going down.

The crew were now piped to breakfast, as if nothing particular was
occurring.  The spirits of all on board were somewhat raised by
observing the evident improvement in the weather.  The carpenter
reported that the water was gaining less rapidly on the pumps, but still
it was gaining.  Another sail, however, was got up from below, fothered
like the last, and passed with ropes under the ship's bottom.  It
produced a more satisfactory result than the former ones; still, after
another hour had passed, the water continued coming in faster than it
could be pumped out.  The commander and Colonel Morley were seen
earnestly consulting together.  They were joined by the
first-lieutenant.

"The winch of the starboard pump has broken, and the pump is disabled,
sir," he said, in as calm a tone as he could assume.

"That settles the question," said the commander.  "Colonel, we must do
our duty.  I see no prospect of keeping the ship afloat much longer.  If
we delay, she may go down with all on board, and the chance of saving
some will be lost."

"I agree with you, captain," said the colonel.

"We need not let the people know this, though," observed Commander
Newcombe.  "Those who go in the boats may be allowed to suppose that the
ship will be kept afloat better without them.  Mr Tobin, hoist out the
boats at once.  The women and children must be divided among them.  I
have settled who is to go in each.  Colonel, you will accompany your
wife and daughters."

"I have a higher duty, sir, though I thank you for the offer.  I remain
with my men," answered Colonel Morley in a firm tone.

"And I remain with you and the ship, sir," said Mr Tobin; "and I
believe you will find that most of the other officers desire to do the
same."

"I will direct the junior officers of my regiment to draw lots who is to
go," said Colonel Morley.

Some little time was occupied in making these and similar arrangements.
The three officers then separated, to perform the duties they had
undertaken.  While the naval officers were superintending the lowering
of the boats, an undertaking of great difficulty and risk, Colonel
Morley entered the cabin, and having summoned the officers around him,
he informed them of the determination which had been arrived at.  He
spoke in a low, calm voice, so that he might not be overheard by his
wife and daughters, or the other ladies.  The captains at once declined
drawing lots.

"Twopenny is the only married man among us," said Captain Power; "he
must accompany his wife."

The lieutenants, when they heard that the colonel intended to remain, at
once decided to stay by him and their men.  The ensigns, with the
exception of poor Holt, who was still in his cabin, were inclined to
decide as their superior officers had already done.

"No, my lads," said the colonel, "you are young, and may have many years
of life before you.  I must insist on your obeying my commands."

The lots were quickly drawn, and Ensign Holt was declared to have the
option of going.  He had been watching the proceeding with staring eyes
and a look of intense anxiety and dread, fully believing, apparently,
that he should be among those to remain.  The excitement was too much
for his nerves.  As his name was pronounced, he sank down on the deck
without uttering a word.  Captain Power kindly raised him up.  An almost
idiotic expression had come over the young officer's countenance, and he
scarcely seemed aware of what was occurring.

"Come, Holt, bestir yourself," said the captain.  "Pack up anything you
may especially wish to take with you.  The boats will soon be shoving
off."

The poor young ensign looked wildly about him for a moment, and then
hurrying into his cabin, began to pack up a huge portmanteau, tumbling
all sorts of articles into it.  He was thus engaged when he heard his
name called, and, leaving it behind him, rushed on deck.  The colonel
meantime addressed the officers.

"Gentlemen, we have still our duty to perform," he said.  "Desperate as
appears our condition, I do not despair; and, at all events, I am
confident that none of you will flinch from what requires to be done.
Every one will take his turn at the pumps as long as the ship remains
above water; and now I will muster the men.  Let the roll be beat."

The roll of the drum was directly afterwards heard echoing along the
decks, and all the men not employed at the pumps fell in.  The married
men, with the drummers, were ordered to prepare to go in the boats.  The
crews of each were then mustered aft, and sentries stationed to prevent
any others from entering them.

Now came the most trying moment of all.  While the commander was
standing on the break of the poop, and issuing his final orders, Harry
Shafto, followed by Willy Dicey, came up to him.

"I hope, sir, you will allow me to remain on board," he said; "and
though Dicey wishes to prefer the same request, I trust you will refuse
it in his case."

"I certainly shall do so," answered the commander, "as I also shall
refuse yours.  I have decided that you are to take command of the
launch.  I know you to be an excellent boat sailor, and I can
confidently entrust her to your care."

"I thank you heartily, sir," said Harry.  "I would most willingly remain
with you; but I know my duty."

"Then go into the boat, and be ready to receive the ladies and women who
will be sent into her, and take young Dicey with you."  He stopped for a
moment, then drawing a letter from his breast pocket, he added, "Here,
take this despatch also, and preserve it, if possible.  It is addressed
to the Lords of the Admiralty.  I have said what it was my duty to say
with regard to the conduct of the officers and ship's company, and the
admirable behaviour of the troops.  I have recommended also to the
consideration of their Lordships my poor old mother and only surviving
sister.  I trust my country will look after them, as they depend on me
for their support; and if I die, it will be in the performance of my
duty.  I have no other claim than that.  I tell you the contents, that
you may be able to repeat them to their Lordships should you reach
England and the letter be lost."

The commander now called over the names of the officers he had selected
to take charge of the boats and of the men who were to form their crews,
and they were ordered into them; and to each was allotted the supply of
provisions and stores which had been prepared.  The cooper had been
engaged in filling the few casks which could be found with water out of
some of the butts on deck.  These were divided among the boats.  A
compass was placed in each, and a chart, as also a quadrant and other
nautical instruments for the launch and each of the cutters; lanterns,
candles, and several other stores were not forgotten.

"Fowling-pieces will be of use," observed Captain Power.  "Here is mine,
Twopenny;" "and mine", "and mine," added the other officers, bringing
them up from their cabins.  "Don't forget the powder and shot."  A
supply in tin cases was soon provided.

While the seamen were performing their various duties, the soldiers
stood, drawn up along the deck, with their officers, as if on parade.
Not a man moved from his post, but all watched the proceedings going
forward as if no unusual occurrence was taking place.  The sea had by
this time so much gone down that the operation of lowering the women and
children into the boats was less hazardous than otherwise would have
been the case.  Mrs Morley and her two daughters were the first to
appear on deck.  The colonel led them to the gangway, where the
boatswain and several of the most active seamen were standing ready to
lower them down, under the direction of the first-lieutenant.  Whether
or not they expected that Colonel Morley would accompany them, it was
difficult to say.  The only words heard, as Mrs Morley seemed to
hesitate for a moment as she was about to be lowered down, were, "We are
all under orders.  Duty must be our first consideration."

Poor Mrs Twopenny shrieked out for her husband.  "He will follow you
presently," said the first-lieutenant, hoping to pacify her.  "Now, Mrs
Rumbelow, you are to go in this boat," he exclaimed.  The sergeant's
wife hesitated, casting a glance towards her husband.

"We want you to go and look after the ladies," said the colonel.  "Come,
Mrs Rumbelow, you have never acted contrary to orders, and you will not
do so now, I am sure."

Without a word she stepped to the gangway, and with very little
assistance reached the boat.  A young drummer, with five or six poor
women, some having children, were also lowered down.

"Come, Davis, I promised the colonel that you and your medicine chest
should go in the launch," said the commander.  "I hope you will be able
to give a good account of your charges.  Come! come!  I must be obeyed,"
he added with a melancholy smile, observing that the surgeon seemed to
hesitate.  "We can do without your services on board."

Eight hands had been ordered into the boat to serve as her crew, and
Willy was very glad to see Paul Lizard among them.  The boatswain had
been ordered to take charge of the first cutter.  Peter Patch went with
him, and poor Ensign Holt was lowered into the same boat, looking more
helpless and woebegone than any of the women.

The people, however, had not been placed in the boats without
considerable difficulty and danger.  As soon as the launch had received
her complement, she was dropped astern.  Here she hung on while the
other boats were being loaded, and as those in her watched this
proceeding, they dreaded every instant to see them swamped alongside.
Some of the people attempted, in their eagerness, to jump in.  Several
were seen to fall into the water; others were with difficulty caught,
and saved from breaking their limbs.  The sea, too, which, while the
launch was alongside, was comparatively calm, had since then rapidly
become more and more agitated, and heavy rollers were seen coming over
the ocean towards the ship.  As the people were getting into the second
cutter, the sea struck her, violently dashing her against the ship's
side; while some were attempting to fend her off, she was swamped and
upset, the unhappy people in her being cast struggling into the foaming
waters.  Two seamen only managed to regain the ship.

"Out oars," cried Harry Shafto; and the crew of the launch attempted to
pull up, and save some of their drowning shipmates.  Before, however,
they could get up even to the ship's quarter, nearly all had
disappeared, several poor women and children being speedily overwhelmed.

"See! see!" cried Mrs Rumbelow, "there is a little chap striking out
towards us; and I do believe he has a baby in his arms.  I know him; he
is young Broke, a famous swimmer.  Oh, Mr Shafto, do save them if you
can."

Harry required no urging, nor did the crew.  In another instant the
young drummer boy was alongside; and the doctor, stooping down, lifted
up the baby; but it seemed as if life was extinct.  Young Broke was
speedily hauled on board.  All for the moment seemed to forget their own
danger in their anxiety for the young infant; watching anxiously for the
report of the doctor, who was seen for a short time gently pressing its
stomach and breathing at the time into its mouth.  "It lives," he said,
"and will, I trust, recover."  The little creature had no lack of
nurses, for even at that moment of trial all were eager to take it.
Young Broke, though nearly exhausted when taken on board, soon
recovered; he could not tell what had become of the mother, but he had
some idea that she was still on board, having entrusted her child to one
of the men before she herself was lowered down.

Harry again dropped the launch astern, in obedience to the orders he had
received.  The sea coming ahead of the ship, she began to pitch
violently; the other boats, to avoid the accident which had happened to
the second cutter, kept well clear of her.  The commander was standing
on the poop, and Colonel Morley by his side.

"Is my husband not coming?" asked Mrs Morley, now appearing for the
first time aware that she was to be separated from him.

"The colonel will act as duty prompts him," said Harry.

"Yes, yes; I know he will," said Mrs Morley, gazing towards the ship.
"And he considers it is his duty to remain on board," she gasped out as
she hid her face in her hands, sobs bursting from her bosom.

Harry, still hoping that, as the weather had been moderating, the ship
might be kept afloat, determined to hold on to the last.  As he looked
ahead, however, he saw the heavy rollers continuing to come in from the
north-west, while the sky in that direction looked dark and threatening.

Colonel Morley was observed every now and then to cast an anxious gaze
at the boat which contained his wife and daughters.  How must he have
felt at allowing them to go away without him!  It must have been a sore
trial to his manly heart at all events.  The commander was evidently
issuing orders to those who remained with him.

"Oh, Mr Shafto, do they not fear that the ship will sink?" exclaimed
Miss Morley.  "Surely they will not remain on board."

"They are, I have no doubt, engaged in building rafts," said Harry.
"The people will thus have a chance of saving their lives, for the boats
could not take all on board."

"But my father, my dear father," exclaimed Miss Morley.

"He will, if possible, remain and try to help those on the rafts,"
answered Harry.  He could say no more, for he was well aware that till
every effort had been made to save his men, Colonel Morley would not
desert them.

Harry's anxiety increased greatly when he saw the threatening aspect of
the weather.  The ship had been brought as close to the wind as
possible, in order to allow the boats with less risk to lie alongside.
A heavy sea now struck her bows; driving her astern, and threatening to
bring her down upon the launch.  Not a moment was to be lost, Harry saw,
or the destruction of the boat and all on board would be inevitable.
With a heavy heart he gave the order to cut the warp to which she hung.
"Out oars, and pull her head round," he added.  The mast had been
stepped.  "Hoist the fore-staysail," he exclaimed, and the boat's head
began paying round.  Another heavy foam-topped sea came rolling up with
a dark black cloud overhead; he held his breath, for he dreaded lest it
should break on board.  The men tugged at their oars.  They, too, saw
the danger.  The ladies could not refrain from uttering a cry of dismay.
Even Mrs Rumbelow kept her lips firmly set as she eyed the foaming
mass.  Paul Lizard had the fore-halyards in his hand.  Up went the
foresail, and as it filled with the gale the boat's head rapidly came
round.  Away she flew before the wind; the threatening sea roared and
hissed under her stern, but failed to overtake her.  On she flew, now
rising, now falling, amid the tumbling seas.  Harry had need to exercise
all his seamanship to save her from being overwhelmed; as it was, the
seas broke frequently close to her quarters, sending into her heavy
masses of foaming water.  To attempt to heave to and remain by the ship,
as Harry had proposed, would have been madness.  Already she had been
left far astern.  Willy had watched her anxiously.  Now she seemed to
rise amid the dark waters, now to sink deep down; and more than once
Willy thought the "Ranger" had gone for ever.  He could scarcely refrain
from uttering an expression of horror.  There were other eyes besides
his in the boat, who were looking towards the ship.  Poor Mrs Morley
and her two daughters sat with their hands clasped together, not a word
escaping their lips; but though they were silent, their hearts were
lifted up in prayer, and they seemed to have forgotten the hardships in
store for them, and their own danger, while thinking of that to which
Colonel Morley was exposed.

Another boat under sail was seen standing in the wake of the launch,
supposed to be the first cutter.  What had become of the other boats
could not be discovered.  Very probably, they too had gone down,
overwhelmed by the heavy sea from which the larger boats had so narrowly
escaped.  The dark cloud now burst over the spot where the devoted ship
lay, rising and falling amid the dark heaving seas, a dense shower of
sleet and rain, like a thick veil, completely shrouding her.  Willy
strained his sharp eyes, but in vain; the "Ranger" was not to be seen,
and he could only just distinguish the white sail of the cutter
struggling after them through the tumbling seas.

On, on they flew; a sense of their own danger seemed to have absorbed
the thoughts of most on board.  Scarcely an observation was made
regarding the fate of their companions; even the little baby which had
been so wonderfully preserved was for the time neglected, the woman who
held it appearing scarcely aware that she had the child in her arms.

"Come, come, Sarah, what are you about?" exclaimed Mrs Rumbelow, "are
you going to let that baby drop into the bottom of the boat, and be
drowned.  You had better give it to me, poor little dear."  Thus
aroused, the woman once more bestowed her attention on the little
stranger.  Mrs Morley, overcome by her feelings, had at length given
way, and lay in an almost fainting state in her daughter's arms.  Her
condition had not escaped Mrs Rumbelow's observation.  The sergeant's
wife leaned forward towards her.  She was sitting at no great distance.
"Come, rouse up, Mrs Morley, marm," she exclaimed, taking the poor
lady's hands, and chafing them with her own somewhat hard palms.  "It is
God's will, dear lady, that we are here.  He'll take care of those we
left on board.  I, too, would lief have remained with my good-man; but
he ordered me to come, and I have always obeyed orders since I entered
the army, as I call it, and that's a good score of years ago.  When we
have done our duty, to my mind, we should be content; and feel sure that
all will go right.  I don't say what we call right, but what God knows
to be right and best; that's it, marm."

Poor Mrs Morley opened her eyes.  "Thank you," she faintly said.  "You
speak kindly.  I know all is for the best."

Mrs Twopenny and the other married women in the boat, having their
husbands with them, were more inclined to think about themselves than
those they had left in the hapless ship.  The crew were not idle, for
they had plenty to do in bailing the boat and tending the sails.  Harry
saw the necessity, in order to prevent the boat from being swamped, of
carrying as much sail as she could bear; and even then, as he cast his
eye astern, he dreaded lest any of the foaming seas which came rolling
up might break on board.  Could he have kept her head to the seas she
might have been safer, but the danger of heaving her to was so great
that he dared not attempt it; and, under present circumstances, he
judged it more prudent to run before the gale.  All he could hope,
therefore, was that the wind might moderate again as rapidly as it had
risen.  His next care was to make some arrangement for the accommodation
of the poor women.  He called Dr Davis aft, and consulted him about the
matter.  It was agreed that an awning should be rigged in the centre
part of the boat, over an oar a little higher than the gunwale, so as to
leave room for the crew to pass on either side; and though this would
afford them but a very narrow space, still they would be sheltered from
the cold and rain and spray.  Fortunately, a spare sail had been thrown
into the boat, which would serve for this purpose; there were also
several planks and small spars which had not been thrown out of her when
she was lowered; and these spread out would serve as a flooring to keep
them out of the wet.  Among other things was a roll of blankets and
several cloaks.  These, spread out, would serve for beds.  The crew
gladly gave up all claim they might have on them for the sake of the
poor women.

Several hours passed; and though the wind and sea had slightly gone
down, no other change had occurred.

"Now, marm," said Mrs Rumbelow, as soon as the awning was prepared; "we
must take possession of our house.  It is not a very grand one, but
we're thankful to those who built it for us."

"Oh, my husband! my husband!" was the only answer poor Mrs Morley could
make.

"I have a husband, too, marm," said Mrs Rumbelow.  "The sergeant and I,
though old folks, love each other as much as any young folks can do.  We
have long known that any day, with the chances of war, we might be
separated, and by many another chance too, though.  I have followed him
pretty well round the world, to look after him, and now the time has
come which we well knew might come, though I cannot say that I feel it
the less on that account.  It's hard to bear, Mrs Morley, that it is;
but if it's God's will that we are not to see our husbands again, we
must submit, marm.  Still, you know, marm, it may not be His will to
take them from us.  He can preserve them if He thinks fit; and if so, we
shall meet them again.  That's what keeps me up."

"You are right, Mrs Rumbelow," whispered Mrs Morley, as the sergeant's
wife knelt by her side within the little tent.  "Does any one think that
the ship is still afloat?"

"That's more than any one can say, marm.  Ships have floated when all on
board supposed that they were going down.  That must be our hope, marm;
and now, Mrs Morley, and you, dear young ladies, take my advice, and
try and go to sleep and forget all about it, or you'll wear yourselves
out.  It's the men's business to look after the boat and us.  We must
trust to them, and still more to One in heaven, who will take care of us
all."

These remarks were made by Mrs Rumbelow as she was endeavouring to
place the young ladies and their mother in the most comfortable position
she could select in the narrow space allotted to them.

In the meantime, the boat ran on as before amid the raging seas; several
had broken partially on board, and four hands were kept continually
bailing, to get rid of the water which thus got into her.

"There is another spare sail for'ard," observed Willy Dicey to Harry.
"Don't you think we can manage to nail it on round the stern and
quarters?  I saw some tools put into the boat, and one of the
carpenter's mates is with us."

"Your advice is good, and we will follow it," answered Harry: and Willy
made his way for'ard to look for the sail.  It was soon found; and the
carpenter's mate, with the assistance of Paul Lizard and Willy, who
prided himself on his skill as a carpenter, quickly sawed out several
stanchions.  These were at once screwed on so as to raise the gunwale
nearly two feet all round the after-part of the boat.  Scarcely had the
canvas been securely fixed when a heavier sea than ordinary came rolling
up, hissing and roaring as if about to overwhelm her.  Many gazed at it
with dismay.  It struck the stern; no small amount of water broke over
the counter.  The heavier mass, however, was prevented from coming in;
and the boat flew on with greater speed, as if to escape from the danger
which threatened her.

"Willy, your forethought has saved our lives, I fully believe," observed
Harry, as he, with others, began baling away with might and main.

Mrs Rumbelow, who at that instant made her appearance from the cabin,
followed their example, having seized a saucepan at her feet.  Another
and another sea followed.

"Bale away, my lads! bale away!" cried Mrs Rumbelow.  "We will try if
we cannot send the water out as fast as it comes in."

Her courage inspired the men, who now and then stopped, believing that
all their efforts to preserve their lives would prove useless.  The boat
was quickly again clear of water, and several minutes passed without a
sea having struck her.  Harry began to hope that once more the gale was
abating.  He now, remembering that the people might be suffering from
want of food, ordered provisions to be served out.

The doctor had spoken but little, except occasionally to offer a word of
consolation to some of the poor women.  He now, however, undertook to
superintend the distribution of the provisions.  Some time was occupied
in searching for them, as it was necessary to select such as did not
require cooking.  A keg of butter was first found, with a cask of
biscuits, but the latter had suffered already from the salt water.  As,
however, they could be most easily got at, they were served round, and
constituted the chief portion of the first meal taken on board.  A few
bottles of rum were next routed out from a case amid a number of things
hastily thrown in.  A small measure full was served out to each person,
and injurious as spirits may prove when taken habitually, this small
dose served to restore the well-nigh exhausted strength of the men.

Willy was hunting about in hopes of finding something more suitable for
poor Mrs Morley and the other ladies.  He was delighted to discover
some cold fowls, a ham, and a couple of loaves of bread, which the
purser had thoughtfully placed in a basket for the very object for which
they were now so much-desired.

"Here, Mrs Rumbelow," he said, handing his prize into the cabin.  "You
must get your charges to eat some of these things."

"Bless you! that I will, Mr Dicey," said the good woman, perfectly
ready herself to sup off her biscuit and salt butter.  She began at once
to persuade the young ladies to eat a portion of the delicacies which
she had received.  She was at length successful.  "And now, marm," she
added, "just a thimbleful of rum; it will do you good, I'm sure.  I am
not in favour of ladies taking to ardent spirits, but, just now, we may
be thankful for some to cheer our hearts and keep out the cold."

Night was now coming on, and though the weather had slightly improved,
Harry could not but feel that the danger of scudding on in the darkness
was greater than in the day-time.  As yet he had been unable to alter
his course, and steer more to the northward.  The boat was still in the
latitude where icebergs might be encountered, and at night they might
not be seen in time to be avoided, "We must commit ourselves to God's
keeping, and do our best," Harry thought to himself.  "Surely I ought to
ask those with me to join in a prayer for our protection.  My friends,"
he said aloud, "we know not what may happen this night; and I trust all
will join in asking God to look after us, and in returning thanks to Him
in having preserved us thus far."

"That they will, sir!" exclaimed Mrs Rumbelow; "and I am sure, too,
that all will pray heartily that those we left on board the ship may be
preserved likewise."

Harry invited Captain Twopenny to act the part of chaplain; but as both
he and Dr Davis declined, he felt that he ought to do so himself.
Engaged, however, in the arduous task of steering, he could not
sufficiently collect his thoughts for the purpose.  While still doubting
what to do, Mrs Morley appeared from beneath her tent, and in a firm,
clear voice offered up a prayer to Him who rules the stormy ocean for
their own safety, as also for that of those in the other boat and on
board the ship.  All joined heartily; and as the noble lady was seen
lifting up her eyes towards heaven, with her hands clasped, no one could
doubt that she was indeed speaking to Him who hears and answers prayer.

"Now, friends, I am sure that there are many here who can join in a hymn
to our merciful Father and Friend," exclaimed Mrs Rumbelow.  "The young
ladies will lead you, for I have often heard them singing on a Sunday
evening, and it has done my heart good to listen."

The Miss Morleys, who had risen with their mother and the other women,
without requiring a second invitation gave utterance, with their sweet
voices, to that beautiful hymn, which ends--

  "O God, our help in ages past,
      Our hope for years to come,
  Be Thou our guard while troubles last,
      And our eternal home."

Amen was echoed by all.

Their hearts were cheered, their fears calmed, as, amid that dark and
raging ocean, those sounds of prayer and praise ascended to Heaven.

Mrs Rumbelow now insisted that those whom she considered under her
especial charge should return to their cabin, though she had no little
difficulty in stowing them away.  The baby had, notwithstanding the cold
and wetting it had endured, completely recovered, and still received the
attention it required from the young woman who had taken it in charge.

During the day, the other boat's sail had been continually watched with
great anxiety.  Frequently it could with difficulty be seen amid the
foaming seas; now, as the sun went down, though Willy and Paul Lizard
strained their eyes to the utmost, they could no longer distinguish it.
Still Harry, in the hopes that their small consort was yet afloat,
ordered a lantern to be hoisted to their after-mast, that she might be
able to follow them during the night.  Happily, the night would not last
long.  A short time after the sun went down the clouds began to clear
away.  The beautiful Southern Cross shone brilliantly forth; other
bright stars appeared, and cheered the voyagers with their calm light.
The boat was now kept perfectly free of water, and all, with the
exception of the look-out forward, and two or three seamen required to
tend the sails, coiled themselves away to sleep.  Harry, though growing
very weary, would not resign his post at the helm, and Willy Dicey
insisted on sitting near him.

"You know, Shafto, I may never have such an opportunity of learning how
to steer a boat in such a sea as this," he observed.

"I hope you never may, Willy," said Harry; "but we may thank God, more
than my skill, for having been preserved hitherto.  We have many a long
league to go over before we can reach even the Auckland Islands; and I
pray that the weather may continue fine till we get there."

In spite, however, of Willy's resolution he often dropped asleep, though
he roused himself up on such occasions, and again spoke to Shafto.
Harry himself at times felt that, had he not been standing up, he should
have fallen asleep too; and he promised Willy that, should the sea go
down, he would in the morning let Paul Lizard relieve him at the helm.
How anxiously he longed for daylight, hoping at noon to take an
observation and ascertain their exact position.  As the sun rose, its
bright rays shining on the eyes of several of the sleepers, roused them
up.  Some at first looked bewildered, as if they had forgotten what had
occurred.  When they found that the sea had gone down, and the wind
decreased to a moderate breeze, a gleam of satisfaction, such as had not
before been seen, appeared on their countenances.  Harry was at length
about to summon Paul Lizard to relieve him at the helm, when Mrs Morley
and her daughters came out of their cabin.  Their countenances were sad
and anxious.  The boat was now moving rapidly under all sail over the
comparatively smooth ocean.  Harry had, as soon as he was able, altered
the course to the north-east.  Mrs Morley looked around, and then at
the compass.

"Oh, Mr Shafto!" she exclaimed, "are you not steering back to the ship?
Surely you would not willingly desert those on board!"

It was a trying question to Harry.  "I would undoubtedly return, had I
the power," he answered; "but my orders were to carry the boat to the
nearest land we can make, where food and shelter can be found.  Were I
to attempt to return, I should disobey those orders.  It might take us
also three or four days to beat back to the spot where we left the ship,
and we might fail to find her after all."

Mrs Morley hid her face in her hands.  It seemed as if her last hope
had gone.

"Oh, why was I separated from him?" she exclaimed, her feelings
overcoming for the moment her better judgment.

"For the sake of your daughters, marm, do cheer up," said Mrs Rumbelow,
who at once came to Harry's assistance.  "Though you yourself, marm,
would go through any fresh dangers to join the colonel, just think how
ill able these young ladies are to bear them," she said, in a gentle,
soothing tone.

At first Mrs Morley seemed scarcely to understand what was said, but in
a short time she recovered herself, her daughters doing their utmost to
console her; and Mrs Rumbelow at length persuaded her to return to the
shelter of the awning.

Before lying down to take the rest he so much needed, Harry ordered the
provisions to be served out.  On searching for the water-casks, only
three were found.  The carpenter's mate giving a knock with his hammer
on one of them, it was empty.  It had been carelessly put together, and
all the contents had leaked out.  The other two small casks would last
so large a party but for a short time.  Many days might pass before they
could hope to reach the Auckland Islands, the nearest land Harry
expected to make, and even with the smallest possible allowance of water
sufficient to sustain life, the supply in the casks would not last half
the time.  This discovery was indeed a sore trial to the young
commander; still he knew too well the importance of keeping up the
spirits of the party to express his fears aloud.  As the sea had now
gone sufficiently down to allow the crew to move about without
difficulty, he directed Dr Davis and Willy to overhaul the provisions,
and ascertain the quantity they had got; and weary as he was, he would
not lie down till this was done.  Their report was far less satisfactory
than he had hoped for.  A good supply of biscuits and flour had been put
on board; but, unhappily, both had been so completely wetted by the salt
water that the greater part of the flour was a mere mass of dough, and
the biscuits, though at present eatable, would evidently not last many
days.  A small hen-coop full of fowls had been placed in the bows; but,
with the exception of two, the poor creatures had been drowned.  There
were two casks of salt pork; but, as the doctor whispered to Willy,
without plenty of water and pease pudding to eat it with, salt pork
would prove dangerous food.  Four hams were also found, and six Dutch
cheeses, with two kegs of butter.

"Here is a case!" exclaimed Willy.  "I wonder what it contains."

It was opened, and within were found a dozen pots of jam.

"Ah, this is more to the purpose," cried the doctor.

"We must keep them, though, for the poor women and children," observed
Willy.

"You are right, Dicey," was the answer.  "But we have not yet finished
our search."

There was another case.  It only contained pickles.  "I am afraid they
will help us but little to keep body and soul together," observed Willy.

"We might have found better food, though they have their value,"
remarked the doctor.  "If we can kill some birds, or a seal, or catch a
few fish, they will be very useful."

A large black sack was found, it was full of charcoal.

"This is poor food," said Willy with a sigh.

"Yes, but what is that iron thing in the bows there?" asked the doctor.
It was hauled out, and found to be a small cooking stove.  "Ah, this is
indeed a valuable prize," he added.  "We may now cook our provisions and
boil our kettle."

"The poor women will be better for some tea, at all events," observed
Willy.  "That is to say, if we have any tea-leaves to make it with, and
to be sure we have but a small supply of water for the purpose."

"We must see about that," said the doctor.  "We will try to manufacture
a still to turn salt water into fresh."

"But the charcoal will go but a little way for that purpose," remarked
his young companion.

"Nil desperandum," answered the doctor.  "We will try what can be done."

"Here's a case which looks like a tea-chest," remarked one of the men
who was helping them.  "It is somewhat wet though."  The case was
opened, and found to contain a large supply of tea; and though the outer
part was spoilt, the interior was perfectly dry.  A tin of coffee
berries was discovered.

"We have no mill to grind them in, I fear," said Willy.

"Ah! but I have my pestle and mortar," observed the doctor, laughing.
"We must make that serve the purpose."

"Here is a jar of brown sugar, and in this basket what were once two
loaves of white sugar," said Willy; "but, alas, they have sadly
diminished in size, and will have a very salt taste."

"We must not be over-particular," answered the doctor.  "We will try and
save what remains."

It was evident that, notwithstanding the forethought of the purser, many
of the articles which he had intended to put into the boat had been left
on board the ship.

"Perhaps the cutter, though, has got a part of our share," observed
Willy.  "When she comes up with us we shall get what we require."

"Water is what we most want, Dicey, and from what I know of human
beings, I am afraid those on board her will not be willing to share that
with us," observed the doctor gravely.  "Thirst is the most trying of
all the pains the human frame is compelled to endure; but we must not
talk about it--we will do our best to keep these poor women and children
from suffering.  I have been accustomed to see men go through trials of
all sorts, but I cannot stand having the others crying out for help, and
not be able to afford it them.  When a man has got a bullet in him, or
requires his leg off, or anything of that sort, it is what I am used to.
I know that I must exert my skill to the best of my power, leaving the
rest to God; so I think no more about the matter.  However, Dicey, go
aft and make your report to Shafto.  I, in the meantime, will calculate
what quantity of provisions we may venture to serve out each day, so as
to make our supply last till we can hope to reach land."

Willy went aft, and made his report in a low voice.  Harry opened his
eyes, and tried to listen, but he was already so overcome with fatigue
that he could scarcely understand what was said, and directly Willy had
ceased speaking, he was fast asleep again.



CHAPTER NINE.

THE ADVENTURE OF THE "RANGER'S" BOATS.

A CALM--THE CUTTER SEEN ASTERN--PEOPLE CRY OUT FOR WATER--HARRY TAKES AN
OBSERVATION--THE LAUNCH PUT TO RIGHTS--SQUIDS LEAP ON BOARD--A HAIL FROM
THE CUTTER--HOLT'S SAD CONDITION--PETER BEGS TO JOIN WILLY--LIZARD KILLS
A WHALE--BLUBBER USED AS FUEL--WILD-FOWL SHOT--MRS RUMBELOW VISITS THE
CUTTER--CUTTER'S CREW TRY TO DETAIN MRS RUMBELOW--THE CREWS TAKE TO THE
OARS--MRS RUMBELOW ASSISTS IN ROWING.

When the young commander of the "Ranger's" launch awoke, he found her
floating on a glassy sea.  Not a breath of wind filled her sails, though
every now and then a long, low undulation rose beneath her keel, and
went rolling away to the southward.  The sun was striking down with
undimmed splendour upon the world of waters.  Harry's head had been
sheltered from its burning rays by a shawl which Mrs Rumbelow had
thoughtfully thrown over him.  He felt that heavy weight at his heart
which those oppressed with care or sorrow are apt to experience.  In a
few minutes, however, after uttering a secret prayer to Heaven for
strength, he was able to cast it off, and arousing himself, sat up to
consider what he had to do.  Most of the people, under the
superintendence of the doctor, were employed in drying the tea and
biscuits, and other articles wetted by the salt water.  On lines
stretched from the masts were hung up numberless articles of clothing
and bedding.  The women were seated in the bottom of the boat; one was
nursing the baby, who appeared still flourishing.  Very few were idle.
Mrs Morley and her daughters were setting them a good example, and Mrs
Rumbelow was making her way among them, the most active of the party
with hand and tongue.  The doctor was busy for'ard over the stove,
where, with the assistance of the armourer's and carpenter's mates, he
was engaged on some iron work which absorbed his whole attention.
Harry's first impulse was to look out for the other boat.  At first he
could not distinguish her, but by the aid of a glass he made out her
sail just rising above the horizon to the eastward; yet it was so
indistinct that, had not Willy and Paul Lizard declared they could make
it out, he might have supposed himself to be mistaken.  He did not
forget to speak a few words to his female passengers.

"Oh, Mr Shafto, cannot you give us more water?" exclaimed Mrs
Twopenny.  "We have only had that little tin caseful a-piece the whole
of this morning, and the doctor says we must be contented with it."

"We are under the doctor's orders on that point," answered Harry, afraid
that others might join in the complaint made by the poor lady.  "Captain
Twopenny will, I am sure, agree with me in the importance of following
his advice."

The captain, however, had no little difficulty in tranquillising the
invalid lady.  She had been accustomed all her life to be petted, and to
have what she asked for, and was little prepared to endure the trials
she would now be called upon to go through.

"It must be near noon," said Willy, remembering that an observation had
to be taken.  Harry pulled out his watch--there was but little time to
lose.  The quadrant was got ready.  Harry felt somewhat weak, as he
stood up with it at his eye, while Willy, with note-book in hand, marked
down the degrees as he read them off.  After a satisfactory observation
was taken, the result showed that they were somewhat farther to the
north than the latitude where they had left the ship, while he
calculated that, since then, they had run upwards of a hundred miles.
Still their distance to the nearest known land was very considerable.
Water, Harry feared, would be their chief want.  His mind on that point
was, however, somewhat relieved when Willy, coming aft, told him that
the doctor hoped to manufacture a still for producing fresh water from
that of the sea.

"He forgets the amount of fuel he will require for the purpose,"
remarked Harry.

"He told me not to be unhappy about that," answered Willy.  "Perhaps he
expects to catch a whale."

Harry smiled faintly at the notion.

"But we may catch some smaller creatures, though," exclaimed Willy.  "I
have just found a harpoon, and Paul Lizard has often told me that he is
a first-rate harpooner, and has struck many a porpoise and dolphin in
his time."

"Please, sir, if we can see one of those creatures, I have little fear
but what we may manage him," observed Paul, who was standing steering
close to them.

Harry's hopes revived on hearing this; not that he would have allowed
anybody to suppose that he entertained any fears about the ultimate
safety of those confided to his charge.

The day was employed in putting the boat to rights, re-stowing carefully
everything of value, and heaving overboard several useless and heavy
articles.  The carpenters' first care was to tighten the hoops round the
water-casks, and it was hoped that, if water could be procured, the
leaky cask would now hold it.  The empty cases were now broken-up for
firewood, to assist the doctor in his operations; and when they heard
what he was about, the spirits of most of the party revived.  Poor Mrs
Morley and her daughters, however, could not forget the brave colonel
left to perish with his men; and Mrs Rumbelow, though she did her best
to cheer others, every now and then uttered a sigh she could not
suppress, as she looked in the direction where the ship had been left.
The day was drawing to a close.

"Hurra!" shouted Willy, "the cutter is nearing us.  I have been watching
her for some time--they have got out their oars--that shows they have
some strength left."

Still the other boat was at a considerable distance when night closed
in.  There was no change in the weather.  The sky was clear and the
stars shone out brilliantly; the watch was set, and all hands not on
duty lay down to sleep, sheltering themselves as best they could under
the thwarts, among the packages, or covering themselves up with cloaks,
or pieces of sail-cloth or matting.  Willy took the first watch.  He
felt not a little proud, as he sat in the stern-sheets, at being the
only officer on duty.  Strange sounds came across the ocean.  He was
sure that some were made by whales, as they rose to breathe at the
surface.  Now and then a splash was heard as some huge monster leaped
out of the water.  Suddenly a large flabby mass was dashed against his
face, and at the same time several other dark objects sprang into the
boat.

"Hilloa!" cried the doctor, towards whom one of them had directed its
course.  "Who gave me that slap in the face?  Ah, I see," he added,
sitting up and lifting the flabby mass in his hand.  "A
_cephalopoda-sepia octopus_, commonly called a squid.  The fellow nearly
poked out my eye with his beak.  What, Willy, were you assaulted too?"

Willy, who had been almost knocked over by the blow from the creature,
was just recovering himself.

"It nearly drilled a hole in my nose," said Willy, laughing.

"Well, never mind," exclaimed the doctor.  "I wish only a few more would
come on board.  They are ugly beasts; but, fried in butter, will serve
us for breakfast, and prove a better dish than salt pork.  How many are
there of them?"

"Five or six, I think," said Willy.

"Well, hand them to me, and I'll put a stop to their crawling
propensities.  They would frighten the ladies if they were to make their
way into the cabin."

The doctor had got out his knife, and was engaged in scientifically
depriving the creatures of life.  This done, they were stowed away in
the stern-sheets.

"A covey of flying-fish would have been more acceptable," observed the
doctor, as he again composed himself to rest; "but they are not to be
found in these latitudes."

Two or three people, awakened by the doctor's voice, inquired what was
the matter.

"Only a few squids come on board to be cooked for breakfast," answered
Willy.  Those who had spoken, satisfied with the reply, were quickly
again asleep.

Silence once more reigned on board, broken only by the snores of the
sleepers, though the blowing of whales or other cetacea could be heard
every now and then, now in the distance, now somewhat nearer; and Willy
hoped that in the morning they might be successful in catching some of
the smaller ones, and obtain a supply of oil.  Some time thus passed
away; the first watch was nearly over, when he was startled by hearing a
loud hail astern.  Unwilling to awaken the ladies, he refrained from
replying.  He could just then distinguish the splash of oars; and
straining his eyes through the darkness, he at last made out a boat
approaching.  He had no doubt she was the cutter, and he hoped to
receive good tidings of those on board.  As she drew near, he heard
every now and then a strange wild shout, and several persons speaking.
At length the boat came close up under the stern of the launch.

"Is that the cutter of His Majesty's ship `Ranger?'" asked Willy.

"Ay, ay," answered a voice, which he knew to be that of Roger Bollard,
the boatswain.

"Why, Mr Bollard, what is the matter?" he inquired.

"One of our people has lost his wits, and if you have the doctor aboard,
we wish he could see what he can do for him."

"Who is he?" asked Willy.

"Mr Holt, sir."

The doctor had started up on hearing Willy speaking.  Roger Bollard
repeated what he had before said.  "Clap a strait-waistcoat on him, and
keep his head cool," cried the doctor, sitting up.  "I'll see him in the
morning; I cannot do him much good now."

"But he may be overboard before then, sir," answered Bollard.  "It's a
hard job to keep him quiet now, and he is getting worse and worse.  He
swears that he will swim back to the ship, as he has left all his traps
aboard, and abuses us for not going to get them."

"Lash him to a thwart, then," said the doctor.  "Still, if you will come
alongside, I'll see what I can do for him."

"Do!  What can a wretched saw-bones like you do?  I say that I am an
officer in His Majesty's service, and I decline being treated like a
common lunatic," exclaimed the poor young man.

"He has got some sense left, at all events," observed the doctor.  "He
never had much in his brains, however."

The cutter coming alongside, the doctor stepped on board.  "Don't desert
us, Dr Davis," said several of those on board the launch.  While Dr
Davis was talking to the unfortunate young officer, and trying to calm
him, Willy asked the boatswain how those with him had fared.

"It's a mercy we were not swamped, so we ought not to complain in regard
to other matters," answered Mr Bollard.  "We have, however, but a
scanty supply of water, and that poor young gentleman and several others
have been crying out for more than I could venture to give them.  Our
provisions, too, are nearly all wet--the flour and biscuit especially."

"That's bad news," remarked Willy.  "We must hope soon to get a fresh
supply of water, and to do without the biscuits and flour."

After a time the doctor came back to the launch; he appeared to have
quieted the young ensign, though he left directions with his companions
to watch him narrowly, observing that he could not answer for his not
suddenly taking it into his head to leap overboard.

"Hilloa!" cried a voice, after the doctor had returned.  "Is that you,
Dicey?  I was fast asleep till this moment.  I am so glad."

It was Peter Patch who spoke.  "I wish Shafto would let me come into
your boat; we should have much better fun together."

"I should be very glad to have you," said Willy, "but I am sure Shafto
will not allow it.  You were ordered into the cutter, and there I would
advise you to make up your mind to remain."

Peter seemed rather annoyed at this rebuff; but still he knew very well
that Willy was right.  Bollard remarked that he was afraid all the other
boats had gone down.  He had looked around for them as he was making
sail to follow the launch.  One, which was at no great distance, was
evidently deeply laden, the seas threatening every instant to break over
her.  Soon afterwards she suddenly disappeared, and he had seen her no
more.  The people in the cutter seemed to have suffered more than those
in the launch, having been completely wetted by the seas which broke on
board; only by constantly bailing had she been kept afloat.

In the morning, when Shafto awoke, he was surprised to find the cutter
so close at hand.  It showed how soundly he had slept that he had not
heard a word of the conversation which had gone on forward.  The two
boats now floated close together, the ocean being as calm as on the
previous day.  It need not be repeated that every morning and evening
prayers were offered up, and two or more chapters read from the Bible.

The doctor did not forget to cook the squids, and produced a dish which
was pronounced excellent, with plenty of pepper and salt, by several of
the party; though others, not pressed by hunger, declined eating such
hideous-looking creatures.  They had the satisfaction of supplying their
friends in the other boat with a warm meal, no stove having been found
in her.  There were, however, several iron pots, and out of these the
armourer undertook to manufacture a stove, should more fuel be obtained.
Several monsters of the deep had been seen rising at no great distance
from the boat.  Paul Lizard, therefore, as soon as breakfast was over,
placed himself in the bows, and stood ready, harpoon in hand, in the
hopes of striking one; while the doctor, the tea-kettle being removed
from the stove, went on with his still.  Numerous birds were also flying
about in the distance; the rifles were got ready in the hopes of
shooting some of them.

Mrs Morley appeared much concerned on hearing of Ensign Holt's illness,
though he was no favourite of hers or her daughters'.  The day wore on,
the doctor working at his still, and the rest of those on board
employing themselves in a variety of ways.  Paul Lizard had stood for
some hours, harpoon in hand, hoping that a porpoise or dolphin might
rise near the boat.  The creatures were seen in numbers at a distance,
but it seemed as though they were aware of the visitors to their realms,
and purposely kept away from them.  Still Paul persevered, his keen eye
looking as if it could pierce down to the bottom of the ocean.  Now he
let his weapon rest at his feet, now he raised it again, ready to
strike.  At length it was seen flying from his hand with tremendous
force.

"Get a running bowline ready," he shouted out--"one for the head, and
another for the tail.  Be sharp, lads!  We must make the creature fast,
or it will get away from us."  The line was flying out as he spoke.
"It's a big fish, at all events," he exclaimed; "we must take care it
doesn't get away."  As the rope approached the end, he secured it round
the bits, and away went the boat, towed by the monster.

"Hilloa," shouted Bollard, "I wish we had been fast to you, to see the
sport.  Out oars, lads!"

The crew of the cutter obeyed the order, and pulled away after the
launch.  Now Paul began to haul in on the line.  Suddenly it slackened.

"It will drown itself if it doesn't come up to breathe," he shouted.
"We shall soon have it lads!"

Captain Twopenny had got his rifle ready; the line was hauled rapidly
in.  Presently a huge black mass rose alongside.

"Give it a shot in the head, sir," cried Paul, "and the creature will be
ours."

The seamen had got the ropes ready, and now dexterously slipped a
running bowline over the head and another over the tail.  The creature,
which appeared to be a small sort of whale, was evidently much
exhausted; a rifle-shot sent through its head contributed yet further to
weaken it; but even as it was, its struggles so violently shook the boat
that Harry was afraid he should be compelled to order it to be cut
loose.  After, however, giving two or three violent lashes with its
tail, which sent the water flying over the boat, it remained perfectly
quiet.

"This is a prize!" cried the doctor exultingly.  "If we can secure the
blubber we shall be no longer in want of fuel."

Axes and knives were soon out, and the thick mass which surrounded the
creature was quickly cut off.  A considerable quantity of the flesh was
also secured, the fore part of the boat being soon well loaded with it,
many of the articles which had before been stowed there having been
brought aft to keep her in trim.  By the time this operation was
finished the other boat came up; and Harry, finding that he could now
depend on obtaining enough water for all on board on short allowance,
ordered one of his casks to be given to their friends in the cutter.
Instead of charcoal, which was kept in store for the future, a fire was
now made up of blubber, which burned with a hot flame, and the still was
found to work remarkably well, though fresh water could be obtained from
it only at a very slow rate.  The chief cause of suffering which had
been dreaded was, however, removed.  Several wild-fowl were shot during
the day, giving to each person a small quantity of fresh provisions,
which were so much needed.  The drowned fowls had also been boiled.
Though somewhat tough and flavourless, they were not to be despised;
altogether, there seemed but little fear of any suffering from want of
food.  Harry Shafto, however, knew better than any one on board that
their voyage might still be a long one; and he advised the doctor to be
very careful in serving out the provisions.  He gave the same counsel
also to the boatswain, the people in his boat being disposed to eat as
much as they fancied, without thought of the future.  Mrs Rumbelow, on
hearing this, offered to go into the boat, and lecture them on the
subject.

"They will listen to me, Mr Shafto," she observed, "more perhaps than
to others in authority over them--the soldiers will, at all events.
They are accustomed to me, and so are the women.  As to the sailors,
I'll try to make them ashamed of themselves, if they hold out."

Harry was very glad to obtain the assistance of the brave woman.  She
soon talked the unruly crew of the cutter into obedience.  Even poor
Ensign Holt quailed under her eye, when she rated him for his behaviour;
she would not leave him until he had promised to behave himself for the
future, as she observed.  She whispered, however, to the boatswain to
keep an eye on him during the day, and at night to have him lashed
securely to a thwart.

"You never can tell what these demented people will do," she observed to
the boatswain.  "I just tell you to do what the doctor advises you,
remember; and now I must go back to my party in the launch."

The cutter's people, once having got her, were in no way disposed to let
her go, and declared that if she did not stop by fair means, she must by
foul.  However, she laughed at their threats, and ordering two of the
seamen to get out their oars, desired the boatswain to steer alongside.
She was obeyed; but as she was stepping from one boat to the other,
several of those in the cutter jumped up as if to detain her, while her
friends in the launch held out their hands to assist her on board.  For
a moment it seemed as if there was to be a regular skirmish.

"I shall know how to trust you again," she exclaimed, in her cheery
tone, much amused at the incident.  "I am grateful to you for the
compliment; but a woman likes to have her own way, and I intend to have
mine as long as I can get it."

Notwithstanding the wetting and cold to which every one had been
exposed, few on board either of the boats complained of illness.  The
doctor, therefore, had but two or three patients, who did not occupy
much of his time, the rest of the day being employed in attending to his
still.  From its very moderate dimensions, however, notwithstanding the
heat created by the burning blubber, it produced but a very small
quantity of fresh water; yet that was sufficient to quench the thirst of
all in the two boats.  His great wish was to produce enough to make tea
for the poor women, at all events.

"But you must tell Lizard to look out for another whale or porpoise, or
some other cetacea, or we shall run short of fuel, and that is a
calamity we must avoid, if possible," he observed to Willy.

Paul, on receiving the message, again took his harpoon in hand to strike
any fish which might rise sufficiently near.  The calm continuing, and
the men being sufficiently refreshed, Shafto, after consulting with
Bollard, resolved to row on till nightfall in the direction of the land
they hoped to reach.  The order was given, "Out oars," and the boats
began to glide smoothly over the calm surface.  When the men began to
grow tired, Mrs Rumbelow was ever ready to cheer them up.  "Pull away,
boys! pull away!" she cried out.  "We are not badly off as it is, but we
shall be better still on dry land.  We shall find the breeze, may be, a
few miles ahead, and that will spin us along without the necessity of
making your arms ache."  Sometimes she would sit down, and grasping an
oar, assist one of the younger seamen; she showed, indeed, that she
could pull as good an oar as any one on board, and thus no one ventured
to exhibit any signs of weariness.  Thus the day wore on till supper
time arrived, and a substantial meal, cooked under the superintendence
of the doctor, was served out to all hands, the cutter coming alongside
for her share.

"Little fear of their parting intentionally with us, since we are the
dispensers of the good things of life," observed the doctor.  "I am
afraid, however, that we shall have to be put on short allowance unless
we get along faster than we have lately been doing."  The last remark
was made in a whisper to Willy.  As most of the soldiers could row, the
men on board were divided into watches, so that they might relieve each
other at the oars, and thus the two boats continued their course during
the night.



CHAPTER TEN.

WATER!  WATER!

FEARFUL WANT OF WATER--FUEL NEARLY EXHAUSTED--AURORA AUSTRALIS SEEN--
ICEBERG IN SIGHT--APPROACH IT TO OBTAIN WATER--SEALS DISCOVERED ON
ICEBERG--SEALS ATTACKED--SEVERAL SEALS KILLED--A PARTY GET ON THE
ICEBERG--FRESH WATER OBTAINED--ICEBERG BEGINS TO MOVE--FLIGHT FOR LIFE--
LAUNCH NEARLY OVERWHELMED--THE CUTTER NOT TO BE SEEN--LAUNCH PROCEEDS ON
HER COURSE--MORE BIRDS KILLED--DANGER FROM WHALES--PROVISIONS BECOMING
SCARCE--LAND SEEN FAR OFF--SUFFERINGS FROM THIRST--A DARK NIGHT--THE
LAUNCH APPROACHES A ROCK--PARTY LAND ON THE ROCK--BIRD COLONY ATTACKED--
SEALS DISCOVERED--THE DOCTOR SLIPS DOWN THE ROCK--THE SEALS ESCAPE--NO
WATER TO BE FOUND--FUEL OBTAINED FROM A WRECK--LYING IN WAIT FOR THE
SEALS--A SAIL SEEN IN THE DISTANCE--THE CUTTER ARRIVES--STARVING STATE
OF CUTTER'S CREW--HOW THEY ESCAPED FROM THE BERG--PETER'S GENEROUS
CONDUCT--THE PARTY ENCAMP ON THE ROCK--A NIGHT SCENE ON ROCK--HARRY'S
MEDITATIONS.

Two days had passed away.  Every drop of water, with the exception of a
small quantity the doctor could produce from his still, was exhausted; a
gill alone could be distributed to each person during the
four-and-twenty hours and sometimes even that quantity could but with
difficulty be procured.  The salt provisions also, on which they had to
exist, made every one thirsty, and the bright sun shining down on their
heads increased their desire for water.  Thirst--thirst--many now for
the first time learned the real significance of that word.  From both
boats voices in plaintive accents were crying out for water.  Oh! how
many would gladly have given everything they possessed for a draught of
the pure liquid; yet, although the still was kept going night and day,
no more water beyond the small measure could be produced, and the doctor
knew that his fuel was getting to an end.  A portion of the charcoal in
the bag still remained, but that was kept for cooking purposes.  There
were, likewise, a few fragments of broken-up cases and other pieces of
wood, which might for a short time feed the stove; but they would
speedily be exhausted.  "What will then become of us all?" thought the
doctor.  "Heaven in mercy protect us!"

Harry Shafto was at the helm.  The two boats were gliding over the
mirror-like ocean, which reflected on its surface the bright stars
overhead.  Willy was by his side, declaring that, though it was his
watch below, he could not go to sleep.  "What strange light is that?"
exclaimed Willy suddenly.  From a bank of dark clouds in the northern
horizon a bright ray darted upwards towards the zenith, expanding like a
fan, and illuminating the whole ocean.  Scarcely had he spoken when it
died away, and darkness once more reigned over the world of waters.
Before a minute, however, had elapsed, a magnificent arch, from which
darted forth rays of varied colours, appeared.  By degrees the light
grew more and more intense, till the whole sky was spread over with a
sheet of brightness; but not for a moment did it remain at rest--the
most brilliant red, purple, orange, and yellow tints streamed upwards in
innumerable radiations, with every possible variety of hues which a
combination of these colours could produce.  Now the rays seemed to
close, now they opened again, like a vast variously-tinted umbrella,
till the bright dome of heaven was all a-blaze.  Now and then the stars
could be seen beyond the mass of light; now they altogether paled, and
were concealed by the marvellous glare.

"This is indeed beautiful," exclaimed Willy.  "I should so like to call
the Miss Morleys; they would be sorry to miss it."

"Thank you," said Harry, "I wish you would, and do so softly, so as not
to alarm them."

"Miss Morley," said Willy, going to the side of their cabin, "there is a
splendid display of the Aurora Australis, and Shafto thinks you would
like to see it."

One of the young ladies was apparently awake; she called her sister,
and, wrapped in their cloaks, they stood for some time gazing at the
wonderful spectacle.  Mere words indeed cannot describe it, nor can the
painter's pencil.  It continued for nearly half-an-hour, varying during
the time in its form.  Now the arch grew still more brilliant, then it
suddenly melted away, dropping downwards in a sheet of flame; now it
arose once more, and the same brilliant and varied hues again appeared.
As Willy was looking out eastward, his eye was attracted by a vast mass
of brilliant light, now assuming one colour, now another, yet the form
remained the same.  He called Harry's attention to it.

"It is an iceberg," exclaimed Harry, "and directly in our course.  Had
it not been lighted up by the Aurora, we might have been close upon it
without its being observed."  He carefully took its bearings by the
compass, while the Aurora continued.  Even the men at the oars could not
help uttering exclamations of astonishment while the glorious spectacle
was exhibited before them.  At length it died away; but the Miss Morleys
continued to watch for some time longer, expecting it to reappear; they
were at last persuaded to return to their cabin, for though the
atmosphere was warm enough when the sun was shining, it was very cold at
night.

Harry altered his course so as to pass to the northward of the iceberg,
hailing the boatswain to follow him.  The boats made but slight
progress; and when daylight broke, they were close abreast of the huge
berg.  The doctor was on his feet in a moment, with unusual animation on
his countenance.  "We must get some of that berg," he said.  "Heaven has
sent it to our aid.  Hurra, boys!  We shall now have as much water as we
can pour down our throats."

How welcome were those words to the seamen, as they awoke from their
sleep with parched mouths and cracked lips; for notwithstanding the
exertion they had gone through, they had taken even less water than the
women and children.  Those who had been tugging at the oars during the
last hours of the night had been relieved, and the boats were eagerly
pulled towards the berg.  As they approached, several dark objects were
seen on a low ledge projecting from one side of it.  "They are seals,"
cried the doctor.  "We must have them!  They will serve us for food and
fuel to melt the ice.  Our casks must be filled with water, and we must
take on board as many lumps of ice as the boats can carry.  But steady,
boys!  If we make the slightest noise, we shall frighten the seals and
lose them."

"I think I could shoot one of the fellows," observed Captain Twopenny.

"And I another," said Harry.  "I suppose Bollard sees the seals."  He
hailed the boatswain, and together the two boats eagerly approached the
ice.  Just then some more seals were seen at a little distance, and in
order to double the chance of killing some, Harry directed the cutter to
steer for the last which had appeared.  Paul Lizard got his harpoon
ready, in the hope of striking one should they take to the water.  Those
in the boats almost held their breath as they glided onwards, for fear
of frightening the wary creatures.  They appeared, however, never to
have been alarmed by man, for every now and then one lifted up its head,
and gazed at the advancing boats, as if they were some huge sea animals,
without showing any signs of alarm.

"You take the big fellow on the right hand," whispered Captain Twopenny
to Harry.  "I'll take another I have marked farther to the left.
Doctor, you pick out one in the centre."

The boats drew nearer and nearer; the seals began to show that they
suspected their visitors.  No one moved in the boat, for fear of
frightening the creatures.  Again the animals began to move.

"They will be into the water if we don't take care," whispered the
doctor.  A few more strokes of the oars were given, and the seals
nearest the edge began to move towards it.  Captain Twopenny fired; the
doctor followed his example, aiming at an animal some way from the edge;
Harry, less accustomed than his companions to the use of a rifle, was
afraid that he had missed his game.  The boat now darted on, Paul Lizard
standing with harpoon poised ready to strike.  The seals, frightened at
the noise, came rushing over the ice, and splashing into the water;
fierce-looking fellows they were, too, with their huge tusks, long
manes, and big beards.  Instead of taking to flight, they came roaring
angrily round the boat, apparently with the intention of attacking her.
The women screamed as they saw the savage-looking animals surrounding
them.  "Load again quickly," cried Harry, "and drive these creatures
off."  One big fellow, the leader of the herd probably, came swimming up
with grinning teeth, as if intent on mischief.  He looked fully capable
of ripping a plank out of the boat; and such seemed his purpose.  Paul's
harpoon flew from his hand, burying itself in the monster's head.  The
seal swam off, dragging out the line.  Paul called two of the men to his
assistance, and while they were hauling away at the animal, who was
fast, the other men were engaged with their oars in keeping the rest of
the infuriated herd at bay.  Two seals lay on the ice dead, brought down
by the captain and doctor.  Three more were shot, but scarcely had the
bullets entered their brains than down they sank, and were lost to
sight.  The remainder of the herd, having sufficient sagacity to know
that the fate of their companions might be theirs, suddenly diving, with
loud splashes disappeared.  They rose again at some distance, blowing
loudly, and looking as if they were about to make a fresh attack on the
boat.  After, however, they had continued for some time swimming rapidly
to and fro, uttering their fierce cries, they seemed to have arrived at
the conclusion that "discretion is the better part of valour," and away
they went till they were lost to sight in the distance.  In the
meantime, Paul Lizard had succeeded in hauling the seal he had struck up
to the boat, when a few blows killed it.  As rapidly as possible it was
cut up, the best part of the blubber being taken on board, and stowed
away in the bows.  The doctor was eager to secure the other two seals
which had been killed, and by pulling a little way round, a smooth
landing-place was found.  The boat rowed cautiously in, when the doctor,
with Willy Dicey, Lizard, and two other men, leaped on to the berg.  The
two seals which lay there were soon cut up, under the doctor's
directions.  "And now, Willy," he said, "as we have an abundance of
fuel, we must get as much ice on board as the boats can carry.  See!" he
added, chopping off a lump with his hatchet; "it is perfectly sweet and
free from salt.  Just tell Shafto to send two more hands here; we shall
soon have enough to quench the thirst of all the party."  Willy ran to
the boat, and quickly returned with two men, bringing axes and a large
basket to transport the ice.  They were working away on the side of the
berg, and had already sent a good supply on board, when they felt it
move in a strange manner.

"Why, it seems as if an earthquake were taking place," said Willy.

At that moment they heard Shafto shouting loudly to them.

"Not a moment to be lost," cried the doctor.  "On, boys, for your lives!
Here, take my hand, Dicey, I'll not leave you behind."

The huge ice-mountain became more and more agitated as they moved on.
They reached the bows of the boat, and tumbled headlong in; and, at the
same moment Paul Lizard, who had seized a boathook, shoved her off; the
men got out their oars, and pulled her head round.

"Now give way, lads, for your lives," cried Shafto.

The water around them became violently agitated, and the huge ice-rock
swayed to and fro.  Shafto cast an anxious look behind him.  Its tall
summit seemed to be bending over.  Where was the other boat?  No one
could tell.  There was little time for thinking of their friends; their
own probable fate absorbed all their attention.  The men bent to their
oars, looking up with horror in their eyes towards the mass which seemed
about to come down and crush them.  The ice on which they had lately
stood disappeared.  Large masses of frozen snow came hurtling down,
falling with loud splashes into the water on either side of them.  One
such mass would have been sufficient to send their boat to the bottom;
but only a few small fragments fell on board, and no one was hurt.  Then
came a cry of terror from many a usually stout heart.  The summit of the
ice-mountain bent over more and more.  What chance had they of escaping
from beneath it?  Down, down it came with a terrific splash into the
hitherto calm sea, throwing up the foaming waters, which dashed over
them in dense showers, while the wave raised by the fall of the berg, as
it rolled after the boat, seemed as if it were about to break on board
and swamp her.  The crew needed no urging to put forth all their
strength.  The boat's stern rose high as it passed under her, and then
on she glided, away from the danger.  They were saved!  Narrow, indeed,
was their escape.

"But where is the cutter?" exclaimed Willy, looking around.  She was not
to be seen.

The weather, which had hitherto been so calm, had been changing rapidly
while they were engaged in killing the seals.  A thick mist had rapidly
swept over the ocean, and shut out even the huge mass of the overturned
iceberg, which still floated upon the water.  They shouted loudly,
hoping that those in the cutter, if she was still above water, might
hear them; but no answer came.

"God's ways are mysterious," observed Mr Morley.  "He has thought fit
to preserve us while our poor companions have perhaps been allowed to
perish.  To Him our thanks are due."

The doctor and Captain Twopenny fired their rifles several times, but
still there was no reply, and Harry reluctantly continued his course.  A
light breeze had sprung up, the sails filled, and the "Ranger's" launch
glided rapidly over the water.  The doctor at once lighted the stove,
and having melted the ice, filled all the water-casks.  How eagerly did
those who had for so many days tasted barely sufficient water to moisten
their throats drink down large draughts of the pure liquid.  A plentiful
repast of seal cutlets and steaks was served out, and a small quantity
of spirits to those who wished for them.  All, however, felt very sad at
the loss of their companions.  "Poor Peter Patch!" sighed Willy; "I
little thought, when he was joking with me this morning, that I should
never see him again."

For several days the boat ran on, the breeze having freshened
considerably.  The charts showed some rocks in their course.  Harry kept
a bright look-out for them.  He was anxious to make them, if possible,
at the same time that he dreaded running on them during the dark hours
of night.  Once more the wind fell, and by this time their water was
again getting low.  All the ice had been melted, and a good deal of the
seal blubber burnt up.  What remained was becoming far from pleasant,
but the doctor insisted that it was too valuable to throw overboard.
Numerous birds were seen at different times, and several came near
enough for the captain and doctor to get a shot at them.  Several
petrels and Cape pigeons were killed; but it was necessary to haul down
the sails in order to pick them up.  Though Harry did not like the
delay, they were too valuable an addition to their larder to be lost.
It was wonderful all this time how Mrs Morley and her daughters bore up
under the trials to which they were exposed.  Poor Mrs Twopenny was the
only invalid, she constantly requiring the doctor's attention.  Thus day
after day passed away, Paul Lizard in vain trying to catch a porpoise or
dolphin, or some other fish.  Their dark backs were frequently seen as
they swam by at a tantalising distance, and sometimes a whole shoal
would appear, by the curious way in which they rose and sank as they
darted forward near the surface, making it seem as if they were
performing somersaults in the water.  Willy could scarcely believe that
they only rose to breathe, and that their backs but slightly moved out
of the horizontal position, their peculiar shape giving them the
appearance of diving.  Whales, too, frequently appeared close at hand,
sending forth from their blow-holes a column of foam-like breath--the
spray which they forced up falling round in graceful jets.  The doctor
explained that the white spout which appeared was the warm breath of the
animal, and not, as the sailors often suppose, a mass of foam forced
from its nostrils.  The whales were, however, too formidable antagonists
to attack, even had one come near enough to allow Paul Lizard to send
his harpoon into its back.

"No, no," he observed; "I know what I am about.  We should get but
little change out of one of those creatures if we interfered with it.
Much more likely to have the boat capsized or sent by its flukes to the
bottom."

The doctor had now again recourse to his still to obtain a supply of
water.  One of the casks was always left full, in case of emergency,
should bad weather come on, and it be impossible to keep the stove
alight.  Again they were on a short allowance of food; the wet flour had
become perfectly mouldy, and the biscuits were in very little better
condition.  Starving people only could have eaten them.

One evening, as the sun was setting, a blue hillock appeared rising out
of the eastern horizon.  At first it was so faint that few on board
believed it to be land.  Harry hoped that it might prove one of the
rocky islets of which he was in search.  All he could tell from the
chart was its existence.  Nothing was said about its size or height.  He
stood towards it, but the wind was light, and little progress was made.
The last pieces of seal blubber had been expended, and but one small
cask of water remained.  There was charcoal only sufficient to cook
breakfast for the next day.  Every one was suffering more or less from
thirst.

"Cheer up, friends," cried Mrs Rumbelow, whose throat, though she did
not say so, was as if a hot iron had been thrust down it.  "Yonder is
the land, and we there may hope to find water and provisions of some
sort."

The night was very dark, and anxious as Harry was to get on shore, he
was afraid of running on some unknown reef, or passing the rock, should
he continue his course.  He therefore hove the boat to, and, as many
sailors have had to do, longed for daylight.  Willy, that night dreamed
of home more than he had done before, and of the loved ones there.
Sometimes, too, thoughts of his late shipmates came into his head, and
they appeared to perform a fantastic drama before him.  "Harry," he
exclaimed, starting up, "what has happened?  You don't know what
dreadful things I have been thinking about."

Harry tried to calm his agitation, but it was no easy matter to do so.
The hardships and anxiety he was going through told on the young boy's
nerves, well-strung as they were; as also on those of many others
aboard.  Poor Mrs Morley struggled bravely; her daughters, feeling
their situation not the less keenly, exerted themselves to the utmost to
console her.  The launch was still a considerable distance from the
rocky island when daylight appeared.  Harry, now once more easing off
the sheets, stood towards it, proposing to go round, and stand in on the
other side, knowing that on the weather side landing would be difficult.
As they approached, several parts of the rock were seen covered with
white patches, and on drawing nearer, these patches appeared to be
moving.

"Why, I believe, those are birds!" exclaimed Willy.  "See, there are
hundreds of them.  They appear to me to be arranged in rows one above
another on the higher ledges of the rock."

"They are penguins, I have no doubt," exclaimed the doctor.  "Though
they themselves are not very palatable food, their eggs, if any remain
unhatched, will afford us some substantial meals.  We shall not starve
if we can get at them."

The sun was very hot, and there was a great demand for water; but the
doctor would only serve out half-a-gill to each person.  He knew full
well that in a short time the last drops would be reached, and that then
their suffering, hitherto but moderate, would be greatly increased.  The
wind fell, and once more the oars were got out.  As the rock was
approached, it was evident that too much surf was breaking on it to
allow of landing on that side.  The boat was therefore rowed round it;
and after coasting along the shore for a short distance, a small
sheltered cove was found, into which they gladly ran.  For the first
time for many a day the wanderers at length stepped on firm ground.  The
ladies were first assisted to land, but they could with difficulty walk,
after being cramped up for so long a time.

"I am afraid the island will afford but short rambles," observed Harry;
"but we need fear no savages or wild animals."

"The first thing to look out for, boys, is water," exclaimed the doctor;
"though, by the appearance of these rocks, it may be a hard matter to
find."

While the females of the party preferred remaining near the little cove,
the rest rambled away in search of the much-desired fluid.  The doctor
had taken his rifle, and Willy, by his direction, carried an axe in his
belt, and a spar sharpened at the end.

"You observe, Dicey," said the doctor, "if we come upon any soft place,
we shall, by driving this spar into it, more readily ascertain whether
water is below."

They had not gone far, however, before they saw how slight was the
probability of discovering water.  There might be some trifling rivulet
formed by the melting snow, but hitherto not a trace of moisture had
been seen on the hard dry rock.  They were climbing the rocks when,
having passed a deep fissure, they saw before them a vast array of
strange-looking birds perched on the crags above their heads.

"Come, Willy," cried the doctor, "we must have some of these fellows at
once."

Directly they were seen, the birds set up a loud concert of squeaking,
squalling, and gabbling.  The doctor shouted to Willy to come on, but so
overpowering were the cries that he could not hear what was said.  Each
bird appeared to be endeavouring to out-squall and out-gabble its
neighbour.  Undaunted by the noise, the doctor climbed on, and was soon
in the midst of the feathered colony.  Willy followed close at his
heels, when the birds fearlessly commenced attacking them, snapping at
their legs, seizing hold of their trousers, and showing their anger in
every possible way.

"I say, Dicey, we must put a stop to this," cried the doctor, beginning
to jump about as the birds dug their beaks into his calves.  Willy, for
the same reason, was skipping here and there, in a vain endeavour to
avoid them.  "Give me your axe, and defend yourself as you best can with
your stick," cried the doctor; and saying this, he laid about him with
the weapon, and a number of hapless penguins were soon brought to the
ground.  In a short time, upwards of a hundred were killed; the
remainder still continuing gabbling and squalling as loud as ever.  In
some places there were old birds with their young, in others nests on
which the hens were still sitting.  In some of the nests, which were
formed of dry seaweed, or frequently only placed without a lining in the
hollow of a rock, was one egg, in others two.  The eggs varied in size,
some being as large as those of a goose, others not larger than a hen's
egg, with a slight tinge of green.  The nests were about two feet apart,
and generally one old bird was found sitting on the nest, the young ones
endeavouring in vain to nestle themselves under her wings.  They were
very like goslings, covered with a dark thick down.  The parent birds
were about twenty inches in height, with a white breast, and nearly
black back; the rest of the body being of a dark, dun colour, with the
exception of the head, which was adorned on each side with four or five
yellow feathers, three or four inches long, forming graceful plumes.
Thus the birds, when seen standing erect in rows, had very much the
appearance of a company of soldiers.

"These will be a welcome prize to our poor friends," exclaimed the
doctor; "so load yourself, Dicey, with as many eggs and birds as you can
carry, and we will send the men up for the remainder."  Saying this, the
doctor, tying the legs of a number of birds together with his
handkerchief, fastened them round his neck, and then filled his hat full
of eggs.  Willy did the same.

"They will take us for a couple of feathered bipeds of some new
species," said the doctor, laughing.  In truth, except their heads,
nothing was to be seen of the doctor and Willy but masses of feathers.
Now and then some of the birds, who had only been stunned, began
fluttering about, and sticking their beaks into the bodies of their
captors, who, climbing down the steep rocks, were but ill able to defend
themselves.  In spite of this, they succeeded in reaching the cove in
safety, where their appearance, as they expected, created no little
astonishment.  Mrs Rumbelow, with some of her companions, quickly
relieved them of their burdens, and instantly began plucking out the
feathers of the birds, while the doctor and Willy again hastened off to
continue their rambles.  After making their way over the hill, they
came, as they neared the beach, upon a large family of seals basking on
a small strip of sand in a little cove below them.  The doctor was
delighted at the sight.  "Now, Willy," he exclaimed, "we must have some
more of these phocae."  The doctor in his eagerness was hurrying on,
rifle in hand, when his foot slipped, and he went sliding down a steep
rock.  The rifle exploded, the bullet passing very near Willy's head.
Willy cried out, dreading that the doctor would be killed.  Still he
continued his downward course, Willy making his way by a more circuitous
path as rapidly as he could towards him.  At length the doctor reached
the bottom of the cliff, where he lay without moving.  Willy hurried
towards him, expecting to find every bone in his body broken.  Happily,
the sand was soft where he had fallen.

"Help me up, Dicey," he said, in a faint voice.  "Where is my rifle; we
must do battle with the seals notwithstanding."

Willy soon assisted his friend to get on his feet; but when they looked
round for the seals, not one was to be seen; the sound of the rifle and
the doctor's and Willy's voices had put the whole family to flight.  The
worthy doctor, after shaking himself, discovered, to his infinite
satisfaction, that no bones were broken, and in a short time was able to
scramble up the rocks again, to continue his search for water.  Their
worst anticipations were realised; not a spot was found which gave the
slightest indication of there being water below it.  The rock had been
searched throughout, and all hands returned to the cove with the same
report.  They came, however, laden with as many penguins as they could
carry, and all the eggs that could be collected.  There was now no fear
of suffering from starvation.  The great difficulty was how to cook
their abundant supply of provisions.  No other seals had been seen; and
it was feared that those on the little beach, frightened away by the
doctor, would not return.

"If so, the sooner we get away from this barren spot the better,"
observed Harry.  "If the fine weather continues, as I hope it may, we
can expect to reach the Auckland Islands in three or four days."

"I think we should not give up all hopes of catching a seal or two,"
observed the doctor.  "As they have been only once disturbed, the herd
we saw are pretty certain to come back before long; and if we can
conceal ourselves and watch for them, we may shoot or knock some on the
head before they can again escape."

This proposal was agreed to, and Harry resolved to wait a few hours
longer, in the hopes of success.  One of the men also stated that he had
seen some pieces of timber apparently, thrown up into a shallow cavern
at the north end of the rock, and a man with him had in vain tried to
get down to them; but he thought, with the aid of ropes, they might be
reached.

"Then let us get hold of them at once," said the doctor; "they will
serve as fuel, and fuel can procure us water--no time to be lost."

Two lengths of rope, and three blocks to form a tackle, were therefore
procured from the boat; and Harry, taking a party of men with him, under
the guidance of the seaman proceeded to the spot.  From a projecting
point they could look into the cavern, where was seen a considerable
amount of broken planking and timbers, the remains, apparently, of a
large boat or small vessel One of the seamen volunteered to be lowered
down to the spot.  The tackle was secured to the rock overhead, and in a
short time, to the doctor's great satisfaction, a considerable amount of
planking was hoisted up.  He at once eagerly shouldered as much as he
could carry, and two of the men who could be spared followed him to the
cove.  His still was landed, and a blazing fire being raised beneath it,
he was soon able to offer a small quantity of the precious fluid to his
thirsty companions.  All had had enough to moisten their parched
throats, when the remainder of the party arrived with a fresh supply of
fuel.

"Poor fellows, little did they think, when their vessel was cast away,
what a blessing her ribs and skin would prove to us," soliloquised the
doctor, as he added fresh fuel to his fire.  A shot was just then heard.
It was fired by Willy Dicey, who had remained on the summit of the
rock; he was pointing westward, and waving his cap.

"The boat! the boat!" he cried out; and the top of the rock was soon
crowded with most of the seamen, eagerly looking out in the direction
towards which he pointed.  There, just rising above the blue water, was
seen a tiny white spot, some declaring that it was only the wing of a
sea-bird; but when Harry arrived with his spy-glass, he at once
pronounced it to be the sail of the cutter.  So anxious were they all in
watching it that most of them forgot the seals.  Captain Twopenny,
however, reminded by the doctor, had made his way, accompanied by Paul
Lizard and one of the soldiers, towards the sandy beach.  Here they
concealed themselves among the rocks on either side of it, while Harry
and Willy, with the rest of the party, were watching the approach of the
boat on the top of the rock.  First one dark head, and then another, was
seen rising above the surface of the water, and presently the herd of
seals made their way towards the beach.  The creatures, after cautiously
looking about them, began crawling up.  The first which arrived lay down
at no great distance from the edge; but soon others climbing up, giving
them no very gentle shoves, they crawled on still further, and then
again lay down, the next treating the last comers in the same way; till
at length a herd of full fifty seals had landed, the inner ones being at
a considerable distance from the water.  The seamen on the top of the
rock were eager to rush down and attack them.

"They will be off as before, and we shall lose them," said Willy, in a
low voice.  Just then a shot was heard, then another and another, and
presently Paul Lizard was seen scrambling along the beach, and followed
by the captain and a soldier, and a regular onslaught on the seals was
commenced.  The seamen could restrain themselves no longer, and down
they rushed pell-mell to assist their friends; the only weapons,
however, which they possessed were some pieces of the wreck.  The seals
were rushing towards the water, tumbling over each other in their hurry
to escape; a few old bulls, however, the patriarchs of the herd, were
ferociously attacking their assailants.  The captain was tumbled over,
the soldier had nearly broken his rifle in defending himself against the
assaults of a fierce bull, while Paul was laying about him right and
left with his club, when the rest of the party arrived to their rescue.
Two seals had been shot, and Paul's club had brought down four more; the
rest, charging all who opposed them, made their way to the water.  The
captain, though somewhat bruised, and having his clothes torn by the
teeth of the seal which had attacked him, was not otherwise the worse
for the encounter.  The six seals which remained as trophies of the
battle were well worth all the injuries which had been received.  The
seamen's knives were quickly at work, and the flesh and blubber were cut
off and carried away in triumph to be laid at the doctor's feet.  He was
delighted when he saw the spoils brought to him.

"No fear now, my friends, of dying of thirst or hunger," he exclaimed.
"If we can keep our pot boiling, we shall do well."

By this time the cutter had drawn near the rock, and Harry and Willy
once more mounted its summit to watch her.  They could see with the
telescope the faces of those in her looking up with astonishment at
them.  Harry waved to them to go round to the other side of the rock;
and as soon as they understood his signals, the boat was hauled on a
wind, so as to weather the north point.  They all seemed very pale and
miserable.

"There are some people lying at the bottom of the boat," observed Willy.
"I fear they have been suffering greatly."

The two friends hurried down to the cove, and in a short time the cutter
was seen coming round and standing in for it.  The sail was lowered, and
the oars got out; but from the languid way in which they moved, it was
evident that those who were rowing had but little strength.  As she
approached several people were seen pointing to their mouths.

"I thought so," observed the doctor.  "We have fortunately saved some
water, though there is scarcely more than sufficient to wet their lips."

"Oh, give them all we have," exclaimed Mrs Morley, who overheard the
remark.

"Oh yes, do! do!" exclaimed several of her female companions.

The doctor, who had been perseveringly attending to his still, hurried
to the cove as the boat came in with a jug and a little tin canister,
which served as a measure.  The pale cheeks and cracked lips of those on
board the cutter showed how much they had suffered.

"The women first, if you please, sir," said Mr Bollard, as the doctor
stepped on board.  How thankfully they and the poor children received
the few drops of water offered to each of them.  One person only looked
at him with an angry glance.  "Why don't you bring me champagne?"
exclaimed poor Ensign Holt.  "That's fit tipple for a gentleman."  It
was evident, poor fellow, that he was as mad as ever.  He did not,
however, refuse the water poured into his mouth, declaring as he drank
it that it was hock of the first quality.  Not till all the others had
been served would the brave boatswain accept the water for himself.  The
doctor then hurried back to get a fresh supply.

"We are truly glad to see you, Bollard," said Harry, "for we believed
that you had been overwhelmed by the iceberg."

"So we should have been, sir," was the answer, "but the moment we saw
the top of the berg beginning to move we shoved off, and pulled away to
the westward.  We were not a moment too soon, however; for a mass of ice
rose right up out of the water, directly astern of us.  Had we been a
moment later, it would have lifted the boat fifty feet in the air, and,
for what I know, sent us all flying over the top to the other side of
it."

Willy, who had hurried down to the cutter, looked anxiously for Peter
Patch.  He was in the stern-sheets, his cheeks as pale as death, and his
eyes closed.  A few drops of water poured down his throat revived him.
"Thank you, Dicey," he whispered, opening his eyes.  "I thought it was
all up with me."

"You will be soon to rights, Mr Patch," said Bollard, looking kindly at
him.  "He would not touch a drop of water himself," he added, turning to
the doctor, "but gave his share to those two little children crying out
for it."

"And you gave yours to their mothers," said Peter, "so you need not talk
of what I did."

"The youngster has got a heart after all, in spite of his nonsense,"
muttered the doctor; and Peter was a favourite of his ever afterwards.

It was indeed providential that the launch had arrived at the rock some
time before the other boat, and that the firewood and seals had been
procured, or probably many of the poor women and children on board her
would have perished, however the stronger men might have endured their
sufferings.

The doctor hurried back to his still, which he believed no one could
superintend so well as himself.  It required, indeed, the greatest
attention, and three hands were constantly employed in filling up the
boiler and supplying the condenser with cold water.  Though Harry was
anxious to continue the voyage, the doctor begged that they might remain
on the rock during the night, that he might the better keep his still at
work, and, at the same time, as there was fuel sufficient for their
fires, that a good supply of seal-flesh might be cooked.  The tent was
accordingly carried on shore and considerably enlarged, to afford
accommodation for the ladies and other women, while some of the men
slept on shore, thus giving ample space for the remainder to stretch
their legs on board the boats.  The scene looked wild and strange in the
extreme to Harry, as he retired a short distance from the camp to enjoy
a few moments of solitude, and seek for that strength he so much needed,
with the heavy responsibility thrown upon his young shoulders.

By the side of the small cove on which floated the two boats was the
white tent, and at a little distance their camp-fires blazed up
brightly; while high above rose the dark, rugged peaks of the
weather-worn rock on which, ever and anon, a ruddy glare was cast by the
flames at their base, while beyond stretched out into interminable space
the dark, heaving ocean.  Across that ocean he was now to go, and guide
the course of the two boats towards an inhospitable land, yet the
nearest where water and fuel could be found.  It could not, however,
prove a permanent resting-place, as the winter, he had heard, was severe
in the extreme, and provisions for so many mouths it might be impossible
to find.  Yet could he venture farther on in these open boats?  New
Zealand lay beyond; but a large portion of that country was but little
known; they might reach a part inhabited by savages, who might treat
them as foes instead of rendering them assistance.  If so, might it not
be safer to stand across from the Aucklands to the distant shores of
Australia?  Even should the weather favour them, could they carry water
and provisions sufficient for so large a party?  Could any of their
number be left behind?  Who, indeed, would consent to stay?

These questions, and many more, crowded on the young officer's mind as
he thus sat beneath the rugged cliffs of that wild sea-worn rock.  He
resolved, at all events, to steer for the Auckland Islands, which had
been discovered in 1806 by Captain Bristow, commander of the "Ocean,"
South Sea whaler, and called after Lord Auckland; but with the exception
that they contained some good harbours, Harry knew very little more than
that fact about them.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE AUCKLAND ISLANDS.

THE BOATS LEAVE THE ROCK--STEER FOR THE AUCKLAND ISLANDS--SCARCITY OF
FRESH WATER--MRS RUMBELOW PUTS THE MEN TO SHAME--CLOUDS GATHER IN THE
SKY--PREPARATIONS FOR CATCHING RAIN-WATER--RAIN COMES AT LAST--LAND IN
SIGHT--THREATENINGS OF A STORM--THE AUCKLANDS APPROACHED--OFF A
HARBOUR--RISK OF RUNNING IN--THE STORM BURSTS--THE BOATS STAND TOWARDS
THE HARBOUR--DANGEROUS PASSAGE--ANXIETY FOR THE CUTTER--BOATS RUN UP THE
HARBOUR--A LANDING-PLACE FOUND--SAFE ON SHORE.

The whole of the next day was passed on the island.  Among its various
productions, scanty though they seemed at first, was a supply of salt,
found in the hollows of the rocks.  This, in addition to the salt
produced by the still, gave the party enough to preserve a considerable
number of the birds they had killed, as well as some seals' flesh.
Under Mrs Rumbelow's direction, the former were plucked and split open;
and while some were salted, others were hung up in the smoke of the
fires to dry.  Every one during the day was so busily employed that it
seemed to pass rapidly away.  Though Harry, afraid of a change of
weather, had intended putting to sea in the evening, he consented, at
the entreaties of most of the party, to remain till the following
morning.  Being the first on foot, at early dawn the following morning
he called up Willy, and the little camp was soon astir.  While Mrs
Rumbelow and her willing assistants were busily cooking the last meal
they could hope to enjoy on shore for many days, the men were engaged in
stowing the boats with their fresh provisions, and as large a supply of
fuel as they could carry.  Prayer was offered up, Mrs Morley reading a
chapter in the Bible, and then the whole party embarked.  The short stay
on the rock had greatly revived them, and even poor Ensign Holt seemed
much more tranquil and contented.

"It won't do to trust him, though," said Peter Patch to Willy, as they
were embarking.  "I have to keep my eye on him, and I am afraid, even
now, he will play some trick."

The little baby, in spite of the cold to which it had been exposed,
seemed to flourish, still affording a great amount of interest to its
nurses as at first, young Broke occasionally begging that he might have
it in his arms; and it was pleasant to see the tender care he took of
the little girl.  She was called Bessy, and was supposed to be the child
of a Sergeant Leslie, whose wife had accompanied him; but as there were
two or three babies of the same age on board, there appeared to be some
doubt about the matter.  Young Broke evidently considered himself the
rightful guardian of little Bessy, and would have again risked his young
life, if necessary, for the sake of preserving hers.

The sea continued smooth and the wind fair, and the boats ran swiftly
across the ocean.  Twice a-day the cutter came up alongside for her
supply of water.  It was a small quantity, little more than sufficient
to moisten the throats of the voyagers after each meal; still they were
thankful to obtain even that.  Frequently, as they saw the clouds
gathering in the sky, they longed for rain, that they might obtain a
larger amount of the necessary fluid.  Though the rain might wet them to
the skin, and chill their bodies, they could endure anything, they
thought, for the sake of more water.

Willy often dreamed he was on shore, wandering near sparkling cascades
and clear running streams, but that somehow or other he could never
reach the water to obtain a draught.  Probably the dreams of others of
the parties were of a similar character.

Day after day passed by; the wind was very light, and the voyage
promised to be longer than Harry had anticipated.  The doctor looked
anxiously at his stock of fuel.  "I am afraid our boiler won't hold out
much longer," he observed to Willy.  "Ask Shafto when he hopes to sight
these Auckland Islands he talks of.  We have not passed them, I hope."

"No fear of that," answered Willy.  "Shafto says that we are still
nearly two hundred miles from them."

"Two hundred miles!" murmured the doctor.  "That is a long distance,
should the wind come foul; but we must keep the pot boiling,--there's no
doubt about that."  The following day, the doctor told Shafto that he
thought it would be prudent to reduce the allowance of water.  "We can
exist with very little, and though that may be painful, it is far better
than going without it altogether," he remarked.

Several of the people murmured when they received their reduced
allowance; even some of the women declared they must have as much as
they had been accustomed to; and two or three of the seamen and
soldiers, who had hitherto behaved well, exclaimed that they would not
be deprived of their rights.  Harry's anxieties were greatly increased.
Mrs Rumbelow, however, came to the rescue.

"What is that you say, men?" she exclaimed.  "Are you not able to go
through what these poor ladies--who have been accustomed to gentle
nurture all their lives--endure without complaining?  You should be
ashamed of yourselves.  I'll soon show the next man I hear talking in
that way that I have not been in the regiment for thirty years without
learning my duty; so look out.  But I think better of you, boys.  If I
was to ask you now, you would, I am sure, be ready to give up half your
allowance to any of the poor women who might require it more than you
do!"

Not another word was said.  Little Broke, it was observed, as soon as he
got his allowance of water, always crept near little Bessy, and poured a
few drops down her throat before he would take any to quench his own
burning thirst.  The seal blubber was at length expended, and but a
small quantity of wood remained to keep the stove alive.  The anxiety of
all naturally increased as the prospect of obtaining more lessened.
Some, indeed, were beginning to despair.

Before long, however, dark clouds were seen gathering in the sky,
hanging low down above their heads, the breeze freshened, the air felt
heavy and damp.

"What do you think of the weather?" asked Harry of the boatswain, the
cutter being within hailing distance.

"We shall have the rain, sir, and I am getting a sail ready to catch it.
I'd advise you to do the same," was the answer.

The canvas which formed the ladies' cabin was immediately stretched out
between the masts, and triced up at the corners; the women held out
their shawls, and every arrangement was made to catch the hoped-for
shower; while the casks and cans, and all the articles capable of
holding water, were got ready.

"There it is! there it is!" cried several voices, as the rain was seen
descending some hundred fathoms from the boat in a thick shower; but it
was to leeward of them.  Then it suddenly stopped.  Soon another heavy
fall of rain came down at a considerable distance astern.  How
tantalising it was to the thirsty throats of those who watched it!  Now
another shower appeared ahead, but not a drop descended where the boats
lay.

"Oh, Mr Shafto, is the rain not coming near us?" inquired several of
the poor women, as they turned their flushed faces towards him, and
hugged their children closer to their bosoms.  He could not bring
himself to say that he thought so, as he observed their cracked lips,
their lustreless eyes, and anxious looks.

"We must hope for the best," he replied.  "See the showers are falling
all around us, and we may hope that one will visit us ere long."

The men proposed getting out their oars, and pulling in the direction
the next shower might appear.

"We might be too late to reach it, and miss another by so doing," he
answered.  "Ten minutes of one of those showers will be sufficient to
supply all our wants."

Still the rain continued falling, and the thirsty voyagers fancied they
could hear the splash in the water, so near did one or two showers come
to them.  Now the heavy clouds seemed to be rolling away, but others
came up in their stead.

"There's a drop!  I felt it on my face," cried Willy.  "Another, and
another.  It rains! it rains!"  In an instant all in the boats were
lifting up their faces to the sky, the poor little children opening wide
their mouths to catch a few drops of the refreshing liquid.  There was
no mistake about it now.  Down came the welcome rain in thick heavy
drops.  The sails were hauled down, for fear of passing through the
shower.  Not a drop, if they could help it, would have been lost.  As
the water fell it was drained off into the casks and buckets; the women
rung out their shawls; every bit of rag that could be wetted was eagerly
sucked.  Still the rain continuing to fall, every can, and even the
smallest cup that could be found, was filled.  They had learned the true
value of water.  Scarcely had all their measures been filled when the
rain ceased, the clouds rolled away.  The sun shining forth assisted to
dry their saturated garments.  A brisk breeze soon after sprang up, and
the boats danced gaily over the now laughing water.  The hearts of the
voyagers were inclined to laugh too, many lifting them up to heaven to
express their gratitude for the relief afforded them.  There was now
water enough, they hoped, to last them till they could reach the
wished-for land.  Notwithstanding this, the doctor kept his precious
still going, when the stove was not required for cooking, carefully
husbanding the small remains of fuel.

A strong northerly breeze was blowing, the boats continuing their course
to the eastward, the launch leading.  All night long they had stood on,
the dark foam-topped seas rising up around them.  Harry feared that he
should be compelled to heave to should the wind increase.  He had been
at the helm during the middle and morning watch.  Willy was on the
look-out forward.

"Land! land!" he shouted.  Daylight had just broke.  "There are cliffs
ahead, with high lands rising beyond them," he added.  Paul Lizard was
awake in a moment, looking out with him.

"You are right, Mr Dicey."

"Do you see a high point to the south'ard?" asked Harry.

"Yes, sir," answered Paul.  "And it seems to me that there's an opening
in the cliffs."

"That must be the west entrance to the southern harbour of the Auckland
Islands," said Harry.  "I little expected to make such a run.
Providence has guided us, not my navigation."

Every one in the launch was soon eagerly looking out towards the land.
The cheering intelligence was announced to those in the cutter.  They,
however, had also seen the land, but were not so well informed about it
as was Shafto.  The boats now stood on, steering for the narrow passage
between the cliffs.  Harry looked anxiously ahead.  It seemed to him
that the line of breakers ran directly across the passage.  If so, to
attempt to enter would be hazardous in the extreme, although, in
consequence of the wind leading directly in, the risk might be lessened;
yet every instant the gale was increasing, and it was important to get
without delay under shelter.  He knew that there was a wide western
entrance; but the wind might be blowing out of it, and a long time must
pass before it could be reached.  He hove to, therefore, till the cutter
could come up, that he might consult with the boatswain.

"It's six of one and half-a-dozen of the other," answered Bollard; "the
boats have shown what they can do, and I am ready to chance running in."

Harry could not conceal from himself the risk he was about to run; yet
it might be greater should he continue at sea during the gale which was
brewing.  Giving, therefore, the helm to Lizard, he swarmed up the
foremast, that he might the better examine the appearance of the
entrance.  It was sufficiently threatening to have deterred him under
other circumstances from making the attempt to enter; yet as there
appeared a narrow space of dark water, a break in the line of foam, he
resolved to stand on.  On either side rose perpendicular cliffs; that on
the north four or five hundred feet high, but that on the south
considerably lower.  The two boats stood on, the cutter keeping about a
hundred fathoms astern of the launch.  Harry placed Paul Lizard at the
helm, he himself going forward, holding on by the foremast.  The oars
were got out, to be in readiness should any flaw come off the shore, and
all hands not required to pull them, or tend the sheets, were ready with
buckets to bail out the water should a sea come on board.  Mrs Rumbelow
had taken possession of the largest she could find, ever ready to set
her companions a good example.  She perhaps, as well as any one, knew
the risk that must be run.

"Now, my dear ladies, and you soldiers' wives, don't be screaming out if
a little drop of water cornea aboard; we'll soon send it back again; and
in ten minutes or so we shall be safe at anchor.  Just think how God has
taken care of us heretofore, and He is not going to desert us now," she
exclaimed, looking round on those to whom she spoke.

The gale was rapidly increasing; dark clouds were gathering overhead,
from which ever and anon flashes of bright lightning darted forth, with
crashing peals of thunder.  The leaden-coloured waves danced up wildly
on either side.  The boats dashed on.  The roaring of the breakers could
be heard, as they leaped up madly against the frowning rocks.  Harry
kept his eye fixed on the spot of clear water ahead.  On either hand of
it rose up the white foaming wall of hissing waters, amid which the
stoutest boats would have been in an instant overwhelmed.  There was no
possibility of turning back now; they must stand on, or their
destruction would be inevitable.  Harry, holding on to the mast with one
hand, kept the other pointed in the direction Lizard was to steer.  Many
of those on board shut their eyes as they drew near the roaring
breakers.  The tide was running out strong.  Such a wind as was then
blowing would alone have enabled the boats to stem it.  Tall basaltic
cliffs rose up on either hand, while the foaming rollers, as they came
in, appeared ready to engulf the two boats.  Now the launch rose to the
summit of a high sea, now downward she glided, the breakers hissing and
foaming so close to her that it seemed impossible she could pass through
the narrow opening between them in safety.  Now a heavy mass of water
came tumbling on board on the starboard side; now another fell over her
on the other hand.

"Bail away, boys, bail away," cried Mr Rumbelow; and all who had
buckets or cans exerted themselves to the utmost, down to young Broke,
the water being hove out again as fast almost as it had come on board.
The launch flew on.  Harry breathed more freely.  She was already within
the breakers; but the waters still kept leaping and tumbling about in a
way which showed the rapid current running against them.  Should they be
becalmed under the cliffs, they might find it impossible to stem it.
Willy had been standing near Lizard; he now looked back anxiously for
the cutter.  Where was she?  His heart sank.  Had she been engulfed?  A
huge roller came roaring up astern.  Presently she appeared on its
summit, darting forward with the speed of an arrow; now she descended,
gliding on towards the passage the launch had just passed through.
Willy could not help feeling intense anxiety about her.  It seemed
impossible that so small a boat could pass through so fierce a tumult of
water in safety; yet in another instant she was gliding on through the
passage, and, shooting forward, was almost up to the launch.

The crews of the two boats cheered each other as they thus found
themselves in comparative safety, the sound of their voices echoing from
cliff to cliff.

"Let us, my friends, return thanks to Heaven, which has so mercifully
preserved us," said Mrs Morley, who had during the time sat with her
two daughters gazing at the scene, apparently fearless and calm.  They
had been so living that they were prepared without flinching to
encounter any danger which might meet them.

The wind blowing directly up the harbour, they ran on, no place
appearing on either side where they could land.  A small island was
passed a mile from the entrance, but its shores were rugged, and
afforded no resting-place.  On they advanced; point after point was
passed, still no sheltering bay had been seen where they could securely
anchor.  At length Harry perceived on the port bow a wide opening.  It
was the entrance, he hoped, to an inner harbour, where shelter might be
found.  He shouted to the boatswain that he would stand in.

"Cheer up!  There's a harbour at last," cried Mrs Rumbelow, as she
surveyed the entrance.  The men kept the halyards in their hands, ready
to lower the sails at a moment's notice; the oars were got out, prepared
for any emergency.  The boats glided on.  Instead of the tumbling,
hissing waters through which they had lately passed, all was calm and
smooth.  On the right was a high bluff, with a reef running out from it.
On the left the land was more level, but everywhere covered with low,
stunted trees; while the shores on either hand were fringed with black,
rugged rocks, and ahead rose ranges of hills, some bare and bleak,
towering to the sky, the nearest clothed thickly with brushwood.  The
harbour they had entered proved to be of considerable size, extending
far up into the interior of the island.  As they sailed on, numbers of
seals appeared--some swimming round them, others resting on the rocks
and gazing at the intruders to their domains with wondering eyes,
evidently unaccustomed to the sight of human beings.

At length, after proceeding several miles up the harbour, which branched
off in several directions, Harry observed a small bay on the right which
promised to afford shelter to the boats.  The sails were lowered, and he
steered for it.  A ledge running out on one side formed a natural
landing-place.  The launch pulled in, and the men jumped on shore.  The
cutter came close up astern, and the crews, rejoicing in having reached
a harbour in safety, gave vent to their satisfaction in hearty cheers.
The whole party were soon on shore.  Beyond the rocks on which they
landed was a broad plot of grass land, sloping gradually upwards,
bordered by a mass of underwood and stunted trees.  In the distance rose
several hills, some of considerable height; while opposite the bay the
harbour had the appearance of a large lake, dotted here and there with
wooded islands, and encircled by a belt of hilly country, covered with
trees.  On the opposite side of the outer harbour which they first
entered Harry told them was Adams' or South Island; while, eastward, a
broad estuary stretched away towards the ocean, forming the entrance to
Carnley Harbour.  Close to where they landed a beautiful stream of clear
water came rushing down from the heights, making its way into the bay.
The moment it was seen most of the party rushed towards it, and in an
instant were kneeling down by its side, taking it up with cups and cans,
which the more provident had brought with them.  Willy immediately ran
back to the boat to secure a can and a small cup, with which, having
filled, he hastened back to where Mrs Morley and her daughters, with
poor Mrs Twopenny, were seated on the rocks.  He saw that they, at all
events, were not unmindful of God's protecting care, which had carried
them through so many dangers, and that they were, with grateful hearts,
offering their thanks to Him to whom their preservation was due.  As
they ceased, Willy approached them.  The two young ladies were certainly
not suffering less than others; but they would not touch the water till
their mother and their invalid companion had quenched their thirst.
When they had done so, Willy could no longer resist placing the jug to
his own lips.

"What, my boy," said Mrs Morley, "had you not first drunk of the water
yourself?"

"No, how could I," said Willy, "when I knew how much you wanted it?"

Willy was amply rewarded with the smile the young ladies bestowed on
him.

"That is indeed true chivalry," observed Emma Morley to her sister.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE "CRUSADER" IS DISABLED.

FEVER STILL ON BOARD--PLANS FOR THE FUTURE--EMILY AND MAY ATTEND THE
SICK--MRS CLAGGET'S SUSPICIONS--SCENE ON DECK OF EMIGRANT SHIP--LAND IN
SIGHT--ARRIVAL AT CAPE TOWN--"CRUSADER" AGAIN READY FOR SEA--"CRUSADER"
MEETS ANOTHER SHIP--CHARLES AND BILL WINDY ON BOARD--THE LOST ONE
RECOVERED--CHARLES NARRATES HIS ADVENTURES--SEAMAN OVERBOARD RECOVERED--
ATTEMPTS TO FOLLOW THE SHIP--SHIP LOST SIGHT OF--WITHOUT FOOD OR WATER
IN BOAT--WINDY KEEPS UP THE MEN'S SPIRITS--THEY STEER FOR TRINIDADA--
LONG VOYAGE IN PROSPECT--SUFFERINGS FROM HUNGER AND THIRST--PICKED UP BY
HOMEWARD BOUND SHIP--GET ON BOARD SHIP BOUND FOR THE CAPE--END OF
CHARLIE'S NARRATIVE--"CRUSADER" STANDS TO THE SOUTH--A GALE COMES ON--
TREMENDOUS SEAS--SAIL BLOWN FROM BOLTROPES--MRS CLAGGET'S TONGUE IN THE
STORM--MRS CLAGGET BEGS THE CAPTAIN TO CHANGE HIS COURSE--SHIP THROWN
ON HER BEAM-ENDS--THE MASTS CUT AWAY--THE "CRUSADER" SPRINGS A LEAK.

The "Crusader" having sailed sufficiently far south to obtain the
assistance of the prevailing westerly winds, once more, with
studding-sails on either side, glided rapidly over the ocean towards the
southern end of Africa.

Besides the sickness which still prevailed, she had run short of water,
in consequence of her long detention in the calms of the Tropics; and
this made it doubly necessary for her to touch at the Cape, in order to
obtain a fresh supply before she continued her course across the
Southern Ocean.

Proudly as she sailed on, how different were the spirits of those on
board to what they had been at the commencement of the voyage.  Jack
Ivyleaf no longer spouted or sang his comic songs.  The poor steerage
passengers mourned for their lost friends.  The seamen talked over the
good qualities of Bill Windy, the late mate, who was a general favourite
with them.  The captain sincerely grieved for him, and felt his loss
acutely.  But Emma and May Dicey, perhaps more than any one else, had
cause to mourn for their brother.  Mr Paget endeavoured, with the most
delicate attention, to comfort them; and even Mrs Clagget's manner
softened when she attempted to soothe the grief of the poor girls.
Still her tongue would keep wagging, and they would frequently have been
glad had she kept silence.

"You see, my dear Emily, you and May have been deprived of your brother,
and I know what it is to lose a person one loves.  When poor dear Mr
Clagget was taken from me, I thought my heart would break; but it
didn't, you see, and I got over my grief in time.  Now, according to my
idea, it is wise to make the best of everything; and what I propose is,
when we reach New Zealand, that we should set up house together.  You
cannot live alone, that's very certain, and I have no wish to reside by
myself.  It is but natural, and right and proper, that an old friend of
your family, as I am, should remain with you, and afford you that
protection which you so much require."

Notwithstanding Mrs Clagget's kind intentions, neither Emily nor May
had any wish to have the sound of her tongue always in their ears.  They
talked over her proposal, but agreed that they would rather do anything
than be compelled to accept it.  Mr Paget did not offer any advice on
the subject, considering that there would be time enough to discuss the
matter when they were nearer New Zealand.  He probably thought that they
would, when there, find some more desirable friend than the talkative
lady appeared to be.  What was passing in his own mind, indeed, he did
not reveal.  There were still so many sick on board that the young
ladies' services were almost as much required in attending to them as at
first.  In this occupation they found their best solace.  After two or
three days, they had aroused themselves to attend to their self-imposed
duties.  They were now never idle, although tears unbidden often came
into their eyes when they thought of their young brother, cut off so
suddenly in his youth and strength.  They endeavoured, on such
occasions, to turn their minds to the duties they had in hand, and, to
the casual observer, they appeared very soon to have recovered from
their loss.

"I have an idea," said Mrs Clagget to the lady who occupied the next
cabin to hers, "that it won't be long after we arrive in New Zealand
before my friend Emily replaces poor dear Charles.  I should have given
those two girls credit for having more feeling; but ah, my dear Mrs
Jones, there's wonderful elasticity in the spirits of youth.  I am sure
such was my case, when I was a girl--down one moment, up the next;
weeping and sighing, laughing and dancing, within a few minutes.  I was
still in my youth when I was deprived of my dear Mr Clagget, and, as I
was telling them the other day, I thought my heart would break; but I
bore my loss with wonderful equanimity."

"Yes; but then you are a wonderful woman," observed Mrs Jones, who had
long since become weary of her neighbour's loquacity, and did not
observe that the Miss Diceys showed any want of feeling at the loss they
had suffered.

Although at first unwilling to encounter their fellow-passengers, the
two poor girls, feeling the importance of taking the fresh air, used to
come on deck at night, where they would stand, their hands clasped
together, watching the beautiful constellations, and gazing over the
dark ocean which they believed to be their beloved brother's grave.  The
other passengers, respecting their grief, kept aloof from them, and
allowed them the part of the deck they chose to themselves.  The old
captain and Mr Paget were the only people who spoke to them on such
occasions, and then only to advise them to retire to their cabins, when
the late hour made it desirable.  Sometimes, notwithstanding this, Emily
lingered, and Mr Paget, finding that he was not intruding on her
sorrows, stood by her side, offering such subjects of consolation as he
thought likely to produce a good impression upon her mind.  Emily felt
very grateful to him, and was thankful that she and her sister had a
friend on whose calm judgment and sympathy they could so thoroughly
rely.

The "Crusader" sailed on towards the east before a steady breeze.  Often
for days together not a sheet nor tack was started; the crew had seldom
to go aloft, except to serve some of the rigging, or to keep the usual
lookout.

Although the sickness on board did not increase, the captain still
considered it necessary to put into Simon's Bay for water.  One fine
calm morning, the passengers were scattered about in groups on deck, the
women belonging to the steerage attending to various domestic concerns,
the mothers dressing and nursing their children, the girls working or
pretending to work with their needles.  Three or four of the men were
helping the cooks, some were mending their shoes, others were tailoring,
a few of both sexes were reading, a greater number arguing some knotty
point, or smoking their pipes, and several were sitting listlessly with
their hands between their knees, already wishing that the voyage was
over, and that they were once more engaged in the occupations to which
they had been accustomed.  The crew were all busy in their various
duties about the ship.  The captain was not a person to allow his men to
be idle.  The carpenter was at his bench, scattering white shavings
around him; several were at work with heaps of oakum, spinning yarns.
The sailmakers, with canvas spread before them, were plying their
needles; others were making mats, or splicing or knotting ropes.  The
painters, with their pots and brushes, were giving touches to the
bulwarks and other parts where the paint had been rubbed off; and every
particle of brass was getting a fresh polish from the ship's boys, who
whistled as they worked.  The cabin passengers were collected under the
awning on the poop.  In one part, Mr and Mrs Bolton, with their
children around them, were holding school; the younger ladies were
reading or working.  Mr James Joel was laying down the law on some
agricultural subject to the young farmer, Luke Gravel.  Tom Loftus and
Jack Ivyleaf were smoking their cigars, and arranging some plan of
proceeding which Jack had proposed as certain of success.  Mrs Clagget,
though with work in her hands, had forgot all about it in her eagerness
to employ her tongue on her reluctant hearer, poor Mrs Jones.  Emily
and May were reading together a book which Mr Paget had lent them.  He
had wisely judged that the best way to restore their spirits was to draw
them off from themselves.  He was standing near them, doing nothing, an
unusual occurrence for him.  Now and then he glanced over the page, and
made some remark, and though perhaps he was not aware of it, he
continued watching Emily's countenance as she read.

"I thought so before, and now I am sure," whispered Mrs Clagget to her
companion.  "Well, it's the best thing that could happen."

"But is he going to settle in New Zealand?" asked Mrs Jones.  "He is a
mere traveller I fancy, or perhaps he has a wife already."

"I think too highly of him to suppose that," said Mrs Clagget; "though,
to be sure, I do wish he would talk more about himself.  I like a person
to be communicative; those reticent people always puzzle me."

Such was the state of affairs on board the "Crusader" when a voice was
heard from aloft shouting the welcome cry of "Land ho!  Land on the port
bow!"  In an instant every one was on the alert, looking out in the
direction indicated; but though it could be seen from the mast-head, a
considerable time passed before it was visible from the deck.

The captain ordered the seamen to the starboard braces, and in an
instant, the deck, before so quiet, was full of bustle and life.  The
ship was hauled up to the north, and at length the bold outline of the
Cape of Good Hope came into view.  Before evening the "Crusader"
anchored in Simon's Bay.

The captain at once went on shore, and returned with the satisfactory
intelligence that the passengers would be allowed to land on the
following morning, though they would be kept in quarantine till all fear
of infection had passed away.  This would detain the ship for some time;
but it was hoped that the residence on shore, with the advantages of an
abundant supply of fresh vegetables, would restore the sick to health.
Mrs Clagget was very indignant on finding that she would not be allowed
to visit the town, nor to travel into the country.  She had, however, to
submit to regulations which were for the good of all.  All the
passengers were indeed compelled to land, as it was considered necessary
thoroughly to fumigate every part of the "Crusader," an operation which
could not be carried on while they remained on board.  When released
from quarantine, the Miss Diceys met with much sympathy from the
inhabitants of Cape Town, who had heard of the loss of the boat.  Mr
Paget was received with great attention by the principal people in the
place.

"I am sure he must be somebody," observed Mrs Clagget, when she heard
of it.  "I have always remarked a peculiarly aristocratic air about
him."  However, as Mr Paget himself did not speak of any of his
acquaintances, the good lady began to doubt whether the report was true.

At length the "Crusader" was declared to be again ready for sea, the
steerage passengers were removed on board, and the following day the
rest again occupied their cabins.  Captain Westerway had wished to
obtain another first mate in the place of Bill Windy, but he had been
unsuccessful.  The second mate was a young man, and though a fair
sailor, was not as trustworthy a navigator as the captain desired; thus,
consequently, throwing more labour and responsibility on him.  Once more
the sails were loosed, the anchor hove up, and the "Crusader" stood out
of Simon's Bay, the captain hoping to get a good offing before
nightfall.  Sail after sail was loosed; and close-hauled, with the wind
to the westward, she glided swiftly over the blue sea.  While the
passengers were on deck watching the receding shores, a shout was heard
that another ship was approaching under all sail, right ahead.  Their
attention was turned towards the stranger.  She was an object to be
admired, as, the sun glancing on her wide spread of canvas, she heeled
gracefully over to the breeze.  The two ships rapidly neared each other,
the "Crusader" keeping to windward.  Closer and closer they drew; it
seemed, indeed, as if they were about to run into each other.  The
stranger, however, slightly deviated from the course on which she had
been steering, and then keeping as before, showed that she intended to
pass as near as possible to leeward of the "Crusader."  The passengers
of the latter ship hurried to the side nearest her, and a number of
people were seen on board, some holding on to the shrouds, others
leaning over the bulwarks.

"Why, as I'm a live man, there's our mate, Bill Windy," exclaimed one of
the "Crusader's" seamen, "and there's Dick Hansom, and Tom Bowline, I do
believe!  Yes, it's Tom himself!"

Emily and May heard these exclamations, and, eagerly gazing with beating
hearts, they saw their brother Charles in the main rigging.  They looked
and looked again, scarcely trusting their eyes; but there could be no
mistake.  He waved his hand; he had seen them, and Bill Windy discovered
them also.

"Heave to," cried the mate, "and we will come aboard you."

The two ships glided by each other.  The helm of the stranger was put
down, and with her headsails backed against the masts, she lay, hove to.
Captain Westerway imitated the manoeuvre, and the "Crusader" likewise
became almost stationary.  Scarcely even now crediting what they had
seen, and feeling as if they were in a dream, the two sisters watched
the stranger.  A boat was lowered.  Several people jumped into her, and
she rapidly approached.  In a few minutes their dear brother Charles,
for whom they had so long grieved as lost, was in their arms.  May hung
about his neck, and kissed him again and again.  Bill Windy and the rest
of the boat's crew received the hearty greetings of their shipmates.
The good captain, with a tear in his eye, warmly shook his mate by the
hand.  "I would rather see you here alive and well, my dear fellow, than
be told I had a fortune of a hundred thousand pounds left me, and need
no longer knock about the salt ocean.  I had given you up as gone for
ever, Bill."

"I knew that you would do your best to look for us, captain," answered
the mate, "and that it was no fault of yours that you didn't pick us up.
We had a narrow squeak for it; but we had saved poor Tom, and that
cheered us during the dangerous time we had to go through."

"And how did it all happen, how did it all happen, Mr Charles?"
exclaimed Mrs Clagget, as soon as she thought he and his sisters had
kissed and welcomed him sufficiently, as she called it.  "We're dying to
know how it happened, for we never expected to see you again."

"I hope soon to tell you my story," answered Charles, "but I must shake
hands first with the friends who are wishing to speak to me."

Mr Paget was among the foremost to welcome Charles, the rest of the
passengers following, and expressing their pleasure at seeing him again.

"Now, Charles, you must know that I am very angry with you for jumping
into that boat," exclaimed Mrs Clagget.  "The only way you can make
your peace with me is to tell me your story at once.  I can't let you go
and describe all to your sisters and other people, and allow me to have
it second-hand."

Charles laughed.  "I must not disappoint you, then, Mrs Clagget," he
said.  "But were I to give you more than the outline of my adventures, I
should have to spin you too long a yarn; so you must excuse me if I
somewhat curtail my story.  Soon after we shoved off from the ship, we
saw the lifebuoy, and Tom Bowline, the man who had fallen overboard,
clinging to it, and driving away to leeward.  We followed, and not
without difficulty got him at last on board.  We then attempted to
secure the buoy, and while so doing, a heavy sea broke over us, and
nearly swamped the boat.  She had, we found, so slight a hold of the
water that she drifted away even faster than the lifebuoy.  One of the
oars had been broken, and another was carried away while we were trying
to haul in the lifebuoy.  We thus in vain attempted to pull back to the
ship, and found ourselves every instant increasing our distance from
her.  Sometimes, as we sank into the trough of the sea, she was hidden
from our sight, and we knew, consequently, that we could not be seen
from her deck; besides this, from the colour of the boat, when we were
on the crest of the sea, we were well aware that she could scarcely be
distinguished from the foaming water around.  At length we saw the yards
swung round, and then we knew that we must have been given up for lost.
To reach her was impossible.  You may fancy, my dear sisters, how
acutely I felt for you, knowing the grief my supposed loss must cause
you.  That, indeed, was the hardest thing to bear.  Our hopes revived
when we saw the ship wear round, and stand back again nearly across the
spot where Tom had fallen overboard; but she kept too far to windward.
Though we could not row with any effect, we determined to try and sail.
Happily, Jack Ivyleaf and Tom Loftus had in the morning been reclining
at their ease in the boat to smoke their cigars, and, to make themselves
comfortable, had thrown in some rugs and blankets.  With these we
devised some sails, the broken oar was fitted as a bowsprit, and two
other oars were stepped as masts.  Some of the emigrants had,
fortunately for us, also left a child's mattress in the boat.  This,
split open, formed a jib and fore-staysail We had a coil of rope, with
which we fitted the stays and sheets.  Our sails answered better than we
expected; but we found that we could not lie sufficiently close to the
wind to get up to the ship.  Our disappointment was great when we saw
her again standing on her course.  Night was approaching, and we were by
this time some five miles away; still, while the light lasted, we could
clearly trace the rise and fall of her bowsprit with the swell of the
sea.  Bill Windy, however, did his best to keep up our spirits.  `Never
fear, lads,' he exclaimed, `we are slipping along at a good rate through
the water, and we shall not be so very far astern of the old ship after
all; perhaps at daylight, when the sea goes down, as it is doing fast,
she will catch sight of us, and we shall be aboard again for breakfast.'
The word `breakfast' made us think of food, for we were feeling
somewhat hungry; but not a particle could be found in the boat.  The
mate now divided us into two watches; he was in the one, I in the other.
While one of us steered, another kept a look-out, and the rest slept.
I confess that I felt from the first that the chance of catching the
ship was but small; still I hoped that we might do so, and hope kept up
my spirits during that long night.  Sleep I could not for thinking of
you both, and what would become of you should I be lost.  I knew we were
a long, long way from any land, without a drop of water or a particle of
food.  We could scarcely, therefore, expect to survive till we should
reach even the nearest point.  While I sat alongside the mate, talking
of the possibility of overtaking the ship, I asked him whether he really
thought we could do so.

"`That depends whether during the night she carries much sail or not.
The captain believes that the boat was swamped.  To tell you the truth,
Mr Dicey, I don't think we shall overhaul her, however, we must not
give way to despair.  If the worst comes to the worst, we must try and
make a little island which lies midway between the coast of South
America and Africa, called Trinidada.  It is a barren spot, but I have
heard that water is to be procured there, and it is said that a few
runaway seamen, with negro wives, manage to pick up a livelihood on it.
If so, we shall not want for food, as where they exist we can manage to
support ourselves till a ship passes within hail.'  By the mate's
calculation, the island he spoke of was about a hundred and twenty miles
away to leeward.  It was, however, but a small dot in the ocean to hit
to a certainty; still he thought we should not fail to pass within sight
of it.  `However,' he concluded, `mind, I don't think that it is
impossible we may, after all, be in sight of the ship at daylight.'  The
boat was making fine weather of it, and slipping at the rate of five or
six knots an hour through the water, so that, had we possessed something
to eat and drink, we should have had less cause for anxiety.
Notwithstanding this, the men kept up their spirits wonderfully, and as
they were roused up one after the other to take their watch, each man
had a joke on his lips.  The thing they chiefly seemed to sigh for was a
pipe of tobacco.  Tom had had some in his pocket, he declared, when he
went overboard, but it must have slipped out, and he mourned its loss
more than that of his hat.

"When morning broke, you may be sure we eagerly looked out for the ship,
but she was nowhere to be seen.  `Then, lads,' exclaimed the mate, in a
cheerful voice, `what we have now to do is to steer for the island I
have been telling Mr Dicey about.  No fear as to getting there, and we
may live like Robinson Crusoe, the lords of all we survey, till some
craft comes by to take us off, and then we can go or not as we have a
mind to do.'  `Hurra for Trinidada,' shouted the men, inquiring of the
mate what sort of a place it was.  As the wind was right aft, we rigged
the square-sail with the boathook as a yard, and though the sea was
still running pretty heavily, we calculated that we were making a good
six knots an hour.  The mate advised the men to take a reef in their
belts when they felt hungry.  `Ay, ay, sir,' answered Tom, laughing,
`it's the best way to keep hunger out, when there happens to be no
plum-dough to stow aboard.'  `I wonder who will have ours,' exclaimed
another of the men.  `I'll lay anything Dick Handspike does his best to
get my share.'  Thus the men joked and laughed as if we were not in the
middle of the Atlantic, with a fearful probability of being starved to
death.  Bill Windy assured us that we should make the island by noon the
following day, whispering to me, however, that he had hopes of reaching
it by dawn, and we all made up our minds for another supperless night at
sea.  I had little notion before what were the actual sensations of
thirst and hunger.  I could not help thinking of your remark, Mrs
Clagget, to me a short time ago, and wished that a covey of flying-fish
would come on board.  Some of the men had begun to scrape the broken
pieces of the oar, and chew the wood to stop the gnawing of hunger.
Another night, we all felt, would be very trying.  The day wore on, and
though we had kept a bright look-out on either side, no sail had been
sighted.  Believing that if I could get to sleep, I might better endure
the pangs of hunger, I at length threw myself down in the bottom of the
boat, and had been dozing away, though still conscious of where I was,
when I heard a shout of `Sail, ahoy!'  We were all sitting up in a
moment, and saw, on the port bow, the topgallant sails of a ship rising
above the horizon.  She was standing to the northward.  We bore away and
rapidly neared her.  As we approached, she altered her course still more
for us.  We were seen, and had now every hopes of getting on board.  At
length she hove to, and we were quickly alongside.  She was an American
whaler, homeward bound.  The captain received us with the greatest
kindness; our boat was hoisted up; and while Windy and I were
entertained in the cabin, the men were hospitably treated by the crew
forward.  Although we were no longer in danger of starving, I could not
help still thinking of the grief you, my sisters, were suffering on my
account, and wishing that some aerial telegraph existed among the
wonders of nature by which I could send you a message to assure you of
my safety.  Months might pass before I could find a ship to rejoin you
in New Zealand.  When the captain heard of my anxiety, he promised to
keep a bright look-out for any ship bound for the Cape or the Australian
colonies, on board which he might put us.  The mate and I spent most of
each day relieving each other at the mast-head, not willing to trust to
the eyes of others.

"Near a week had passed away, when Bill Windy, who was aloft, hailed the
deck.  A ship was in sight, steering southward.  We stood for her, with
a signal flying.  She hove to.  We did the same.  She was bound out for
the Cape.  Wishing good-bye to the kind master, who would not receive
even the boat which we offered him as payment for his hospitality, we
went on board the other ship.  We were as kindly received as before.  We
met with no accident, though we had a somewhat slow passage, till, to
our joy, we recognised the `Crusader' coming out of Simon's Bay.  Thus,
Mrs Clagget, ends our adventures.  I only wish you had heard them from
my friend Windy, as he would have given them in a more graphic manner."

"Oh, I intend to get them out of him before long," said Mrs Clagget.
"There are a number of things I want to ask him about, and remember, Mr
Charles, that you never go and do so foolish a thing again.  You don't
know how angry I have been with you."

"I am much obliged to you, Mrs Clagget, and promise to remember your
advice," said Charles, laughing, as he descended with his sisters to
their cabin, where they might talk of their dear home and the loved ones
there.  Charles greatly relieved their minds when he told them that he
had written home, and that he hoped his letter would reach England as
soon as that which conveyed the intelligence of his supposed loss.  They
had thought of remaining at the Cape, but Mrs Clagget and Captain
Westerway had urged them to continue their voyage in the "Crusader."
Perhaps Mr Paget might have said something about the matter.  At all
events, they had determined to go on to New Zealand, thence to return
home, should they find it desirable.  Having recovered their brother,
they had now no longer any doubts about the future, but believed--and
surely that was but natural--that all would go smoothly and happily.

The ship stood to the south, till she again met with the steady westerly
wind, which had already carried her so many hundred miles on her voyage.
A change, however, again came over the ocean.  Dark clouds were seen
hurrying across the sky; the sea, hitherto rolling in regular billows,
now began to foam, and hiss, and dance wildly about, the wind carrying
the spray in thick sheets from their curling summits over the deck.
Sail after sail was taken off the ship, till the topsails, closely
reefed, alone remained set, the gale howling and whistling in the
rigging.  The waves continued to increase in height, and huge mountains
of water rose up on either side, whilst others came rolling astern, as
if about to break over the poop and sweep the decks of the stout ship.
The emigrants were desired to keep below, the hatches were battened
down, everything that could be washed away was secured.  Lines were also
stretched along the deck, by the aid of which the seamen could make
their way from one end to the other.  Four of the best hands, secured by
ropes, were at the helm, where they stood struggling and clinging to it
every now and then, in spite of all their efforts one or other being
thrown on either side from the violent jerks it made.  The wind
increased every instant, low heavily laden clouds bounded the horizon,
circumscribed to a couple of miles.  Sometimes the ship sank so low in
the trough of the sea that the curling summits of the waves appeared to
reach above her mast-heads; now she climbed a watery height, to remain
but for a moment, before she rushed down again on her impetuous course.
In vain the captain and his mates shouted to the men, their voices were
drowned by the loud uproar of the waves, the howling and whistling of
the wind in the rigging, the creaking of the bulk-heads, the flapping of
the canvas, the complaining of the masts and spars.  A fierce hurricane
was blowing, such as Captain Westerway said he had never before
encountered in those seas.  Charles and Mr Paget frequently made their
way on deck to witness the grand spectacle which the ocean presented.  A
close-reefed fore-topsail, and a storm-staysail were the only sails set;
but even with these the masts bent as if they would go by the board, and
every moment it seemed likely that the canvas would be carried out of
the boltropes.  Looking astern, they saw the huge waves following them,
now one came rolling up, its foaming crest towering over the taffrail,
while ahead appeared another, the summit of which could just be seen
above the fore-topmast-crosstrees.  In an instant, the ship, escaping
from the watery mountain astern, rose to the crest of that before her,
and thus she careered onwards, again sinking so low down, that,
sheltered by the surrounding seas, the wind could not be felt on deck,
though still heard whistling aloft.  Directly afterwards it came with a
force against which it seemed scarcely possible to withstand.
Frequently as the ship rolled, the ends of her yards flicked off the
crest of the waves which rose up on either side.  For several days the
ship ran on, the gale in no way moderating.  Emily and May longed to go
on deck, to witness, with their brother and Mr Paget, the wild tumult
of waters.  They wisely entreated them not to make the attempt.

"No, no, young ladies," said Captain Westerway, "you had better stay
where you are.  We are doing our best as seamen, but we cannot tell from
one moment to another what may happen.  A mast may go, and one of those
waves following astern might break on board, and sweep the decks, and
you will be carried away like feathers without the possibility of saving
you."

This reply made them very anxious whenever Charles and Mr Paget went on
deck.  One day they both had gone up as usual, promising to hold fast
and not run any risk of the danger the Captain had pictured.  Just as
the ship had reached the crest of a sea a clap was heard like the sound
of thunder.  The fore-topsail had split.  In an instant the larger
portion was blown into ribbons, which, streaming out, flapped and
twisted and curled themselves round the yard.

"Fore-topmen, aloft!" cried the captain, and, led by Bill Windy, several
men mounted the rigging with axes in their belts.  As the fragments of
the sail beat wildly about, the men ran a fearful risk of being caught
by them and hurled into the foaming sea.  Bravely they faced the danger,
and, cutting away the remainder of the sail, off it flew like a gigantic
kite ahead of the ship.  Now came the task of bending another sail.
Notwithstanding the difficulty, this was accomplished, the ship happily
escaping being pooped during the interval.

Several more days passed by and still the gale gave no sign of abating.
How different was the aspect of the cabin now to what it had been during
fine weather.  The stern lights were closely shut in, the sky-light
battened down and covered over, to prevent any sea which might come on
board breaking through.  A solitary lamp swung, both night and day, to
and fro, casting a pale, flickering light around.  Most of the
passengers kept in their cabins, seldom venturing out, even at the
breakfast and dinner hour, at which time the table was partially covered
with dishes, firmly secured by puddings and fiddles, as the captain told
them the lines and sandbags fastened to it are called.  Even Mrs
Clagget's tongue was more silent than usual; sometimes, however, it
could be heard amid the creaking of the bulk-heads, as she endeavoured
to make Mr Jones listen to her complaints; but, though the notes of her
voice were distinguishable, that much-enduring lady could but seldom
catch the meaning of her words.  "Terrible!" then the ship rolled and
the bulk-heads creaked.  "Deceitful!" and a blow on the quarter from the
sea prevented the remainder of the sentence being heard.  "Ought to have
come another way,"--the increasing uproar drowned even her voice.
"Complain to authorities," showed that Mrs Clagget entertained strong
doubts of the captain's seamanship.  Now and then, when he made his
appearance in the cabin, though he was but seldom off the deck, she
attacked him vigorously.  He, however, only smiled at her complaints,
and assured her that, had he the management of the weather, he would
have arranged smooth seas and steady breezes for her sake, and for that
of the other fair ladies on board.  "But you see, madam," he observed,
"though the wind blows pretty strong, it is carrying us at a good rate
on our course.  In a few days we shall be at no great distance from the
southern end of New Zealand; and, once under the lee of the land, we
shall have, I hope, smooth water and a fair breeze to carry us into
port."

The gale, however, continued longer than the captain expected; but he
hoped soon to make the land which he had spoken of.  This news raised
the spirits of all, and many who, during the continuance of the
hurricane, had shut themselves up in their cabins, now once more
appeared on deck.

"Do you really tell me that the sea has greatly gone down?" said Emily,
as she watched the still mountainous billows amid which the ship
laboured.

"Oh, they are mere mole-hills to what they have been," answered Bill
Windy, who was standing by.  "The stout ship makes nothing of them.
See, we have our three topsails set again, and shall soon be shaking out
the topgallant sails and letting fall the courses."  The mate, however,
was wrong in his prognostications.  During the middle watch, while the
second mate had charge of the deck, the wind suddenly chopped round.
The ship heeled to the fearful blast.  In an instant her lee-yardarms
were dipping in the foaming seas.  Before he had time to issue any
orders the main topgallant mast was carried away, dragging the
fore-topmast, and with it the jibboom.  Still the ship did not rise--she
was on her beam-ends.  Captain Westerway and Bill Windy were on deck in
an instant.  The watch below came hurrying up without being summoned.
Every one knew what had occurred.

"Cut away the mizen-mast, Windy," cried the captain.

The mate, with a gleaming axe in his hand, stood ready to obey the
order.  The shrouds were cut.

"Cut," cried the captain, and a few strokes sent the tall mast into the
sea.  The desired effect was not produced.  The helm was put up, but the
ship refused to obey it.  The mate sprang to the mainmast.  That, too,
must go, or the ship might never rise from her dangerous position; but
it was a fearful alternative; for, deprived of her masts, she might be
driven at the mercy of the wind and waves, and cast helpless on some
rocky shore of that bleak region, towards which, should the gale
continue, she might be driven.

"Cut," again cried the captain.  The mainmast fell into the seething
water, the seamen hurrying with axes to sever the ropes which kept it
still attached to the ship.  With a sudden jerk the ship in another
instant rose to an even keel; but so violent was the motion that the
foremast, deprived of its accustomed support, went by the board, and the
"Crusader" lay a helpless wreck on the wild waste of waters.

It is needless to describe the dismay and anxiety of those below, though
only partly aware of the dangerous position to which the ship was
reduced.  Now, answering her helm, she flew before the gale.  While the
captain was issuing orders to clear the wreck, the carpenter appeared
with a face of dismay.  He had been sounding the well.

"Three feet of water in the hold, sir," he said.  "It will be a hard
job, with all the pumps going, to keep the leaks under."

Mr Paget heard the announcement.  "I will get the emigrants to work
them," he said, "and the cabin passengers will, I feel confident, set
the example."

"Rig the pumps at once, then, Mr Gimlett," said the captain.  "When the
gale moderates we will get up jury-masts, and do our best to save the
ship.  Tell the poor people not to be downhearted, Mr Paget, but to put
their trust in Him who has carried us thus far on our voyage in safety."



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

AN INVASION OF SEALS.

STORES LANDED--PARTY SENT TO KILL SEALS--A TENT RIGGED--WOODCUTTERS SET
TO WORK--TIGER-SEALS--A MOB OF SEALS ATTACKED--PETER CHASED BY
TIGER-SEAL--WILLY RESCUES PETER FROM THE SEAL--HARRY MEDITATES ON HIS
RESPONSIBILITIES--THE ENCAMPMENT AT NIGHT--A STORM THREATENS--RAIN COMES
THROUGH THE HUTS--INVADED BY SEALS--SEALS DRIVEN OFF--A HURRICANE--BOATS
IN DANGER--THE CUTTER HAULED UP--THE LAUNCH WRECKED--THE HUTS BLOWN
DOWN.

As soon as the thirst of the long sea-tossed party was assuaged, Harry
called the officers and men round him.

"We have an abundance of work before us," he said.  "We have but a
scanty stock of provisions remaining, and must obtain more without
delay.  We have wood to cut for fuel, and we must get up the best
shelter we can manage for the women and children before nightfall.
First, however, we must land our remaining stores, and secure them under
cover.  For these purposes we will form three parties."

Dr Davis volunteered at once to go in search of seals; several, it
will be remembered, having been observed poking their snouts out of the
water as they came up the harbour.  He had hopes also of finding more on
the islands or rocks within its circuit.  Captain Twopenny offered to
accompany him, and Willy and Peter Patch begged that they might go also.
Harry told them that they might take the cutter as soon as she was
unloaded, with four of the men to pull.  The boatswain and a large party
took charge of the unloading of the boats and putting up the huts, while
the remainder, armed with all the axes which could be mustered, were
directed to cut down wood for fuel.

"And, please sir, what are we to do?" asked Mrs Rumbelow; "there are
other hands here willing to work."

"I think the best thing you can do is to look after the children,"
answered Harry.

"Oh, sir, the ladies can do that; and they will pardon me for saying so.
I and several other women can manage to bring in the wood as the men
cut it, or to carry up the stores from the water.  No one among us
wishes to be idle."

"I am not going to work," said poor Mr Holt, who was seated by himself
on a rock.  "I was brought here against my will, and do not intend to be
made a slave of."

"Poor fellow," observed Harry, "he is not yet recovered from his attack,
Well, Mrs Rumbelow, I will accept your services; but what we have to do
must be done quickly, as night will shortly be upon us."

The wooding party under Paul Lizard, as soon as they had collected all
the axes and large knives to be found, went off to the wood at a short
distance from the landing-place.  The cutter was quickly unloaded.  The
doctor, in the meantime, had been surveying the island across the
harbour with a spy-glass.  "I see several dark objects moving up the
bank," he observed.  "I have no doubt they are seals; and, if so, we may
hope to obtain an ample supply of fresh meat.  We shall find clubs of
more use than our guns," he added; "make haste, and get some ready."  As
soon as the clubs were cut from some small trees growing near the beach,
the doctor, fearing that the seals might return to the water before they
could get up to them, hurried his companions into the boat, which pulled
away across the harbour.  The launch had been hauled alongside the
rocks, and as soon as she was unloaded, Harry and the boatswain set to
work to erect a tent.  The mast served as the ridge pole, and the spars
and oars formed supports over these, while the sails of the two boats
were spread and secured to the ground by stones placed along the lower
edges.  Besides this, the canvas was made fast with lashings and ropes
to the poles.  A tent of tolerable dimensions was thus formed,
sufficiently large to protect all the women and children.

"Should rain come on, there is something it wants," observed Mrs
Rumbelow, who had been very active in bringing up the things from the
boats.  "We must spread a flooring of some sort.  It will not do for
Mrs Morley and the young ladies to lie on the bare ground."  Saying
this, and summoning the other women, she hurried off to the wood.  In a
short time she and her attendants returned with loads of spruce
fir-tops.  These were spread over the ground at one end of the tent.
The cutter's foresail had been triced up, and served as a partition.
"There, marm," she said, addressing Mrs Morley; "we have fitted up a
room for you, and the two young ladies, and Mrs Twopenny, where you may
be tolerably private; I wish it were a better one.  You have not been
accustomed to this sort of rough life; but I and most of the other women
have seen something of it before, and can manage very well in the rest
of the tent.  I only hope the children won't disturb you at night."

Mrs Morley warmly thanked her.

"Bless you, marm," answered Mrs Rumbelow, "we have only done our duty.
We could never do too much for our poor colonel's lady; so pray, marm,
don't talk of thanks."

Mrs Morley and the other ladies gladly took possession of that portion
of the tent prepared for them, feeling truly thankful that they could
rest without the dread of awaking and finding the dark seas tossing and
foaming around them.  As soon as the tent was set up, the boatswain and
most of the other men joined the party in the wood, to collect the
boughs and the thickest bushes they could find.  With these they erected
a number of wigwams, within which all the men might lie down and find
shelter.  Mrs Rumbelow would not yet let her attendants rest, but back
again they went to the wood, and returned laden with as much fuel as
they could carry.  A large fire soon blazed up.

"I wish we had some seal-flesh ready for cooking," observed the
boatswain to her as she began busily to employ herself in roasting the
last of the penguins, and the few remaining eggs which had been brought
from the rock.  "This sort of work makes one hungry."

"If the doctor and the rest have any luck, we shall soon have as much as
you and all hands can stow away," she answered.  "We'll keep the fire
blazing for them."

The cutter had meantime made her way across the harbour towards the
island.  As she drew near it, the doctor and his party distinguished
several large animals, apparently asleep, high on the beach.

"Why, I do believe they are lions!" exclaimed Peter Patch, as a huge
monster, one of the nearest, lifted up its head and stared at the
intruders with its large eyes.  The creature's mouth was of a prodigious
size, furnished with teeth, four of which were of great length.  It had
long bristles on its lips, and from the neck and shoulders stood up a
thick mane of coarse hair.  As they continued to advance, it lifted up
its head just as a dog would do, opening wide its mouth as if ready to
attack them with its enormous teeth.

"I say, Dicey, surely the doctor is not going in to fight these savage
creatures," whispered Peter.  "Why they will tear us to pieces and
gobble us up in five minutes."

"They look fierce enough," said Willy.  "But they are only seals, and as
they have not got legs, I suppose we can easily manage to keep out of
their way."  Captain Twopenny proposed shooting the sea-lion; but the
doctor warned him not to fire, lest he might alarm the remainder, who
might take to the water before they could land.  He directed Willy,
therefore, to steer the boat further round, so that they might get on
shore at a little distance from the seals, and then, by creeping on them
unawares, kill as many as they might require.

They soon landed, and the captain and doctor led the way, club in hand,
followed by Willy, Peter, and three of the men, one having been left in
charge of the boat.  Willy shortly afterwards missed Peter, who had
evidently no fancy for attacking the lions, as he still believed them to
be.  After making their way through the bush for a short distance, the
rest of the party came upon an open space in which were at least a
hundred seals, apparently fast asleep, divided into three bands, which
the sailors called mobs, quite separate from each other.  They were of
all sizes; some were huge bulls, others cows; and among them were a
number of young calves.  The doctor told off two men to attack each mob.
Willy thought that it must be dangerous work to fight such formidable
creatures; still he was not inclined to flinch from it.  The doctor
directed them to knock over the young ones, and not to mind the others,
unless the creatures should stand at bay, or attack them.  "If they do,
we must give them a hard rap on the nose, which, depend upon it, will
settle them at once," he observed.

Having placed their guns against a tree, they grasped their clubs at a
sign from the doctor, who set them the example, and rushed in among the
seals.  The animals waking up, stared at the intruders with
astonishment, while the doctor and his companions, wielding their clubs,
struck right and left at their heads.  A single blow was sufficient to
kill the young ones, and in a few seconds more than a dozen were knocked
over.  The larger animals, seized with alarm, instead of turning to
attack their assailants, scuttled off, moving themselves with their fins
at a rapid rate towards the water.  Three, however, of the large seals
were killed, besides the smaller ones.

"Well done, my lads," cried the doctor, delighted.  "We shall have
provisions enough to last all hands for several days.  No fear of
starvation now, I hope.  Dicey, do you and two of the men bring the boat
round to take the seals on board.  Dick Sharp and Tom Wall, go with Mr
Dicey."

"Ay, ay, sir," said the men named.

Willy hastened off to obey the order, carrying his gun with him.  He had
not gone far when a cry was heard.  "Help! help! help! a savage brute is
at me."  It was Peter Patch who was crying out.  Willy and his
companions hurried on, and in another instant they caught sight of Peter
Patch scrambling up a tree, while a huge tiger-seal, as the sailors
called the creature, on account of the colour of its fur, was charging
at him with open mouth.  Peter had barely time to draw himself up out of
the monster's way.  The seal, seeing Willy and the other men
approaching, now came dashing on towards them, and they had to leap
actively out of its way to avoid its sharp tusks.  So savage did it look
that they had no wish to approach its open jaws; indeed, with such
rapidity did it run and twist about in the thick bush, that they had
considerable difficulty in escaping from it.

"Take care," cried Peter; "he nearly killed me just now.  If he catches
you, you'll repent it."

At that moment the seal either heard Peter's voice or caught sight of
him, and again dashed up towards the tree.  This enabled Willy and his
companions to get into a more open part of the bush.  Peter shrieked
out, "Oh! oh! shoot him, shoot him, or he will be clambering up after
me."

Willy could not help laughing at his messmate's fright, not believing
that the creature could possibly climb the tree.  He was now able to
stop and take aim.  He fired, and though the bullet went through the
seal's head, it seemed in no way incommoded, but, finding that it could
not reach Peter, turned round and made again towards its other foes.
Willy, who had begun to load, had to scramble as best he could through
the scrub, to escape the charge of the enraged creature.  The seamen,
observing the dangerous position in which he was placed, hurried forward
with their clubs uplifted.  The animal turned towards Tom Wall, and
seizing his club, wrenched it out of his hand, biting it almost through.
Dick Sharp, however, at the same moment let fall his weapon on its nose
with such force that the creature staggered and sank to the ground, thus
allowing Tom to get back his club.  Before, however, either of them
could repeat the blow, the seal, recovering, again dashed at Tom, who
had to leap out of its way, narrowly escaping an ugly gripe on the leg.
Willy had again loaded, but was afraid to fire lest he might hit either
of the seamen.  The seal now stopped, seeming doubtful at which of his
assailants he should next rush.  When they stopped the creature stopped
also; and directly they moved, either to one side or the other, it
charged as fearlessly as at first.  At length Willy got another shot.
Again the ball entered the creature's head, but without producing any
apparent effect.  Several times the brave old sea-lion charged, now on
one side, now on the other, till it again got into the open space.  It
was now apparently beginning to feel the effects of the bullets, for,
raising itself up on its fore-flippers, it remained several seconds
glaring at its foes.

"Come on, Tom," cried Dick Sharp.  "We are not going to be beaten by a
seal, I hope, though he does look more like an African lion than any
creature I have ever before set eyes on."

Peter, ashamed of his fright, now came down from the tree, and picking
up his club, which he had dropped, he with the rest advanced towards the
doomed seal.  A well-aimed blow by Dick brought it again to the ground,
and in another instant it was deprived of life.  As it was too far from
the boat to attempt to get it on board, they left it, and quickly pulled
round to the spot where the other slaughtered animals lay.  In a short
time the boat was fully loaded.  Just as they were shoving off, several
wild-fowl were seen.

"We ought to try and get some," said Willy, "for though this seal's
flesh will do for us and the men, the poor ladies require more delicate
food."

Captain Twopenny and the doctor at once crept up towards the birds, and
soon killed a dozen; for they, being evidently in happy ignorance of the
effect of fire-arms, were not frightened at the report of the guns.
Willy also succeeded in bringing down three with his gun.  It was quite
dark, as the boat, with her welcome supply of provisions, crossed the
harbour, the light from the camp-fire serving as a beacon by which Willy
could steer his course.

The weather had been somewhat threatening, the wind freshened up, and
deeply laden as was the boat, they were afraid that she might be swamped
before they could reach the shore.  At length, however, they got safely
to land, and found the party still busy in putting up huts.  Mrs
Rumbelow was was among the first to welcome them.  As soon as she saw
the wild-fowl, she begged for a couple, and began picking them on her
way back to the fire.  The seals and the remainder of the birds were
quickly landed, and an ample supply of their flesh was soon either
boiling over the fire or roasting before it.  Mrs Rumbelow prepared
with the birds a more delicate meal for the ladies than the seal-flesh
could afford.  Willy had the satisfaction of taking it to them, with the
last plateful of biscuit crumbs which remained.  One of the compass
lamps had been hung up to give light to the tent within which the four
ladies were seated.

"The doctor says that he hopes to-morrow to find some roots which may
serve instead of bread," observed Willy; "and he begs, Mrs Morley, that
you will accept the last apology for wheaten bread we are likely to have
for some time."

"Pray, thank the doctor, and we hope that you will share it with us, Mr
Dicey," said Mrs Morley.

"No, no, marm!" answered Willy, laughing at the bare thought of such a
thing.  "Mr Shafto has determined that the officers and men shall share
alike, and we have all agreed to abide by his wishes."

The arrangement for the night had scarcely yet been completed, but the
people were so hungry that Harry Shafto allowed them to knock off work,
that they might cook the seal-flesh which had just arrived.  Three fires
had been lit, round which eager faces were collected, some toasting
pieces of seal-flesh on the ends of sticks, others more scientifically
roasting them on spits, while Mrs Rumbelow was cooking more of the
wild-fowl reserved for the women.  Close to these fires were the huts
just erected, of various shapes, some like Indian wigwams, others with
circular roofs, others of a more square form, as the fancy of the
architects had dictated; while beyond them was the more pretentious tent
composed of the boats' sails.

In front, the two boats floated in the bay, with a dark outline of the
shore and hills of the other side of the harbour, while behind the camp
rose tree-covered heights, some towering up towards the sky, out of
which numberless stars were now shining forth.  Harry had walked a
little way from the camp, where he stood, considering what was next to
be done.  He felt the full responsibility of the position in which he
was placed.

"We may still," he thought, "reach New Zealand in the boats; but the
risk of the passage across the stormy sea which intervenes is very
great.  We may be unable to make the English settlements in the northern
island, and it is uncertain what reception we may meet with from the
natives on any other part of the coast.  It may be wiser to remain where
we are; but, then, with regard to the matter of provisions?  Do the
seals frequent the harbour at all times of the year?  If not, we shall
have only the birds, and any wild animals which may exist, to live on.
Perhaps even wild-fowl may not be found at all seasons, and then are
there any other animals besides seals?  I think I have heard that hogs
and goats have been landed; but they may have been destroyed by the
severity of the climate, or the want of proper food."

Such and many more thoughts passed through the young officer's mind.
His meditations were interrupted by the shrill whistling of the wind in
the trees.  Dark clouds gathering to the northward had begun to course
rapidly across the sky, soon obscuring the stars overhead, warning him
that he must hasten back to the camp, and urge the men to hurry on with
the huts, which might afford them some shelter from the coming storm.
He found them seated round the fires, discussing the seals' flesh.  Most
of them had been too hungry to wait till it was thoroughly cooked, and
even the officers had been unable to refrain from beginning supper till
he joined them.  He, however, took but a hurried meal, and then went in
search of the boatswain, who was seated at one of the fires.

"We have put up some huts for you and the other gentlemen, just in front
of the ladies' tent," said Mr Bollard.  "The men refused to build their
own till they had made them pretty comfortable as things go.  They will
soon, however, have theirs ready, as we have plenty of boughs cut down
for the purpose."

Harry thanked the boatswain, and told him to hurry the men on with the
work.

All hands were soon again busy, and in a short time the huts were
finished, those of the men extending on either side of the little group
intended for the officers.  The three fires, with fresh fuel added to
them, burned up brightly in a row between them and the beach.

Scarcely were the arrangements for the night completed, when the rain
began to fall in torrents.  The women hastened to their tent, which kept
it out pretty well, but the leafy bowers, it was soon found, formed but
a very imperfect protection.  The men, however, wearied with their day's
exertion, were glad to get within, and coiling themselves up on the
rough boughs which served as couches, most of them were soon fast
asleep.  Harry had Willy and Peter Patch as his companions; Captain
Twopenny and the Doctor took charge of poor Holt.  Willy could not help
telling Harry of Peter's adventure with the seal, and they had a hearty
laugh at the fright he had been in.

"And so would you," exclaimed Peter.  "How could I tell that the beast
was not going to swallow me up; he had a mouth big enough, at all
events."

It was some time before the inmates of the midshipmen's berth (as they
called their hut) could get to sleep.  Though the leafy wall around them
sheltered them from the wind, yet the rain penetrated in all directions;
and they had to turn their collars up, and sit as close together as
possible in the centre of the hut to avoid being wetted through.  For
some time they had sufficient light from the blazing fires to see, and
were able to stop up some of the gaps in the roof; but by degrees the
torrents of water which came down from the higher ground put them out,
and they were left in almost total darkness.  It was hopeless, while the
rain continued, to relight them.  Overcome by fatigue, Willy and Peter
dropped off asleep, while Harry, though kept awake some time longer by
the thoughts which occupied his mind, at length followed their example.
As no human beings nor wild beasts inhabited the island, Harry had not
thought it necessary to place a watch.  He had been asleep for some
time, when he heard Peter, who was nearest the opening of the hut,
shrieking out loudly, "A lion! a lion!  Oh! oh! the brute, he will eat
me up!"

Harry naturally thought that his messmate was dreaming.  "What is the
matter, Peter?" he cried out.  "Wake up.  There is nothing to hurt you."

"I am awake, and there is a huge beast shoving his snout right against
me."

Harry now sat up, and there, sure enough, he saw by the dim light the
large head of an animal at the entrance of the hut.  At the same instant
cries and shouts burst forth from the inmates of the other huts, and the
camp, till then so quiet, was in a complete uproar.  Willy, awoke by the
noise, jumped up.  "Why, it is a huge seal," he exclaimed.  Fortunately
he had brought his club into the hut, and telling Peter to stand aside,
he dealt the animal a heavy blow on the nose.  The poor seal, not
expecting such a reception, began to back out, when another blow laid it
lifeless.  The midshipmen, on going outside their hut, saw the whole
ground covered by huge black forms moving in all directions, while the
seamen, armed with clubs or whatever they could pick up, were running
about, striking right and left at the astonished creatures.  The seals
apparently had landed at one of their usual places of resort, not at all
expecting to find it occupied by human beings.  In their fright several
charged right into the middle of the camp, and two of the huts were in a
moment levelled to the ground.  They paid dearly for their mistake, for
the seamen, some frightened and others angry at being roused from their
slumbers, killed ten or twelve of them before they made their escape.
Some were seen moving at a rapid rate inland, bellowing loudly, while
others crawled quickly down into the water.  Harry, fearing that the
ladies would be alarmed, hastened to their tent to assure them that
there was no danger.

Once more, the seals having taken their departure, order and quiet was
restored to the camp.  In case they might return, a watch, however, was
placed, that due notice might be given of the approach of the intruders.
Sailors have happily a knack of going to sleep at times when other men
would be kept awake, and in a few minutes all hands, with the exception
of the watch, were again wrapped in slumber.  Harry had hoped to get a
good night's rest, to be enabled the better to go through the duties of
the next day.  He had been asleep some time, when he was once more
aroused by hearing Paul Lizard's voice.

"It's coming on to blow very hard, sir; and from the way the sea is
breaking into the bay, I am afraid the boats, if we don't look after
them, will be knocked to pieces."

"Call Mr Bollard, and we will see about it," said Harry, springing to
his feet.

It was indeed blowing a regular hurricane, and it did credit to the
builders of the huts that they should have withstood its force.  The
waves, crested with foam, came rolling in from across the harbour,
breaking with great violence against the rocks.  The seamen, aroused
from their sleep, hurried out of their huts, encountering as they did so
thick showers of spray, which, driven by the wind, broke over them.  The
first thing to be done was to haul up the cutter, which, dashed about by
the foaming seas, ran the risk at any moment of being knocked to pieces
on the rocks.  So violently, however, did the waves break on the shore,
that the seamen could not without much difficulty get hold of her.

"Now, my lads," cried Bollard, "we will make a dash at the boat.  A
strong pull, and a pull altogether, and we will have her in safety."

Inspired by his and Harry's example, the men succeeded in getting hold
of the boat, and as the next sea lifted her, they hauled her up on a
level part of the rock.  The launch meantime was tossing about at her
anchor; the foam-topped seas now breaking on board her, now lifting her
up as if they would send her bodily on shore.  The sailors watched her
anxiously; for should no vessel appear to take them off the island, she
would afford them the only means of escaping.  The hurricane was
apparently not yet at its height.  The wind howled and whistled louder
and louder through the woods, the sea, breaking in white masses along
the shore, every instant roared more fiercely; first one hut, and then
another was overthrown, and their materials scattered over the ground;
but the men were too anxious watching the boat to care about the matter.
Another and another foaming sea came rolling onwards.  It was evident
that they would either swamp the boat or drive her from her anchor.

"The cable has parted," cried several voices.  The boat rose to the top
of a sea, and then came hurrying on towards the shore.  All felt that
there was but little hope of saving her.  Notwithstanding this, they ran
to the point towards which she was driving.  Before they could reach it,
she was thrown with tremendous violence against the rocks, rebounding a
short distance, to be driven back again with greater force than before.
The crashing of her planks and timbers could be heard as she was driven
again and again against the pointed rocks.  Those who endeavoured to
reach her ran a great risk of being crushed or swept off by the receding
sea.  Harry, fearing for their lives, ordered them to desist, having a
faint hope that she might be thrown high up on the rocks before her
total destruction had been accomplished.  He hoped in vain, for she
continued beating with increasing violence against the rocks, till every
timber and plank on one side were stove in, and in a few minutes, being
driven again and again on the rocks, scarcely two of her planks remained
hanging together, the fragments strewing the beach in all directions.
With a heavy heart at the serious accident that had occurred, Harry
returned to his hut, which, having been built more strongly than the
rest, had hitherto escaped destruction.  The ladies' tent had also
withstood the gale; but how long it would continue to do so it was
difficult to say.  The seamen, in no way disconcerted by the disaster,
were laughing and cutting jokes with each other as they endeavoured to
rebuild their huts in the dark; but scarcely had they tried to fix the
boughs in a proper position than another gust would again scatter the
whole structure far and wide.  The sea, too, was making its way higher
and higher up the beach, sending deluges of spray over the spot where
the huts had stood, and reaching occasionally up to the tent.  As may be
supposed, no one in the camp got more sleep that night.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

FORAGING.

CONSEQUENCE OF LOSS OF LAUNCH--MRS MORLEY'S RESIGNATION--PREPARE TO
WINTER ON THE ISLAND--HOUSE-BUILDING COMMENCED--THE LADIES' COTTAGE
COMPLETED--MORE HUTS ERECTED--BIRDS SEEK SHELTER IN THE COTTAGE--THE
YOUNG LADIES' AVIARY--INDUSTRY OF THE SETTLERS--ANXIETY ABOUT
PROVISIONS--FISH CAUGHT--FISH-HOOKS MANUFACTURED--SEA-LIONS ATTACKED--
LIZARD CHARGED BY SEA-LION--ESCAPE OF TIPPO SAHIB--COW-SEALS' MILK--
YOUNG BROKE TAKES MILK TO LADIES--THE DOCTOR'S EXPEDITION INLAND--
SEAL-TRACKS UP MOUNTAIN--RIPE FRUIT FOUND--WILLY AND PETER CHASED BY A
SEAL--A CAVERN DISCOVERED--FIGHT WITH THE SEAL--BREAKFAST ON THE
MOUNTAIN--DIFFICULT TRAVELLING--ENVELOPED IN A THICK MIST--ENCAMP FOR
THE NIGHT--WILLY SEES A DOG--PROCEED ON JOURNEY--TRACES OF HOGS
DISCOVERED--A SHIP CLOSE IN-SHORE--THE PARTY HURRY FORWARD--THE SHIP HAS
GONE--THEIR SIGNAL NOT NOTICED--RETURN ALONG THE BEACH--A HUT IN THE
DISTANCE--A DEAD SAILOR DISCOVERED--PROCEED OVER THE HILLS--WILLY FINDS
NEST OF PARROTS--RETURN TO VILLAGE--DIGGING FOR ROOTS--WILLY'S
GALLANTRY.

When daylight broke, the whole harbour appeared covered with
white-crested waves, dancing and leaping wildly, while the beach was
covered with the fragments of the launch.

Harry felt very unwilling to communicate the disaster to Mrs Morley.
It must be done, however.  As soon as she appeared, he told her of what
had occurred.

"God's will be done," she answered.  "Any suffering we may be called on
to go through seems light compared with that others have had to endure.
I have sought for strength from on high, and it will not be denied me."

The rain had now ceased.  In spite of the gale, fires were lighted; and
Mrs Rumbelow, with the aid of several of the men, set to work to get
breakfast ready.  They had still some tea and coffee remaining, as they
had been enabled to use but little of it during the voyage; their only
other food, however, was the wild-fowl and seals' flesh.  Of the latter
they had certainly an abundant supply, but would willingly have
exchanged some of it for the coarsest sea biscuit.

As soon as breakfast was over, Harry held a council of war with the
doctor, Captain Twopenny, and Mr Bollard.  All hope of getting away, if
no vessel appeared, was now cut off.  They might have to remain many
months--it was impossible to say how long.  Winter would soon be upon
them; and as shelter from the cold and wet was indispensable, the first
thing was to build warm substantial huts, the next was to provide food.
The doctor was of opinion that they could not depend on the seals
remaining in the harbour, while he feared that the health of all would
suffer unless some variety of food could be obtained.  He advised, in
the first place, that the seals' flesh should be salted and dried, so as
to have a store in reserve should the animals disappear.  He volunteered
also to set off, when the weather moderated, on an exploring expedition,
to ascertain the natural productions of the country.

"We may find roots and fruits of some sort which may answer the purpose
of bread and vegetables, and we may discover the hogs and goats you
speak of, Dicey; and perhaps some other creatures," he observed.  "In my
opinion, when people use their intellects, and exert themselves, there
are few parts of the world so utterly unproductive that they must of
necessity starve,--as we should certainly if we were to sit down in this
little nook with our hands before us."

"Very right, sir," observed the boatswain.  "I have a notion that we
should also keep a look-out along the coast for any vessel which may be
passing.  If we remain up here, any number might go by and not discover
us.  As soon as the weather moderates, I'll therefore, with Mr Shafto's
leave, take the boat down the harbour, and search for some point where
we may establish a look-out place, and set up a flagstaff with which we
can signalise any ship coming in sight."

Harry at once agreed to Bollard's proposal, and Captain Twopenny
volunteered to accompany the doctor on his proposed exploring
expedition.

In the meantime, as the weather continued too bad to move to any
distance, it was arranged that all hands should turn to at
house-building.  The spot selected for the little village was on the
driest piece of ground to be found at the foot of the hill; and it was
agreed that the first house put up should be for Mrs Morley and her
daughters, with another for Captain and Mrs Twopenny close to it.  The
best axe-men at once commenced felling trees.  They were not long or
thick enough, however, to form log-huts after the American fashion.  It
was settled, therefore, that they should be put in upright, close
together, and the interstices filled with clay, while the outside walls,
as well as the roofs, were to be thatched with the long grass which grew
in abundance at the foot of the hills.

While the men were hewing down the trees, Mrs Rumbelow, with four of
the most active women, set to work to cut the grass for thatching.  It
was no slight task, as it was evident that a large quantity would be
required.  By the end of the first day, they had, however, formed a
stack of considerable size.  In the meantime, Willy and Peter, with
young Broke and the other boys, collected all the fragments of the boat
which had been washed on shore.  With some of the planks they proposed
forming a floor for Mrs Morley's cottage.  The most perfect were kept
for repairing the cutter, and Willy suggested that others might serve
for manufacturing casks in which the seals' flesh could be pickled.

"But where are we to get the salt from, now that the doctor's still is
not at work?" asked Peter.

"We shall find plenty of it among the rocks if we get some sunshine,"
said Willy; "and if not, we must dig some salt pans.  I heard him say
that if we could obtain plenty of salt, there would be no fear of our
starving."

Where people labour with a will, under good management, work proceeds
rapidly.  Before the evening the timber for the first two cottages was
shaped, and trees for several others were cut down; while grass enough
had been stacked for thatching them.

The ladies were not idle.  Fanny and Emma Morley insisted on carrying
the bundles of grass, and even poor Mrs Twopenny tried to exert
herself, but certainly did very little real work.  When Mrs Morley was
seen accompanying her daughters, Mrs Rumbelow came up to her.  "Please,
marm, I beg your pardon, but that must not be.  What is play to us is
killing work for you.  Let an old woman advise you, and don't go and
knock yourself up.  Mr Shafto commands here, and I am sure he will say
I am right."  It was not, however, without difficulty that the poor lady
could be induced to return to the tent.

The first two cottages were completed.  They had fire-places composed of
stone and clay at the further ends, the wall being of sufficient
thickness to prevent the woodwork outside from burning; while the
chimneys were formed of wood coated inside with clay.  The roofs were
made double; the lowest set of rafters were first covered with grass,
and a layer of clay placed over them: above this was a thickly-thatched
pointed roof, so that the snow and wet could not rest on it.  Harry and
Willy, with the assistance of the doctor, put up a porch in the front of
Mrs Morley's house, which gave it a picturesque look.  As there was no
planking to spare, the doors and window-shutters were formed of rough
frames and bars across, with grass thickly interwoven between them.
These served to keep out the wind and cold, and, as Willy said, looked
excessively rural.  The bedplaces, fixed against the walls, were raised
some feet from the floor, and formed much after the fashion of the
doors.  In the centre was a table constructed out of the planking of the
launch, with seats on either side.  Bound the beds, with a sailor's
forethought, Harry had stretched some broad pieces of canvas, assisting
to keep off any draughts which might make their way in blowing weather
into the cottage.  Captain Twopenny's abode, though smaller than Mrs
Morley's, was constructed in the same manner.  He and Harry, with all
the men of the party, had been up by daybreak to complete them.  As soon
as breakfast was over, they invited the ladies to take possession of
their new cottages.  Mrs Morley and her daughters expressed themselves
delighted with theirs.

"You have indeed, Mr Shafto, laboured hard to secure our comfort," she
said, "and we feel most grateful.  I little expected so soon to have
such excellent shelter."

"What a fearful place to have to live in during the winter," said Mrs
Twopenny, as she surveyed the abode to which her husband introduced her.
"Why didn't you build it of brick."

"Simply, my dear, because no bricks can be had," answered the captain,
not looking very well pleased; "and this you will, I hope, find warm and
comfortable.  We might have been very much worse off, believe me."

Mrs Morley and her daughters at once set to work to arrange, with the
scanty means at their disposal, the interior of their cottage, assisted
by Mrs Rumbelow.  Meantime, all hands were engaged in putting up the
other huts.  One of larger dimensions was in a short time finished for
the women, into which they at once moved; Harry and the officers taking
possession of the tent; while two other huts, one for the men, and
another for themselves, were being erected.

The sun at length shone forth brightly on the little settlement: the
woods were alive with song-birds, numbers of which came fearlessly
flying up as if to ascertain what the strangers had been about.  Their
notes were very sweet, though their plumage was somewhat sombre.  They
seemed especially anxious to make the acquaintance of Fanny and Emma
Morley, who were standing at the porch of their cottage watching them,
and surprised at the bold way in which they approached.  First one came
hopping up, and then another, and when the young ladies stooped down and
offered them some small bits of meat, the birds without hesitation took
the food out of their hands.

"How cruel it would be to kill any of our little confident visitors!"
said Emma.  "We must beg Mr Shafto to allow no gun to be fired near our
village, lest it should frighten them away."

"I am afraid that if there is a scarcity of food it will be very
difficult to persuade the people not to do so," observed Fanny.

"But with so many seals and other large birds in the neighbourhood, I
trust we may never be reduced to such an extremity," answered her
sister.

While they were speaking, a large flock of birds came flying rapidly
towards them.  Some darted through the open window, others made their
way over their heads through the door into the cottage, and others flew
round them, evidently in great terror.  On looking out, they observed
the cause of the birds' alarm.  Hovering in the air was a large hawk,
about to pounce down upon the little songsters.  They called to Captain
Twopenny, who was approaching his cottage.  He ran in for his gun, and
in another instant the savage pirate fell to the ground.  Instead of
flying away at the report, the little birds seemed to comprehend the
service which had been rendered them, and kept flying round and round
the cottages, or settling on the roofs, as if perfectly satisfied that
no harm was intended them.  Harry, who soon afterwards appeared,
promised to warn the people against injuring the little birds; and after
this they made themselves perfectly at home among their visitors, flying
fearlessly in and out of the cottages, no one attempting to interfere
with them.  They were, indeed, frequently seen settling on the hands of
the children, who soon learned to make pets of the confiding little
creatures.  On several occasions after this large flocks pursued by
hawks came for shelter among their friends, when the birds of prey
seldom escaped the captain's gun.  Among their feathered friends was a
pretty little green bird, which sung very sweetly; another was exactly
like the English blackbird; and a third, with a red breast, came hopping
up with the familiarity of the winter visitor of old England, the dear
little Robin.  One of the latter perched with perfect confidence on
Emma's hand, and seemed in no way disposed to fly away.  After looking
up pertly in her face, it hopped off to the trellis work of the porch,
where it perched, apparently determined to take up its abode beneath
their sheltering roof.  In a short time several others followed its
example; indeed, the porch looked like an aviary, except that the birds,
instead of being confined within wire bars, could fly in and out as they
pleased, and go off to the woods in search of the food they found most
suitable to their tastes.

The young ladies, however, did not give all their time to their pets,
for they were anxious to set an example of industry to the rest of the
women.  They had found some long grass, which they set to work to plait.
They began by making some hats for the children; and these succeeding
well, they manufactured others for the women as well as for themselves.
Even Mrs Twopenny, seeing them employed, tried to make herself useful,
and succeeded beyond the expectations of her companions.  As soon as the
huts were supplied with bedplaces, and tables, and seats, two or three
of the men employed themselves in making wooden bowls and cups and
plates, though, as they had no turning-lathe, the articles were somewhat
rough in appearance.  However, as the supply of crockery which had been
brought in the boats was but small, they were very acceptable.  Others
were engaged in making casks for preserving the seals' flesh.  Mrs
Rumbelow had also carefully collected all the feathers from the
wild-fowls which had been killed.  With these she made several warm
quilts, the first of which she presented to the ladies, telling them
that she hoped still to have enough feathers to supply all the women and
children.

Another important object, which Harry especially desired to succeed in,
was the manufacture of the seal-skins into leather.  He was anxious to
have these to serve as bed-coverings for the men as soon as possible; he
foresaw, too, that their shoes and clothing would soon wear out, and
that the seal-leather would be the only material with which to supply
their places.  On making inquiries among the men whether any of them
knew how to dress the skins, Dick Sharp said that he had been
apprenticed to a currier, and thought, if he could obtain some suitable
bark, he should be able to dress the skins, and make them fit for any
purpose which might be required.

"Very well," said Harry; "we must appoint you to that duty; and, doctor,
it must be your charge to look out for bark with tanning properties."

His chief anxiety, however, was to provide food for the party.  The boat
had been sent over every day for seals, but they were already becoming
wary, and fewer were killed than at first.  Some mussels had been found
on the rocks, but they were only to be obtained at low water, and in no
large quantities.  The doctor and Captain Twopenny had also gone out
every day with their guns in search of wild-fowl; but they were
compelled to be very economical of their powder, of which they had only
a limited supply.  Before long that must come to an end.  What then was
to be done?  Should the seals go away altogether, unless they could
entrap the birds by some means or other, they would run a fearful risk
of starvation.

While Harry was considering this important matter, Paul Lizard appeared
with a good-sized cod which he held up triumphantly as he came towards
the village.  "I have brought this for Mrs Morley and the other ladies,
sir," he said; "and if I had some proper hooks I could get as many as
would serve all hands.  I often used to catch fish when I was a boy; and
so I thought I would just knock out a couple of hooks from crooked
nails, and see, what could be done.  I took young Broke down with me;
and before long we got plenty of bites, but not one could we hook, till
at last I caught this fellow."

"There will be no difficulty in getting the hooks," said Harry.  "We
will set the armourer's mate to work to try what he can do for you."
The bellows had fortunately been kept in good order, the stove serving
as a forge, and a block of stone as an anvil.  In the course of an hour,
under Paul's superintendence, a hook was produced which satisfied him
thoroughly.  This served as a model for others.  Some long sticks were
cut for rods, while the mussels made excellent bait.  Taking two other
men with him, Paul hastened back to the part of the shore where he had
caught the cod.  In the course of a couple of hours the party returned,
laden with as many fish as they could carry.  The supply was indeed most
welcome, and they were received with warm congratulations from Mrs
Rumbelow, who forthwith set the women to work to clean and cook as many
as were required.  The poor children especially were in want of a change
of food.  Though they had apparently suffered but little from exposure
in the boat, several were now ill, and demanded the doctor's constant
attention.  Little Bessy was among the invalids; and hoping that she
might benefit by being removed from the other children, the Miss Morleys
offered to take charge of her.  From that day she became the inmate of
their cottage, and was a constant source of interest.

Paul and young Broke, with Tom Wall and another man, were now regularly
constituted the fishermen of the settlement.  Next morning, at daylight,
they set out, hoping to get some fresh fish for breakfast.  They made
their way further down the harbour than they had before gone, intending
to go out to the end of some rocks which formed one side of a small bay.
Peter and Tom Wall had carried clubs with them, on the chance of
falling in with seals.  On climbing over the rocks above the bay, they
caught sight of a mob of sea-lions, apparently fast asleep.
Approaching, they were quickly in the midst of the animals, and had
killed three cows and their calves before the rest discovered them.
Most of the animals, on awaking and seeing their foes, scuttled off in
their usual fashion into the water.  One old bull, however, a large and
savage-looking creature, indignant at having his family thus destroyed,
charged at Paul, who was unable to turn and defend himself.  Supposing
that he could run faster than the sea-lion, he scampered off inland, not
a bit alarmed, but shouting and laughing at the idea of having to run
away from a seal.  The other men followed, trying to attract the
attention of the savage beast, who appeared to have singled out Paul as
the object of its vengeance.  Paul ran on as fast as his legs could
move; but the old seal kept way with him as long as he remained on the
level ground.  Matters were becoming serious, and he saw that, should
the creature catch him, he might suffer severely.  Fortunately, a high
and rugged rock appeared before him; he made towards it, and succeeded
in scrambling up its side just as the seal reached his heels.  The
animal was not to be stopped, and made a great effort to follow, but a
sailor in climbing was not to be overtaken by a seal; and just as Paul
reached the top, the disappointed brute tumbled over on its back.  Tom
Wall, with his companion, who had just come up, was on the point of
striking the seal when Paul cried out, "Let the old fellow alone; he
deserves to live for the pluck he has shown, and we have more meat
already than we want."  The bull, on recovering himself, instead of
attacking his other foes, made off round the rock, and took refuge in a
wood a little beyond it, where they could hear him bellowing loudly in
his rage and disappointment.

"I have heard tell of an old fellow in India, one Tippo Sahib, and to my
mind that's a good name for that old chap," said Paul.  "If we ever come
across him again I shall know him by his ugly phiz."

While they remained in the neighbourhood Paul, however, could not help
looking round every now and then, expecting to see Tippo Sahib charging
out of the wood towards him.

On returning to the shore, they found young Broke by the side of the
cows.  "Look here," he exclaimed, "the creatures have got first-rate
milk.  If I had a bowl now, I might carry some for little Bessy.  I
should not be surprised but what it would set her all to rights."

"Well, then, boy, you run back and get the women to give you a couple of
cans, and tell four or five of the men to come along and take the seals'
flesh to the village, while we three remain here fishing."

Young Broke ran off in high glee; and as the Miss Morleys came out of
their cottage in the morning, he appeared with a bowl of fresh milk in
his hands.

"Where have you got that, my boy?" asked Fanny.

"Please, miss, we killed some cows this morning, and I have brought it
for little Bessy," answered the boy.

"Some cows!" exclaimed Mrs Twopenny, who had just joined her friends.
"I had no idea there were any on the island.  And could the men have
been so foolish as to kill them?"

"They are not real cows, please, marm," answered young Broke, "but those
fish sort of creatures.  The doctor has tasted the milk, and he says it
is much better than goats' milk, and will do the little girl a great
deal of good.  There's more than she can want, and I hope that you
ladies will take the rest.  I must be off again, because I have to bring
some fish for Mrs Rumbelow to cook for your breakfast."

Without waiting to receive the thanks of the ladies, the lad hurried
away.

Mrs Rumbelow boiled some of the seals' milk, of which there was a good
supply, with sugar, in order to preserve it.  So beneficial was its
effect on the children, with the assistance of the fish, that the doctor
was now able to commence his proposed exploring expedition.  He and
Captain Twopenny, carrying their guns, set out at daybreak the next
morning, accompanied by Willy and Peter, with axes in their belts, and
Tom Wall and Dick Sharp, the two latter taking their clubs to do battle
with any seals they might encounter.  The doctor had also a wooden spade
with a sharp point which he had manufactured, and carried like a sword
by a belt round his waist.  Willy had a similar implement, which he had
made after the doctor's model.

"If I mistake not, Dicey, we shall find our tools of as much value as
our guns," observed the doctor.  "By their means we may discover the
treasures hidden beneath the soil, and which we can at all times obtain;
whereas the birds may fly away, and the beasts, if any exist besides
seals, may not always be found."

The explorers soon began to climb the steep sides of a mountain which
rose beyond the harbour.  "Why, surely this country must be inhabited,"
exclaimed Willy, as they got into a pathway which led up the mountain.

"It is very evident that such is the case, but we have already made
acquaintance with the inhabitants," said the doctor.  "This is a
seals'-track; and, see, there are others leading up from the water.  The
creatures are fond of travelling inland, though I should not have
supposed they would have made their way up the mountains."

They followed the track for a considerable distance, and still it
continued, till they calculated that they were at least four miles from
the shore.  They were struck by the evergreen appearance of the trees
and the herbage generally.  Some of the trees were in blossom.

"Here, here," cried Willy.  "Look at these red berries.  They seem quite
ripe, and I saw several birds perched on the tree eating them."

The doctor hastened up, and nibbled one of the berries in a cautious
manner, to ascertain its nature.

"Ah, yes, a subacid flavour; they are wholesome, I should think.  Peter,
just eat a handful, and we will judge whether or not they are
poisonous."

"But suppose they prove the latter?" asked Peter.

"Why, then you will have the honour of suffering for the benefit of
science," answered the doctor, laughing.  "But you need not be alarmed;
I will set you an example."

The doctor tasted another berry.  Peter then ate nearly a handful,
acknowledging that, though the flavour was pleasant, they were very
acid.

"We will mark the spot," said the doctor, "and on our way back carry a
load down to Mrs Rumbelow to preserve."

"But where is the sugar to come from, doctor?" asked Willy; "we have but
a small stock remaining."

"Perhaps we may find some on our journey," said the doctor.  "Numerous
roots possess saccharine qualities, and from the flavour of one I dug up
just now I have hopes that we may manufacture sugar from it.  At all
events, it will form a valuable addition to our daily fare.  What do you
think of this?"  The doctor produced a good-sized root, which resembled,
on being cut open, something between a potato and a turnip, but of
rather a drier character than either.  "This will serve us for bread, if
we cannot find anything better;" and the doctor tasted it two or three
times.

"Yes, there is an abundance of saccharine in it," he observed, "and I
have little doubt also that we can manufacture beer from it, which will
suit the tastes of the men better than cold water, and serve instead of
tea for all of us when our store runs short.  If we find nothing else
during our expedition, we should be well satisfied.  But remember that,
however insignificant a plant may look, we should examine it thoroughly
to ascertain its character."

"I have seen plenty of those leaves at no great distance from the
village," said Peter Patch; "but I had no idea that there were roots
under them."

"Ah! so much the better; we shall have a supply of food at our doors,
and when we return you shall go out and dig them up, Peter," said the
doctor, who perhaps, rather doubted the correctness of the midshipman's
assertion.

Willy and Peter in their eagerness frequently went ahead of the rest of
the party.  The latter was a little in advance of his companion, when he
uttered a loud cry.  "Oh! there is another of those horrid brutes."  At
that instant a fierce bellow was heard, and a huge tiger bull-seal
started up and gazed fiercely at the midshipmen.  They grasped their
axes to attack the seal; but the animal, rushing forward, warned them
that "discretion was the best part of valour."  With such short weapons
they could not hope to strike it without the risk of being seized by its
formidable tusks.

"Run, Dicey, run," cried Peter; and Willy, brave as he was, felt that it
was prudent to follow Peter's example.  The seal came after them at full
speed, bellowing loudly.  His voice and their shouts brought the seamen
to their assistance; but the animal, seeing fresh foes in front, turned
aside, and before the men could reach it, dashed at a rapid rate through
the bush.

The doctor and captain now joined the chase, and away they all went, the
seal bellowing and the men shouting and laughing.  The doctor, who was
not so active as the rest of the party, was soon distanced.  The captain
in vain attempted to get a shot at the animal's head; he knew that a
wound in any other part of the body would produce no effect.  On went
the seal, down the side of the mountain, following a well-marked track.
"Where he goes we can follow," cried Willy; "come on, come on."  The
seal soon showed that he could not only run for a short distance faster
than they could, but that he could keep at the same speed for a longer
time.

"This beats coursing," cried Peter Patch.  "The creature will give us as
good a chase as a hare.  If we had but some dogs it would be fine fun.
We must have run a couple of miles already."

"We may have to run a couple more before we catch him," said Willy, "and
it won't do to give it up."

They were approaching the shore, or, rather, the head of a gulf which
ran up from it.  Should the seal reach the water he would be lost.  The
party doubled their speed, when the animal, then about fifty yards
ahead, suddenly disappeared.  Willy and Peter could with difficulty
stop, and save themselves from falling into a deep narrow gully with
perpendicular sides which appeared before them.  They leaned over the
edge.  It was thirty or forty feet deep, a stream of water running at
the bottom.  Had they gone over, they would probably have broken their
necks.

"He will escape by the end of the gully," cried Willy.  "Sharp and Wall,
run round to the beach and try and stop him."

The men did as they were directed; while Willy and Peter scrambled down
with the assistance of some bushes which grew in the sides to the bottom
of the gully.  On making their way towards the sea, they found that the
gully was arched over, and they now entered a spacious cavern, down the
centre of which the stream made its way.  It was separated into two
parts by the stream; each part was about fifty feet long and fully
twenty wide, while the roof appeared to be nearly thirty feet above
their heads.  A flood of light came through a round hole in the centre
of the roof, and enabled them to survey the cavern.  The walls and
ground were perfectly dry, and they agreed that it would not be a bad
place to live in, provided the wind did not set through it.  As they
were proceeding on, they heard the captain's voice shouting to them, he
wondering where they had got to.  Looking up, they caught sight of his
head appearing through the hole.

"Here we are, all right," said Willy.

"Why, boys, how could you get down there?"

Willy told him.

"What has become of the seal?" asked the captain.

"I suppose he is somewhere not far off, if he hasn't reached the sea,"
answered Peter.  "Yes, sure enough, and there he comes."

The seal at that moment appeared, rushing back, having encountered the
men at the outlet.

"Run, Dicey, run," cried Peter, "or he'll be upon us."

The midshipmen were caught in a trap.  It was more easy to climb down
the side of the gully than to get up again.  The monster came rushing
towards them with open mouth.  Willy this time determined not to fly,
but, flourishing his axe, stood on the defensive.  The consequences
might have been serious had not the captain, getting sight of the animal
at that moment, fired.  The bullet struck it on the head, and though it
did not stop its course altogether, Willy was enabled to spring out of
its way, and Tom and Dick, coming up, despatched it with their clubs.
As no seals had been killed for several days, the meat was very
acceptable.

"We may have some seal-steaks for dinner, at all events," said Peter, as
the men prepared to cut up the animal.

Having performed their task, they were directed to carry the remainder
of the seal's flesh to the village, while the captain and midshipmen,
with a good supply of steaks, made their way up the side of the
mountain.  Following the seal-track, they at length found the doctor,
who was sitting down, waiting their return.

"See, our island produces one species of ferae which I did not expect to
find," he exclaimed, holding up an animal by the legs.

"Why, it's a cat," cried Willy.

"Exactly so," said the doctor.  "Our feathered friends will be much
obliged to me for killing it.  Should these creatures increase and
multiply, they will in time nearly depopulate the island of its most
attractive inhabitants."

The explorers now proceeded onwards for some way over very rough and
uneven ground.  As they were anxious to obtain a view of the whole
island, they climbed to the highest point in sight, which the doctor
calculated was about a thousand feet above the sea.  Hence they could
look around in all directions.  On every side appeared rocky and barren
heights, thrown up into all possible variety of shapes, while beyond was
the ocean, now blue and calm, and shining in the rays of the bright sun.
The cold, however, was considerable, and all the places usually
rendered soft by springs were frozen hard.  This enabled them to proceed
over spots they could not otherwise have crossed.

The scene was full of wild and rugged grandeur.  Here and there
perpendicular precipices and chasms, several hundred feet in depth, were
visible, while the summit of the central mountain was crowned by a ridge
of rock, which, from its appearance at a distance, they called the
Giant's Coffin.

As the atmosphere was remarkably clear, the whole group could be seen,
extending for about thirty-five miles in length from north to south, and
fifteen miles at the broadest part from east to west.  Several deep
indentations forming harbours were observed, while a number of reefs,
over which, even on that calm day, the surf broke violently, extended
from the shore to a distance of ten miles.  In the far north an island
of some size could be seen, while several smaller islands appeared close
to the rocky coast.  The shores everywhere appeared clothed with scrub
and stunted timber, but on some of the hills the trees were of
respectable height and size.

"See," cried Willy, pointing to the north-east.  "Is that smoke?  Can it
be a burning mountain?"

All the party looked, and though their eyes were not so keen as Willy's,
they also distinguished a thick wreath of smoke ascending in the clear
air.  Though it was at a considerable distance off, yet, eager to
ascertain its cause, they determined to make their way towards it.
After descending the mountain for some time, hunger compelled them to
stop, as they had eaten nothing since daybreak.  A fire was soon
lighted, and their seal-steaks were soon spitted on sticks before it;
while the doctor, after scraping several of the roots which he had just
discovered, put them into the hot ashes.  On being raked out, they were
found to be tolerably well done, though somewhat hard and dry; but to
people who had eaten neither bread nor vegetables for many weeks they
were very welcome.

"We shall find a better way of cooking them by-and-by," observed the
doctor.  "We will try how they answer scraped or pounded; and though
they may not be very palatable, they will assist materially in keeping
us in health.  Well, Peter, do you feel any uncomfortable sensations."

"I hope not," answered the midshipman, surprised at the question.

"We may then venture to make our desert on the berries," said the
doctor, laughing.  "We are much obliged to you for having proved them
not to be poisonous, but I had my doubts, I confess."

"What a shame!" cried Peter.  "Suppose I had died, what would you have
said?"

"Oh, there was no fear of that," answered the doctor.  "In case of
accidents I brought some antidotes in my pocket, and should soon have
got you round again."

"The next time, please make your experiments on Dicey," cried Peter.
"It is not fair that I should be the only one to run the risk of being
poisoned.  Suppose your antidotes had failed?"

"The doctor fixed on you, Peter, as the least likely to be missed of the
party," said Willy.  "You know you have never done anything for the
common good."  Peter had, in truth, generally preferred wandering about
the harbour, and scrambling over the rocks, to working.

"But I found the roots, and could have got any quantity," he exclaimed.

"Yes, but you dug none up, and told no one of them," rejoined Willy.

"Well, you shall see that I can be of as much use as you are, Master
Dicey," exclaimed Peter, bristling up.

"Come, boys, no quarrelling," cried the doctor.  "It's time we were
moving."

Refreshed by their frugal repast, the explorers proceeded on their way.
They found the road far more difficult than they had expected, and soon
came to the edge of a steep precipice, down which it was impossible to
get; and they had, therefore, to scramble a mile or more before they
found a practicable path into the valley.  They went along it for a
considerable distance, hoping to be able to climb up the cliff; but the
sides were perfectly perpendicular, and at last they determined to turn
back and make their way by the shore.  Just then Willy, who had run on
ahead, shouted out, "I see a break in the cliff, and very possibly we
may get up by it."  His advice was followed, and assisting each other,
they succeeded at length in reaching the higher ground.  Another high
and steep hill appeared before them; but they, hoping to find the ground
beyond more easy for travelling over, commenced the ascent.  It was,
however, steep and difficult, and in some places they came to
perpendicular precipices, down which a fall would have proved fatal to
any one who had happened to slip.

They had got about halfway down the mountain when a thick mist was seen
sweeping over the sea from the southward.  It came on so rapidly that
before they could decide what path to follow they were entirely
enveloped in it.  They could now only venture to move with the greatest
caution; any moment they might arrive at the edge of some frightful
precipice similar to those they had before passed.  Anxious, however, to
escape the cold and damp to which they were exposed on the mountain
side, they descended by the only practicable route they could find.  The
mist every instant grew thicker, and the short day was drawing to a
close.  In what direction they were going they could not with any
certainty tell.  At last the captain declared that he would proceed no
further.  The doctor agreed with him.  Just then they saw before them
the edge of the forest, which reached up the mountain side to a
considerable distance from the shore.  They agreed that it would be wise
to camp here for the night; and while Willy and Peter cut down some
boughs to form a hut, and wood for fuel, the doctor and the captain
endeavoured to shoot a few birds for supper.  They could hear them
singing in the woods in great numbers, but the mist shrouded them from
their view till they were close upon them.  The birds were, however, so
tame that they succeeded in killing a few; and these, with some of the
roots which the doctor dug up close at hand, gave them a sufficient
meal.

As night came on, they made up their fire and crept into their leafy
bower for shelter.

"I suppose, doctor, we ought, to keep watch," said Willy.  "We may have
a big tiger-seal poking his nose in among us, or there may be other wild
beasts, though we have not seen them."

The doctor agreed to the wisdom of this, and when supper was over they
drew lots as to who should keep the first watch.  It fell upon Willy.
After they had sat up some time, the rest of the party went to sleep.
Willy had some difficulty in performing his duty, but by running out
every now and then to throw a log on the fire he managed to keep his
eyes open.  As he did so on one occasion, he saw an animal scamper by
him.  "It looked very like a wolf," he said to himself.  He got the
doctor's gun to have a shot at it, should it again appear.  There was no
use, he thought, in waking up his companions.  In a short time
afterwards he heard a loud bark.  He listened.  The bark was repeated.
"Why, it's a dog.  I wonder if there are people in the neighbourhood,"
he said to himself.  "If there are, they will find us out; but they are
not likely to be otherwise than friendly.  However, when I call the
captain I'll tell him to keep a sharp lookout."  When at length his
watch was over, he roused up Captain Twopenny and told him what had
occurred.

"Perhaps there may be natives on the island, after all," observed the
captain.  "Depend upon it, I will not be taken by surprise."

Willy, who was longing to go to sleep, lay down, and before another
minute had passed was far away in the land of dreams.  He was awoke by
Peter Patch, who had had the last watch.  Daylight was already breaking;
the dogs had been heard barking during the night, and Peter said he had
seen two or three creatures, which seemed from their movements to be
like cats, stealing by; but each time, before he could get a shot, they
had disappeared.  Nothing else had occurred.

As the sun rose the mist cleared off; and as soon as they had
breakfasted the doctor proposed that they should once more climb the
mountain, in order to ascertain what direction to take.  They had not
gone far when some footmarks were observed on the soft ground over which
they were crossing.  The doctor examined them.  "Hogs," he exclaimed.
"We shall have pork for dinner soon, I hope.  They, at all events, are
always in season, and will not take their departure like the seals and
wild-fowl.  We shall not starve here if like wise men we exert our wits.
Cats and dogs may serve us at a pinch; I prefer bacon.  Captain, I
daresay you will manage to shoot a porker before long."

This discovery put the whole party in spirits, the doctor was so
positive about the matter.  Willy had gone on as usual some way ahead,
when, looking out in the direction the smoke had been seen, he caught
sight of a large vessel hove to close to the shore.  He could scarcely
believe his eyes.  He rubbed them again and again.  There was no doubt
about it.  He waved to his companions, who made their way up to the rock
on which he was standing.  He pointed in the direction of the vessel.

"She is a long way off from this," observed the doctor, after looking at
her for some moments.  "We must get down to the beach as fast as we
can."

"What has brought her in here, I wonder?" said Captain Twopenny.

"Probably the smoke we saw yesterday may have something to do with the
matter," observed the doctor.  "At all events, there is no time to be
lost."

He gazed as he spoke over the intervening country.  There were deep
valleys to be passed, and steep hills, with rugged rocks and precipices,
to be scaled.  Having taken the bearings of the vessel, they set out.
They first had to descend the mountain side.  They soon came to a soft
boggy ground, and were obliged to make a wide circuit to avoid it.  Not
without considerable difficulty did they at length reach the bottom of
the valley.  A stream was to be crossed; they waded through it,
regardless of the cold.  Now they came to a precipice.  Considerable
time was spent before they could find a way to the top.  Then they were
involved in a labyrinth of huge rugged rocks.  The sun shining brightly
enabled them to keep a tolerably correct course, otherwise it would have
been difficult to determine in what direction they were going.  On and
on they went.  The hope of obtaining relief for themselves and their
friends kept up their spirits; but Peter Patch at length cried out that
he could go no further.  They had brought some baked roots and cooked
wild-fowl with them.  A stream which came trickling down the side of the
hill afforded a refreshing draught of water.  They would not stop to
light a fire, but, taking a hurried meal, again pushed on.  The doctor
himself confessed that he was beginning to get knocked up; still they
thought that they must soon reach a height from which they could make a
signal to the ship.  For the last hour or more, however, they had been
unable to get sight of her.

"Had she been at anchor, I should have had more hopes of doing so," said
the doctor; "but still we must not despair."

"That's the hill," cried Willy; "I know it by its shape.  If we can get
to the top of it we shall reach the shore in a short time."

The rest of the party thought Willy was right, and thus encouraged, made
their way with renewed ardour.  The summit of the hill was free of
trees.  They gained it at length.  Willy was the first to reach the top.
A cry escaped him.  "She is gone! she is gone!" he exclaimed.  He waved
his cap frantically; he shouted as if his voice could reach across the
intervening ocean.  The rest soon joined him.  A ship under all sail was
standing away with a fresh breeze from the land, from which she was
already some three miles distant.

"The smoke of a fire might still attract the attention of those on
board," said the doctor.  Willy and Peter ran down the hill, and began
hewing away at the driest bushes they could find.  A fire was soon
lighted.  More bushes were brought; a thick column of smoke ascended in
the air.  How eagerly they gazed at the receding ship.  Still she stood
on.  No attention was paid to their signal.

"They either do not see it, or think that it is the result of accident,"
observed the doctor.

More bushes were thrown on the fire, and then they hurried down the
hill.

"Perhaps she may be a sealer, and landed some of the crew to catch seals
from the shore.  If so, she may return," remarked the captain.

"She does not look like one," said Willy.

The bottom of the hill was reached.  They made their way along the
beach.  In a sheltered spot a hut was seen.  It was rudely constructed
from the wreck of a vessel.  Outside there were the ashes of a fire
still smouldering; within were several bedplaces covered with leaves.
Other signs showed that it had been lately occupied.  Whoever the people
were, they had just been taken off by the ship,--probably part of the
crew of some vessel wrecked on the shore.  They looked about in the
neighbourhood, and discovered six or seven mounds which had the
appearance of graves.

"Well, my friends, I am very glad that the poor fellows, whoever they
were, got away; and for ourselves, we are not worse off than we should
have been had we not discovered them," observed the philosophical
doctor.  "Don't let us be cast down.  If one vessel comes, so may
another; and next time we may be more fortunate.  And now I advise that
without loss of time we make the best of our way back to the
settlement."

As the shore appeared for some distance tolerably free of rocks, they
agreed to keep along it till compelled by the rising tide to take their
way over higher ground.  Still, as they walked along they could not help
every now and then turning round to watch the receding ship.  Gradually
her hull disappeared, her courses sank beneath the horizon, the topsails
followed, and then Willy alone could discern a small dark speck, which
soon faded from view.  He heaved a sigh.  "I should like to have sent
home news, at all events, that I was safe, and perhaps Charles and the
girls may by this time have reached New Zealand.  They will be very
sorry when they hear that the ship has been lost, and of course they
will think that I was lost in her."  Willy seldom allowed himself to
give way to thoughts like these.

The doctor was very anxious to get back that night; so, although pretty
well knocked up himself, he urged his companions to proceed as fast as
they were able.  For several miles they continued along the beach,
occasionally having to climb over high ledges of rocks which jutted out
into the water, or to go round bays or small inlets.  Still, after the
experience they had had of the interior of the island, they considered
that this road was less fatiguing than the way they had come.  Seeing a
succession of rocks running out into the ocean, they were at length
about to strike across the country, when a small hut was discovered at
the head of a little bay just below them.

"Why, perhaps, after all, there are human beings besides ourselves on
the island," exclaimed Willy.

"If such is the case, we will make their acquaintance," observed the
doctor, and they descended into the bay.  They hurried towards the hut.
On reaching the entrance, even the doctor started back.  Part of the
roof had been blown off, allowing the light to strike down into the
interior.  On a rude bed, raised a couple of feet from the ground, lay
the body of a man.  He was fully clothed, but the eyeless skull and
parchment-like cheeks showed that he had been long dead.  He was dressed
as a seaman.  A sou'-wester was on his head, and a woollen muffler round
his neck, while a blue serge vest and a dark jacket and trousers clothed
his body.  Several pairs of woollen socks and stockings were on his
feet, one of which was tied up with rags, as if it had received some
injury.  His legs were crossed, and the arms and fingers stretched out
straight on either side.  Had it not been for the light which struck
down on the head, the body lay in so natural a position that the man
might have been supposed to be asleep.  Close by was a small heap of
limpet and mussel shells, and within his reach were two bottles--one was
empty, but the other was full of water.  Another object attracted their
attention.  It was a piece of slate, on which were scratched several
zigzag marks, which had apparently been formed by the hand of the dying
man, who had probably in his last moments attempted to write his name
and give some account of his sad history.

The doctor, after examining the body for some minutes, observed, "He has
died of hunger, poor fellow.  Probably he belonged to the crew of some
hapless vessel wrecked near this, the survivors of whom were taken off
by the ship we saw this morning.  Poor fellow, we must come back and
bury him another day, but we must delay no longer."

The sad spectacle they had just witnessed made the explorers turn their
thoughts from themselves.

They pushed on as fast as they could go, but were often nearly dropping
with fatigue.  Marshes had to be passed, and frequently they were
plunging across boggy ground, running the risk every instant of sticking
or sinking beneath it; several streams were forded, and rugged heights
climbed similar to those they had traversed on the previous day.

Just before sunset they stopped to dig a quantity of roots, which the
doctor was anxious to carry with him, while Captain Twopenny shot
several birds.  While Willy was hunting about, he heard a low clattering
sound.  Searching more narrowly, he found in a small bush a large nest
with five young birds.  "Here, here," he cried to Peter, who ran up.
"Why, I do believe they are parrots.  They are nearly fledged.  How
delighted the Miss Morleys will be to have them."

"But how can we carry them?" said Peter.

"See, I will tie them up in my handkerchief, and sling them round my
neck," said Willy, securing the nest as he proposed.  The young parrots
were, as may be supposed, a constant care to him for the rest of the
journey.  Peter every now and then looked into the handkerchief as it
hung at his back, declaring that the birds were getting on very well,
only opening their mouths as if they wanted to be fed.  They seemed to
like the berries which had been found, and meeting with another bush,
Peter collected a supply to feed them with.

At length it grew so dark that they could with difficulty see their way.
They were about to encamp, when Willy caught sight of the lights in the
village, far below them.  Just then they got into a seal-track, along
which they proceeded.

"Look out, Peter, lest we should find a lion in the path," said Willy.
He had scarcely spoken when a bellow was heard close to them.  It was
repeated in all directions.

"I don't quite like it," exclaimed Peter.  "Can those horrible noises
really be made only by seals?"

"No doubt about that," said the doctor.  "They are not likely to attack
us, and the best thing we can do is to push on."

To those not aware of the cause, the loud bellows which resounded
through the woods would have indeed seemed terrific.  Once or twice one
of the monsters was seen scrambling among the bushes, but was soon out
of sight, and none appeared to be combatively disposed.

At length the lower ground was reached, and in a short time they were
welcomed by their friends at the village.

Harry Shafto was especially thankful when he received the report of the
doctor; and it was arranged that the next morning, as soon as some more
spades could be manufactured, a party should set out to dig roots, while
Captain Twopenny volunteered to lead another in search of hogs.

"At all events, I trust we need have no fear of dying of starvation,"
Harry remarked in a tone which showed the relief he felt.  "Had it not
been for you, doctor, however, I confess we should have been badly off."

Willy awoke at early dawn to feed his parrots, which were chattering
away at his ear.  As soon as breakfast was over, he took them up to the
Miss Morleys.  "I have brought an addition to your menagerie," he said,
exhibiting his prizes; "but as they are nearly fledged, you must find
some means of preventing them from flying away."

"Oh, I hope we may tame them sufficiently to make them wish to stay with
us," said Emma.  "What pretty little lively creatures.  We are so much
obliged to you, Mr Dicey."

"Perhaps Mrs Twopenny would like to have one," said Fanny.  "And do you
not wish to retain one yourself?"

"I am afraid that I should not have time to attend to it," said Willy.
"But I will take one to Mrs Twopenny; and if you will bring up one for
me, I should like to carry it home with me for my sisters."  Mrs
Morley, who heard the remark, smiled faintly.  She was thinking,
perhaps, of the little probability there was of their ever returning to
the shores of England.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A SHIP!

THE ISLAND FLAG--EXPEDITION TO ESTABLISH A LOOK-OUT PLACE--CUTTER
PROCEEDS DOWN THE HARBOUR--PIERCE ATTACK OF SEALS--TIPPO SAHIB PUT TO
FLIGHT--FLAGSTAFF SET UP--LOOKOUT HUT ERECTED--NIGHT IN THE HUT--THE
BOATSWAIN'S YARNS--HARRY PUTS OFF TO RETURN--BLOWING HARD--BOAT IN
DANGER--RETURN TO LOOKOUT POINT--THE STORM RAGES--PETER WRAPS HIMSELF IN
THE FLAG--ANXIETY ABOUT THE BOAT--HUT ON FIRE--ATTEMPTS TO SAVE HUT--
PASS NIGHT BY THE FIRE--A SHIP SEEN.

The cutter had been thoroughly repaired, and Harry resolved at once to
go down the harbour and fix on a look-out place whence a signal could be
made to any ship approaching the southern end of the island.  A
flagstaff had been constructed out of the spars of the launch, and some
of the straightest trees which could be found.  The boatswain had rigged
it completely, so that it was ready at once to set up.  Willy and Peter
laughed heartily when they saw the flag which had been formed.  It
consisted of two boats' ensigns, increased in size by a petticoat and
part of a seaman's shirt.

"If its materials can be distinguished, it will tell pretty plainly the
character of our party," remarked Harry.

Harry took the boatswain, with Peter and Willy and four other seamen,
one of whom was Paul Lizard, and another Tom Wall.  As the excursion
might prove a long one, and as in that uncertain climate they might be
detained by bad weather, they carried provisions for a couple of days,
hoping, should they be kept out longer, to be able to kill some seals or
wild-fowl for their support.  The rest of the party were to search for
roots and berries, from the latter of which Mrs Rumbelow announced that
she could make an excellent preserve, could sugar be manufactured.  The
doctor promised to exert his scientific knowledge to the best of his
power for the public good.

The wind being light, Harry and his party had to keep close in-shore, to
avoid the tide which was still running up the harbour.  Just as they got
off the bay, where Paul and Tom had the adventure with the old sea-lion,
several seals were seen swimming about, apparently fishing, darting
rapidly to and fro in various directions in chase of their prey.
Presently there was a great commotion in the water ahead, and two huge
animals appeared struggling together.  "Why, they are fighting," cried
Willy.  "What tremendous digs they give into each other's necks with
their sharp tusks."

One was a tiger and the other a black seal.  Now they separated, now
they dashed at each other, just like savage dogs, not uttering the
slightest sound all the time.  Now they sank below the surface, now rose
again, tearing away at each other as before.

"I shouldn't be surprised that one of them was the big fellow you called
Tippo Sahib, who attacked you the other day, Paul," said Willy.

"May be, sir," answered Lizard.  "But see, there's another on the rocks.
That's master Tippo, I suspect.  He looks as if he was watching for us,
and I shouldn't be surprised if he was to give chase."

Willy laughed at the notion; but directly afterwards the old lion
plunged into the water, and his snout was seen within a few seconds
rising close to the oars.  Harry ordered the men to pull on, as he did
not wish to expend any shot on the animal.  Tippo, however, seizing the
blade of Paul's oar, held it so tightly that he nearly hauled it out of
his hands.  Not till he had received several blows on the nose from the
other oars would he let go.

"Why, he has nearly bitten my oar in two," cried Paul.

"Better that than your leg," observed Willy.

"That's Tippo; I have no doubt about him," cried Paul.  "He means
mischief."

The sea-lion, however, was kept at bay by the oars, while the boatswain
stood up in the stern with a club, ready to give him a blow should he
come nearer.  After swimming round the boat for some time, he seemed to
consider that he could gain nothing by a battle with the four-legged
strange creature, as he doubtless considered the boat, and so leisurely
swam back to the rocks he had left, up which he scrambled, and sat
watching the cutter as she continued her course along the shore.

A breeze at last sprang up, and sail being set she ran down to the mouth
of the harbour.  On the northern shore, near the eastern entrance, was a
point rising for a hundred feet or more above the water.  Here the party
landed, and Harry and the boatswain agreed that it was the best station
on which their flagstaff could be planted.  From its summit they could
look over the whole of the southern island; while the flag would be
visible far out at sea, beyond the western entrance of the harbour.  The
flagstaff was accordingly landed, and as all hands were required to set
it up, and the boat could not be left alone, she was hauled up on the
beach.  But as they had only wooden spades to work with, some time was
occupied in digging the hole in which to plant the flagstaff.  It was at
length got up, and stayed by four shrouds.  The flag was hoisted and
flew out to the breeze.

"That will show that some one is not far off," observed Mr Bollard.
"But should a vessel send her boat on shore, the people may not know
where to find us."

"I have been thinking of that," said Harry, "and will leave a bottle
with a paper in it directing them to the settlement."

"But if another gale was to spring up, and there is every chance of
that, the flag might be blown to pieces, or the flagstaff itself carried
away," observed the boatswain.  "If you think fit, therefore, Mr
Shafto, I'll remain here with one or two of the men; and, depend on it,
we will keep a bright look-out for passing vessels, so that we need only
hoist our flag should one come near enough to see it."

"We can ill spare you at the camp, Bollard," said Harry; "and if you
remain here you will require shelter and food.  This hill is a bleak
place, and if we could not get to you with a supply of provisions, you
would run the risk of starving."

"As to shelter, we have our axes, and we might easily put up a hut; and
for the matter of food, if we are hard-pressed, we can make our way
overland to the settlement; it cannot be much more than five or six
miles."

As the boatswain was so anxious to remain, Harry at last consented to
his proposal.

"We must put you up a hut, however, before we return to the settlement,"
he observed; "and after we have had dinner we will set to work about
it."

There was a wood at some little distance; and, as soon as the meal was
over, all hands repaired there to cut timber for the proposed hut.  They
worked away very hard, Harry and the midshipmen labouring as well as the
rest.  As soon as several trees were felled, Harry, leaving Bollard and
two of the men to cut more, with the rest of the party carried them up
the hill.  They had then to dig the foundation of the hut.  While this
was doing, Willy and Peter collected a supply of grass from the
hillside.

So busily were they all employed that evening arrived before they
thought the day was half spent.  Dark clouds had been gathering, and the
wind increasing, and they had the prospect of a stormy night.  The hut,
however, was roofed in, and they were able to take shelter from the
torrents of rain which now came down.  Fuel having been collected, they
lighted a fire in the front of the hut, but the wind blew the flames
about so furiously that there was a risk of the walls, and a still
greater one of the roof, catching fire.  No one, therefore, ventured to
go to sleep; indeed, there was not room for all the party to stretch
their legs.

The first hours of the night were passed, as they sat close together to
keep themselves warm, watching the bending flagstaff, and listening to
the howling of the wind and the roar of the surf as it broke on the
rocky shore.  Harry did his best to keep the party amused, and got Paul
Lizard, who could sing a good song, to strike up a merry stave; and
Paul, once set going, was generally loath to stop.  His full manly voice
trolled forth many a ditty, sounding above the whistling of the storm
and the roar of the waves.  Then adventures and stories were told, and
yarn after yarn was spun, most of which were no novelties to the
hearers.  The boatswain, who seldom condescended to tell his adventures
except to the other warrant officers, narrated several wonderful ones he
had gone through; and Willy and Peter could not help being surprised,
after encountering so many dangers and hardships, he should be still
living to narrate them.  He had been left alone on an iceberg in the
Polar seas, when the boat in which he was chasing a whale and all the
other hands had been lost.  He had been stranded on the coast of Africa,
and made captive by the natives; when escaping, he had been nearly torn
to pieces by a lion, only managing to scramble up a tree just as the
monster's claws were within a few inches of his heels.  He had got on
board a slaver, which had gone down while being chased by a man-of-war,
and had been picked up again just as a shark was about to seize his
legs.  A ship he had been on board had blown up, when only he and a
dozen more had escaped.  On another occasion his ship had caught fire,
and the crew had to take to their boats.  Three times besides he had
been wrecked.  "And yet, you see, mates," he wound up by saying, "here I
am, alive and well, and fit for duty; and if you ask me if I think we
are to get out of this place, I tell you.  To be sure I do.  We are not
half as badly off as I have been a score of times."  Encouraged by their
officer, the men kept up a brisk conversation till daylight dawned.

The weather appeared to have somewhat moderated, and Harry hoped, as
soon as breakfast was over, to be able to launch the boat and return to
the settlement.  As the party were descending the hill, however, a seal
was heard bellowing in the wood.  As it was important to secure the
supply of meat the animal might afford, they set out in chase.  The cry
of the creature guided them towards her; but as they advanced, it became
evident that she was going away from them.  They therefore increased
their speed, hoping before long to come up with her.

"May be she has lost her calf; and if so, we must keep a look-out,"
observed Paul Lizard.  "She will prove mighty savage."

"She is not likely to show fight against half-a-dozen men," said the
boatswain.  "Come along, lads, we have lost a great deal of time
already."  At last the bellowing grew louder, and the seal was seen
looking about her, wondering perhaps at the unusual sounds which struck
her ear.

The boatswain was the first to emerge from the cover of the wood.  The
creature lifted up its monstrous head, and opening wide its jaws, made a
dash at the intruder.  So formidable did she appear that the sturdy
boatswain, though he would have faced a human foe without trembling,
turned tail and ran for his life.  The seal followed, but just then,
Paul Lizard coming in sight, she bolted at him, moving over the ground
with her flipper-like feet at a rapid rate.  Paul, having learned a
lesson from experience, dodged behind a tree, and when the seal nearly
reached him, sprang on one side, giving her a blow with his club on the
nose.  It was not sufficiently well dealt, however, to bring her to the
ground; and, again catching sight of the boatswain, she once more rushed
at him.  Imitating Paul's manoeuvre, he managed to escape her charge.
She, however, had fixed her eyes on him, and continued the pursuit, the
rest of the party following.  Before they could get up with the animal,
the boatswain had run a considerable distance in an opposite direction
from the flagstaff.  Matters were growing serious; for he had well-nigh
lost his breath, and the seal was so close to him that he could not
venture to turn round and strike at her.  Willy and Peter could not help
laughing, thinking the matter very good fun, a notion the boatswain in
no way shared with them.  At last Paul and Tom Wall so distracted her
attention that she stopped short, allowing the boatswain to bring up and
face about.  The three then dashed at her with their clubs, and quickly
ended her life.

"Well, mates, we have deserved our dinners, at all events," exclaimed
Paul, as he commenced cutting up the seal.  "Mr Bollard will have
gained an appetite for his."

"I had rather have gained it in a more dignified way," observed the
boatswain, wiping the perspiration from his brow.  "I had no notion one
of these brutes would show so much fight."

"You should have had Tippo Sahib at your heels, sir," said Paul.  "He
showed us yesterday that he was ready enough to fight, and he is twice
as savage on shore."

Some time was occupied in cutting up and packing the seal's flesh, and
then, each man carrying a load, they turned their steps towards the
Flagstaff-hill.  It was past noon before they got back, but Harry still
hoped to be able to reach the settlement at nightfall.  The fire had to
be relighted, and as soon as some of the seal had been cooked and eaten,
they hastened down to launch the boat.  It took some time to do so; but
at length she was got afloat; and, leaving the boatswain and two of the
men at the look-out station, Harry and the rest made sail.  Though the
weather appeared threatening, he was unwilling to abandon his intention.
The wind was contrary, and he had to stand out some way from land to
fetch the mouth of the inner harbour.  He had just gone about when the
wind shifted, and a furious blast from the north-west blew directly in
his teeth, making the boat heel over, and nearly capsizing her.  The
sails were lowered just in time to prevent such a catastrophe, but it
soon became evident that it would be a difficult matter to reach the
harbour's mouth.  The sails, however, being closely reefed, Harry
determined to try what could be done.  The boat looked up bravely for
some time to the gale, but the wind increasing still more, he saw that
the attempt was hopeless.  The open ocean lay broad on his beam, foaming
and raging, and there was now the danger of his being blown out to sea.
The only spot where he could hope to land without losing the boat was
the little bay he had just before left.  Keeping as close to the wind as
he could, he therefore stood towards the shore.  Even with the reduced
canvas she carried, and all hands sitting up to windward, the boat
heeled over fearfully.  Harry was at the helm, looking out anxiously
through the spray, which beat up in showers over the bows, for the point
which formed the northern side of the little bay into which he wished to
run.  Sometimes the boat's head fell off, and he was afraid that he
should be unable to reach it.

"I don't like the look of things," whispered Peter to Willy; "what if we
don't reach the bay?"

"We may perhaps lose the boat," answered Willy, "but I trust that we may
be able to scramble on shore somewhere or other."

At length they got near enough to distinguish Bollard and his
companions, who had come down to the beach to assist them.  A fiercer
blast than before struck the boat's sail; down she heeled, till the
hissing water ran over her gunwale.  For a moment Harry feared she would
not recover herself.  As he put down the helm she once more rose, and in
another minute was under the lee of the point; and he steered in towards
the only spot of sandy beach which the bay afforded.  The sails were
hauled down, and all hands stood ready to leap out as she touched the
shore.  Aided by the next sea which came rolling in, she was run high
upon the beach.

"This is indeed unfortunate," said Harry to the boatswain.  "It is too
late to get back to-night, and I am afraid our friends at the settlement
will become anxious about us."

"But they will see it is blowing hard, sir, and that will fully account
for the boat not being able to get up the harbour," answered the
boatswain.

Perhaps Harry was thinking that the fierce gale then blowing would only
increase the anxiety which some, at all events, of the inhabitants of
the settlement would feel on his account.

By the time they reached the hut the day was well advanced.  There was
still a short time of daylight, however, and the men employed it in
cutting a further supply of fuel, that they might keep up a good fire
during the night.  A stream had been found at the bottom of the hill,
from which they replenished their water-casks.  Their supper, as on the
previous evening, consisted of roast seal and a few roots cooked in the
ashes, washed down with tea boiled in an iron bowl which had served as a
baler for the boat.  The night as it advanced became even more
tempestuous than the preceding one.  A few bough-tops served to keep
them off the damp ground, and on these as many as could find room lay
down to sleep, while the rest sat up keeping watch over the fire.  Peter
Patch finding the flag, which had been hauled down at sunset, wrapped
himself up in it--a fortunate circumstance, as it afterwards proved,
although the midshipman's object was of a purely self-interested nature.
No songs were sung that evening, and though a few yarns were spun, they
were often wonderfully long-drawn, the drowsy listeners scarcely
comprehending the drawling words which struck on their ears.  The night
passed slowly by.  They were thankful that the boat had been drawn up on
the beach, and placed, as they hoped, in safety, out of the reach of the
sea.

The gale increased, thunder roared, and lightning flashed, and the whole
harbour, as far as the eye could reach, was lashed into fury.

"I don't like the look of things, Mr Shafto," observed the boatswain to
Harry, who had just sat up to make room for others.  "If the sea was to
reach the boat it would soon knock her into splinters.  I cannot stand
it any longer.  With your leave, sir, I'll go and see if she is all
safe."

Saying this, Bollard started up, Paul Lizard following him.  In a short
time they were heard shouting, and all the party hurried down to join
them, Peter Patch, very unwilling to be roused, bringing up the rear,
wrapped, to keep himself warm, in the flag which he had appropriated.
They were not a moment too soon.  The foaming water had already reached
the stern of the boat, and was every now and then lifting her up and
letting her fall again on the sandy beach.  In a few minutes more she
would have been carried away or knocked to pieces.  By great exertion
they managed to haul her up out of the reach of the surf, though every
now and then the water washed up almost round her in a sheet of foam.
As it was high tide, they had hopes she would remain safe during the
night.  Still, although drenched to the skin, they were unwilling to
leave her when so much depended on her preservation.  Again and again
they tried to drag her further up.  They were still standing round her,
when Willy, looking towards the hill, exclaimed, "Why, surely our fire
is blazing up brighter than before."

"Our fire!" cried Harry.  "I am afraid that the hut is in flames!  On,
lads, we can do no more for the boat, and we may still manage to save
the hut."

The whole party rushed up the hill; but already, as they drew near the
top, they saw, to their dismay, that not only the walls, but the roof
itself had caught fire.  Fanned by the wind, the flames rapidly spread
round the building which had cost them so much labour to erect; and so
fiercely did the dry grass with which it was covered burn that they
could not approach it.  Not without difficulty, indeed, did they save
the shrouds of the flagstaff, towards which the wind drove the flames.

"And all our grub is inside," cried Paul Lizard.  "I'll try and save
that, even though I get scorched a bit."

Paul was rushing forward.  "Avast," cried Harry, seizing him by the arm.
"My gun and powder flask is within, and any moment the powder may
explode."

Scarcely had he spoken when a loud report was heard, and the shattered
flask flew out, just passing between them, and in all probability would
have struck Paul on his legs had he gone a few paces further.  In a few
moments the gun itself went off, but fortunately being in an upright
position the shot with which it was loaded flew over their heads.

"The danger is over now, at all events," said Paul.  "And though our
breakfast must be pretty well cooked, we must save some of that."
Saying this, he rushed up to the hut with a long stick which he had
picked up, and began raking away at the ashes.  Tom and another man
joined him, and succeeded in scraping out a portion of the seal-flesh
and some roots, though, as he observed, holding them up, "somewhat
over-roasted."

"You have forgotten the axes, lads," cried the boatswain.  "Try and get
them out, or we shall have a hard matter to put up another hut."  After
making several efforts, the heads of the axes were raked out, though the
handles had been so burnt and charred as to be useless.

"Never mind that," observed the boatswain.  "We may manage to replace
them."

The walls of the hut, from being of some thickness, continued to burn
for a long time.

"Well, lads," said Harry, "as we cannot save the huts, we must now make
up a rousing fire with the remains of the wood, and try and warm
ourselves.  The rain has fortunately ceased, and we shall get dry in
time, I hope."

The seamen, caring apparently little for the accident, began to pile up
the wood they had cut on the remains of their fire, which they scraped
to a sufficient distance from the burning hut to enable them to sit
round it, laughing and joking as they did so.

"Shouldn't be surprised but what our bonfire had been seen from the
village," said Paul Lizard.  "They will be thinking that a burning
mountain has burst forth.  Come, lads, pile on more logs.  It's precious
cold still, in spite of the fire."

Fortunately, more wood had been cut for the hut than was required, and
this, in addition to the fuel they had collected, enabled them to keep a
fire burning till daylight.  As may be supposed, no one ventured to go
to sleep; indeed, all hands underwent a regular roasting process,
sitting now with their backs to the fire, now with one side, now with
another, and then facing it, till their wet clothes were tolerably well
dried.  By the boatswain's advice they then stripped off their inner
garments, which they dried and then put them on again, thoroughly
warmed.  The latter part of the night was employed in fashioning some
fresh handles for the axes out of the toughest pieces of wood they could
find, so that they might be ready by daylight to go to work.

"There, my axe is as good as ever," cried Paul Lizard, as he secured the
handle he had just finished.

"And so is mine," said Tom Wall.  "We will soon have the hut up again,
and make it a little bigger the next time."

"That's the spirit I like, lads," observed the boatswain.  "Never strike
your flag while the ship swims.  That's the motto for English seamen;
and I hope, lads, you will always stick to it.  Now, Paul, just; give us
a stave; we have not heard your sweet voice all the night.  Just see if
you cannot shout as loud as the gale."  Paul thereon, nothing loath,
struck up, "Cease, rude Boreas, blustering railer."  Paul's example was
followed by others, and daylight broke on them even before they expected
its appearance.

Willy was the first to spring to his feet, saying that he would take a
run down the hill and up again to warm himself.  Peter Patch followed
him.  They had got a little distance from the bright glare of the fire,
when Willy turned his eyes seaward.

"Why, Peter," he exclaimed, after gazing earnestly for a few seconds,
"there is a sail, and not far off the mouth of the harbour."

"A sail! a sail!" shouted the midshipmen together.  All the party sprang
to their feet, and every eye was turned in the direction Willy pointed
to.

"She is trying to beat in; no doubt about it," exclaimed the boatswain.
"She is a large ship, under jury-masts, but will find it a hard job,
though."



CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

ENSIGN HOLT MAKES HIMSELF USEFUL.

PROCEEDINGS AT THE VILLAGE--VARIOUS EMPLOYMENTS--SCHOOL ESTABLISHED--
ENSIGN HOLT RECOVERS HIS SENSES--MRS MORLEY READS THE BIBLE--THE
DOCTOR'S EXCURSION INLAND--THE DEAD SEAMAN BURIED--ENSIGN HOLT MAKES
HIMSELF USEFUL--ANXIETY ABOUT HARRY AND HIS PARTY--FANNY'S MEDITATIONS--
HOLT LEADS EXPEDITION TO LOOK FOR HARRY.

The party at the village were busily employed.  The doctor had set the
armourer and cooper to work, to make, under his superintendence, an
apparatus for manufacturing sugar and beer.  The women, directed by the
ever-active Mrs Rumbelow, were scraping the roots which had been
collected for that purpose, while the tanner was trying various ways of
preparing the seals'-skins.  Two or three of the men were endeavouring,
with fair success, to make shoes from some they had roughly cured, to
replace those of several of the party which were nearly worn-out.

Captain Twopenny and his party returned from his hunting expedition with
three hogs.  Though they had seen traces of many more, the animals were
so active and the country so difficult that they had been unable to kill
them.  Still it was satisfactory to know that the island possessed means
of giving them support besides that which the waters afforded.  He had
also shot as many birds as the men could carry.

The doctor, ever fertile in resources, had had a stone hut constructed
in which both birds and fish could be smoke-dried after the fashion
practised in England and elsewhere.

The children had now plenty of work in plucking the birds ready for
curing, and afterwards in sorting the feathers for beds and coverlids.

From the first Mrs Morley and her daughters had visited the women's hut
every evening to read the Scriptures and to comfort them in their
sorrow.  The poor women, most of whom had left their husbands on board
the "Ranger," well knew how truly Mrs Morley could sympathise with
them, and listened to her exhortations and advice.  Some who had before
been very indifferent to matters of religion now looked forward with
satisfaction each day to the time when they were to receive a visit from
her and the young ladies.  She and her daughters held school with all
the children at their cottage.  It was carried on under difficulties,
for they had only one book, but that was the Bible.  The young ladies
devised, however, various means for teaching the little ones.  Some thin
flat stones served as slates, and young Broke cut out several sets of
letters from wood, which were greatly valued.  On Sunday the whole party
assembled in the men's hut, where Harry had conducted a service, and
every evening also he had borrowed Mrs Morley's Bible, and read a
chapter to the men.  During his absence she now did the same.  This
system tended greatly to keep the people contented and orderly.  They
saw that those of superior education among them were resigned to the
trials they were called on to endure, and were trusting to the support
and protection of that great and merciful God whose message of love to
man they every day heard read, and who would send them relief in His
good time.

Young as Harry Shafto was, by his firmness and decision he had
maintained a strict discipline among the little band, and even the few
who might have been disposed to be mutinous never ventured to dispute
his authority.  Even now that he was absent, they implicitly obeyed the
doctor, whom he had left in command.

Poor Ensign Holt has not been mentioned for some time.  He had gradually
been improving in health and spirits.

"Come, Holt," said Dr Davis to him one morning.  "It is time that you
should rouse yourself.  We are all exerting ourselves to the utmost for
the common good, and I wonder you are not ashamed to sit in the hut
doing nothing.  Surely it is more degrading to eat the bread of idleness
than to labour like the rest of us.  Take a spade in hand, and come and
dig for roots; or, if you like it better, try to catch, some fish.  At
least endeavour to gain your daily bread."

"If I do anything, I'll work as hard as the rest of you," said the
ensign, with more intelligence in his countenance than had long been
there.  "What are you going to be about, doctor?"

"To dig for roots.  That I suspect was among the first occupations of
primeval man, and requires no great exertion of the mind," answered the
doctor.  "Here is a spade.  Come along."

Without another word the young officer followed his kind friend, and
having been shown the leaf beneath which the root was to be found, set
to work and dug away diligently till he had collected as many as he
could carry.  The doctor sent him back to the village with them, and
told him to return without delay.  All day long he worked away, and
seemed very proud of the pile of roots he had dug up.  That evening, by
the doctor's invitation, he attended the meeting in the men's hut, and
listened with great attention while Mrs Morley read the Bible.  She
afterwards spoke a few kind words to him, expressing her pleasure at
seeing him so much improved in health.  He burst into tears.

"I have been a good-for-nothing foolish fellow," he said at length.
"But oh, Mrs Morley, if you would but take me in hand, I think there
might be a chance of my improvement."

"If you seek for strength and guidance whence alone it can come, you may
be very certain there will be an improvement, dear Mr Holt," said Mrs
Morley, kindly.  "The trials you have gone through, and may yet have to
endure, will then prove a blessing to you.  I will gladly give you
counsel and advice, but more I cannot do.  Let me remind you only of
God's promise, `that if you seek you will find; if you knock, it shall
be opened unto you.'"

From that day forward a great change was perceptible in the young
ensign.  He laboured as hard as any one; and whenever he could borrow
Mrs Morley's Bible, he would sit up for hours together at night reading
it diligently.

This had occurred some days before Harry went on his expedition to the
harbour.  The doctor reminded Captain Twopenny of their intention of
burying the body of the unfortunate seaman they had found on the beach.
He invited Ensign Holt to accompany him, taking also two men, with
spades, who also carried their clubs in case they should fall in with
seals.  He had his gun, and proposed that Holt should take one also.
"No," answered the ensign.  "I am but a poor shot, and should only throw
away powder.  I will carry your game.  I am not of use for much else."
Formerly, how indignant he would have been had such an idea been
suggested to him.

They started at daybreak, hoping to get back at night, and to find
Shafto and his companions had returned.

The journey was a very fatiguing one.  Though the captain knew the way
tolerably well, it was noon before they reached the little bay where the
dead seaman lay.  The ensign seemed greatly struck when he saw it.
"Poor fellow," he said, contemplating the body.  "I thought my fate a
very hard one, and yet how infinitely worse was that poor fellow's, cast
on this inhospitable shore, perhaps deserted by his companions, and left
to die in all the agonies of starvation, without a human voice to soothe
his last hours."

"It won't do to give way to such thoughts as those, Holt," observed the
captain, who had no sympathy with the ensign's present state.  "Come,
lads, we will bury the poor fellow, as we promised, and when we get
back, I daresay Mrs Morley will speak about the subject.  We have no
time to lose, or we shall run the risk of being benighted on the
mountain side."

A shallow grave was dug in the soft earth at the foot of the cliff, and
the melancholy remnant of humanity was lifted into it.

"Poor fellow," said one of the seamen.  "You or I, Bill, may come to
this one of these days, though, as Mrs Morley says, it matters little
if we are prepared."

"Come, lads," cried the captain from the top of the cliff, "be quick
now.  We must make the best of our way homewards."

The party were tolerably successful in obtaining provisions during the
excursion.  The captain killed a hog and a number of birds, and the men,
after a short combat, knocked a seal on the head whom they found
wandering in the woods.  The ensign shouldered the hog--fortunately for
him, not a very heavy one--the men having cut up the seal, divided the
pieces between them, and the captain carried the birds; and thus heavily
laden they reached the village soon after nightfall.  Before this the
rain had begun to fall in dense showers, and a strong gale was blowing.

They found their friends in considerable anxiety about Harry Shafto and
his party, who had not returned.  The next day was Sunday, and he had
promised to be back without fail.  A fire was kept burning on the beach,
by the doctor's directions, during the night, to guide his boat into the
bay.  Emma and Fanny, who had persuaded their mother to go to bed, sat
up watching anxiously for his return.  Frequently they went to the door,
hoping to hear the voices of him and his companions; but the only sound
which reached their ears was the howling of the wind through the
neighbouring trees, and the roar of the surf upon the rocky shore.  They
had a good excuse for sitting up, little Bessy being somewhat ill and
restless.

"I trust no accident has happened to Mr Shafto," said Emma, when, after
waiting several hours, Harry did not appear.  "His life is of great
consequence to us all."

"It is indeed," sighed Fanny.  "Oh, no, no, it would be too dreadful to
think of.  But what can have delayed him?"

"The boat may have struck on the rocks, and have been injured," observed
Emma; "or, as the wind blows down the harbour, that may have delayed
him."

"But the wind was blowing up the harbour all day," said Fanny.  "I hope
Dr Davis will send an expedition along the shore to search for them.
They took, I am afraid, but a small amount of provisions, and may be
suffering from hunger."

"I daresay they will, after all, appear early to-morrow," observed Emma.
"They can row up, if they are unable to sail."

Fanny was less hopeful than her sister.  She could not help
acknowledging to herself that she felt a deep interest in the brave
young officer, under whose guidance, and in consequence of whose
judgment and courage, the lives of the whole party had--humanly
speaking--been preserved.  Though Harry had treated her, and her mother
and sister, with the most gentle and thoughtful attention, he had not by
word or look showed that he felt especial regard for her.  But this, she
was sure that, under the circumstances in which they were placed, he
would be very careful to avoid doing, "Yet why should I allow such
thoughts to enter my mind," she said to herself.  "Perhaps it may be our
lot never to leave this place, and how selfish in me to think thus when
my poor mother is weighed down with such a burden of grief, which it
should be my sole thought how best to alleviate!"

The morning came.  The gale was blowing with even greater violence than
during the night.  Still there were no signs of the boat.  The seamen
told the doctor that this was no wonder, as she would be unable to get
up while the wind held in its present quarter.  Still, several of them
went down along the shore to a considerable distance, but came back
without having seen any signs of the missing party, two of them who went
beyond the rest declaring that they could not get any further, as Tippo
Sahib had chased them, and that they had had to run for their lives.

The usual Sunday service was conducted in the men's hut, and all seemed
especially serious and attentive.  As soon as it was over, Ensign Holt,
as he accompanied the doctor to their hut, said, "I hope all is well
with Shafto; but still the ladies seem very anxious about him; and if
you will let me, doctor, I will start off, and try to find our friends.
I daresay, one or two of the men will be ready to accompany me, and we
will take as large a supply of provisions as we can carry.  They may, at
all events, be hard up for food, wherever they are."

"A good idea of yours, Holt," answered the doctor, "though, as probably
they would have been able to kill a seal or two, I have no apprehension
on that score.  My idea is that the boat has met in with an accident
somewhere round the coast.  The danger is that you may miss them, as
they will probably take the shortest route across the country.  We will
talk the matter over.  It is late for starting to-day; but if they do
not appear to-night, or early to-morrow morning, I should say that you
ought to set off."

Had Fanny Morley been consulted she might possibly have advised the
ensign to set off immediately.  She was very grateful to him when she
heard of his proposal; and she and Emma assisted Mrs Rumbelow in
arranging some knapsacks and baskets, in which he and his companions
might carry provisions for the party.

The day passed by--the morning came--the boat did not appear--and the
ensign, with two men and young Broke, who begged to accompany them,
prepared to set out on their expedition.

Few would have recognised the helpless creature who landed on the island
a short time before in the active young man, with a bright and
intelligent eye, who was to lead the party.  He felt that he had work
before him, and that he could be of use to his fellow-creatures.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

THE WRECK OF THE CRUSADER.

WATCHING SHIP FROM FLAGSTAFF-HILL--SHIP APPROACHES HARBOUR--PRONOUNCED
TO BE AN EMIGRANT SHIP--LAUNCHING BOAT TO ASSIST SHIP--SHIP ENTERS THE
SOUND--THE EMIGRANT SHIP IN DANGER--CUTTER PUTS OFF--THE SHIP ANCHORS
NEAR REEF--BOAT GETS ALONGSIDE--MRS CLAGGET'S TONGUE HEARD--PASSENGERS
LOWERED INTO BOAT--DANGEROUS PASSAGE TO THE SHORE--THE "CRUSADER" DRIVEN
ON THE REEF--WATCHING WRECK FROM THE BEACH--HARRY RETURNS TO THE WRECK--
BILL WINDY'S BRAVE EXPLOIT--COMMUNICATION ESTABLISHED WITH SHORE--SEA
BREAKING OVER SHIP--CAPTAIN WESTERWAY THE LAST TO LEAVE--ENCAMPMENT ON
THE SHORE--GOOD HOPE FOR THE FUTURE--ARRIVAL OF ENSIGN HOLT--MUTINY
AMONG THE CREW--MAWSON RINGLEADER OF MUTINEERS--RESOLVE TO BUILD A
VESSEL.

We left Harry Shafto and his companions on the brow of the hill,
watching with intense eagerness the ship they had just discovered as she
endeavoured to beat up towards the mouth of the harbour.

"They must have seen our hut blazing during the night, and it probably
served them as a beacon," remarked Harry.  "What we considered our
misfortune was to their advantage."

"Ay, ay, Mr Shafto, it's an ill wind that blows no one good," observed
the boatswain.  "I only wish she had the wind freer.  It will be no easy
matter for that big ship, rigged as she is, to beat up this harbour, and
when she is inside it is hard to say where she can bring up; for, with
the wind shifting and veering about, there is no safe anchorage that I
could find for her."

"She would not attempt to come in here unless she was in distress,"
remarked Harry.  "And if, as is probable, there are passengers on board,
they may be landed here with less danger than on the open coast, even
should she get on shore."

"I should not like to insure her against doing that," said the
boatswain.  "Heaven help her and the poor people on board.  If the
captain knows the place, he would rather have kept out at sea than tried
to come in here.  See, she is about again, and is standing to the
south'ard.  Perhaps, after all, he thinks he had better not make the
attempt."

"We must run up the flag.  It will help them to find the mouth of the
inner harbour, at all events," said Harry.  "Come, Patch, you must give
up your cloak; you can do without it now."

The curiously-contrived flag was quickly hoisted and flew out to the
breeze.

The party stood in silence watching the ship for some time.  They were
too anxious about her to make many remarks.  The gale continued blowing
as hard as ever.  Suddenly it shifted to the southwest, the ship fell
off a few points, and then she was seen slowly to come about, and once
more she headed up towards the harbour.

"He has made up his mind to come in.  No doubt about that," observed the
boatswain.

"It is time, Mr Shafto, for us to launch the boat, to go off to her,
and we may then be ready.  The captain thinks if he is once inside he
will be all safe, but to my mind he will be greatly mistaken."

"I'll follow your advice, Mr Bollard," said Harry.  "We will do our
best, lads, to help the people if the ship gets on shore.  I know that I
can depend on you."

"Ay, ay, sir, and never fear," answered the men, as they followed the
young officer down the the hill.  They kept the ship in sight all the
way, and could still see her clearly from the beach.

On she stood, and the wind holding, she was able to steer directly for
the harbour.  Under ordinary circumstances she would have appeared
secure of entering a haven of safety; but with the wind constantly
shifting, the rocky shore on either side, and deep water close up to it,
there would still be great danger, even should she succeed in making the
entrance.

The boat was reached, but now came the difficulty of launching her; for
the wind having shifted to the south, the sea raised across the broad
estuary drove directly into the bay.  Could they once get her safely
through the surf, however, they might obtain shelter under the western
point, where a reef running out formed a natural breakwater.  They ran
her down the beach, but when near the water both Harry and the boatswain
hesitated about attempting to launch her.  Should they not succeed in
getting her quickly through the surf, one of the heavy seas which were
breaking on the shore might roll her over and knock her to pieces, as
well as endanger all their lives.  Still, if they waited till any
accident happened to the ship, they might be too late to render
assistance to those on board.

As the stranger stood in, the English flag was seen flying at her peak,
and from her appearance the boatswain pronounced her to be a
merchantman, probably an Australian emigrant ship, and that if so she
would probably have numerous passengers on board.

"She has evidently been fearfully knocked about," said Harry, who was
looking at her through his spy-glass.  "And I can only see one
quarter-boat.  Come, lads, we must try to launch the cutter.  Dicey and
Patch, do you jump in and stand by with the oars.  When I give the word,
we will run her down without stopping, and back out as the sea falls
off."

Harry waited till a heavy sea broke on the shore, then all hands uniting
their strength, in another instant the boat was afloat.  They leaped in,
the oars were out in a moment, and before the next sea broke, the boat
had been urged fifty fathoms from the beach.  Only one small patch of
water was visible where she could remain in safety, close inside the
reef.  They pulled towards it, the seas, as they rolled in, threatening
to capsize her.  It was reached, and by keeping the boat's head towards
the outer rocks they were able to lie in comparative safety, and watch
the progress of the ship.

"If the wind holds she will get in, and may be come to anchor under the
south island," observed Bollard.

"It would be safer for her, then, to run up the inner harbour; for
should the wind afterwards shift, she would be placed in a dangerous
position," said Harry.

"No doubt about that, sir," observed Bollard.  "The chances are that she
will leave her ribs on the rocks."

"If so, we must do our best to save the people," said Harry.  "The sea
breaks heavily along the shore, and they will be placed in great
danger."

The ship meantime was standing boldly on, keeping close to the southern
shore, for the purpose evidently of being well to windward.  She had
already reached the entrance of the sound, and now she was in
comparatively smooth water, though the fierce gale made her heel over,
threatening every instant to carry away her masts.  It must have been an
anxious time to those on board.  Away to leeward the waves were dashing
fiercely on the rockbound coast, and well they must have known, should
any accident happen, that no power could save them from driving against
it, when few could have hoped to escape with life.

The party in the boat continued anxiously to watch the ship.  Harry was
considering how he could best render her assistance.  It was a long way
by land to the mouth of the sound, and should she drive on shore in that
direction, all on board might be lost before he and his party could
reach the spot.  Still the masts held, and the captain evidently dared
not shorten sail, as only by carrying on could he hope to keep to
windward.

"He is a brave seaman, whoever he may be," observed Bollard.  "Hold on,
good sticks, hold on, and you may still bring the stout ship into port!"
he added, apostrophising the masts.

"They see our flagstaff, and will probably steer for it," said Harry.
"Or perhaps they are aware of the existence of the inner harbour, and
purpose running up to an anchorage."

The ship had now got within two miles of where the boat lay; and,
sheltered somewhat by the land, she stood up more bravely than before to
her canvas.  The captain evidently did not like the look of the shore on
his port side, as no preparations were made for coming to an anchor.

"She will do it now," cried Bollard, "if the wind holds for another
quarter of an hour.  See, she is keeping away.  They have made out the
entrance of the inner harbour.  We might pull outside the reef, Mr
Shafto, and get on board, to pilot her in.  If they see us coming, they
will have ropes ready for us."

"It would be no easy matter to reach her, and we shall risk our lives
and the loss of the boat, if we make the attempt till she is in smoother
water," said Harry.  "However, we may pull round to the harbour, and
lead her in; they will be looking out for a boat, and will be sure to
see us.  Now, lads, give way.  Dicey and Patch, you must keep the
bailers going, for we shall ship some seas, and must be prepared.  We
will first get to windward, and step the mast, and then run merrily up."

The ship was now standing almost across the sound, making directly for
the mouth of the inner harbour.  As she drew nearer, the gush of water
from her sides, evidently forced out by pumps at work, showed her
distressed condition, and the reason which had induced her commander to
seek a haven instead of keeping the open sea.  The boat had just got
from under the shelter of the reef, when the wind again shifted several
points to the westward, and blew with greater violence than before.  The
crew tugged bravely at their oars; but all their efforts could scarcely
send the boat ahead in the teeth of the gale.  The ship, heeling over,
made her way across the sound.  The mouth of the harbour was almost
reached, when with redoubled violence the wind struck her.  Down she
heeled, and all her masts in one instant falling over her side, she lay
a helpless wreck upon the water, driving rapidly towards the reef.  So
close was she already that Harry could see the people running along her
decks.  An anchor was let go, but even when the whole cable had run out,
so great was the depth of water that it did not hold.  Another anchor
followed.  Still the ship drove onwards.

Harry, forgetting his previous caution, urged his men to pull out, in
the hopes of getting alongside before she struck, and saving, if
possible, some of the females who might be on board.  There was but
little time to do so, however, for she was already within three cables'
lengths of the rocks.

"She holds! she holds!" cried Willy.  The last anchor had brought her
up.  "Whatever becomes of the ship, lads, the people may be saved."

It was now seen that the only boat had been stove in when the masts were
carried away.

"The lives of those on board may depend on our exertions, lads," cried
Harry, when he discovered this.  The crew thus encouraged and incited,
used every effort to reach the sorely battered vessel.  Several persons
were seen collected on the poop, eagerly watching their approach.  It
was too probable that the anchor would not long hold, and when, driven
on the reef, her destruction would be inevitable.

At length the boat succeeded in getting under the ship's quarter.  "Let
no one attempt to get into the boat till the women are cared for," cried
some one from the poop in a stern voice, as the boat lay tossing up and
down.

A chair slung by ropes was lowered with a female in it, who shrieked out
as she descended, "Hold on tight, hold on tight, good sailors! hold on,
I pray you, hold on tight!  Don't let me drop into the water.  I was
ready to sacrifice myself for the good of the rest by coming first; hold
on, hold on!"

Her tongue had been heard even before the chair was over the side, and
continuing till she was unlashed and handed over to the boatswain into
the stern of the boat, where she continued uttering exclamations without
intermission.  "Oh, do take care of the girls, they are under my charge.
Let them come next; I must not be separated from them."

"Why," exclaimed Willy, as he caught sight of the lady's features, "are
you not Mrs Clagget, and are my sisters and Charles with you?"

"Yes, to be sure they are, and there comes Emily.  And is it possible
that you are Willy Dicey, and can I believe my senses?" was the answer.

Willy did not stop to reply, but sprang to the bow of the boat to assist
his sister, who was just then being lowered down.  May followed her.
Harry recognised them.  "Is Charles with you?" he asked, as he carried
May aft.

"Oh, yes.  Can he come with us?"

"Not till the other women are safe," he answered.  "I am sure he would
not."

There was no time to exchange further words, for more women and children
were being lowered down.  Poor Mrs Bolton, when she had got all her
children with her, cried out for her husband, but the necessary rule was
adhered to.

"He will come next trip, when you are all landed," said Harry.

Though anxious to take off as many as the boat could carry, Harry,
afraid of overloading her, at length resolved to take no more.

The passage to the shore, though short, was full of danger.  The oars
were got out, the rope which held her to the ship cast off, and now came
the fierce struggle with the seas.  The crew had to exert their utmost
strength to clear the end of the reef.  Those who watched her from the
deck must have trembled for their safety.  Often it seemed as if she
must be driven into the surf, which broke in sheets of foam over the
rocks; but the strong arms of the crew and their tough oars did not fail
them.  The point of the reef was doubled, and the boat now glided into
comparatively smooth water within it.  Instead of attempting to run on
the beach, Harry steered her towards some rocks which formed the inner
part of the reef.  Even here the landing was far from easy.  While some
of the men kept the boat from being dashed against the rocks, Harry,
with the boatswain and the rest, leaped into the water.

"Come, marm," said Mr Bollard to Mrs Clagget.  "You were the first in
the boat, and you should be the first out, and do just cling on to my
back, and I will soon place you on dry ground."

"Oh, you will let me into the water, I know you will," answered Mrs
Clagget.

"No, no, marm, don't be afraid," said Bollard, seizing her hands, and
lifting her up on his shoulders as he would have carried his hammock.
"You must set the rest of the ladies an example."

Mrs Clagget's tongue did not cease; but the boatswain, regardless of
what she said, ran with her over the rocks, and putting her down,
quickly returned to the boat.  Harry in the meantime having landed May,
the boatswain next took up Emily, and bore her to the shore, while Willy
and Peter scrambled over the rocks, each with a child on his shoulders.
One after the other, the whole of the passengers were thus landed.

The midshipmen were then about to jump into the boat.  "No, Dicey, do
you and Patch remain on shore, and take care of the women," said Harry.
"If we are lost, there will be no one to send for help to the
settlement.  You understand me?  I can trust to your judgment.
Good-bye."  Saying this, Harry ordered the crew to shove off, and once
more pulled away to the ship.

Harry had frequently cast an anxious glance towards her.  She appeared
already to have got nearer the reef; and his fear was, knowing the depth
of the water on the outside and her already leaky condition, that,
should she strike, she might go down before the rest of the people could
be landed.

The boat had got to the outer end of the reef, when so heavy a squall
met her that the crew, though exerting all their strength, in vain
attempted to pull against it.  The ship felt its force; nearer and
nearer she drew to the reef, pitching her bows into the seas as they
rolled along nearly the whole length of the broad estuary.  At last she
rose to a heavier sea than ordinary.  The cable parted, and the hapless
"Crusader" drove stern-on to the rocks.  She struck heavily, the falling
sea driving her broadside on to them.  To rescue any of those on board
from the outside of the reef was now an operation of too much danger to
be attempted, and Harry, by the boatswain's advice, steered back, hoping
to establish a communication with the ship across the reef.

Emily and May Dicey stood on the beach, watching with fearful
apprehension the ship as she lay with her broadside against the reef,
the sea wildly breaking over her.  "Oh! they will be lost, they will be
lost," cried May.

Emily clasped her hands.  "Willy, can nothing be done for them?" she
exclaimed.

"I hope so," said Willy.  "If man can help them, Harry Shafto and
Bollard will do it."

Most of the poor women were uttering cries and lamentations in their
terror for the safety of their husbands left on board.  There were still
also a number of poor women and children.  Willy felt more anxious for
them even than for the men.

The boat was seen coming back.  "Oh, they have given it up.  There is no
hope for them!  Dear, dear Charles! he will be lost.  I wish we had
stayed with him," cried May.

"I am very sure Harry Shafto has not given it up," said Willy.  "He
knows that the only way to get the people out of the ship is on this
side.  We shall soon see what he is about to do."

The part of the reef where the ship had struck was under water, and some
distance from the point of rocks which ran out from the shore.  Had she
gone to pieces and no boat been at hand, although so close to the land,
the greater number, if not all, might have perished, for the surf as it
receded would have carried them off, and even the strongest swimmer
would have found it difficult to make way against it.

Harry and his brave crew were now seen to approach as near the ship as
they could venture without the risk of being carried on the rocks.
Several persons were standing on the ship's starboard bow, which was now
nearest the shore.  One of them held a coil of light rope in his hands;
he hove it, but it fell short.  Again and again he made the attempt.  At
length a person standing near was observed to fasten it round his waist,
when, holding on by another rope, he lowered himself down.  He waited
till the receding sea had gone past him, and then, as another rolled up,
he leaped on its crest, and was borne onwards, striking out boldly
towards the beach.  On he struggled.  Again the receding sea bore him
backwards towards the reef.  He redoubled his exertions.  Harry ordered
the cutter to "back in," anxious to assist the brave fellow.  The rocks
appeared fearfully close.  He stretched out his hand to grasp the
swimmer's arm.  "Give way, lads, give way," he shouted; and the
boatswain coming to his assistance, they hauled the man in, and secured
the rope which was fastened to his waist.  They now pulled away across
the little bay formed by the reef and the shore, towards a high rock
which jutted out from the beach.

"I thought Bill Windy would do it," exclaimed the man who had been
rescued; and without shaking the water from his clothes, he began
hauling in on the line which he had brought with him.  At the other end
was a hawser which the boat now towed towards the rock.  Leaping on to
it, the boatswain and Lizard made fast the hawser.  A communication was
thus established between the vessel and the shore.

Emily and May, with the rest of the party on the beach, had been
watching these proceedings with intense eagerness.  The boat again
pulled back towards the wreck.  The brave mate was seen to cling to the
hawser, and work his way back.  Several times the surf covered him, but
he held on tight, and, emerging from the water, clambered up the bows of
the ship.  The hawser was tautened up, while the boat hung on to it,
ready to receive the next comers.  The mate was soon again seen making
his way along the hawser, carrying another line and a block.  He reached
the boat in safety, when the block was secured, just above the boat.  A
cradle, which had meantime been prepared, was slung on the hawser; but
eager as those on board were to reach a place of safety, they appeared
to hesitate about trusting themselves to it.

"Why are they losing so much precious time?" cried Emily.  "How
fearfully the sea is breaking over the ship; any moment she may be
dashed to pieces, or fall off the rocks into the deep water.  Oh, see!
see! there is a man making the attempt with two children.  It is Mr
Paget."  That gentleman, finding others hesitated, had taken two infants
from their mothers' arms, and had seated himself in the cradle, to set
an example to the rest of the people on board.  Holding on with one
hand, and steadying the cradle with the other, though the surf as it
rose washed over him more than once, he reached the boat with his
charges.

"Thank Heaven!" exclaimed Emily.  "He is safe! he is safe!  And there is
Charles; he is following the brave example."

Several other persons succeeded in gaining the boat.  Tom Loftus, Jack
Ivyleaf, and Mr Bolton, the father of the large family already on
shore, were among them.  Each brought either a couple of children or one
of the women with him--the latter being afraid of trusting themselves
alone.  The boat was already full, and as yet no casualty had occurred;
but the danger was every instant increasing.  The tide was rising, the
sea striking with fearful violence against the side of the ship, making
every timber in her quiver.  It need not be told how heartily those who
now reached the shore were welcomed by the party already on the beach--
how his wife and children clung round Mr Bolton; how Emily and May
pressed Charles' hand; and how, in voluble language, Mrs Clagget
expressed her satisfaction at seeing her fellow-passengers out of the
terrible wreck.

Harry, without stopping a moment after the last person had landed, again
pulled across the bay.  Already several of the sailors were seen making
their way along the hawser independent of the cradle.  As the boat
approached, they then dropped one by one into her.  Bill Windy rated
them for not remaining on board.

"You should have stopped to get up provisions, you rascals," he
exclaimed.  "How are all these people to be fed?"

"Little hope of getting provisions or anything else," answered one of
the men, "when the chances are that the ship will be knocked to pieces,
or go down before the day is many minutes older."

"Greater need for you to have stopped and helped to get them into the
boat," said Windy.  "But, bear a hand, and assist these people off the
cradle."

The same operation as before was repeated, till the boat was once more
full, all the remaining women and children being got into her.

A rush was now seen to take place towards the forecastle, and a heavy
sea struck the after-part of the ship, carrying away a large portion of
the stern upper works.  What would next happen it was not difficult to
foretell.  Several unfortunate people who had remained there were hurled
into the surf.  In vain they struggled--no assistance could be given
them--and, one by one, they were carried away.  Had anything been
necessary to make the nigh worn-out crew of the boat increase their
exertions, this would have done so.  Happily, the hawser still remained
secure.  Harry shouted to the master, who unflinchingly was standing on
the forecastle directing the landing of the people, to put himself into
the cradle.  "No, no," he answered.  "Not while a man remains on board
will I quit the ship."  At length, contrary to the expectations of many,
nearly all the surviving passengers and crew were got safely into the
boat.  Besides the captain, only one trembling wretch remained.  He
clung frantically to the bulwarks, afraid of quitting his hold, and
trusting himself to the cradle.

"Come, Mr Mawson," exclaimed Captain Westerway, "I am hauling the
cradle back for the last time, and if you do not go, before many minutes
you will be carried off by the sea, and no power on earth can help you."

The wretched man looked up with pale cheeks and staring eyes.  "I dare
not, I dare not," he answered.  "But will you not save me, Captain
Westerway?"

"Save you!  I want you to save yourself!" said the captain, taking him
by the shoulder.  "Come, get in there, and hold tight;" and the captain
lifted the trembling wretch, and forced him into the cradle.  He
shrieked out with alarm as he felt himself moving, clinging convulsively
to the hawser; but the men in the boat, more for the captain's sake than
his, hauled away, and quickly had him out; and the cradle was travelling
back for their brave commander.  As he was placing himself in it he felt
the ship tremble violently.  The sea which struck her washed over him.
Those in the boat thought he was gone, but to their joy they saw him
still holding on to the hawser.  They hauled away with all their
strength, for a few seconds' delay might have caused his destruction.  A
loud cheer burst from their throats as he reached the boat, and at that
moment the upper part of the ship, to which the hawser was made fast,
parted, and was speedily washed away.

The old captain sighed as he watched the ship breaking up.  "I would
gladly have been among the poor fellows lost; and yet, no.  I am wrong
to say that.  It is my duty to look after those who are saved."

The survivors of the passengers and crew of the ill-fated "Crusader"
were now collected on the beach.  Though saved from a watery grave, how
fearful would have been their condition had Harry and his companions not
been there to assist them!  As it was, starvation stared them in the
face.  How could all be fed with the scanty supply of provisions which
he possessed.  Bill Windy proposed going back to the wreck; but now that
the communication with her had been cut off, it was impossible to get on
board without the greatest danger.  Evening, too, was approaching, and
shelter must be found for the women and children.  Harry despatched some
of his men for the axes to cut wood for fuel and building huts, while he
and others hauled up the boat, and by turning her partly over under the
cliff, provided shelter for the whole of the women and children; while a
large fire made in front enabled the shipwrecked party to dry their
drenched garments.  Willy and Peter hastened off to the spring to obtain
water.  The poor children were crying out for food.  Such as Harry had
he divided among them and their mothers, but nearly the whole party were
already suffering from hunger.

At the settlement all might be fed and sheltered, but many hours must
elapse before they could reach it.  He knew, too, that in the dark it
would be almost hopeless to make the attempt.  He resolved, however, to
start the next morning with a party of the men, who might return with
provisions; but in the meantime he feared that many would suffer
greatly.  He held a consultation with Captain Westerway, Mr Paget, and
Charles as to what was best to be done.

"Should the weather moderate in the morning, or the wind shift, I still
have hopes that we may get some provisions from the ship," answered the
captain.  "If not, the men, at all events, can hold out a few hours; and
as there seems to be an abundance of wood in the island, we may form
litters, and carry the women and children who are unable to walk.  We
have hitherto been so mercifully preserved that I do not fear for the
future.  Had it not been for the light you showed on shore, Mr Shafto,
we should none of us at this time have been alive.  The men were nearly
worn-out at the pumps, and I had no hopes of keeping the ship afloat
many hours longer, when, as we were standing to the eastward, we caught
sight of the light on shore, and I at once knew that it must be on a
part of the Auckland Islands."

"Our hut did not catch fire by chance, then," said Harry.  "We were
mourning its loss, little thinking of the advantage it would be to
others.  You would probably not have seen the ordinary fire we had kept
burning."

While they were talking a shout was heard, and Willy and Peter Patch
were seen hurrying up, followed by Ensign Holt with a couple of men and
young Broke, each carrying a heavy load of seals' flesh on his
shoulders.

"Here is food for you all, good people," shouted the midshipmen.  "No
fear of starving now, for Holt says they left a couple more big fellows
which they knocked on the head not a mile away."

Harry warmly welcomed him.  The ensign's astonishment was, as may be
supposed, very great at seeing so large a party.  He at once volunteered
to go back to the spot where he and his companions had killed the seals,
with any of the people who would accompany him, to obtain a further
supply of their flesh.

Meantime, Harry and Captain Westerway set all hands to work.  While some
were cooking the seals' flesh, others brought in fuel, and poles, and
boughs to build huts.  A tent was formed of the boats' sails which Harry
begged the Miss Diceys, Mrs Clagget, and the other ladies to occupy.
Some, however, of the merchant seamen grumbled on being ordered to work
by the young naval officer, asserting that as they were now on shore,
and their ship stranded, they were free men, and would do what they
liked.

"As you please," said Harry.  "But no work, no pay.  You will have, at
all events, to forage for yourself."

The mutineers, who had sat down at some distance from the rest of the
party, at length appeared to repent of their resolution, and one of them
came up, humbly begging for some meat, and fuel to keep up a fire.
Harry, not sorry to be relieved of their society, granted them their
request.  They were joined by some of the younger emigrants, and Charles
observed that Job Mawson stole off and sat himself down among them.

Ensign Holt and his party returned at dark with an ample supply of food,
and by this time all the huts for which they had materials were erected,
and the shipwrecked people, thankful that their lives had been spared,
prepared to pass their first night on shore, no one knowing how many
more they might have to spend on the island before they could make their
escape.

The storm continued blowing, but the rain held off.  Harry and his men
went about renewing the fires, so as to keep the poor women and children
as warm as possible.  The chief annoyance arose from the noise made by
the mutineers.  They had been seen wandering about, and appeared to have
hauled something on shore.  Not long afterwards they began to sing, and
shout, and shriek out in the wildest fashion.  At last the sounds died
away, and their fire alone, smouldering in the distance, showed where
they were.

Captain Westerway took but little rest; he seemed dreadfully cast down
at the loss of his ship, in spite of the consolation which Charles, Mr
Paget, and Harry tried to give him.

"I had thought, when I came in here, to get the leaks stopped, and
continue the voyage to New Zealand," he said, sighing deeply.

"We do not know what can be done yet," said Harry.  "At all events, we
may build a new vessel out of the old one; and though she cannot carry
all the people, she may give notice of our condition, and a larger one
may be sent from New Zealand to our relief.  So you see, Captain
Westerway, your loss is our gain; for had you not come in, months or
years might have passed before we could have made our escape, and the
anxiety of our friends have been relieved."



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

SHIPBUILDING.

PREPARATIONS FOR MOVING TO VILLAGE--LITTERS FORMED FOR LADIES--HOLT
LEADS THE PARTY--WILLY AND PETER CARRY MAY--THE JOURNEY COMMENCED--
STORES AND BOAT RECOVERED FROM WRECK--MUTINEERS DISAPPEAR--KEEL OF
"YOUNG CRUSADER" LAID.

The morning was too tempestuous to allow the boat to make the passage to
the settlement.  Harry, therefore, set all the men to work to construct
litters on which the ladies and the weaker women and children might be
carried, Ensign Holt having undertaken to show the way, which he
declared practicable, though in places somewhat rough and marshy.

The women meantime were busily employed in preparing breakfast.  Paul
Lizard had, fortunately, some hooks and lines in his pocket, and he set
the boys to work to catch fish.

The mutineers did not appear; but Willy and Peter were sent to see what
had become of them, and they reported that they were lying asleep round
the ashes of their fire, with a spirit cask near them, a small portion
of the liquor only remaining in it.  Harry felt that it was important
for him to return to the settlement, in order to make preparations for
the support of so many people, or he would gladly have remained with
Captain Westerway, to assist him in getting stores from the wreck, and
seeing what could be done to build another vessel, as had been proposed.
He left, however, Bollard and Lizard with him; while he, taking young
Broke as his guide, and four of the emigrants, set off towards the
settlement, it being arranged that Ensign Holt, aided by Mr Paget,
Charles, and the other gentlemen, should conduct the main body.

Captain Westerway undertook, should he be able to obtain the provisions,
to send them up in the cutter, under charge of Mr Bollard, One of the
ship's boats, though stove in so as then to be useless, remained on
deck; and the captain hoped, should she not be washed away, to repair
her sufficiently to be of use in visiting the wreck.

Some time passed before the young ensign's party were ready to start,
and had been supplied with food.  Several of the women had found
biscuits in their pockets, which afforded support to the younger
children.  The young ladies had begged to be allowed to walk, but were
assured that their shoes were unfit for the rough ground which they
would have to traverse.  Willy and Peter, with two other boys, insisted
on carrying May, while Emily's litter was borne by her elder brother,
Mr Paget, Tom Loftus, and Jack Ivyleaf.  Mrs Clagget declined taking
her seat on the litter prepared for her.  "No, no; you men will be
letting me down in the middle of a bog," she exclaimed.  "If some one
would lend me a pair of boots, I would show you that I could trudge as
well as any body."  As may be supposed, no boots were to be procured;
but Jack Ivyleaf, ever fertile in resources, undertook to fit the old
lady with a pair of seal-skin moccasins, which would protect her feet
from the rocks.

The party formed a long line, not unlike a caravan prepared to cross the
desert.  They were in tolerable spirits, but the more thoughtful ones
could not help feeling anxious about the means of supplying so many
mouths with food.

As soon as they had started, Captain Westerway launched the boat, to be
ready to visit the wreck directly the weather moderated sufficiently.
Meantime, while some of the people were collecting the pieces of timber
and planking which were washed on shore, others were engaged in cutting
wood for building the huts they required to shelter them from the cold
and rain at night.

Towards evening the sea had gone down sufficiently to enable the captain
and his first mate, with Mr Bollard, to get alongside the ship.  A
short inspection soon convinced them that she was a hopeless wreck.

"It cannot be helped, Windy," said Captain Westerway, with a sigh.  "We
must now try to make the best of what remains of her."

"Cheer up, captain," answered the mate; "though the old `Crusader' will
carry us no longer over the ocean, we will have a `Young Crusader' built
before long, and she will do good service if, by her means, we can get
away to some Christian land.  We might have been much worse off than we
are, and, to my mind, we have no cause to grumble.  Here's our boat
still safe, and, with some tinkering, she may be made to swim and serve
us well.  We will tow her on shore; but first we will see what
provisions we can come at to carry with us."

Bill and his companions at once set to work.  A cask of beef, another of
pork, and three of flour were found, besides several articles--among the
most valuable was the carpenter's tool chest, and a quantity of iron.
These were at once lowered into the boat.  A number of sails were also
got up, and thus laden they returned in her to the shore.

Another trip only could be made that night, when more hands were taken
off to assist in the work.

The various articles brought from the wreck greatly raised the spirits
of the party.  The sails, stretched on poles they had cut, made
comfortable tents, and they had now food in abundance.

"I wish those mutinous chaps had not been such fools," observed Windy.
"I wonder what has become of them."

On inquiries being made, it was found that the mutineers, headed by Job
Mawson, had been seen making their way across the country in the
direction of the settlement.

"I hope they will not have gone to annoy the people there," observed the
boatswain.  "The men are often away hunting or fishing, and only the
ladies and a few other women and children are left at the huts."

"They are not likely to get there before Mr Shafto, at all events,"
said the captain.  "We need not trouble ourselves about them."

Still Bill Windy was not quite comfortable in his mind.  Three or four
of the crew were great scoundrels, and several of the emigrants were
ruffianly fellows, ready to engage in any sort of mischief.

The captain and his mates, with Mr Bollard, sat up for several hours
arranging the plan of the vessel, which they proposed commencing as soon
as the timber could be got from the wreck.  By daybreak they commenced
repairing the boat, and she being put to rights, they were able to
proceed more rapidly in getting the stores and provisions on shore.  A
raft was also formed to facilitate the operation.

So hard did they work--the weather still continuing favourable--that
before many days had passed the keel of the "Young Crusader" was laid,
the old ship disappearing by the efforts of those who a short time
before were so anxious for her preservation.

Nothing had been seen of the mutineers.  "They must take the
consequences of their foolishness," observed Bill Windy, "and, the
chances are, will have to spend the best part of their days on this
island."

Meantime, Captain Westerway had not forgotten the party at the
settlement, and sent up Mr Bollard in the cutter, laden with some of
the provisions which had been saved.



CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE CUTTER IS CARRIED OFF.

JOURNEY OF EMIGRANTS TO VILLAGE--ROUGH TRAVELLING--PURSUED BY
MUTINEERS--TIPPO COMES TO THE RESCUE--WELCOME AT THE VILLAGE--ARRIVAL OF
PROVISIONS--ARRANGEMENTS FOR VICTUALLING THE SETTLEMENT--MUTINEERS SEEN
WATCHING VILLAGE--THE CUTTER CARRIED OFF--THE "YOUNG CRUSADER"
COMPLETED--MRS MORLEY RESOLVES TO REMAIN--MRS RUMBELOW STAYS WITH HER
CHARGES--PREPARATIONS FOR EMBARKING--THE "YOUNG CRUSADER" AT THE
SETTLEMENT.

Ensign Holt and the party of emigrants he was leading made very good
progress on their journey towards the settlement.  The only grumbler was
Mrs Clagget, as she trudged on with a long stick in her hand, sometimes
by the side of the Diceys, and at others addressing her remarks to Mrs
Jones.  However, as it was so evident that she talked for the sake of
keeping her tongue in motion, no one minded her.  She regained her good
humour when, soon after mid-day, the party halting for dinner, fires
were lighted, and steaks frizzling before them.  They had had woods to
cut through, boggy ground to cross, and rugged stony hills to climb.
She, however, got along as well as any one, and her example encouraged
the other women who had to travel on foot.  Their spirits were revived
when their young leader told them that they were within a mile of the
settlement.

The last of the party were climbing the ledge of rocks which formed one
side of the sandy bay when, on looking back, they saw several men
following.

"Why, I do believe they are those fellows who would not work yesterday,"
observed one of the emigrants.  "And there is that ill-conditioned chap,
Job Mawson, among them.  I cannot help thinking they mean mischief."

The mutineers, for such they evidently were, on seeing the party,
hurried on; but as they got halfway across the sandy shore of the bay, a
huge seal suddenly darted out of the wood, and seeing the men running,
made chase.  He soon overtook the nearest, whom he knocked over, giving
him a fierce bite, and then rushed at the next, whom he treated in the
same way.  Willy and Peter, who had stopped on the top of the ridge to
rest, hearing the cries, looked round.

"Why," exclaimed Willy, "that is our old friend Tippo Sahib, and he is
giving those fellows their deserts."

Tippo Sahib sure enough it was.  The mutineers, who had never seen such
a creature before, seized with a panic, ran off in all directions, two
or three overtaking the party of emigrants.

"No, no, we don't want you fellows," cried the men.  "You be off now, or
you will be sorry for it."

Two of the mutineers humbly petitioned to be allowed to keep with the
party, when Willy at length told them that they might do so if they
would behave better in future.  The rest by this time were nowhere to be
seen, having run into the wood to escape, as they hoped, from the
strange beast which had attacked them.

As the travellers neared the settlement, Mrs Morley, with her daughters
and Mrs Twopenny, came out to welcome them.  The former invited Emily
and May to their cottage, while Mrs Clagget, introducing herself to
Mrs Twopenny, told her she should be happy to take up her abode with
her.

Harry having reached the settlement some time before, preparations were
already being made for the reception of the party.  The men willingly
turned out to give up their huts to the women and children.  Fires were
lighted, and several of the people were busy, under the direction of
Mrs Rumbelow, cooking food, while the men were employed in bringing in
wood for forming fresh huts.  Harry started off a fresh party to assist
those already engaged in the work.  The gentlemen laboured as hard as
any of the men, and in a short time a row of huts, constructed after the
fashion of those already built, rose near them.

Harry's chief anxiety was, however, to provide food for so many mouths,
as he saw the store which had been made for the former party rapidly
diminishing.  Some of the emigrants grumbled, too, at not having a
greater variety.  Seal-soup and fried roots served for breakfast, and
boiled or roasted seal, with baked roots and water, for dinner, while
the same fare was served at supper.  Sometimes fish varied the material
for their meals; but neither they nor mussels were to be obtained when
the weather was stormy, and the sea broke with violence on the rocks.

Several days passed away, when a sail was seen coming up the harbour.
She was recognised as the cutter.  Nearly all the inhabitants of the
little settlement ran down to welcome her.  She had on board several
casks and kegs brought by the boatswain from the wreck.  They were
eagerly rolled up to the huts, when they were found to contain flour and
beef, raisins and suet.  "Hurrah! we shall have English beef and
plum-pudding now," exclaimed numerous voices.  The doctor, however, who
acted as store-keeper, ordered them at once to be placed in safe
keeping, to be served out as required.  He soon afterwards held a
consultation with Mrs Rumbelow.  Under his directions, an oven was
constructed, while he set to work in his laboratory to manufacture some
yeast, or risings, as Mrs Rumbelow called the composition; and the next
morning a supply of hot rolls was distributed among the women and
children.  How delicious they appeared to those who had for many a long
day not tasted a morsel of bread!

Bollard brought word that considerable progress had already been made in
building the "Young Crusader," and Captain Westerway requested that he
might be supplied with such provisions as the island afforded, in order
to husband those which had been saved from the wreck, as they would be
required as stores for the vessel.  Among other things, he brought
several cases of gunpowder, and the sportsmen were therefore able to
range the island with their guns in search of game.

Parties went out daily to dig for roots.  Traps were constructed for
catching birds; at low water, mussels were sought for on the rocks; and
more hooks being made, the number of fishermen was greatly increased.
The days, however, were short, and the weather frequently so very bad
that they had literally to make hay while the sun shone.  As provisions
could be obtained they were sent by sea to the shipbuilders, and when
the wind blew too strong to allow the boat to make the passage, they
were sent overland.

Harry's cares, in providing food and maintaining order among so mixed an
assemblage, were greatly lightened by the assistance offered him by Mrs
Morley and Mr Paget, as well as by Charles, Tom Loftus, and Jack
Ivyleaf, who also did their best to instruct and amuse the people, old
and young, when their hours of labour were over.  The school was kept
with less difficulty than before, as several books had been saved from
the "Crusader."  Harry's great care was to keep all employed; indeed, he
foresaw that it would be necessary for every one to exert himself to the
utmost to obtain a sufficient supply of food for the support of their
lives during the winter.  Happily, the weather was not nearly so cold or
stormy as he had expected to find it; and though occasionally it froze
hard, the frost seldom lasted long, while the snow which fell quickly
disappeared again from the lower ground.

Nothing was seen for some time of the mutineers.  It was supposed that
they were living a savage life by themselves in the woods, unwilling to
submit to the discipline to which they would have been subjected in the
settlement.  One day, however, when Captain Twopenny and several of the
other gentlemen were starting on a shooting expedition, they caught
sight of a man in the neighbouring wood, whence he had apparently been
watching the settlement.  As soon as he found that he was discovered he
ran off, and disappeared before they were able to overtake him.  This
circumstance gave Harry some little anxiety, though, as it was known
that the only arms the men possessed were their knives and an axe or
two, they were not likely to prove formidable enemies.  The
probabilities were that the man only intended to steal into the village,
and carry off any provisions on which he could lay his hands.

Two or three days passed away; the cutter had just returned, after
taking supplies to the shipbuilders, and had been hauled up for safety
on the beach.  Early in the morning the boatswain and several men went
down, intending to go off in her in search of seals.  She was not to be
seen.  They went up and down the shore, but not a trace of her could
they discover.  It was too evident that she had been carried away by the
mutineers.  This was confirmed on the following day, when the
"Crusader's" boat, which had been repaired, arrived with the information
that she had been seen passing down the sound early in the morning; but
whether those in her intended to attempt a passage to New Zealand, or
only to land on another part of the Aucklands, it was difficult to say.
As, however, they could have had but a scanty supply of provisions, and
little means of carrying water, it was most likely that they intended to
land on the northern part of the island.

Although the loss of the cutter was a very serious matter, still Harry
felt that it was satisfactory to be relieved of the presence of such
lawless characters.  Captain Westerway sent word that he would either
leave his own boat or build another of sufficient size to go in search
of seals, the chief purpose for which she was required.

At length the satisfactory intelligence arrived that the "Young
Crusader" was ready for sea.  It was now necessary to determine who
should go in her, as she was unable to carry more than a sixth of the
number.  When Harry asked Mrs Morley what she wished to do, she
replied, "My daughters and I are determined to remain, and watch over
those who are entrusted to our care.  When the schooner reaches New
Zealand, a vessel will probably be sent to our assistance; until then we
feel confident that He who has hitherto preserved us will keep us in
safety.  And what do you intend doing, Mr Shafto?"

"My duty is clear.  I will remain, for the same reason, Mrs Morley," he
answered.  "And Dr Davis desires also to stay with us; indeed, few, I
believe, of the `Ranger's' people wish to quit the island.  I will,
however, send young Dicey, with his brother and sisters, and he will
apply to the senior officer on the station, who will probably send a
man-of-war, or some other vessel, as soon as one can be despatched."
The question was put to the various members of the community, "Whether
or not they would desire to remain."

"Remain! to be sure I will," exclaimed Mrs Rumbelow, when she was
asked.  "While the wife or child of one of the men of our regiment stops
here, it's my duty to stay and look after them.  And especially if the
colonel's lady stays, do you think I would desert her, Mr Shafto?  Her
husband was like a father to the regiment, and I would as soon desert my
own mother as her."

The Diceys, however, and Mr Paget, as well as Tom Loftus and Jack
Ivyleaf, resolved to sail in the "Young Crusader."  Though Captain
Westerway warned them that the voyage might prove boisterous, and not
without danger, still Charles was anxious to reach the colony, that he
might begin the life of a settler, and write home to relieve the anxiety
of his family.  The greater number of the emigrants, however, begged to
remain, unwilling again to encounter the dangers of the sea, especially
when they compared the size of the "Young Crusader" with that of the
large ship which had brought them to the island.  She had come up to the
settlement in order to land such stores as could be spared, and to take
others, as well as her intended passengers, on board.  As Harry surveyed
her, he was well pleased with her appearance.  She was a stout little
schooner of about 30 tons, and he felt satisfied to entrust his friends
on board her, especially under the guidance of such experienced seamen
as Captain Westerway and Bill Windy.



CHAPTER TWENTY.

CONCLUSION.

THE "YOUNG CRUSADER" SAILS--VOYAGE ALONG THE COAST--A STORM--SCHOONER
PUTS INTO HARBOUR--FATE OF THE MUTINEERS--THE "YOUNG CRUSADER" PROCEEDS
ON HER VOYAGE--STORMY PASSAGE--NEW ZEALAND SIGHTED--ENTERS A BEAUTIFUL
HARBOUR--HOSTILE APPEARANCE OF NATIVES--MR PAGET ADVISES FLIGHT--THE
SCHOONER MAKES SAIL--ESCAPING FROM THE HARBOUR--PURSUED BY CANOES--
MAN-OF-WAR APPEARS--THE CANOES GIVE UP CHASE--ON BOARD THE "RANGER"--
GOOD NEWS FOR THE SETTLEMENT--HOW THE "RANGER" WAS SAVED--RETURN TO THE
AUCKLANDS--ALL SAFE ON BOARD "RANGER"--HARRY OBTAINS HIS REWARD--OUR
FRIENDS SETTLE IN NEW ZEALAND--CONCLUSION.

The whole of the little community, men, women, and children, collected
on the shore of the bay to witness the "Young Crusader" take her
departure.  Loud cheers burst from their throats as the anchor was
tripped, the sails set, and with a fine westerly breeze she glided down
the harbour.

Emily and May, with Mrs Clagget, stood at the stern, waving their
handkerchiefs, the Miss Morleys returning the salute with tears in their
eyes, for they could not help thinking of the dangers to which their
friends would be exposed on board the little vessel.

"Good-bye, kind friends, good-bye," cried Mrs Clagget.  "We will send
you relief; don't be afraid.  It won't be our fault if your condition is
not made known."  She continued, at the top of her voice, uttering these
and similar expressions long after it could possibly have been heard by
those on shore.

Flagstaff-hill was rounded, and they could look into the small harbour
where the schooner had been built.  On its shores stood the huts they
had occupied, with the reef before them, on which a small remnant of the
wreck was still visible.  They soon reached the mouth of the sound, the
wind enabling them to haul up and stand to the northward, parallel with
the coast.  They had, however, to keep some distance from it, to avoid
the reef which ran out from the shore.

The little schooner had nearly reached the north end of the island when
the fickle wind changed, and a heavy gale right ahead sprang up.  Though
the "Young Crusader" behaved well, the captain was unwilling to expose
her, with so many people on board, to its fury; and the mouth of a
harbour being clearly made out, he determined to run in and take shelter
till the wind had abated.  After running up some way, the schooner came
to an anchor in a small cove, where the captain hoped she might lie in
perfect security.  Darkness came on soon afterwards, the sails were
furled, and all was made snug.

Though disappointed at being delayed on their passage, those on board,
as they heard the wind howling above their heads, and the sea roaring in
the distance, were thankful that they were safe from the fury of the
tempest.

The usual watch was set, and most of the passengers retired to their
narrow berths.  The ladies had a small cabin aft, in which Mrs Clagget
declared that there was scarcely room to allow her to move her tongue,
an observation which brought a smile on the countenances of her
companions.

Willy was walking the deck with Bill Windy, with whom he had become very
friendly, when he caught sight of a dark object moving towards the
vessel.  "There is a boat," he exclaimed; "where can she come from?"

"She is the cutter, depend on it, which those scoundrels ran away with,"
answered Windy.  "They may mean mischief.  Call the captain and the
watch below; it's as well to be prepared for them."

Captain Westerway and all hands were quickly on deck.  The boat
approached cautiously, as if those in her were doubtful whether or not
they were perceived.  At length she came alongside.  The schooner's crew
stood ready for an attack, and it was then seen that she contained but
three people.

"Who are you, and what do you want?" asked Bill Windy.

"Oh, take us on board and give us some food," answered a voice.  "We are
dying of hunger."

"Make fast the boat and lend them a hand," said Captain Westerway, and
the three men were helped up the schooner's side.

They were found to be two of the emigrants and one of the seamen who had
mutinied.  They appeared thoroughly humbled and wretched.  As soon as
they had taken a little food, they gave an account of their sufferings.

They stated that they were themselves the only survivors of the party--
two having fallen down precipices, one having been killed by a seal
which he incautiously approached, another having been drowned when
scrambling out on the rocks in search of mussels, and the rest having
died of starvation.  Job Mawson, they declared, had been their
ringleader.  They had last seen him lying in a sinking state in the
woods.

Although the vessel had already as many on board as could be
accommodated, the captain humanely received them, and the next morning
the cutter was sent on shore to be hauled up on the beach, as she was
too large either to tow or to be taken on board.

The patience of the passengers was greatly tried; but at length, after a
detention of three days, the weather moderating, the "Young Crusader"
again put to sea.  Still she was doomed to experience contrary winds.

Provisions were running short, and all hands, with the exception of the
ladies, were put on short allowance.  Day after day they beat backwards
and forwards, the captain being anxious, if possible, to make the
entrance of Cook's Straits, should he be unable to reach the more
northern settlement of Auckland.  At that time the natives of many parts
of New Zealand were in open hostility with the settlers, and he was
therefore unwilling to run the risk of landing on any other part of the
coast.

The stormy weather still continued, but at length a slant of wind from
the westward enabled the schooner to lay her course.  Water and
provisions were running fearfully short, and her passengers and crew
were already beginning to feel the effects of their scanty fare.  Many
anxious eyes kept a lookout for land.  The thick weather had prevented
an observation from being taken for three days.  Willy had the morning
watch with Bill Windy.  As the day broke, and the sun, rapidly rising
above the horizon, shed its beams across the foaming sea, they lighted
up the snowy summits of a range of mountains.  "Land! land!" he shouted.

"You are right, Mr Dicey; but I am afraid it's a long way from
Auckland," observed Bill Windy.

The deck was soon crowded with eager spectators.  As the sun rose
higher, and the little vessel sailed onwards, the intermediate lower
shore could clearly be perceived.  The vessel stood on till the mouth of
a harbour of sufficient size to admit the schooner appeared ahead.  Sail
was shortened, that she might approach it cautiously, and a bright
look-out kept ahead for sunken reefs.  Captain Westerway was in hopes
that, by going in, even though no settlers might be there, he would be
enabled to obtain a supply of water, as well as wild-fowl or other
birds, to support the people till some more hospitable place could be
reached.  The schooner, under easy sail, sounding as she went, entered
the little harbour, and after making several tacks, brought up at no
great distance from the shore.  It was a lovely spot, and the eyes of
all were gladdened by a sparkling stream which ran down the hillside.
The boat was lowered, the empty casks were put into her, and Charles
Dicey, with two other gentlemen, carrying their fowling-pieces, went on
shore.

How delicious was their first ample draught of water!  A cask being
filled, they sent back the boat with it to the ship while they filled
the others.  This done, they proceeded over the hills in search of game.
They had not gone far before they perceived, in a little cove that was
not seen from the deck of the vessel, several large canoes drawn up on
the beach.

"There must be natives in the neighbourhood, and we may probably obtain
provisions from them," observed Charles.  "Their village cannot be far
off."

"What is that curious-looking stockade on the top of the hill?" asked
Jack Ivyleaf.

"A native pah or fort," said Mr Paget.  "We must approach it
cautiously, for we cannot depend on the friendliness of the inhabitants.
See, there are several men gathering close outside.  They have arms in
their hands.  Their numbers are increasing.  Take my advice, and let us
make the best of our way to the boat.  They may attack us before we can
explain that we have no hostile intentions."

As he spoke, the natives were seen running down the hill towards the
canoes.  Charles urging the party to follow Mr Paget's advice, they
hastened to the place where they had landed.  The boat had returned and
taken on board several of the water-casks.

"Never mind the remainder," cried Mr Paget.  "The water will be dearly
purchased if we wait to allow these savages to overtake us.  Shove off,
shove off!"

Captain Westerway was on deck, surprised to see the boat coming back.
Willy was standing near him.  They observed Mr Paget making signs to
them.  "He is telling us to get under way, sir," he observed.

"So I believe he is," exclaimed the captain.  "Mr Windy, turn the hands
up and make sail."

The people, who were below, jumped on deck, wondering what was the
matter.  The boat was quickly alongside; those in her leaped on board,
and she was hoisted in.

"Shall we weigh the anchor?" asked Windy.

"Not if we wish to escape from the savages' canoes," said Mr Paget.
"Captain Westerway, these people are not to be trifled with."

"We will slip the cable, then," said the captain.  "It is better to lose
that than be cut off, as several vessels have been, by these people."

The headsails quickly filled, the wind blew out of the harbour; the
after-sails were set, and the "Young Crusader" glided rapidly towards
the ocean.  As she got into the middle of the harbour, the cove in which
the canoes lay opened out, and a large number of savages were seen in
the act of launching them.  They were soon afloat, and, filled with men,
made chase after the schooner.  Of their hostile intentions there could
now be no longer any doubt.  On they came, paddling at a rapid rate over
the smooth surface of the water.  All the sail the schooner could carry
was set; but still it was too evident that the canoes, unless the wind
freshened greatly, would overtake her.  The few fire-arms on board the
schooner would avail but little against the vastly superior numbers of
the savages.  The wind increased; still the canoes were gaining ground.
Had the captain waited to weigh the anchor, the "Young Crusader" would
to a certainty have been captured; even now there appeared little
probability of her escaping.

"The savages are gaining on us fearfully," observed Willy to his
brother.  "We shall have to fight for it; at all events, we may kill a
few of the savages before we are taken."

"That would be but a small satisfaction," observed Charles.  "I little
expected such a termination to our adventures."

The breeze continued to freshen.  Notwithstanding this, the schooner did
not gain on the canoes.

"Captain Westerway," cried Willy, suddenly, "there is a sail to the
northward."

"Yes, and she is standing this way," said the captain.  "We will haul up
for her.  Starboard the helm, Windy.  Get a pull at the fore and
mainsheets."

The savages had probably not seen the stranger, or perhaps they wanted
to overtake the schooner, before she could get within signalling
distance.  The ship was a large one, and under all sail.  With the
freshening breeze she came on rapidly.  A shot was now fired from the
leading canoe, another and another followed.  The ladies who were on
deck were hurried below.  Loftus and Ivyleaf were about to discharge
their fowling-pieces in return.  "Don't fire, my friends," said Mr
Paget.  "It will be useless.  Let us rather trust to the protection of
Heaven.  When the savages discover that yonder ship is a man-of-war, as
I have no doubt they soon will, they will give up the pursuit."

In another minute his words proved true.  The canoes were seen to stop,
then to sweep round, and to paddle back again at full speed towards the
land.

Willy intently watched the ship as she approached.  He rubbed his eyes
again and again.  "What is the matter?" asked Charles, seeing him almost
gasping for breath.

"Why, Charles," he exclaimed, "she is the `Ranger.'  Yes, I am as sure
of it almost as I am of my own existence."

In a short time the "Young Crusader" was hove to, and the boat, with
Willy and Peter Patch in her, was pulling towards the ship, which, it
being seen that the schooner wished to speak her, was also brought to
the wind.  The two midshipmen quickly scrambled up the side.  On the
quarterdeck stood Commander Newcombe, with Mr Tobin, the
first-lieutenant, and several of the other officers.

"Come on board," said Willy and Peter, going aft, and touching their
hats.

"What! are you the midshipmen I thought lost, with so many other poor
people?" exclaimed the captain, starting back with astonishment, and
then holding out his hands towards them.  "Yes, I am surely not
mistaken; and have the rest, too, escaped?"

"Yes, sir; Mrs and the Miss Morleys, Harry Shafto, Mrs Rumbelow, and
the boatswain are all safe, though they would be very glad if you would
run down to the Auckland Islands, where we left them a fortnight ago,
and take them away.  They are very hard up for food, I am afraid, and it
is not the pleasantest of countries to live in."

Willy and his companions received the warmest congratulations from all
the officers; and the news soon ran round the ship that those whom they
supposed had long been numbered with the dead were still alive and well.

"It will do the sergeant's heart good when he hears that that first-rate
wife of his is all right and well," observed the quarter-master, who was
one of the first to catch the news.

Willy and Peter felt great satisfaction on hearing that Colonel Morley,
with his regiment, was at New Zealand, and though grieving at the
supposed loss of his wife and daughters, had been greatly supported in
his affliction, and enabled to perform his duty like a true soldier.

"But how, sir, did the `Ranger' escape?" asked Willy.  "We thought we
saw her go down."

"She was well-nigh doing so, my lad," answered Commander Newcombe; "but
by the courage and perseverance of the men, through God's mercy, she was
kept afloat till we could get an additional sail under her bottom, when,
as we steered to the northward, we fell in with a ship which towed us to
the Mauritius.  There the ship being repaired, we were sent on to New
Zealand to land the troops.  So confident were all on board that the
boats had gone down, it was at first deemed hopeless to look for you.
At length, however, from the representations of Colonel Morley, I was
despatched to visit the islands at which you might possibly have
touched, on the merest chance of gaining some tidings of your fate."

As soon as the commander heard of the requirements of the schooner, he
sent a supply of provisions and water on board.  The "Young Crusader"
then steered for Auckland, near which Colonel Morley was stationed, to
convey to him the glad tidings of the safety of his wife and daughters,
while the "Ranger" proceeded to the Auckland Islands.  She quickly
arrived at Charnley Sound, and brought up in the deep bay near its
entrance, on the north side.  Hence, with Willy Dicey as pilot, her
boats were sent up to the inner harbour.  As they approached, Willy's
heart beat high at the thought of the joyful intelligence he was
bringing.  The first person he met was Harry Shafto who, on seeing the
boats approach, had hurried down to the bay.  Harry recognised several
well-known faces of his old shipmates.  A few words served to tell how
the "Ranger" had escaped.  The two friends hurried to communicate the
intelligence to Mrs Morley and her daughters.  On their way they met
Mrs Rumbelow, who had seen the arrival of the boats.  She, too, had
recognised the faces of their crews.  Willy took her hand, and shook it
warmly.

"Happy news, Mrs Rumbelow," he exclaimed; "the sergeant is alive and
well.  I heard of him on board; and I hope in a few days you will see
him in New Zealand."

"You are a good angel, Mr Dicey, to bring me such tidings," she
exclaimed, putting her arms round his neck, and bursting into tears.
"My good brave husband!  I'll never forget who it was that told me I
should meet him again down here on earth, for I felt sure we should be
joined up aloft there."  And the strong-minded energetic woman, who had
held out so bravely, never allowing a tear or complaint to escape,
sobbed for very joy.

They found Mrs Morley, with Fanny and Emma, just leaving their cottage.
"God has indeed been merciful to me," were the only words Mrs Morley
could utter.  Fanny unconsciously gave Harry Shafto her hand.  "How my
dear father will thank you for all the care you have taken of us," she
said.  "We can never sufficiently show our gratitude."  Harry kept the
hand thus offered him.  What Harry said in return it is not necessary to
repeat.

As there was but little property to carry away, in a few minutes every
individual was ready to embark.  Harry Shafto was the last person to
leave the shore.  The boats, laden with passengers, pulled down the
harbour.  The sea was smooth, and without accident they, before
nightfall, got alongside the "Ranger."

A bright moon enabled them to put to sea that night, and, the weather
continuing unusually fine, within a week they landed in New Zealand.

Harry Shafto gained his well-earned promotion, and in two years became a
commander and the husband of Fanny Morley.

A remittance sent out by Mr Nicholas Steady, when he heard of the loss
which the Diceys had suffered from the wreck of the "Crusader," enabled
Charles to commence his career as an emigrant.  His nearest neighbour
was Mr Paget, who, it surprised few to hear, became the husband of his
sister Emily.  Sergeant Rumbelow got his discharge, and he and his wife
settled near them; while Mrs Clagget, who took up her abode with her
relatives in the town, paid them frequent visits, and never failed to
tell all the news of the place, which she detailed with her accustomed
volubility.  Charles won the heart of Emma Morley, and, when his sister
May married Tom Loftus, she became the mistress of his house.  Dr Davis
settled in their neighbourhood, and was a very constant visitor at the
houses of his old friends, not only in cases of sickness, which were
rare, but on all festive and other interesting occasions.

Little Bessy, left an orphan, was adopted by Sergeant and Mrs Rumbelow,
and, growing up a good, steady girl, married young Broke, who, become a
warrant officer, found his way at length to New Zealand, where he
ultimately settled.

Willy Dicey is now a post-captain, and Harry Shafto, though still young,
an admiral.  Ensign Holt sold out of the army, and forming a partnership
with Peter Patch, who had got tired of a seafaring life, they became
successful settlers at no great distance from their former friends.

The old "Ranger" has long since been laid up in ordinary, and the "Young
Crusader," under the command of Bill Windy, to whom Captain Westerway
presented her, traded for many years between the settlements and
Australia, till she had gained a comfortable fortune for her owner, who
at length settled on shore near the friends his courage and kind heart
had gained for him.

The former passengers of the two ships often met at the gatherings of
the settlements; and a new generation, which sprang up in their midst,
delighted to hear them recount the adventures they met with during their
voyages in the "Ranger" and "Crusader."

THE END.







        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE VOYAGES OF THE "RANGER" AND "CRUSADER" ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

