








LITTLE WHITE FOX AND HIS ARCTIC FRIENDS




[Illustration: "Such ugly, bent noses I never saw before in all my life,
either." FRONTISPIECE. _See Page 21_]




      LITTLE WHITE FOX
   AND HIS ARCTIC FRIENDS


             BY

        ROY J. SNELL


   WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY
       GEORGE F. KERR


          [Device]


           BOSTON
 LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY
            1916




       _Copyright, 1916_,
 BY LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY.
      _All rights reserved_

   Published, September, 1916




CONTENTS


 CHAPTER                                             PAGE

     I. LITTLE WHITE FOX MAKES A DISCOVERY              1

    II. LITTLE MISS PTARMIGAN FOOLS HIM                 9

   III. HE GETS HIS HEAD THUMPED                       19

    IV. WHEN LITTLE FOXES QUARREL                      27

     V. LITTLE WHITE FOX MEETS BARRED SEAL             34

    VI. LITTLE WHITE FOX HELPS HIMSELF                 41

   VII. LITTLE WHITE BEAR AND LITTLE BLACK BEAR        48

  VIII. TROUBLE FOR LITTLE WHITE BEAR                  54

    IX. LITTLE BLACK BEAR'S DISCOVERY                  61

     X. FUN FOR TWO LITTLE BEARS                       67

    XI. BIG WHITE BEAR MEETS HUSKIE                    74

   XII. LITTLE WHITE FOX GOES HUNTING                  83

  XIII. BIG WHITE BEAR'S KITCHEN                       89

   XIV. BIG WHITE BEAR FINDS LITTLE WHITE FOX          95

    XV. LITTLE WHITE FOX GOES FISHING                 101

   XVI. LITTLE BROWN SEAL'S NARROW ESCAPE             108

  XVII. A STRANGE JOURNEY                             115

 XVIII. LITTLE WHITE FOX COMES HOME                   122




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


 "Such ugly, bent noses I never saw before in all
     my life, either."                                  _Frontispiece_

 "Now," he said, when he had finished fishing, "we
     will have dinner."                                       PAGE  38

 Little White Bear knew right away what he had done.            "   52

 "I am going to make your teeth chatter so you can't
     call your master."                                         "   81

 Big White Bear popped right up out of the ocean!               "  119

 She was going back to his own dear beach.                      "  128




ACKNOWLEDGMENT


Six of the Little White Fox Stories appeared serially in the
_Continent_, to whose publishers my thanks are due for permission to
publish them in book form.




LITTLE WHITE FOX AND HIS ARCTIC FRIENDS




CHAPTER I

LITTLE WHITE FOX MAKES A DISCOVERY


Little White Fox was very, very much worried, for something dreadful had
happened, something he couldn't account for at all: Tdariuk, the
reindeer, was dead!

Tdariuk was not related to Little White Fox. And he wasn't a bit in the
world like him. He was many times bigger than Little White Fox would
ever be, and he was quite different from him in every way. But all the
same, Little White Fox loved him. If you had asked him why he loved the
big reindeer, he would probably have told you that, for one thing,
Tdariuk, in spite of his huge body, was very gentle and kind. None of
the little animals of the tundra was afraid of him. Little Mrs.
Ptarmigan calmly hunted for dry blueberries and weed seed right beside
him while he cropped his moss. And when he drew close to the shore by
the sea, Little Brown Seal never thought of such a thing as slipping off
his rock and hiding in the water. Even if there were no other reason,
wouldn't Tdariuk's gentleness alone make Little White Fox love him?

Now when Little White Fox discovered that his big, kind friend was dead,
he ran home as fast as his legs could carry him to tell his mother the
sad news.

"Mother! Mother!" he called tumbling into his home under the great rock,
"Tdariuk is dead!"

"Tdariuk dead!" cried Madam White Fox. "Who could have been mean enough
to kill him?"

"I don't know who killed him, but he's dead, I know that," said Little
White Fox, the tears running down his cheeks.

"It must have been Old Man Gray Wolf, or Omnok, the hunter," said Madam
White Fox, wiping her eyes with her paw. "For my part, I could easily
wish them both dead themselves. None of us is safe as long as they are
about. But who told you Tdariuk was dead?"

"No one told me. I found it out for myself," boasted Little White Fox
proudly, quite forgetting his sorrow in thinking what a wise young chap
he was.

"_You_ found it out!" exclaimed his mother. "Pray, tell me how?"

"Why, you see," explained Little White Fox, with an air of deep mystery,
"I was down on the tundra, at the foot of Saw Tooth Mountain, looking
all around to see what I could see. And all of a sudden I came right on
one of Tdariuk's great, fine antlers lying there in the snow. Now, what
do you think of that? And when I went on a little farther, there was the
other one! And then I knew, of course, that Tdariuk was dead."

When Madam White Fox heard that, she smiled a little and stopped wiping
her eyes. But all she said was: "Keep your eyes wide open, my son, and
one of these days you will see something very strange."

Little White Fox thought that a queer way to answer him. Why, she hadn't
even told him he was smart to discover about Tdariuk.

"What do you mean, mother? What will I see? Tell me what I will see!
_Please_ tell me what I will see!" teased Little White Fox.

But not another word would Madam Fox tell him. Little White Fox
wondered why she dried her tears for Tdariuk so quickly, but he
couldn't find that out, either.

And so every day and all day, Little White Fox went peering curiously
about everywhere, just as his mother had told him to do, trying to find
the something that was "very strange." He looked all around among the
sand dunes by the ocean, but there was nothing strange there. He went in
and out among the big rocks at the foot of Saw Tooth Mountain and came
near falling into one of Omnok's cruel traps, but there was nothing
strange there. He went here and there, and back and forth, all over the
tundra, but there was nothing strange there.

Hunt as he would, Little White Fox could find nothing strange anywhere.
He had grown quite discouraged, when one day, when he was searching
down among the scrub willows by the river, his ear caught a familiar
sound, "Ark! Ark! Ark!"

Little White Fox couldn't believe his ears.

"Why, that's queer!" he exclaimed. "It sounds just like Tdariuk, the
reindeer. But it can't be Tdariuk. How could it be Tdariuk, when
Tdariuk's dead?"

Then he heard it again, much louder this time and quite close: "Ark!
Ark! Ark!"

Little White Fox, for once in his life, was too astonished to say a
word. He just held his breath and waited. And in just another moment out
walked Tdariuk, as big and gentle as ever, and very much alive indeed.
And--on his head he wore a brand new pair of antlers, bigger than the
others and all covered with velvet! My! how handsome those antlers
were!

Little White Fox didn't stop to ask a single question. He just gave
Tdariuk one long look and then whirled around and ran home as fast as he
could travel.

He burst breathlessly into the cave and started to tell his mother that
Tdariuk wasn't dead. But it wasn't news to her; she had known it all the
time. Little White Fox, however, had found out the something very
strange that she had hoped he would find, and had done it all by
himself. Therefore Madam Fox was very happy as she curled down on the
floor for her afternoon nap.




CHAPTER II

LITTLE MISS PTARMIGAN FOOLS HIM


When Little White Fox saw that he had really found out about Tdariuk,
the reindeer, all by himself, he became very wise. The next time one of
his friends disappeared from the tundra, he didn't say a word about it
to his mother, but went searching, searching, everywhere, every day.

This time it was Little Miss Ptarmigan who had disappeared. Probably you
don't know Miss Ptarmigan, for she lives only in cold lands where there
is plenty of snow. But she is a very interesting young person. She is a
bit larger than Madam Partridge and not quite so large as Madam Prairie
Hen. And a very dainty little lady she is, too, for all winter--and
that's just the time Little White Fox had known her--she had worn a
perfectly white gown, quite as white as the coat he wore himself. And if
she hadn't worn pink shoes and stockings, he probably would never have
been able to find her in the snow at all.

Now, if Little White Fox had been as old as his mother, he would have
been trying all the time to catch Little Miss Ptarmigan and carry her
off to his home for mincemeat. That is what grown-up foxes do to the
Ptarmigan folks when they get a chance. But Little White Fox was a very
small chap, and didn't give much thought to mincemeat. All he thought
about was having a good time, so almost every day he hunted up Miss
Ptarmigan, and they had a grand game of hide and seek. It was always an
exciting game, too, on account of Miss Ptarmigan's white dress, and the
only way Little White Fox could find her was by watching for her pink
shoes and stockings as she hid away in a snow bank. And when she sat on
her feet, he could almost never find her at all.

"You just wait, Miss," cried Little White Fox one day. "When summer
comes, I'll get you!"

"You will, will you!" replied Miss Ptarmigan. "How will you do it?"

"Why, in the summer the snow will be gone, and the ground will be all
brown. Then I will be able to find you anywhere!" Little White Fox gave
a hop, skip and jump that ended in a somersault, so tickled was he with
his own smartness.

"Oh, indeed!" said Miss Ptarmigan, looking very wise and mysterious.

That was all she said, but Little White Fox wasn't fussed. He hadn't
lain curled up on the grass mat in his home thinking about it night
after night for nothing.

One day when the snow was nearly all gone, Little Miss Ptarmigan
suddenly disappeared. Little White Fox didn't believe she was dead. He
remembered how he had been fooled by Tdariuk, and he remembered, too,
how she had looked when he talked about catching her. Also, he
remembered how he had found out the truth about Tdariuk. Therefore,
being a wise youngster, as I have said, he didn't say a word about it
to his mother. He just went quietly about, looking, looking everywhere
for Miss Ptarmigan.

In the meantime, Miss Ptarmigan had been making trouble for herself.
Silly old Mrs. White Owl had been telling her all winter how very well
white suited her complexion. And now summer had come, and Mother
Ptarmigan had forbidden her to go outdoors at all till her new brown
summer suit was finished. Miss Ptarmigan hated indoors, and she couldn't
understand what difference her dress made, anyway. But she never thought
of disobeying till one fine, warm day when her mother was away from
home, Little Miss Ptarmigan grew very lonesome.

"I want to go out in the sunshine," she kept saying to herself. "There
can't be a bit of harm in it. I am sure I would see Old Mrs. White Owl,
and she would say something nice about my white dress."

Down at the foot of the mountain was some one else, a some one who
didn't think much about the sunshine and the flowers. It was Master
Black Fox. He was thinking of his sausage grinder. It hadn't been used
much of late, and he was afraid it might get lazy. "A plump chub of a
Ptarmigan would grind nicely," he said to himself, smacking his lips,
"but they all wear brown dresses these days, and one cannot tell them
from the weeds and grass."

Just then his eyes opened wide. "Can I believe it?" he whispered. "Is
that one of them going down the mountain this minute--and with a white
dress on? Yes, sir, it is!"

Then Mr. Fox looked all about him very sharply, this way and that, for
his own coat was black as coal, and could be seen quite well against the
brown grass when he moved. But when he lay quite still, you couldn't
tell him from a stone. He was not afraid that Little Miss Ptarmigan
would see him. He knew where she was, and could hide behind rocks until
he came close to her.

After Mr. Fox had looked all about him very sharply, this way and that,
he began to creep around this rock and that one, all the time drawing
closer to innocent, foolish Little Miss Ptarmigan, whose white dress
showed plain as day against the brown earth. And presently he was right
behind a big rock she must pass in just another minute. And then he was
so close that it seemed almost as if she could hear him breathe.

But she didn't. She just walked along, thinking about the fine things
Madam White Owl had said to her, till zing! something sprang at her. She
gave a frightened scream and flew to one side, but she was too late.
Something sharp and cruel closed down on the toe of her pink shoes. It
was the teeth of Mr. Black Fox's sausage grinder. But he closed them
down a little too hard, for it cut the toe right off the pink shoe, and
the tips of Little Miss Ptarmigan's pink toes besides, and away she
flew, screaming with pain, toward a white snow bank in the valley.
There each little hurt toe left a red spot on the white snow, and my,
how they did ache!

One day quite a while later, when Little White Fox was over among the
brown rocks at the foot of Saw Tooth Mountain, he heard a scratch,
scratch! among the dry grasses behind him. He turned around, and there
stood a little stranger dressed all in brown. She looked wonderfully
like Miss Ptarmigan. She was just about the same size, and her shoes and
stockings were just the same shade of pink.

"Hello, Little White Fox!" she cried. "I thought you said you could find
me when summer came and the ground was all brown. You have been looking
for me a whole week, and I have been out here all the time. You saw me
yesterday, but you didn't know me, because I had put on my summer
clothes. Oh, Little White Fox, you are a very wise fellow! A very wise
fellow, indeed!"

It was Miss Ptarmigan. She had changed her white gown for a brown one!




CHAPTER III

HE GETS HIS HEAD THUMPED


"Who put all those rocks there, I wonder?" mused Little White Fox,
scratching his head and looking puzzled. "They are white and all the
same size. How queer!"

Little White Fox had climbed almost to the top of Cape Prince of Wales
Mountain. He had crept around among the rocks until he was way out on a
ledge looking out over the great blue sea. And here he had found these
strange rocks, all gathered in one little pile by themselves. As he
looked around, he presently saw more piles here and there, and all just
the same size. "Now, what do you think of that!" he said to himself,
scratching his head again, and more puzzled than ever.

He was still rubbing his head thoughtfully, when a sound behind him made
him look around, and his bright eyes fell on a group of the strangest
little people any small fox ever came across. There were seven of them.
They all stood in a row, and each was as straight up and down as the big
whalebone over the grave Omnok, the hunter, had made for his father.
Little White Fox had seen some of these strange folks when he was with
his mother a few days before. She had told him that they belonged to the
Sea Parrot family. "There is a very large family of them," she had said.
"They live almost anywhere on the ocean most of the year, but they make
Alaska their summer home."

These seven little black sea parrots all stood up stiffly in a row, and
not one word did they say, either to Little White Fox or to one another.
But Little White Fox felt that they were looking at him, and he didn't
like it a bit. "What business is it of theirs if I walk around here and
see what I can see?" he thought to himself. "They are very ugly little
people, anyway. Look at their faces! They are nearly all nose! And such
ugly, bent noses I never saw before in all my life, either!"

Just then a strange, pleasing smell came to Little White Fox's quivering
nostrils. Could it come from those strange, round rocks? He would see.
He walked up to one of the piles, and, putting his nose down close, gave
a big, long sniff. Yes, sir, that's just where it did come from! "How
queer!" thought he. "I never saw such rocks before. Guess I'll push one
of them around and see what will happen." At that, he stretched out one
of his front paws, and began to roll one of the rocks about. Bing!
something struck him an awful blow right on the top of his head.

"Ouch! What was that!" cried Little White Fox, peering about and rubbing
his head.

The seven strangers were standing still stiff in a straight row. Not a
word did they say, but they had moved quite a bit closer to Little White
Fox.

"I wonder," said Little White Fox. Then he began to roll the rock again.
Bing! something struck his head, harder than before. Little White Fox
whirled about quickly this time. One of the strangers was straightening
up.

"What has she been doing?" he said to himself. "I shouldn't wonder if
she had been hitting me with her ugly face. I have a great mind to bite
her! What business is it of hers if I come up here and roll these little
stones around? Don't all the stones in the world belong to anybody who
wants them?"

He gave the rock a vigorous push this time. It rolled over a small
ledge, gave a little squash! and broke in two in the middle. Little
White Fox could hardly believe his eyes when he saw the inside of the
stone spread out on the ground, all yellow and white! And _Ah-ne-ca!_
how strong it smelled! But the smell was the most delicious that Little
White Fox had ever sniffed.

"I'll just taste some of that good smelling stuff," said Little White
Fox happily, and was about to poke his small nose right into it, when
ouch! something hit him a terrible whack right on the top of his head.
My, how it hurt! It made his head ache so he could hardly think
straight. And this time he knew who had done it. It was one of those
ugly Parrot people.

"Now, I _will_ bite her!" cried Little White Fox, and straight at that
stiff row he dashed. And then at last the strangers found their
tongues. Such a screaming and chattering Little White Fox had never
heard before. But he found he couldn't bite them, after all, for every
time he jumped at one of them, she leaped right over his head and hit
him with her ugly face. So by and by Little White Fox was glad to run
away home and leave the strange rocks to the ugly little people who were
so savage and so bold.

Mother White Fox laughed and laughed when she heard of her son's strange
adventure.

"But, mother," said Little White Fox, looking very much puzzled, "What
did they care about those old rocks?"

"Care, child!" cried his mother, holding her sides, "those things were
not rocks; they were their eggs. And the ledge you were on was their
home. By and by those eggs will turn into little Sea Parrots, and when
their wings and feet are strong, the babies will go swimming and flying
out over the shining sea."

Little White Fox was far too young to understand all this, but he could
understand how his head had been thumped. So you may be sure it was a
long, long time before he went back to that cliff. When he did so, the
Sea Parrots were all gone, and so were the strange things he had thought
were rocks.




CHAPTER IV

WHEN LITTLE FOXES QUARREL


There apparently were more little Foxes together on the tundra that
afternoon than there ever had been before. Little White Fox had just
come around a bunch of muckluck grass and spied them, all very much
interested in something they had found.

"Ha! Ha!" chuckled Little White Fox to himself. "They'll get their heads
pecked good and hard pretty soon!" For those little Foxes there on the
tundra had found some of those same round objects that Little White Fox
had thought were stones and later learned were eggs. The only
difference was that these were much larger and were out on the tundra
near one of the salt ponds.

The young Foxes had been playing happily together when they found the
eggs. There were the Silver Fox twins, the Black Fox triplets, Reynard
Red Fox, Violet Blue Fox, and Baby Cross Fox. Rather a large gathering
of Foxes, I admit, but there are more of the Fox family in Alaska than
in any other part of the world.

Little White Fox slipped behind the muckluck grass and listened. His
relatives were quarrelling over who should have the extra egg. You see
here were eight little Foxes and nine eggs, so the question was who
should take the extra egg?

"We should have the egg," said the Silver Fox twins boastfully, "because
we belong to the most aristocratic branch of the family. Our mother's
coat alone is worth three hundred dollars."

"You have no more right to hold up your heads than we have," one of the
Black Fox triplets answered him. "Our mother's coat is worth quite as
much as any Silver Fox's that ever lived."

"Fie! Fie! you are both wrong," reproved Reynard Red Fox. "The best
known should always be considered first. Now my father is known all over
the world. Whole books have been written about our family."

"I should have it, because I am a baby," wailed Baby Cross Fox.

"I'd like to see any of you get it," cried Violet Blue Fox, seizing the
egg and attempting to carry it away. But the greedy miss, while trying
to carry it, let go of the one she already had, so she was not a whit
ahead.

The fact of the matter was that one of those eggs was all any little Fox
could carry, and it certainly was all he could possibly eat. But of
course not one of them had thought about that.

Now Little White Fox had lain hid behind the muckluck grass nearly
splitting himself with laughter at the thought of the whacking their
heads were going to get after awhile. But when he had waited a long time
and no one had come to molest his cousins, he began to want one of those
eggs for himself. It happened that this was the nest of Old Mrs. Long
Neck, the widgeon duck. And Omnok, the hunter, had captured her two days
before, so she would never come back to protect her eggs.

Little White Fox stood it as long as he could, and then he came marching
boldly out from his hiding place.

"If you don't mind," he said very importantly, "I'll take the extra egg,
and that will settle the difficulty."

But that only started the discussion going faster than ever. "You
didn't!" "I did!" "You can't!" "I can!" "I will!" "You won't!" and so on
and so on they went. Probably they would be quarrelling yet, if Little
White Fox had not caught sight of a very tall person coming through the
muckluck grass. It was the dreadful Omnok, the hunter!

"Look out!" he cried.

But he was too late. Bang! went the hunter's terrible gun, and a hot
bullet whizzed by his ear. The Foxes scattered in every direction,
Little White Fox making for his home as fast as his legs would carry
him. And his heart beat so fast that even when he had been for half an
hour safe under the big flat rock, his breath still came pantingly.

"_Ah-ne-ca!_" cried Omnok, out on the tundra. "What did I shoot at them
for? Their coats are not worth a penny till old winter gets at them and
makes them thick and strong. My, but they were a fine bunch! If I can
catch half of them next winter, I can buy a whole herd of reindeer and
become a reindeer man. But what have we here? Ho-ho! So this is what
they were making such a fuss about! Old Long Neck's nest! Well, I guess
nine good eggs will be fine eating for my wife and the children."

With that Omnok put the eggs in his hunting sack and went stalking
away.




CHAPTER V

LITTLE WHITE FOX MEETS BARRED SEAL


Little White Fox was running all over the ice that covered the ocean. It
was spring, and the sun was shining its best all the time, but there was
plenty of ice left. When there is two miles of ice out on the sand bar,
and it is all six feet thick, you may easily guess it takes the sun a
long time to loosen it up.

Well, Little White Fox was skipping about here and there to see what he
could see, and was not paying much attention where he was going when,
_Ah-ne-ca!_ down he went! Down! Down! and splash! right into the icy
water! My! he was frightened! How was he ever to get out of that place?
Six feet of ice wall, straight as the sides of a house, was all about
him. But what was this he saw on one side. It seemed to be a sort of
little shelf. And, yes sir! as Little White Fox swam over to that side
and began to climb up, his feet caught on a ledge, and before he knew it
he was sitting in as neat a little room as you ever saw, and all made
out of ice! walls, floor, and ceiling!

"Now I wonder who lives here," said Little White Fox to himself.
"Whoever it is, I suppose I shall have a great quarrel with him when he
comes home."

But no one came, and very soon his coat was quite dry and he found
himself very comfortable in this strange little ice palace. But how was
he ever to get out and go back to his mother and friends?

Just when he was thinking about that, he saw the water get black all at
once, and in another moment he was looking right into the face of a
stranger who had popped up out of the water, as if by magic.

"Who are you?" asked Little White Fox, shaking all over with fright.

"I have many names." The stranger grinned so broadly Little White Fox
quite lost his fear at once. "Some call me Barred Seal," the stranger
continued, "and some call me Ring Seal. Others call me Rainbow Seal, and
still others call me Northern Lights. You may call me what you like.
But say, there's room for us both up there, isn't there? I am tired!"

"But," said Little White Fox, when they were both comfortably seated,
"you look very much like Little Brown Seal."

"Yes," said the other, "he is my cousin, so is Spotted Seal and Oogrook,
the big seal, and Little Light Brown Seal, and goodness knows how many
more! We are a large family. I am told that we have cousins living down
in the Aleutian Islands who are very aristocratic indeed. They go by the
name of Hair Seal. Why, their coats, I am told, are so valuable that
Omnok, the hunter, would risk his life to get one of them! For my part,
I prefer this simple coat which no man would steal, unless he needed it
to make a pair of boots. But you must be hungry, and so am I. Just wait
a minute."

Master Barred Seal disappeared in the water, reappearing from time to
time with a fish in his mouth.

"Now," he said, when he had finished fishing, "we will have dinner."
Before Little White Fox was spread the most tempting array of fish he
had ever seen.

"This is the finest home in the world," said Barred Seal proudly. "Your
dinner comes right to your front door. Look!"

Little White Fox looked, and sure enough, there in the water were plenty
more fish swimming round and round.

"But what if Omnok, the hunter, should find us here?" Little White Fox
shivered suddenly.

[Illustration: "Now," he said, when he had finished fishing, "we will
have dinner." _Page 38_]

"What if he should?" repeated the other. "There are four feet of solid
ice between us and the top. He will not come down in the water to get
us, so what could he do?"

"But very soon, Mother tells me," said Little White Fox, "the ice will
all melt, or the wind will blow it out to sea."

"Oh, well, in that case," replied Barred Seal, smiling, "there is still
the wild, free ocean to live in as always."

"Not for me!" said Little White Fox, turning white in the face and
losing his appetite all at once. "How can I get out of here?"

"You don't want to go so soon," answered Barred Seal. "Stay with me
awhile. I rather like you. And, as you see, we have plenty of good fish
to eat."

"I thank you," said Little White Fox very politely, "but I'd very much
rather go back home." And at that moment he had a frightful vision of
all that ice going out, out to sea.

"Very well," said Barred Seal, "I'll go in the water and stand on my
tail; then you can climb out on my back. Only don't dig in your toe
nails."

In another moment Little White Fox was out in the bright sunshine, and
you may be very sure he was glad to be there. "I guess the world was
made about right," he said to himself. "And I am glad the hills, the
tundra, and my own little home are just as they are, and I am glad I am
Little White Fox."




CHAPTER VI

LITTLE WHITE FOX HELPS HIMSELF


Little White Fox was hungry again, and it was the hard, cold, winter
time, when all of the little folks of the tundra have to hunt far and
wide for food. He had asked Tdariuk, the reindeer, to invite him out to
dinner. Tdariuk was very nice about it, but said he had only some
lichens, which men call reindeer moss, to eat. When Little White Fox
tasted them, he said they were not one bit good. The truth is they are
very bitter, and taste good only to Reindeer and Caribou folks.

So Little White Fox went scratching away over the tundra and hillsides
to see what he could find. He was half way up the side of Cape Prince of
Wales Mountain when he came on the tracks of a stranger. "He must have
come down from the higher mountains," said Little White Fox to himself.
"I wonder who he is. I don't believe he is any bigger than I am, for his
tracks are very close together."

He followed the tracks, very curious to know who this newcomer might be.
Pretty soon he came to a tunnel right into the snow. There were several
tracks in and out of this, so he could not tell whether the stranger
were at home or not. Little White Fox knew now that the other fellow was
not so large as he, for the tunnel was almost too small for him to
enter. But he gathered his coat close around him and crowded in. He
rather hoped that he would not find the stranger at home, but that the
table would be set for dinner.

And that was just the way it was! Little White Fox knocked at the door,
and when no one answered, he walked right in. No,--the table wasn't set,
but in the storeroom there was plenty of food. Little White Fox did not
make the least fuss but set the table himself.

Now you might think that Little White Fox would eat only fresh eggs and
fish, but if you think so you are mistaken. He likes berries and roots,
and that is just what he had to eat that day,--blueberries from the
hillsides and nice juicy roots and bulbs from the tundra! My, they
tasted good!

He had just finished eating when something disturbed him. He had been
listening to the noise the wind made blowing across the entrance to the
tunnel. Now the wind didn't make any more noise,--not so he could hear
it, anyway. That meant that some one had entered the tunnel.

Now Little White Fox was not wishing to see any one just then. "Guess
I'd better find the other door to this house and go home," he said to
himself. But there wasn't any other door. Little White Fox wasn't
afraid, but then,--he just humped himself all up in a corner and wished
he didn't have to meet the stranger, that was all.

Well, sir! he had to laugh when he saw the stranger come in at the
door. He was the oddest little fellow you ever saw! He looked just like
Thunder, the big white rabbit, only his ears were short, his coat was
yellow, and he was ever so much smaller. Little White Fox knew who he
was right away, for he had heard his mother speak of the Lemming family.
And this was one of the Lemmings! There could be no doubt of it. And the
Lemmings are great fighters, if they happen to be in the mood for it.
Why, they have been known to jump right into the ocean and try to swim
across it.

"Now I wonder what I'd better do," thought Little White Fox to himself.
But just because he couldn't think of anything at all to do, he did
nothing. And that was the very wisest way to behave just then. All
bunched up the way he was, he looked very large and strong. The longer
Mr. Lemming looked at him, the more sure he became that Little White Fox
was some relation of his. And we must be very kind to all our relatives,
especially when they are bigger than we are!

Mr. Lemming moved over to one side of the room as if to say, "You may go
out if you like."

Little White Fox moved half way to the door and then stopped, which
meant, "I'd like you to move a little farther away."

Mr. Lemming went back to the other side.

Little White Fox went to the door, but even then he did not go out, not
right away, he didn't. He turned and looked at Mr. Lemming, which meant,
"You won't bite my heels, will you?"

Mr. Lemming didn't make a move.

Little White Fox put his head out of the door. Then you should have seen
him get out of that tunnel! I don't believe Little White Fox ever went
faster in the world. When he was out on the snow, he looked around and
felt foolish, for Mr. Lemming was not coming after him at all.

That night Mr. Lemming closed up the tunnel to his house and made a new
one under a rock, where he thought Little White Fox would not be able to
find it.

Of course Little White Fox should have waited until Mr. Lemming came
home, and then asked him for something to eat. But, you know, he was
very hungry, and besides he was only a little white fox, after all.




CHAPTER VII

LITTLE WHITE BEAR AND LITTLE BLACK BEAR


Little White Bear stepped out from behind a great boulder that was black
as black could be against the whitest of all white worlds. And my! It
was a lonesome world! His mother had left him alone, years and years
ago, it seemed to him, to find something to eat. At last he was so
lonesome he just had to get out into the sunshine and see if there was
any one in all the wide, white world who would play with a little white
bear.

"I wonder! I do wonder if there is any one!" he said to himself.

"Chee! Chee!" said a very small voice right close to him. He looked and
looked, and at last he spied Little Snow Bunting balancing herself on a
salmon-berry bush.

"What does she mean by that?" thought Little White Bear. "Does she want
to play with me?" But when he came closer to her, she said "Chee! Chee!"
so loudly and saucily he felt almost sure she didn't, and when she
spread her snowy wings and flew far, far away, he was quite sure she
didn't.

"My! What a world!" said Little White Bear. "I wonder--" But just then
he heard a strange sound,--crack--crack--crackety, crackety, crack! What
could it be? In just a moment Tdariuk, the reindeer, came trotting
around the point, and Little White Bear knew it was Tdariuk's heels he
had heard cracking. But Tdariuk didn't give him time to say a word. He
just caught one whiff of bear smell, and away he went faster than
ever,--crack--crack--crackety, crackety, crackety! Crack! Crack!

Down by the ocean things were no better. When Little Brown Seal saw him
coming, he tumbled right into the ocean without so much as saying "How
do you do."

Little White Bear looked this way and that, and suddenly he spied some
little black things going up and down, up and down, over a little snow
hill. Sometimes there were four, sometimes three, sometimes two, and
sometimes none at all. "Must be Jim Raven and his crowd," said Little
White Bear. "Well, _they_ won't get away from me! I'll just slip up to
that little hill and then jump right over it so quick they won't have
time to fly away!" He slipped up very quietly, Oh! just as quietly as
any little bear could. He crept round this little hill and that little
salmon-berry bush until he was right under the snow hill. "Now," he said
to himself, "Now's the time!" He couldn't see the black things going up
and down, but he knew they were there, so he gave one big, big spring
and then, "Oh! Oh! Ow! Wow! E-e-e! Let me go!" he cried, and bounded
away as fast as he could. What could have scratched him so? Where had
Jim Raven and his crowd gone? Pretty soon he looked around, and right
there in the snow where he had jumped was a little bear just about his
own size and a great deal like him, but black as black could be!

"What'd you jump on my stomach for?" said the stranger. Then Little
White Bear knew right away what he had done. The black things he thought
were Jim Raven and his crowd were not those people at all, but they were
Little Black Bear's feet sticking up over the hill, as he rolled around
on the snow, having a frolic all by himself.

"Well," said Little White Bear, "where did you come from?"

"Oh! My home is just a little way up in the hills," said Little Black
Bear politely. "We have a great many cousins in this cold country; there
is Little Brown Bear and Big Barren Ground Grizzly Bear, and I don't
know how many more, but we seldom get to see any of our white cousins.
How are you? I am glad to see you."

[Illustration: Little White Bear knew right away what he had done.
_Page 52_]

"I think I shall be very fine when I get over my scratches," smiled
Little White Bear. "You must have very sharp claws."

"They are quite sharp," said Little Black Bear slowly. "I am sorry I
scratched you. Let's find something to play, and you will forget all
about it."

"All right!" said Little White Bear gleefully, and away they went,
looking for some adventure in the great, white world.




CHAPTER VIII

TROUBLE FOR LITTLE WHITE BEAR


"Come on," cried Little White Bear, almost standing on his head in his
eagerness to be at play with this new friend.

"Let's go exploring," said Little Black Bear. "That's the most fun of
all!"

"All right," shouted Little White Bear, turning a handspring. And away
they went,--two little bears out to see what they could find in the
great, white world.

They went down by the lakes and saw where Widgeon had made her nests in
the warm summer time; they wandered over the hills and said "Woof
Woof!" in the doorway to Little Mrs. White Fox's home; they went here
and there, but at last they came upon something really very strange.

"What can it be?" said Little White Bear, standing on one foot and
looking very wise.

"What _can_ it be!" said Little Black Bear, scratching his head. And
what indeed could it be? It was right down at the foot of the mountain.
There was a big, black, square thing right in the snow, and in the
middle of that there was another little square that was brown. Did any
one in the wide world ever hear of finding such a strange thing in a
great white wilderness? There wasn't a square thing anywhere else on the
whole tundra. Things were round and crooked and made of little angles,
but who ever saw a square thing in real tundra land?

The two little Bears walked round and round it and tried to think what
it could be. At last Little Black Bear put one foot on it very timidly.
"There!" he said bravely, "I stepped on it! Do you dare?"

"Of course I do!" said Little White Bear, walking right out on the big
square. "See me!" he shouted and went racing right across the thing.
That is, he started across, but just when he was on the little brown
square, he felt his feet begin to sink. There was a rip--ripping of
something, and down he went, till he struck kerwhack! on something far
below. He jumped to his feet very quickly. Where was he? There were
brown walls all about him, like the walls of the cave where his home
was. And look as he might, Little White Bear could see no way to get out
except to climb back up through the hole he had made when he fell in.
And that was far, far above his head. He could never get out that way.
And what was worst of all, as he began to look around, he was more and
more sure of one dreadful thing. And that was that he was in the house
of Omnok the hunter. My! That was a terrible thought. But it was true!
They had been playing on Omnok's roof, and Little White Bear had fallen
right through the window in the roof. Omnok had made a curtain out of
the coats of many eider ducks, and this was the brown square that Little
White Bear had started to run across.

Well, there wasn't a thing he could do. He just wandered round and
round, but he couldn't find the least little place where he could get
out. "What a strange place to live!" he thought to himself. "How does he
ever get into it himself?"

But Little White Bear wasn't the least bit doubtful that Omnok would be
able to get into his house when he came home. And you may be very sure
he wasn't a bit happy. He just went way over in the corner under Omnok's
bed and sucked his thumb while he wished he was at home in his own dear
cave. All of a sudden he heard a noise. Omnok was coming! Little White
Bear heard his voice, very big and very angry, outside! "Who has stolen
my 'pooksack'?" Omnok growled. "Who has broken my window?"

How poor Little White Bear trembled. He crouched down under the bed just
as far as he could. Now he could hear Omnok come closer to his house.
And then he saw Omnok's face at the side of the wall. Ah! Yes! There was
a little curtain there! Why had he not seen it! But suddenly a happy
thought came to Little White Bear. Just when Omnok was standing up, with
his terrible gun in his hand, Little White Bear rushed right at him and
tumbled against his feet so hard that Omnok went sprawling to the floor,
and his terrible gun went clattering after.

Little White Bear bounded out of the little door. But there was just a
little alley and then another room with a window high up in the wall. He
looked quickly, and saw a little shelf, like Omnok's bed, only higher
up, right under the window! Little White Bear jumped up but tumbled
back. He tried it again and fell back. But the third time he found
himself on the shelf, and in another minute he was out in the fine old
world, running as fast as ever he could for home. And you may be very
sure he was glad to be with his mother safe in their cave that night.




CHAPTER IX

LITTLE BLACK BEAR'S DISCOVERY


What was Little Black Bear doing all the time Little White Bear was down
in Omnok's house, and what about Omnok's "pooksack"? Well, Little Black
Bear looked down into Omnok's house and wished his little playmate would
hurry out, so they could discover some more things. But when he had
waited what seemed a long, long time, he went on a little exploring trip
all by himself. And he discovered something right away. It had four legs
like Tdariuk, the reindeer. But it was ever so much larger than
Tdariuk, and its legs were straighter. Little Black Bear wasn't long in
finding out that this was not really any one at all, but just a rack
Omnok had made on which to keep his meat. And there was meat up there!
Oh! strips and strips of it! But it was all high out of reach. Little
Black Bear sniffed and sniffed, and My! It did smell good! But even when
he stood on his tiptoes he couldn't reach the least little mouthful.
There _was_ one thing closer to the ground. And such a strange thing as
it was! It looked like a coat that had belonged to one of Little Brown
Seal's cousins, but he couldn't be in the coat right then, for the
collar was tied up tight as could be, and so were the sleeves.

"If there was any one in that coat, he would smother right away," said
Little Black Bear, scratching his head. "But there is something in it!
See how its sides bulge out! I'll just give it a good poke and see what
happens."

Now that strange thing was just hung up by one string, and it swung
about very easily. When Little Black Bear gave it a great poke, it went
up in the air quickly! It came down quickly too, and it hit Little Black
Bear square on his nose. He spun about and tumbled down in the snow, and
at first he had a notion to be angry.

When the thing had stopped swinging, he stood on his tiptoes and smelled
of it. "E-ee-ee! How good it smells," he cried. "I just believe that is
Omnok's 'pooksack' of seal oil which mother has been talking about!"
Little Black Bear's mouth began to water and water, for his mother had
told him there was nothing half so good in the world as fine, rich seal
oil.

Now how was Little Black Bear going to get that oil out of that
"pooksack"? He thought and thought and thought. At last he remembered
the sleeves which were tied up. They were tied way down at the ends, and
there must be seal oil right down to the very tips. His mouth was too
small to bite the "pooksack", but one of these sleeves,--that was the
very thing! He would bite one of those, hard! with his sharp teeth, and
the oil would come right out into his mouth!

He had to stand on his tiptoes to reach, but at last he set his teeth
hard and _Ah-ne-ca!_ How good that seal oil did taste! It went gurgle,
gurgle, right down his throat so fast he could hardly get time to
swallow.

But very soon he began to feel as if he had had quite enough. How was he
going to stop the seal oil from coming out? Well, he couldn't do that.
He would just have to open his mouth and dodge right out of the way
quick. "That will be easy," he thought to himself. Anyway, he took two
or three more swallows, then he opened his mouth wide, and _Ah-ne-ca!_
before he could move one bit, that seal oil shot him right in the eyes
and ears and began to run down his back so fast he couldn't even give
one grunt. You should have seen that little bear! He was oil from head
to foot! And as for his fine, silky, glossy, black coat, he was just
sure it was ruined! He didn't stop a minute to see if Little White Bear
was out of Omnok's house, but ran home as fast as ever he could.

"Why! Why!" cried his mother, as he came into the house. "Where have you
been?"

Little Black Bear couldn't say a word. He just crawled over in one
corner and looked down at his toes.

And was his coat really ruined? Ask puss if her coat is ruined some day
when she comes in out of the rain, and see what she will say. Mother
Black Bear cleaned that coat up that very night so it looked better then
new, but how she did it I wouldn't pretend to say.




CHAPTER X

FUN FOR TWO LITTLE BEARS


Little White Bear and Little Black Bear met at the snow hill next day,
but Little White Bear didn't jump into Little Black Bear's sharp claws,
and you may be very, very sure they didn't go exploring around Omnok's
house! They did go way, way out on the white roof of the ocean. There
were splendid hills of ice to hide behind, and everywhere were great ice
boulders over which they could play leap-frog.

Little White Bear had just started to leap over one fine, large boulder,
and Little Black Bear was coming right after him, when all of a sudden
Little White Bear turned a backward somersault and tumbled right into
Little Black Bear.

"Wow!" howled Little Black Bear. "What's the matter?"

"Shish!" whispered Little White Bear. "I saw something!"

"On the ice?" asked Little Black Bear, beginning to be frightened.

"Right out there a little bit farther," whispered Little White Bear.
"And it was the biggest thing! Oh! My! I can't tell how big it was!"
Then Little Black Bear was frightened! What could it be, way out here on
the ice, miles and miles from shore? Little White Bear hadn't seen it
move, but how could it get way out here if it weren't alive? Trees and
things like that couldn't grow on the roof of the ocean.

They lay crouched down behind that big ice boulder until Little White
Bear's foot had gone to sleep, and Little Black Bear was catching cold
from sitting on the ice.

"I am going to peek round and see if it has moved," said Little White
Bear bravely. He looked, and it hadn't moved one little bit, so it
seemed as if it couldn't really be alive! Perhaps it was something that
Omnok had left there. They crept up toward it, little by little, until
they were right up to it, and what do you think? It was nothing but
Omnok's big whaling boat he had left on the ice.

They looked all around to see if Omnok were about, then they tumbled
right into that boat for a frolic. There were a great many things in the
boat, but the most interesting of all was a great, long "pooksack." It
wasn't full of seal oil. If it had been, I am quite sure Little Black
Bear would have had nothing to do with it. It was just full of air.
Omnok had used it for a sled when he drew his boat over the roof of the
ocean. And what a splendid football it did make, and how they did knock
it about! First Little White Bear would give it a boost with his big,
clumsy paws, then Little Black Bear would boost it right over Little
White Bear's head! Then there would be a scramble to see who would get
to it first. But one time Little Black Bear kicked it right over Little
White Bear's head so high that it tumbled off the roof of the ocean and
down into the great dark sea. And Little White Bear tumbled right into
the ocean after it! Yes, sir! Right into the water, and you never saw
water so cold in all your life! Little White Bear didn't scramble out as
fast as ever he could! He just climbed up on that "pooksack", happy as a
clam, and wanted Little Black Bear to come in too! Little Black Bear,
however, had a notion that the water was cold, so he touched it with his
toe and "Um-m-m! Um-m-m!" he didn't want any swim that day. But Little
White Bear wouldn't come out of the water and play, so all Little Black
Bear could do was to skip along home and tell his mother that he was
quite sure that Little White Bear would freeze to death that very night.

"Oh, no!" said Madam Black Bear, looking very wise. "Little White Bear
won't freeze to death."

"Why," said Little Black Bear, opening his eyes wide, "I'm sure I'd
freeze right away."

"So you would," said his mother. "You were a wise young fellow to try
the water before you ventured in. But Little White Bear is quite
different. He has a very warm coat and is very fat. He is used to the
cold water and will live in it all winter. But just you wait," she
added, with a sly wink. "You will have a surprise for him some day! When
he comes to look for you some cold, cold time, won't he be surprised to
find you snugly tucked away in bed and sleeping all day and all night?
Won't he, though?"

Madam Black Bear laughed a big bear laugh, and Little Black Bear laughed
a little bear laugh, so together they were after all two of the happiest
bears in all the world.

When Omnok went out on the roof of the sea to get his big boat, he saw
what Little White Bear and Little Black Bear had done. He was very angry
when he saw that his "pooksack" was gone. He thought Big White Bear had
been there.

"I'll go hunting for him to-morrow morning," he said to himself. "And
I'll take Huskie, my Malemute dog, along!"




CHAPTER XI

BIG WHITE BEAR MEETS HUSKIE


"Now, I'll tell you," Omnok said to Huskie, "Big White Bear is a great
big bully. He likes to fight all the little folks of the tundra and sea
because he is so big. It would be a good thing if we could show him that
he isn't so awfully big, after all. Wouldn't it?"

"Ki, yi, yiyi," said Huskie, which meant he thought it would.

"Well, then, this is what you must do. Go running about on the ocean ice
everywhere and hunt for him. I will be hunting too. If you find him
first, run away, then call me. I will shoot him. Do you see?"

"Ki, yiyi," answered Huskie again, meaning this time, "I do."

Huskie ran up and down, in and out among the ice piles, until his feet
were sore. He was very anxious to find Big White Bear. Whenever a little
fellow has a chance to harm a big fellow he thinks is a bully, he always
wants to do it. Did you ever notice that?

So Huskie ran on and on, even if his feet were sore.

"Hello!" He had just gone around something he thought was an ice pile
when he heard a voice.

Looking up, he saw the face of Big White Bear. What he was going around
wasn't ice at all. It was Big White Bear. And, my! What a monster he
was! Huskie had to look away off at Cape Prince of Wales Mountain and
look again at Big White Bear before he could tell which was the larger,
bear or mountain.

He wanted to run away. But Big White Bear was so very near he didn't
dare to, so he just said "Hello!" But to himself he said, "Big White
Bear is a big, big bully, just as Omnok said. I am glad he is going to
get killed."

"Who are you?" asked Big White Bear.

"I'm Huskie, the Malemute dog. Who are you?"

"I am a Polar Bear. Where did you come from?"

"My home's over there on the shore," said Huskie, pointing his nose
toward shore. "Where'd you come from?"

"I came from far, far North. I've never been here before. Didn't mean to
come this time. Last night I went to sleep on a corner of Old Ocean's
blanket. Old Ocean put up his knee in his sleep, and my corner of the
blanket slid right down here. What do you think about that?"

"Very strange."

Now Huskie is a great fighter himself, for a little fellow. And great
fighters like fight stories. He was just itching to know all about Big
White Bear's big fights.

"Who'd you kill last?" he asked.

"Who did I kill?" said Big White Bear, opening his eyes very wide.

"Yes, was it a very bad fight?"

"A bad fight?"

"Yes, you don't seem much scratched up for a great fighter. Look at me;
one leg bent, nose split, and scarred up all over," said Huskie proudly.

"Do you think I'm a great fighter?"

"Of course you are. Omnok says--" Huskie caught himself just in time. If
Big White Bear knew all about Omnok, he'd run away.

"Why, I never fight anybody," said Big White Bear gravely.

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Huskie. "That's a good story. You never fight any
one. What a fib!"

"It's the truth."

"The truth? Ha! Ha! Of course that's not true. You're a bear. All bears
are fighters, and great big bullies, besides! Why! I bet you've got
claws three inches long."

"You think so?" Big White Bear put out his front paw which was as big as
the trunk of a small tree. Huskie dodged.

"Look," said Big White Bear.

Huskie looked at Big White Bear's claws. They were not as long as his
own. They were broad and blunt, just sharp enough for climbing over the
ice.

"I don't know why they name me Bear," said Big White Bear; "Old Buster
Grizzly, Buster Brown, and Buster Black, now, are very distant relatives
of mine. Indeed, they have long claws and are great fighters. But my
nearest relative, Tusks, the Walrus, is no fighter at all, and believe
me, neither am I."

But Huskie was a very quarrelsome and suspicious fellow.

"That will do to tell," said he; "but I know it is not true. As for
those claws of yours, I can guess how that is. They look very harmless
now. But when you want to fight, you run them out like a cat's."

"It's no such thing," said Big White Bear.

"Oh, yes, it is. Omnok says it is. I am going to tell him now, and he'll
fix you!" Vain boast! Huskie had forgotten himself.

In another instant, before he could dodge, Big White Bear had grabbed
him and hugged him tight. Huskie could not call out at all. His voice
became the tiniest little squeak.

"Let me go! Let me go!" he squeaked. "I won't tell! I won't tell! Oh!
Oh! Please, Mr. Bear, let me go!"

[Illustration: "I am going to make your teeth chatter so you can't call
your master." _Page 81_]

But Big White Bear only grinned, and said "Huh?"

"Oh, I'll not kill you," said Big White Bear finally. "It's just as I
have told you. I am no fighter. I never hurt anybody, unless I am driven
to do so. I'll not kill you, but I am going to make your teeth chatter
so you can't call your master."

At that, Big White Bear dropped right down into the cold, cold water
with Huskie in his arms.

Now Big White Bear lives half the time in water, and he does not mind it
a bit. But poor Huskie! When Big White Bear put him back on the ice, he
couldn't have said a word to save his life.

"Now, go and tell your master that you have seen Big White Bear," said
Big White Bear, grinning. "But you don't know where he is just now."

Then he dropped into the water and disappeared.

Huskie did not wait to hunt up his master. He ran home as fast as he
could go. Try as he might, Omnok has never been able to get him to go
hunting for Big White Bear again.




CHAPTER XII

LITTLE WHITE FOX GOES HUNTING


Little White Fox went hunting for Big White Bear! And he didn't have a
gun or a spear or a bow and arrow! Now what do you think of that! You
see, it was this way. It was winter time, and food was becoming very
scarce on the hills and the tundra. All the delicious roots were frozen
hard in the earth, and the berries were all gone. Little White Fox was
very hungry, and he told Little Mrs. White Fox about it.

"Well," said his mother, "I guess we will have to go and find a Big
White Bear."

"Find a Big White Bear!" cried Little White Fox. "Why, he'd eat us!"

"But you mustn't let him do that," said Mrs. White Fox.

"But what do we want to find him for?" said Little White Fox, scratching
his head.

"Listen," said Mrs. White Fox very mysteriously. "Big White Bear is a
very wasteful fellow. He has a big, big kitchen, and he has the greatest
amount of food stored there. Oh! piles and piles of it! He doesn't like
to eat his food in his kitchen. He brings some out every day and always
leaves plenty. Now, if we can find him, we will just follow him about
until his dinner hour. When he is gone, we will have plenty to eat.
See?"

Little White Fox did see and, though he was half afraid of Big White
Bear, he was also very hungry, and so he was anxious to go on the hunt
right away.

"You go one way, and I'll go the other," said Madam White Fox. "When you
find Big White Bear, you come right back to this rock. I will come back
too, and we will follow him about for weeks and weeks and have plenty to
eat."

Away went Little White Fox, looking, looking everywhere for Big White
Bear! He looked behind the cliff on the mountain. But Big White Bear
wasn't there. He looked on the sand bars, but he wasn't there. He went
peering all around the little lakes, but he wasn't there.

And where do you think Big White Bear was? He wasn't in very good
business, I assure you. He was over on the other side of the mountain.
Tusks the Walrus had just climbed out of the water and had gone to sleep
on the beach close to the mountain. Tusks was a great, good natured
fellow, with a monstrous, heavy body and a pair of terrible looking
tusks, which were not really terrible at all, for Tusks never used them
except for digging clams. Big White Bear was up on the rocks, way, way
above Tusks, and he had a great rock in his powerful paws, as big a rock
as he could lift! He was going to throw it right down on Tusks and kill
him. He had plenty to eat at home, but he thought this would be a fine
chance to get some fresh meat.

Just when he was getting ready to throw it, something happened. Little
White Fox came round the corner of the hill, looking here, there, and
everywhere for Big White Bear. He came on round and round till he was
just above Big White Bear, and then all at once he saw him! He was so
glad he had found Big White Bear, that he stood right up on his two feet
and gave one big, big laugh, "Ho! Ho! Ha! Ha! Yak! Yak! Yak!" just like
that.

There was never a worse scared bear than Big White Bear in all the
world! He had a guilty conscience, for he knew it was not right to throw
a rock on poor, tired Tusks, and when he heard Little White Fox laugh,
he didn't know who it was. It might be some one very big and dangerous.
It might be Omnok, the hunter, with his terrible gun! Big White Bear
just trembled and trembled, and the rock fell from his powerful paws and
went splashing into the water without hurting Tusks at all. But when he
looked around to see who had laughed at him, he couldn't see any one at
all. Little White Fox knew a whole lot better than to let Big White Bear
see him just then! But just after that Little White Fox did a very
thoughtless thing. He was so hungry and wanted so much to see where Big
White Bear had his kitchen, that he forgot all about his mother telling
him to come back to the big rock, and away he went, after Big White Bear
all by himself.




CHAPTER XIII

BIG WHITE BEAR'S KITCHEN


"I mustn't lose Big White Bear," thought Little White Fox, "and I
mustn't let him see me. Oh! My! No! I mustn't do that, for he is a big,
big fellow and who knows what he might do to me?" So he slipped along
behind very slyly, hiding behind this rock and that one, behind this
snow pile and that one, very carefully indeed.

But Big White Bear was nearly as badly frightened as Little White Fox.
"What was that great big laugh?" he kept thinking to himself. And every
time he thought of it, he looked behind him, and I am sure he really
expected to see Omnok, the hunter, step right out with his terrible gun.
But by and by, when he had gone down the mountain and across the tundra
and over the little lakes, he was not so much afraid, and he began to
grow hungry. Now that was just what Little White Fox hoped would happen,
for he was very hungry himself and very curious besides to see where Big
White Bear kept his pantry. Where would it be? Would it be in the tall
mountains, or on the tundra, or out on the roof of the sea? How
interesting it would be to know!

Pretty soon Big White Bear began to go straight ahead, without turning
to one side or the other. Then Little White Fox was sure he had started
for his kitchen, and he was glad as could be! Big White Bear went right
out on the roof to the ocean and on and on and on, till Little White Fox
was good and tired. When he came to the dark, dark waters of the ocean,
Big White Bear didn't stop one moment. He just tumbled right into the
water and disappeared all at once!

"My!" said Little White Fox, opening his eyes very wide. "He will surely
be drowned." And then all at once he thought of the fine dinner he had
been expecting to get and how far it was back to the great rock where
his mother was to wait for him. And then, of course, he remembered what
his mother had said about coming back to call her. How sorry he was now
that he had forgotten all about that. Oh! if they could only find Big
White Bear's kitchen! Just then Little White Fox heard a scratching on
the ice and bounded behind an ice boulder before he was seen. Big White
Bear had come right up out of the ocean with the biggest dinner you have
ever seen. His kitchen was right down in the water under the roof of the
ocean, and he had brought his dinner out on the ice to eat it in the
sunshine.

Little White Fox thought Big White Bear would never, never get through
eating, but he finally did. And there was quite a big dinner left for
Little White Fox. When Big White Bear was fast asleep on the ice, taking
his after-dinner nap, Little White Fox crept up and began to eat his
dinner too. "He didn't ask me," said Little White Fox, "but then I
didn't give him a chance, I am sure he would if I had." It was a very
good dinner and how Little White Fox's sides did stick out when he had
finished! But he didn't stay to say thank you, so I guess he wasn't very
sure that Big White Bear would have invited him. He just hid behind an
ice boulder and waited for Big White Bear to wake up. He mustn't lose
Big White Bear. He began to think about that fine dinner he had just
eaten and about how he had found Big White Bear all by himself and how
he had frightened him. It made him feel so good he just wanted to laugh.
The more he thought, the more he wanted to laugh, and the first thing,
before he knew it, he was laughing right out loud, "Ha! Ha! Yak! Yak!
Yak! Yak!"

Just that minute Big White Bear woke up, and he didn't stop to see who
was laughing! He tumbled right into the ocean and went paddling away as
fast as ever he could. He didn't stop till he was almost out of sight,
then he looked back once for just a moment and went paddling on and on,
till he was way out of sight. Little White Fox had lost Big White Bear.
All the fine dinners he was to have in the future were lost, just
because he had laughed at the wrong time.

I don't know what Little Mrs. White Fox had to say to him when he came
home, for I wasn't there, but there are some very fine switches made out
of reindeer moss lying all over the tundra. However, Little White Fox
was a very young fellow and had a great many things to learn, so perhaps
his mother did not punish him very hard.




CHAPTER XIV

BIG WHITE BEAR FINDS LITTLE WHITE FOX


When Omnok returned from hunting Big White Bear he sat down and began to
think. "White bears about," he thought to himself. "There must be white
foxes about too, for they always stay close to white bears. I must go
out and set some traps." And that is just what he did the very next
evening. He threw the cruel looking traps, with their ugly steel jaws,
over his shoulder and went out to look for a good place to set them. At
last he came to a place where there were many white bear tracks. "I
guess this will do," he said to himself. He took out his great knife
and cut out a cake of snow that was nearly as hard as ice. He cut this
up into four little snow boards, very square and very smooth. Then he
made a little hole in the snow and put a trap there. Next he made a thin
shingle of snow,--so thin that the least touch would break it right in
two. He put this over the trap and smoothed it over so carefully that no
one in all the world could tell there was a trap hidden there. Then he
made a little house over it with the four boards,--a very fine looking
house with a roof and three sides, and with one side left open for the
door. He put some nice pieces of meat inside of the house, so when any
little fox came to live there he wouldn't have to go away hungry.
Finally he spilled a few drops of delicious smelling seal oil around the
house and went away.

Now who should happen by that way, almost right away, but our own Little
White Fox, looking, looking everywhere for Big White Bear. Right away
the west wind blew a little whiff of the rich seal oil in front of his
nose, and almost before he knew it, Little White Fox was standing in
front of the little house that Omnok built, wondering how it came there
and how there happened to be such delicious looking meat inside of it.
He wasn't quite sure it was safe to go inside, so he just licked up all
the drops of seal oil around the outside. It was very good, but it was
only a taste, and it made him hungrier than ever.

"I just believe I am going to have that meat!" he said to himself. He
was about to put his paw on the little snow shingle that was so thin and
would break so easily, when he heard a great, gruff voice right behind
him.

"Here! What you doing there?" Little White Fox just tumbled a back
somersault away from the little house and ran as fast as ever he could,
for there, right behind him, was Big White Bear! It's one thing to be
looking for some one very much larger than yourself, but quite another
thing for that big person to be looking at you. Little White Fox didn't
take any chances. But when he was a long distance away, and Big White
Bear wasn't following him, he turned around to see what would happen to
the little house. He wished Big White Bear would go away, so he could
get all that delicious meat.

But Big White Bear did not go away. He bent his long neck and put his
great nose right up to the little house and gave a great "Woof!" The
little house was far too small for Big White Bear to enter, so he put
out one of his ponderous, powerful paws and sent the little house flying
every way. But his ponderous, powerful paw went too deep. It touched the
thin shingle, and Snap! the trap came down on Big White Bear's paw. Came
down hard too! Ow-e-e-e! How it did hurt! How Big White Bear roared! One
might have thought he was being killed! He ran limping to the ocean,
dragging the little fox trap after him. When he got there, he stuck his
paw up in the air, and moved it round and round, round and round, till
the chain on the trap went Ziz! Ziz! Ziz! just like that. All of a
sudden the trap came loose and tumbled into the sea, and I think
Steadfast Starfish's children are playing with it still.

Little White Fox ran straight home to tell his mother how he had found
Big White Bear and all the things that had happened.

"Well," said his mother, "I think Big White Bear has found you, and I am
sure it is a good thing he did!" Then she sat down and told Little White
Fox all about the dangers of nice smelling meat and the little houses
that Omnok builds.




CHAPTER XV

LITTLE WHITE FOX GOES FISHING


Little White Fox was hungry again. It would seem that a little white fox
is hungry most of the time. He went wandering all over the tundra,
looking for something to eat. At last he came to the bank of the river.
He was sniffing about there when he spied a door right in the ground
near the ice roof of the river. "Hello!" said he, stopping short, "I
wonder who made that door in there." He looked into the door but could
see no one. It was too dark. He shouted into the door, but no one
answered. He crept part way down the stairway. Then he stopped and
listened. He heard nothing, so he ventured on, and almost before he knew
it, he found himself in one of the biggest caves he had ever seen. It
was as wide as half the river and as long as he could see in each
direction. It had an ice roof and a good solid floor. Only the floor
stopped pretty soon, and then there was water.

"I don't believe anybody in the world could build a house like this!"
said Little White Fox. "I guess it just happened to be here, and some
one has discovered it. I wonder who it could be?"

He walked down close to where the water was, and there he found tracks.
Oh! hundreds and hundreds of them! But he could not tell whose tracks
they were. He had never seen such tracks before.

"Anyway, I believe there is something good to eat in that water," he
said to himself. "If there wasn't, that fellow wouldn't come down here
and stand around so much. It is nice and warm down here out of the wind,
and I guess I'll stand around a little myself and see what will happen."

Meanwhile, down below in the river, two of the little river people were
having a talk all by themselves. They were Unfortunate Flounder and Mr.
Salmon Trout. Salmon Trout is a very graceful fellow who always holds
himself erect in the water. When he swims, he goes so swiftly that you
can hardly see him. But Unfortunate Flounder goes floating around on one
side all the time, and looks more like a dead leaf than any member of
the fish family.

"Why do you not stand straight up in the water as I do?" said Salmon
Trout.

"Well," said Unfortunate Flounder, "it's only a little my fault. Can't
you see that my eyes are on one of my flat sides and my stomach on the
other? It wouldn't be very pleasant to go about looking one way and
going another, would it? When I was going south, I'd be looking west;
don't you see?"

"How does it happen that you are that way?"

"I was born that way. All my children are the same, and so were my
parents before me. You see, it's really a matter of ancestry. Way back
somewhere, one of my great grandparents found out it was easier to lop
around sidewise in the water than to stand straight up as you do, so he
lopped around all his life long. His son followed his example and lopped
around a little worse. So it went on, until to-day we could not
straighten up if we were to try. At least, it would take whole
generations before we could balance ourselves as well as you do. As for
me, I don't see as it matters much, for, after all, I quite agree with
my great grandfather that it is best to be comfortable, even if it does
make you ugly, ungraceful, and slow."

But just then Unfortunate Flounder learned what an unhappy thing it was
to be slow. Little White Fox from his station on the bank had been
watching, watching very sharply two dark spots that had appeared in the
water. He had watched them come closer and closer. At last he thought he
could reach out and grab one of them without getting in the water.

"Look out!" cried Salmon Trout, as he glided swiftly away. But poor
Unfortunate Flounder was too slow, and he felt Little White Fox's sharp
teeth close down on him.

Just then something happened. "Here! what are you doing in my fishing
house?" demanded an angry voice. It frightened Little White Fox so badly
that he dropped Unfortunate Flounder back into the river and looked
around.

It was Mr. Golden Marten, and this was his fishing house. At least, he
called it his, for he had made the stairway down to it. It took Little
White Fox only a moment to discover that while Golden Marten was not
quite as large as he was, his teeth were very sharp. The door to the
stairway was quite close to him, and before Golden Marten could stop him
Little White Fox was out of the door and racing for home as fast as his
little legs could carry him.

"All the same," he said to his mother that night, after he had told her
of the cave, "when I am as old as you are, I am going to have a fish
house all my own!"




CHAPTER XVI

LITTLE BROWN SEAL'S NARROW ESCAPE


One day Little White Fox was out in front of his house sunning himself.
He and his mother were living off the bounty of Big White Bear these
days, so there was nothing to worry about. He just stretched himself out
there on the white snow and looked away at the wide, white world, as
contented as could be. But all at once he saw a strange, strange thing.
Out on the roof of the silent sea, Little Brown Seal was sunning himself
too, right close to the door of his home. He was taking little "cat"
naps. You see, Little Brown Seal could not sleep down in his house in
the ocean. It was far too damp down there. So he was lying there by his
door, sleeping just two or three minutes at a time, then looking up to
see if there was any danger near.

Now that wasn't such a strange thing. Little White Fox had seen Little
Brown Seal do that nearly every day, but the strange thing was that
there was some one else out on the ice who seemed to be doing the very
same thing that Little Brown Seal was doing,--taking "cat" naps. And
stranger still, he did not seem to be one of Little Brown Seal's
relatives! He was too long, and he didn't wiggle his body right!

Little White Fox could see all that, but Little Brown Seal was so low
down on the ice that all he could see was the stranger's head. He might
have known even then that it was not one of his cousins, if he had had
as sharp eyes as Little White Fox. But he didn't, for his eyes were very
poor. So Little Brown Seal thought it was one of his own cousins taking
a nap now and then, just as he was. Once it looked to Little White Fox
as if he were beginning to understand that the stranger was not one of
his cousins, for he stayed awake a long, long time and looked and looked
and looked. The stranger seemed to be sleeping a long time, and that
made Little Brown Seal suspicious. But just then the stranger bobbed his
head and looked all around this way and that way, just as any real,
wise seal would do, and Little Brown Seal decided it was all right, that
this stranger was one of his really truly cousins.

And who do you think the stranger, who acted so very much like a seal,
was? It was Omnok, the hunter, with his terrible gun sliding right along
beside him! He had learned how Little Brown Seal took his "cat" naps,
and he was going to slip right up to him and kill him. He kept creeping
up closer, closer, closer. But Little Brown Seal had made up his mind
that it was one of his cousins, and so he didn't ask himself any more
questions about it. He just kept on taking his little "cat" naps and
waking up to look all around, this way and that way, but never paying
any attention to this stranger who was coming nearer all the time.

"My," Little White Fox thought to himself, "he will surely be killed.
Yes, sir! I am very, very sure Little Brown Seal is going to be killed!"

But just when Omnok was getting very close, and just before he was going
to raise his terrible gun and kill Little Brown Seal, a strange thing
happened. I don't know how it happened. Perhaps Little White Fox was
sorry the sun was going down so soon that day, or perhaps he was
lonesome for his mother. Perhaps he was sorry for Little Brown Seal,
because he was going to get killed in just another minute; but whatever
it was, Little White Fox began to feel bad all at once. He wanted to
cry, and he _did_ cry! He lifted his pink little nose into the air and
cried, "Ah! Ah! Ah! Yak! Yak! Yak!"

Now Little Brown Seal may not have very good eyes, but he has very good
ears, and he had just wakened from a "cat" nap when he heard that
lonesome wail from Little White Fox. And he didn't wait one minute, nor
one second! He tumbled down into his house in the ocean as quick as a
wink, just as Omnok the hunter was getting ready to shoot him!

Perhaps you think Omnok wasn't angry! But he had heard Little White Fox
cry. He would get Little White Fox's coat. Then he would be even. But
Little White Fox was nowhere about when Omnok climbed the hill. No, you
may be sure he wasn't! He was way under the great rock in his own
little home, where Omnok couldn't get near him. So all Omnok could do
was to put his terrible gun over his shoulder and go back home.




CHAPTER XVII

A STRANGE JOURNEY


Little White Fox went on a strange journey one day, and when he arrived
at its end, he didn't know where he was! You see, he had been living for
a long time with his mother off the bounty of Big White Bear. Now the
snow had almost all gone from the mountains and the tundra. Little Mrs.
White Fox had gone over to the land and told Little White Fox to watch
sharp and see if Big White Bear came up out of his kitchen and left
anything for them to eat. She was going over to see if she could find
any perfectly good blueberries which had been hidden all winter under
the snow.

Little White Fox loitered about on the roof to the ocean and dreamed, as
little folks will in the springtime. The weather was fine, and the sun
was shining now, all day and all night. A great deal of the roof to the
ocean had floated mysteriously away, one night, but there was a great
deal of it left, and Little White Fox felt very safe. But all of a
sudden, Scratch! Scratch! he heard Big White Bear come up out of his
kitchen. Then he knew that there was going to be a feast, just as there
had been so many times before. He waited and waited until Swish, Swish
he heard Big White Bear tumble back into the water and swim away. Then
such a feast as he did have! Well, Little White Fox ate so much and the
sun shone so brightly, that he began to feel very, very sleepy, and
almost before he knew anything about it, he was curled up on the roof to
the ocean fast asleep, dreaming as hard as ever a white fox dreamed.

I don't know how long Little White Fox slept; hours and hours I imagine.
But when he awoke and looked about him, all he could see was the dark,
deep ocean everywhere. He jumped to his feet and peered this side of him
and that side, but it was all the same dark, deep water. There was
nothing but ocean everywhere. The big waves had come along and carried
off the part of the roof to the ocean that Little White Fox was sleeping
on!

What was Little White Fox to do? He could not swim very far, and it was
a long way to land; in fact, he could not see any land at all. Besides,
the water was very, very cold. He couldn't think of a thing to do. He
just curled up in a heap and shivered and shivered and shivered, he was
so lonesome and frightened.

"Hello!" shouted Tusks the Walrus, sticking his head out of the water.
He looked and looked. "That's strange," he said to himself. "I thought I
saw Little White Fox over here on a piece of the ocean's roof. Guess
not, though. I don't see him now." And away he swam for a frolic with
one of his cousins.

"Hello!" cried Little Brown Seal, turning a somersault in the water.
When he turned the somersault, he looked at the piece of the ocean's
roof. "My! My!" he sighed. "These eyes of mine must be getting very bad
indeed! I thought I saw Little White Fox on that piece of roof." And he
too went paddling away to play.

[Illustration: Big White Bear popped right up out of the ocean!
_Page 119_]

And all the time Little White Fox was hiding his nose in a little snow
bank, and closing his pink eyes because he was so very much afraid of
every one, even his best friends, out here on the silent, lonesome sea.
Very soon he was nearly frightened to death. Big White Bear popped right
up out of the ocean! He climbed up on one end of the piece of roof and
tipped it up so Little White Fox thought he would surely be tipped into
the sea. But he dug in his toes and hid his nose, and closed his eyes
very tight. Pretty soon Big White Bear thought of something he wanted
to do and tumbled back into the sea.

Little White Fox floated on and on, for hours and hours and hours, over
the silent sea. But by and by when he was very, very hungry and very
sure that he would never see his dear home and his dear mother again,
there came a dreadful storm. Little White Fox had to dig his toe nails
in tight, again, and once the piece of the roof broke right in two and
nearly threw him into the sea! But finally he felt a bump. His piece of
roof had struck something hard. Bump! Bump! He nearly stood on his head,
and in a minute the piece of roof was perfectly still. Little White Fox
looked up, and right by the piece of roof was the finest sandy beach
you ever saw. He gave one big run and jumped on the beach, and scampered
away, as fast as ever he could, just before a big wave came and carried
the piece of roof back to sea.

It wasn't any time at all until he was up on the edge of the finest
hill, eating the richest, juiciest blueberries that had ever been kept
under a snow bank all the long winter through. And pretty soon he was
all dry, and feeling fine and not hungry at all.

"But where in the world am I?" thought Little White Fox, scratching his
head. "I'll have to see if I can find some of my friends who can tell me
how to go home. It must be a long, long way."




CHAPTER XVIII

LITTLE WHITE FOX COMES HOME


When Little White Fox looked all around him very carefully, this way and
that, and didn't see a thing he had ever seen before and not a person
who knew him in all this new tundra and all these new hills, he felt
very blue, you may be sure. But he didn't cry about it. He was too happy
at being off that bit of roof to the great ocean for that. So he looked
as far as he could see in every direction, and at last he spied some
little lakes way down on the tundra. "I'll just go over there and see if
there is any one I know," he said to himself, and went trotting away as
fast as ever he could. He came right down by the lakes and at last he
saw some one he had met in his own home land. It was Mr. Widgeon Junior,
a son of Old Mrs. Widgeon Duck, who was killed by Omnok the hunter.

"Hello," said Little White Fox.

Widgeon Junior looked up quick, in a frightened sort of way, but he
never said a word. He just stretched out his long neck and flapped his
strong wings and began to fly. And all the time he pointed with his bill
straight ahead and with his feet straight behind, as if to say, "Follow
me; this is the way home."

"I just believe that _is_ the way home!" said Little White Fox. "His
mother had her nest right down on our tundra last summer, and I believe
he is going there right now!" So he picked up his feet lively and ran
along behind Widgeon Junior but he couldn't near keep up! It wasn't any
time at all before he was so far behind that he couldn't see Widgeon
Junior at all! And before long he was just as badly lost as before. But
he trotted on cheerfully, "For," he said to himself, "I'll see some one
else I know very soon."

And sure enough, all of a sudden there was a clap, clap of wings, and
some one that looked just like Who-Who, the big white owl, went soaring
over his head. But when Little White Fox shouted "Hello" in his very
best voice, the great white owl never answered a word, but went flapping
on till he lit on the top of a whalebone which one of Omnok's relatives
had put up to mark a grave.

"Well," said Little White Fox to himself, "I guess that isn't Who-Who,
but anyway, it is one of his cousins, and he is very wise. All the Owl
folks are. He will tell me the way home."

So he hurried over to the foot of the whalebone and said, "Please, Mr.
White Owl, won't you tell me the way home?"

The big white owl never answered a word, but he winked his eye very
cunningly, as much as to say, "Look, I'll show you." Then he flapped his
great, white wings, and away he flew, and away after him, as fast as
ever he could trot, came Little White Fox, never once looking this way
or that to see where he was going, so proud was he to be able almost to
keep up with this new friend. He ran and ran and ran until he was out of
breath, when he saw the big, white owl spread his wings out straight and
light on a whalebone sticking right out of the ground and looking for
all the world like the one he had flown away from just a little while
before. Little White Fox ran up to the whalebone and looked up at the
big white owl.

The big white owl closed one eye and winked very knowingly as if to say,
"Am I not a very wise old owl?"

Little White Fox looked all around at the tundra and the hills, and sure
enough, that was the very same whalebone, sticking up out of the ground!
The big white owl had led him a long way, all around in a circle! You
may be sure Little White Fox was disgusted. He would never ask another
thing of a big white owl again, if he lived a thousand years! But away
he trotted toward some other little ponds he had seen some time before.

He was slipping along as quietly as he could in the grass when he heard
a splash, splash in the water, and there was Mrs. Swan. Of all the
people in all the world, besides his own dear mother, Little White Fox
liked Mrs. Swan best! Her white gown was always so smooth and tidy, her
neck so graceful, and she seemed so kind, that Little White Fox thought
she was just the most perfect lady that ever was! To be sure he had been
tempted once to steal one of the big eggs out of her great nest, on the
beach the summer before, but he hadn't done it, and now, you may be very
sure, he was glad he hadn't, for perhaps she would tell him the way
home.

"Please, Mrs. Swan," he said, making a very graceful bow, "will you tell
me the way home?" Mrs. Swan looked at him very kindly but never said a
word. Very soon she flapped her great, white wings, and putting her bill
right out before her and her feet straight behind, out she went flapping
away to the northward. Then Little White Fox knew that was the way home,
for she was going back to his own dear beach to make a new nest and to
hatch out some more little Swanfolks.

[Illustration: She was going back to his own dear beach. _Page 128_]

I wish I had time to tell you of all the adventures that befell Little
White Fox on his way home, but I haven't. Perhaps some other time we
will hear all about that. But one day, when the sun was shining brightly
and the flowers were beginning to bloom, who should little Mrs. White
Fox see come trotting up the path by the big rock but her own long-lost
son, Little White Fox. And you may well believe that she was glad to see
him! She had thought she would never see him again. And the things he
had to tell her! How she did listen, and how the other little Foxes,
Violet Blue Fox and Little Cross Fox and the Silver Fox twins and all
the rest, how they listened! Oh, Little White Fox was quite a person in
his family that evening! But when he had been given a good dinner with a
piece of blueberry pie such as only Little Mrs. White Fox can make, and
had curled himself up on the moss cot by the side of the great rock, he
went to sleep thinking that after all there was no place in all the
world like his own home under the big rock, and no one in all the world
quite so good as his own mother; and he felt very, very sure that he
would be careful in the future and not let anything carry him away from
her.






        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE WHITE FOX AND HIS ARCTIC FRIENDS ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

